

Outcast London
Gareth Stedman Jones
Peregrine, £3
Why didn’t London experience a revolutionary uprising at the end of the first world war, while Moscow and Berlin did? Why has the London working class appeared relatively passive compared with its brothers and sisters in other European capitals?
Outcast London by Gareth Stedman Jones, in a new paperback edition from Penguin, gives some of the information to answer these questions. A mass-based socialist movement had not emerged in London by the end of the nineteenth century. Factory industrialisation was small scale. Trade unionism was weak and skilled and unskilled workers were sharply divided. The Outcast Londoners of the book were the thousands of poverty stricken casual labourers who lived in the city in the second half of the nineteenth century. The 1880s, in particular, were a decade in which the London working class was severely hit, as the decline of the traditional craft trades of London and a chronic shortage of working class housing in the inner areas coincided to create a social crisis of huge proportions. This was the decade that introduced the terms ‘unemployment’ and ‘the unemployed’ into the common language.
While unemployment grew, workers from skilled trades were forced into the growing sector of sweated unskilled jobs in which men women and children worked long hours for poverty wages, Security declined, and casual work flourished.
Railway clearances led to wholesale demolition of working-class housing causing massive overcrowding. In the twenty years from 1861 to 1881 the city’s population (i.e., that inside the old city boundaries) fell by over half – from 113,387 to 51,439 – through forcible eviction and demolition. Rent racketeering mushroomed in these conditions of overcrowding and acute poverty.
The London riots and street marches of the unemployed in the 1880s arose from the anger and frustration built up in these conditions. The small groups of socialists now emerging were able to recruit numbers of artisans. For as the depression deepened, more and more of the ‘respectable artisans’ of the previous two decades were drawn into the crisis and the struggle. Their activities assisted the new growth of organisation of the unskilled into unions. But many of the gains made by the socialists were short lived. The immediate respite from impoverishment brought about by the unionisation of some of the unskilled was soon eroded.
The middle class response to the crisis of the poor is well documented, particularly the ‘sick fear’ of the ‘London mob’ that ravaged the wealthy. Stedman Jones shows how the vast public support for the 1889 dock strike revealed the middle class preference for the lesser evil – rather an orderly strike than a riot.
The new paperback edition of Outcast London will help give this excellent piece of analysis of the social and material conditions of the London working class the attention it deserves. While the history of the skilled working class has been researched in some depth, this work penetrates new areas of the lives and experiences of the unskilled and casual poor. Cut off as they were from the institutional development of the aristocracy of labour and the traditions of radicalism of the artisans in the earlier part of the century, we are shown one of the ugliest faces of the Workshop of the World, and the ‘rootless volatility’ of its inhabitants.
‘Brought up to treat life with the fatalism of the gambler, the casual poor rejected the philosophy of thrift, self-denial, and self help preached to them so insistently’ by the middle class. But ‘the ever pressing demands of the stomach, the chronic uncertainty of employment, the ceaselessly shifting nature of the casual-labour market, the pitiful struggle of worker against worker at the dock gate, the arbitrary sentence of destitution, and the equally abitrary cascade of charity, provided no focus for any lasting growth of collective loyalty upon which a stable class consciousness could be based.’
The failure of the socialist movement of the 1880s to overcome these mountainous problems paved the way for the establishment of the ‘bureaucratic machine politics of Herbert Morrison’s London Labour Party’ in the twentieth century.
 



The Bookmarx Club is offering a feast of good books in the first three months of this year. As the club grows it can offer a wider range of books and give the club members greater choice. The range and choice will undoubtedly grow in 1978 if readers realise how much they can save on increasingly expensive books. If you can’t afford £4.50 per quarter then share the cost and the books with a friend.
Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative are starting the year with an ambitious list of books by Victor Serge all priced at £1.25. They are Conquered City, Birth of our Power and Men in Prison. Following the success of Marx for Beginners, Writers and Readers are about to launch Lenin for Beginners at £1.25.
Quartet have recently published Jeffrey Weeks’ Coming Out: Homosexual Politics in Britain from the Nineteenth Century to the present at £3.95. New from Allison and Busby is The Selected Writings of Alexandra Kollontai, translated and edited by Alix Holt at £2.95. Allen Lane have just published Dutiful Daughters (£5.95) edited by Jean McCrindle and Sheila Rowbotham, a book of inter views with women talking about their lives.
New from Pluto are two books on Surrealism: Franklin Rosemont, Andre Breton and the First Principles of Surrealism (£1.80), and Andre Breton, What is Surrealism? (£5.00), a selection of Breton’s writings by Rosemont. The publication of these two companion volumes coincides with a major exhibition of Surrealist art at the Haywood Gallery in London and a season of Surrealist films at the National Film Theatre, in February. Rosemont’s prose will upset, confront and chasten. He doesn’t take prisoners.
‘Marxism is the theory of the self-emancipation of the working class. In spite of the prevalent misunderstandings and gross distortions of this theory, surrealism concedes nothing to its innumerable slanderers and manhandlers ... Surrealism rejects the easy ways out; the dreary sociological utopianisers pontificating in an academic vacuum, the imbecilic American middle-class idolators of North Korean communism, or the clever super-communist manicurists à la New Left Review, who differ from the smug armchair theoreticians of the 30’s only in the way that fashions in upholstery have changed.’
We can only guess what Rosemont would say to the Tory members of the North West Arts Council who were responsible for cutting the Council subsidy to the North West Spanner Theatre group. Several touring theatre groups are currently under attack and need our support. The main reason for the attacks is the enormous success that socialist theatre has begun to enjoy, success that philistines would clearly like to smash.
The latest issue of History Workshop (No. 4) has an interesting section on the Workers’ Theatre Movement in the 1920’s and 1930’s. It contains an article by Tom Thomas, a founder member of the Movement, on A propertyless theatre for the propertyless class.
As a contribution to the current expansion of socialist theatre Pluto are publishing a number of playscripts this year including Margaretta D’Arcy and John Arden’s The Non-Stop Connolly Show, John McGrath’s Mum’s the Word and Carol Churchill’s Light Shining in Buckinghamshire. For information about the Playscript Club that Pluto has started write to them at Unit 10 Spencer Court, 7 Chalcot Rd, London NW1.
For information about the persecution of the North West Spanner Theatre group write to North West Spanner, The Drill Hall, Manchester Road, Mossley, Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancashire. North West Spanner have helped to initiate a campaign to defend the arts against political censorship, so if you want more information write to them.
 



The Technology of Political ControlAckroyd, Margolis,
Rosenhead, & ShalicePenguin £1.25
THE problem of reviewing this book is posed by a theme which is
summarised on the cover.
‘They (the authors) have written a a careful,
chilling and sane book on what is certainly the central political
question of our time.’
This book is certainly carefully researched and provides chilling
evidence of the new technology open to a state’s control
agencies. But the issues raised do not constitute ‘the central
political question of our time.’ Those people who do argue this
view, or more frequently a less extreme version of it, tend to be
paralysed by the politics of paranoia. The authors of this book are
not at the extreme pole of this view but the presentation of their
arguments nourish that interpretation. The more blood curdling
aspects of the international use of new forms of torture,
manipulation, intelligence operations etc., will come as a revelation
to the majority of Penguin book buyers browsing through W.H. Smugs.
The information in the book provides valuable ammunition for the
debate on the use of science and the nature of technological
innovation.
But the value of the information is distorted by the framework of
political ideas in which it is placed. The central dynamic of class
conflict is seen through a conspiratorial prism. The vision that
appears takes the form of an encroaching Corporate ‘Strong
State’. The message that filters through, seemingly derivative
of Marcuse, is ‘They are many, we are few’.
Now this is not to argue that the state is not becoming more
repressive; on the contrary. The needs of capital in Britain today
are such that the state is attempting to be more coercive. But such
measures over the last few years have only enjoyed a partial success.
Working class organisation has shown itself to be extremely
resilient. We need to go forward with courage, arguing for socialist
alternatives, and not lose sight of the fact that it is in the
workplace that we are capable fo building the forces that can combat
state repression. Portugal and Spain are examples. We are many, they
are few.



TWO important new books on the history and practice of sexual
politics are published by Pluto this month. They will be reviewed
soon, as both raise issues that need clarifying and discussing today.
Sheila Rowbotham A New World for Women: Stella Brown-Socialist
Feminist (Pluto Press £1.50), Sheila Rowbotham and Jeffrey
Weeks Socialism and the New Life: The personal and sexual politics
of Edward Carpenter and Havelock Ellis (Pluto Press £1.80).
Virago have also produced a book that illuminates the history of
rank and file socialist and feminist struggles before the First World
War. The Hard Way Up, The Auto-Biography of Hannah Mitchell
Suffragette and Rebel (Virago £1.75). A fascinating story.
Ken Coates, Beyond Wage Slavery (Spokesman Books £2.45).
Boring and pretentious, this book is only of interest to those
comrades who take a (sectarian) pleasure in tracing the political
downfall of those they disagreed with in 1968.
Burchett and Roebuck, The Whores Of War: Mercenaries Today
(Penguin £0.75). Despite sexist title and liberal politics an
interesting read, a book full of information that will be useful to
all who want to knwo about the realities of mercenaries today.
Bob Dixon, Catching Them Young: Vol.1: Sex Race and
Class in children’s Fiction; Vol.2: Political Ideas in
Children’s Fiction (Pluto Press, £1.80 each). These
two volumes are published this month. They’ll make a valuable
contribution to the debates among teachers and parents about the real
weight of ideological indoctrination that children suffer. Also new
from Penguin is Leon Kamin The Science and Politics of I.Q.
(95p). The American author attacks the notion that I.Q. is largely
inherited. He argues that the
‘I.Q. test has served as an instrument of
oppression against the poor, dressed in the trappings of science,
rather than politics.’



THE best book on the parliamentary road has not yet been written.
It would probably take the form of a present day Pilgrims Progress
in which our hero or heroine would stumble into Quagmires of
Illusions, Graveyards of Lost Souls, the Desert of Ward Committees,
be tempted by the Ogre of Corruption, be Axed by the Cuts, only to
end up dying of hypothermia in a miserable block of flats named after
Harold Wilson.
In the meantime, what can be read? Miliband’s Parliamentary
Socialism (Merlin Press) tells the sad story of the Labour Party
from its earliest years to the late 1960’s. David Coates tells
a similar tale in The Labour Party and the Struggle For Socialism
(Cambridge Univ. Press). Both titles have their limitations, but they
are the best histories of labourism available with Miliband’s
much the more readable. Both provide an arsenal of facts and
arguments against reformism, gradualism, and the parliamentary road.
A more recent book deserving a wider audience is Leo Panitch’s
Social Democracy and Industrial Militancy with the subtitle,
The Labour Party, the Trade Unions and Incomes Policy 1945-1974
(Cambridge £8.50, so get it from your library). This is a
detailed study of Labour’s commitment to capitalism, the Trade
Union Leaders commitment to Labour’s commitment, and the
struggles of the rank and file.
For those who like the facts from the horse’s mouth then
visit your library to look through Crosland’s The Future of
Socialism, Harold’s Labour Government 1964-1970, or
the more intimate Confessions of a Cabinet Minister by
Crossman. These are the works of the men who made it. For those who
didn’t make it, generally to be found on the left of the PLP,
you might sample a very sad book by Eric Heffer, The Class
Struggle in Parliament.
Two more serious views that we must consider are Stuart Holland’s
The Socialist Challenge (Quartet £2.95) reviewed by
Colin Sparks in IS 97, and Ralph Miliband’s article in
Socialist Register 1976 (Merlin £2.50). Holland belongs
to the more sophisticated state capitalist wing of the Labour Party,
whereas Miliband is one of the few survivors of a generation that
mainly slithered without trace into the Slough of Despond. Our
argument with their views have been taken up in this and recent
issues of International Socialism. The debate on the new draft
of The British Road to Socialism of the CPGB has highlighted
some of the important differences between reformist and revolutionary
paths. With the CPGB we meet the High Priests of Reformism for it is
they together with the Labour left who sow the illusions that have
paralysed so many good militants. Our task is to confront those
illusions head on, with the lessons of Chile and Portugal fresh in
our minds.
Further Reading
Prieto, Chile (Pluto 75p)
Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956-68 (Penguin £4.00)
P. Foot, Why you should be a Socialist (SWP 35p)
P. Foot, The Politics of Harold Wilson (Penguin o/p)
 


This is not the article originally written. The task I set myself was to write a definitive analysis of the labour movement today. This has yet to be written. It will require a great deal of collective effort, debate and analysis. This article replaces a draft which was little more than a summary of the struggles over the last decade with what I thought were a number of insights into the many changes that have occurred.
Over the decade 1967-1977 there have been enormous changes in the scale and nature of class conflict, in the context of the declining fortunes of British capital. Struggle and experience have generally been fragmented, only occasionally linked into a common purpose. A total view of the dimensions of class conflict has been, and remains, elusive. Patterns offering interpretation have seemingly coalesced, only to disintegrate with extraordinary speed and frequency as the level of struggle has changed.
Given the absence of any substantial analysis of these changes anywhere on the left it is necessary to open up the debate and work towards a definition of the problems. Articles have been written, particularly in the pages of this journal, which have examined partial aspects of the whole. But just as our practice as revolutionaries is to link the fragmented struggles of the class into a generalised offensive, our theory must develop through a process of debate and exchange which links the experience and understanding gained from the struggles we’re engaged in. What follows is intended as a contribution to the debate.
 
A Starting Point
Any overview of the development of the labour movement over the last decade needs to start with the important contributions made by Cliff and Barker in Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards (1966) and their consequential writings in the late 1960s. They focussed on the post war growth of the shop steward movement in the engineering industry. The full employment, or near full employment, of the war and the post-war period had given workers new confidence. After the defeats of the 1920’s and 1930’s shop steward organisation had grown again and flourished in the post-war boom. Gains could frequently be won without strike action. Where strikes did take place they were, on the whole, unofficial, short, small and usually successful. But the class consciousness of the pre-war years was largely replaced by a sectional consciousness which fragmented the working class. The place where workers believed improvements in their lives could be won shifted from the national level to the shop floor. It was a ‘do-it-yourself’ reformism which emphasised self reliance and self activity: a partial advance and a partial retreat.
Taking their analysis as a starting point, the theme of my first draft was ‘capital’s needs v. the shop floor response’ as the central dynamic of class conflict over the last decade. But this approach presents problems as the composition of the workforce has changed, with around 50% now employed in the public sector, and as the level of conflict and militancy has grown in this area.
With the end of the post-war boom, capital’s need in, for example, the engineering industry, could be concisely stated: the rate of exploitation had to be increased. To put this into effect employers demanded that labour costs be reduced and that productivity be raised. Firstly there had to be an end to wage drift and shop floor bargaining power had to be curtailed. Secondly there had to be increased productivity, which meant shop floor organisation and confidence had to be emasculated.
In engineering and related sectors capital’s problem was its own product, the confident shop floor movement which had grown out of the boom years. Capital’s economic success had created its own antithesis, a movement whose aspirations were rising as capital’s confidence declined.
But the relation between capital and labour in the public sector is not clear. We do not yet have a theory capable of defining ‘capital’s needs’ when discussing a hospital, a school, or a town hall. In an engineering factory, the question of raising the rate of exploitation is clear – through speed up, cutting manning levels etc. But in a hospital, can we even talk about a rate of exploitation?
So our starting point, the attempt to define the central dynamics of the conflict between capital and labour, leads to our first problem. Ten years ago, when the core of militancy was to be found in the engineering industry we had a working hypothesis, which, tried and tested, has been proved correct. But it has not been sufficient to explain some of the newer struggles in the public sector.
 
A Turning Point
Our next major problem was posed by the return of Labour to power in 1974. When we fought with the miners for the defeat of the Heath government our expectations were high. Our interpretation of the development of working class consciousness and shop floor organisation led us to believe that after a short honeymoon between Labour and the unions, conflict would build up to the levels of the recent past. We were wrong.
The return of Labour was a turning point whose consequences have thoroughly challenged our theories of the post war working class movement. Some continuities do exist which require renewed examination, together with new developments which must reshape our ideas.
Under the social contract strike levels have fallen dramatically. For the first time since 1966 the number of strikes fell for two years running in 1975 and 1976 after a decade from 1964 to 74 of rising struggle. Even more important, and more marked, was the fall in the number of working days lost in disputes. From large, officially-led strikes during the Heath government, there was a return to small, fragmented, and largely unofficial strikes under Labour. In 1971 and 1972 over 75 per cent of days ‘lost’ in strikes had been through official action. That figure had gone over 88 per cent in the first two months of 1974, but once Labour took over the percentage fell to 11.5 per cent for the remaining ten months of 1974 (see Table).



Stoppages in the years 1966-1976




Year


No. of
stoppages
beginning
in year


No. of
workers
involved in
stoppages
000’s


Aggregate
no. of days
lost in
stoppages
000’s


  


Year


No. of
stoppages
beginning
in year


No. of
workers
involved in
stoppages
000’s


Aggregate
no. of days
lost in
stoppages
000’s




1966


1,937


   544


  2,398


1972


2,497


1,734


23,909




1967


2,116


   734


  2,787


1973


2,873


1,528


  7,197




1968


2,378


2,258


  4,690


1974


2,922


1,626


14,750




1969


3,116


1,665


  6,846


1975


2,282


   809


  6,012




1970


3,906


1,801


10,980


1976


1,990


   661


  3,286




1971


2,228


1,178


13,551


 




Source: Department of Employment Gazette, January 1977



But the downturn in struggle under the Social Contract has clarified our understanding of the transformed role of the trade union bureaucracy, the further development of state intervention as an integral part of capital’s survival, and the potential for rightward drift in many sections of the established left in the working class.
When the minority Labour government was returned to power in March 1974 the Tory incomes policy had just been smashed by the miners. After two years of falling real income, the pressure of workers pay demands was irresistible. But the 1974 miners’ strike was significantly different to the earlier strike in 1972, which had been much more of a rank and file struggle. In 1974 the miners’ officials played a much stronger role in the running of the dispute and kept a tight rein on initiatives.
The first sections of the working class to confront the newly elected Labour government were the local government workers, teachers and nurses. At practically the same time, in April, the leadership of the engineering workers signed a national agreement that gave almost nothing to the two million workers involved.
The capitulation of the engineers’ leaders delayed but did not stop the action of the rank and file. A few months later numerous strikes broke out in engineering, including the most advanced, best organised, traditionally most militant section- the car workers. With the end of stage 3 of the Tories incomes policy in late July, many groups were determined to restore their real incomes, including lorry drivers, the dustmen, and groups of engineers.
The level of militancy was high as the economy slipped into deeper crisis. Labour’s response was to lead a new ruling class strategy. The government’s first job was to repeal the Industrial Relations Act and the Employment Protection Act. These two pieces of legislation were not based primarily on enforcing the rule of law in industrial relations or on weakening the union machinery. Their purpose was more subtle. They have been attempts (so far, quite successful attempts) to integrate unions with management, to formalise procedures, to reduce conflict through conciliation and arbitration. The net result is to increase substantially the role of the full time union official and to undermine the power of shop stewards. The Arbitration, Conciliation and Advisory Service (ACAS), for example, has been successfully diverting conflict on the shop floor towards arbitration settlements for some time now.
But this was only part of the strategy. Their real concern, having begun to prepare the way, was the launching of a new offensive to increase productivity levels within the national capital’s industrial base.
Raising productivity means disciplining the workforce, and extending the control of management over the shop floor. It means rationalisation, speed up, fewer jobs, and more work for the same money. Above all, it means undermining the power of the shop floor and its representatives, the stewards. It means the reduction of manning levels, the increase of flexibility and the reduction of job demarcation. Centrally they require an increase in the intensity of work.
In addition they needed to increase the attack on the welfare state in order to give new priorities to public expenditure.
And to carry out this offensive they had to sell it, not as a piranha, but as a gold-fish. So they called it the Social Contract. Just as capital gives wages for labour as an apparent exchange of equivalents, so the Social Contract was sold as a swapping of pipes of peace.
It is no accident of history that the Labour Party/TUC committee that drafted the Social Contract sat together for two years prior to October 1974, and drew their solution for the crisis from the level of class conflict in 1973 and 1974. ‘The essence of the new social contract’, they said, was ‘an entirely new recognition of the aims of social justice.’
The Social Contract could not have been perpetuated without the united and active assistance of the trade union leaders. They presented an almost entirely united front to their divided and fragmented members, as the overwhelming TUC votes show. The successful selling of the deal depended on convincing the mass of the working class

that the British economy was in crisis – not difficult given the levels of unemployment and inflation, and the fact that real wages had barely risen;
that wage rises aggravate the crisis – as Wilson’s document put it ‘One man’s wage rise is another man’s job’; and
so that any workers going for higher wages would be acting against the interests of the class as a whole.

Such a tissue of half truths could only be maintained in the absence of any alternative leadership arguing against the barrage of propaganda, or capable of leading struggles to disprove its logic in practice.
Under phase 1 and phase 2, the state and the employers have bludgeoned shop floor organisation through unemployment, the cuts, etc and through the removal of wage bargaining to Cabinet committee meetings.
The social contract has only been the thin end of the wedge. As the wedge has driven deeper, the other intentions have become clearer; the drive for higher productivity, the incorporation of senior stewards, integration sold as democracy, the reduction of manning levels, the disciplining of the rank and file.
To take on the Contract is not just to take on your own employer, but to take on the world – as the 32 strikers at SU Carburrettors found in 1976. Their strike sent the pound careering downwards and threatened two thousand years of civilisation. In such a climate, defeatism is infectious. To an extent, this is true under any incomes policy, but shop floor struggle over the last two and a half years has been on substantially different terrain to three or four years ago. Much more than the, the struggle has not been just with an employer or even directly with the state, it is directly challenged by whole layers of trade union officialdom, both full time and lay, from the General Council down to the convenors and senior stewards in many industries.
The successful intervention of these layers of officialdom has been truly remarkable. Their authority and their persuasive arguments for the maintenance of the Labour Government ‘at all costs’, have been an important legitimating force for all the attacks on the working class. Once committed to the Social Contract the union bureaucracy played a major role in shifting working class consciousness to the right. And this was only possible because the sergeants and lance-corporals of the movement went with them, aided by the rightward drift of the broad left and the Communist Party seeking to maintain their positions of influence in the (rightward moving) machine.
For the organised shop floor the consequences of these shifts could have been disastrous, indeed in some cases, in the many factories that have closed, they have been. But the overall picture is not one of collapse. For two years the struggle has been contained, but it has not been a defeated and demoralised working class that has given up, rather a militant working class that has held off, or has been held off. Since it began the social contract has developed a number of weaknesses, not least the increased distance that has grown in the unions between the leaders and the rank and file. But the weakest part of an incomes policy, the part that makes it most fragile, is its own success. Not its ideological success for that is one of its strengths, but its material success in holding down wages, which has produced smouldering, deeply felt resentment and anger.
The disputes of the first few months of 1977 showed conclusively the remarkable resilience of shop floor organisation. Shop steward organisation has evidently not atrophied during two years of low activity – on the contrary, its strength, and the speed with which old links were reformed and new ones created, showed the potential that could be realised when a lead was given. Meetings of engineering stewards were held around the country to discuss solidarity with the Leyland toolroom workers, new combine committees sprang to life, as at Schweppes.
In the first three months of 1977, 2,331,000 strike days were recorded, of which half took place in March alone.
These disputes have taken place in the traditional strongholds of union militancy amongst craftsmen in large companies. In Leyland it was the toolroom engineers, at Heathrow the maintenance engineers, at Port Talbot the electricians, and at The Times it was skilled printworkers.
On the other hand these strikes have been partly responsible for the flexibility of current phase three proposals – showing as they did the potential revolt against a further rigid pay deal. On the other hand some of the demands they raised were sectional, and therefore vulnerable to productivity and incentives deals.
In the Leyland dispute there was a clear demonstration of a preparedness to fight the Social Contract. Groups of angry stewards led the fight, but they were elbowed out of the way by the established old guard of senior stewards, led by Derek Robinson. The Leyland combine committee, and the broad left within it, allowed management, the press, Scanlon and Jones, and the government to divide factory from factory and bludgeon the toolroom workers back to work. Once the dispute was over, the senior stewards made sure that subsequent initiatives were stillborn. For example they worked very hard to ensure that the April 20th anti-Contract demonstration was made up of small delegations, rather than masses of strikers, despite the fact that they had called it. During the Heathrow strike it took the old guard even longer to re-establish control and wrest the leadership from the militant rank and file stewards who led the strike.
In August 1976, the TUC General Council had ‘persuaded’ the National Union of Seamen not to strike in support of their claim by threatening them with expulsion from the TUC. In the toolmakers dispute at Leyland the National Executive of the AUEW publicly supported management in its threat to sack 3000 workers on unofficial strike. The leadership of the print union NATSOPA went even further. Not only did they support the management of The Times in trying to sack the workers on unofficial strike in March 1977, they went as far as expelling the men from the union and offering to find other men to do their jobs.
 
The Trade Union Bureaucracy
The most important factor in sustaining the Social Contract has been the trade union Bureaucracy, but the role they have played was not one that we anticipated. Of course, class collaboration is nothing new in the history of trade union officiajdom, but the degree of recent collaboration has rarely been seen outside of wartime.
In the post-war boom the trade union leaders played a relatively quiet collaborationist role. In the 1950’s and 1960’s, officials played very little part in the majority of disputes.
The majority of the strikes of those years were fought out in individual factories between the workers concerned, led by their stewards, and the management. The disputes were won so quickly that the officials rarely knew of them before they were settled. But collaborate they did. The number of governmental committees on which the unions sat rose from 60 in 1949 to 81 in 1954 and the trend continues. And in a number of cases the union bureaucracies managed to smash rank and file organisation – for example at British Light Steel Pressings (1961) and Ford Dagenham (1962).
But the scale of the change since 1974 is unprecedented. When the capitalist class decided to cut the miners’ wages in 1926, they had to defeat the General Strike first. In the last two years, the Wilson and Callaghan governments have enforced the biggest fall in real wages since the nineteenth century with the active support of the trade union leadership.
Paradoxically, the struggles in the late 1960s and early 1970s helped to make this possible. The shift from localised disputes to national confrontations with the government thrust the trade union leaders willy-nilly into the centre of the stage. And they found themselves forced, in order to ride the tiger of rank-and-file militancy, to lead their members in these confrontations. So Scanlon and Jones led the opposition to Wilson’s incomes policy and In Place of Strife in the late 1960s and even right-wingers like Gormley found themselves leading the two great miners’ strikes that broke the back of the Heath government. Where the leaders acted they did so to divert the militancy into official channels and to prevent it from escaping control, but nonetheless they acted.
It is worth quoting what Tony Cliff wrote in 1969:
‘The vacillation of the trade union bureaucracy between the state, employers and the workers, with splits in the far-from-homogeneous bureaucracy will continue and become more accentuated in the coming period. Hence its ridiculously impotent and wretched position. It dreams of reforms but fears to settle accounts in real earnest with the state (which not only refuses to grant reforms but even withdraws those already granted) and it also fears the rank-and-file struggle which alone can deliver reforms. The union bureaucrats are afraid of losing what popular support they still maintain but are more afraid of losing their own privileges vis-à-vis the rank and file. Their fear of the mass struggle is much greater than their abhorrence of state control of the unions. At all decisive moments the union bureaucracy is bound to side with the state, but in the meantime it vacillates’. (IS 36, 1969)
It wasn’t Vic Feather calling demonstrations that stopped the Industrial Relations Act, it was the revolt of the rank and file over the jailing of the Pentonville Five. The state learnt that lesson and so did the union bureaucrats. But pushed by the rising militancy of the rank and file, the union bureaucrats were on new terrain. The union leaders were products of the 1950s and 1960s. The consciousness and activity of the rank and file is the product of their everyday experience in the present. The gap grew wider as the struggle grew. Cast in a new role, the bureaucrats flexed their muscles: not to do battle but to maintain their position. Their commitment to the Labour government/TUC social contract policy arose from the years 1968-1974, when they had been left behind by the militancy of the unofficial movement.
After 1974 the trade union leadership were able to demonstrate their loyalty to the interests of British capital. Their pleas for concessions that would enable them to sell wage controls to their members, which had been brushed aside by Heath, were answered by Wilson and Callaghan. And the theme of the TUC’s proposals to the government (and the slightly more left-wing version advocated by the Tribune group, Alan Fisher and the Communist Party – the so-called ‘alternative economy strategy’) has centred on building up the strength of British capital against the inroads of foreign competitors. Hence the General Council’s demands for import controls and support for the NEB as the instrument of the reorganisation of British capital under the aegis of the state.
In enforcing the Social Contract on the rank and file the trade union bureaucracy has been at an advantage. The shop stewards’ weakness was their fragmentation and the narrowness of their horizons – the fight over wages, hours and conditions in individual shops and plants, rarely even at combine level. The struggles of the early 1970s had increased the power of the national leaderships and thrust politics onto the shopfloor. So far, most shop stewards have failed to adapt to this new situation.
Moreover, since the 1960s a web of links has evolved connecting an upper layer of shop stewards with the trade union officials and the employers. There are now something like 5,000 full-time shop stewards in Britain. These convenors and senior stewards form a distinct layer closer in social position to full-time officials than to lay stewards. They do not work on the shopfloor, are not laid off during disputes, are provided with offices by the management. Their job is to negotiate with the employers, their life is devoted to the reaching of compromise. It is upon this group that the various participation schemes in Leyland and Chrysler have battened in order to incorporate them into the process of rescuing British capital. The evolution of Derek Robinson at Longbridge into a supporter of management’s proposals to cut down on industrial stoppages and introduce plant-wide bargaining shows that participation has had its successes.
In the wake of 8,000 redundancies in 1975, Chrysler management introduced a sophisticated participation scheme, which not only decimated disputes while productivity was relentlessly forced up, but also paved the way for their longer term planning agreements, which smell of American style labour contracts. The senior stewards were crucial in this process. British Leyland built their participation proposals on the seduction of convenors into decision making – but the overturning by mass meetings and ballots of several crucial proposals that senior stewards had agreed to back demonstrates that despite their more intimate knowledge of the workforce senior stewards are no safer from exposure than full-time union officials.
 
New Unionisation
Union membership grew between 1965 and 1974 from 8.9 million to 10.4 million, despite the growth in unemployment and the decline in numbers employed in sectors with a strong union tradition such as mining and railways, and the growth of areas such as banking and insurance. The proportion of the workforce in trade unions grew from 43% to over 50% or, if workplaces employing fewer than 200 are excluded, to 89%. The most rapid rises in union membership were in 1969-70, when the unions rejected Labour’s incomes policy, and during the years of opposition to the Tories’ Phase Two and Three.
A Department of Employment survey on workplace industrial relations in 1972 showed that shop steward organisation had stood firm against all the batterings of the previous few years. 82% of shop stewards interviewed could hold meetings in the workplace, and 52% could do so in working hours. In the public sector, shop steward organisation was growing apace. Stewards were only officially recognised in local government in 1969 and in the National Health Service in 1971, but the strikes and battles over bonus schemes led to their rapid growth. For example, in NUPE, in 1970, 39% of branches had no union stewards, while by 1974 only 11% had no stewards. In 1970, 21% of branches had five or more stewards, and by 1974 this proportion had risen to 48% – almost half.
Since 1974 trade union membership has continued to grow despite the higher unemployment. The main areas of new recruitment are among women and in the public sector. The reasons for the steady ‘growth are not at all clear and a detailed analysis would need to examine each sector of employment.
The Employment Protection Act and the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act gave certain concessions to the unions in the field of recognition. Some sections of the lower paid have used these in order to gain elementary trade union rights, although this has by no means always been possible: the most obvious case being Grunwicks. The public sector cuts have helped the recruitment in NUPE, but this is not the whole explanation for its growth. ASTMS have launched an aggressive recruitment drive in a variety of areas of lower management where differentials have been eroded, and living standards have fallen.
The growth of unionisation when the struggle was on the up. between 1969 and 1974, can more easily be understood: it was largely a process of learning from the example of others’ success. The growth during the down turn is harder to explain. But what it does show is the degree of ‘burrowing at the base’ that is taking place despite the containment of struggle since 1974.
Public sector unions like NUPE, NALGO, NUT and CPSA have become increasingly important and combative over the past few years. This development has its origins in the incomes policies of previous governments – the dustmen broke through the Labour wage controls in 1969 and then inflicted the first defeat on Heath; hospital workers launched into a tremendously militant attack on the Tory Phase Two in 1972-3; and the 1974 strikewave after Heath’s fall brought sections like the nurses into action. It also reflects the growing weight of public sector workers since the 1950s, who now form 7 million in a workforce of 15 million. The majority of workers expelled from manufacturing industry who found new jobs found them in the public sector.
But the issue that’ has transformed the situation has been Labour’s cuts in social spending. Direct attacks on their members’ jobs have forced the leaders of the public sector unions to organise large-scale protests like the lobby of Parliament on November 17, 1976 which brought 80,000 workers onto the streets. Alan Fisher of NUPE in particular has used the campaign against the cuts to recruit to NUPE on a large scale.
The militancy of the public sector workers is being restricted by their ‘new left’ leaders to protestations rather than any national offensive. The force of the NUPE anti-cuts campaign has been dissipated in a series of localised ‘guerilla actions’. Intervention by the courts was enough to persuade Geoffrey Drain of NALGO to call off his union’s one-day strike in Scotland last March. The ineffectiveness of the official opposition to the cuts has led to a certain demoralisation after the euphoria generated by November 17th.
The public sector union leaders, and Fisher in particular, find themselves in a quandary. On the one hand, they need to sustain the momentum of the anti-cuts campaign if they are to hold their unions together in the face of the swingeing attacks on their members’ jobs. On the other hand, sustaining the momentum inevitably raises issues that threaten to destroy the cosy harmony of the TUC. Cross-industry rank-and-file unity against the cuts and the Social Contract is a spectre that no trade union bureaucrat can happily contemplate. Fisher and the rest will twist and turn, caught in this contradiction.
 
Changing Consciousness
Since 1974, the question has not been whether living standards will fall, but by how much. Government ministers talk openly about cuts in real wages and permanent unemployment – which ten years ago would have been unthinkable. The Economist proclaimed the end of the postwar boom in March 1975, and congratulated the government on achieving ‘one object, which should not be undervalued; the education of the general public, left-wing ministers and trade union leaders in the inexorable laws of economics.’
The extent of the impact of this view is very difficult to ascertain: on one level it has produced the generalised notion of ‘the country is in a mess’ but section after section of the working class knows how their own management are ‘not doing that badly’. Overall, however, there is a general recognition that the system is in crisis.
The ideas of the shopfloor that grew up in the 1950s and 1960s were geared to the belief that improvements could be wrung out of the system through rank and file action. But the crisis since 1973 has upped the stakes, there is little room today for militancy without politics. The consciousness of rank and file workers has yet to adapt to this.
The strikes of the last few months suggest that a shift is taking place and that threats of imminent doom are not able to overcome anger at falling living standards. But the seriousness of the crisis has undoubtedly driven many of the militants of yesteryear to the right. Even so the crisis cannot erase from working class consciousness the struggles and tactics of 1969-1974. The major confrontations of the miners, of the Pentonville 5, of UCS were not so long ago. The work-in at Upper Clyde Shipbuilders was important in leading the way for thousands of workers to occupy their factories in the face of belligerent managements. The fact that hospitals have been occupied in the last year is a direct consequence of the earlier occupations in engineering and an example of how a tactic that once was considered extreme has become popular coinage among many sections of workers.
For each section of workers that entered the arena of struggle in the early 1970’s new lessons were learned. Among each group of post office workers, building workers, miners, gas workers, firemen, hospital workers, civil servants, teachers or journalists, there are those who want to take up the fight. Many of the hard core of militants are younger workers whose trade union experience does not go back before the years of rising struggle in the early 1970’s.
But the key problem for militants over the last two and a half years has been the drift to the right of the traditional political organisations of the working class. The Labour government’s shift to the right has been accompanied by the continued organisational and electoral decline of the Labour Party. The growth of the Scottish National Party threatens to condemn Labour to permanent minority status. The parliamentary left’s reaction has been timid even by the standards of their predecessors in the 1930s and 1950s.
The shift to the right of the Labour Party and the trade unions has been paralleled by a slide to the right by the Communist Party and its Broad Left. The policy of the British Road to Socialism makes this a necessary move if the CP is to maintain its spheres of influence in the union machine. For many CP industrial militants this move has created considerable problems. Moreover the CP’s bases of industrial support contribute to this shift. Its most entrenched base, in TASS, depends on a regime of appointed full-timers. Many of its leading stewards have been drawn into collaboration with the employers via participation schemes.
The disintegration of the broad left machine in the CP’s traditional stronghold in the engineers, where the right have succeeded in almost wiping out the electoral advances of the left in the 1960s, is likely to intensify the CP’s shift to the right. To the extent that the CP still serves as the focus for the left in many industries, this shift will cause strains of the sort the Communist Party is experiencing at present over the new draft of The British Road to Socialism.
But if the Social Contract has resulted in a ‘crisis of leadership’ in the British labour movement, this crisis reflects the fragmentation of rank-and-file consciousness and organisation. The post-war boom produced a powerful and self-confident working class. But a crucial problem for us is the degree to which the localised, ‘do-it-yourself reformism of the 1950’s and 1960’s did not create the conditions out of which class wide rank and file organisation and generalised political consciousness could easily emerge when the challenges of the 1970s demanded them. Revolutionary socialists can play a decisive role in changing that situation.
 



THE new Bookmarx Club has been launched successfully and its membership is growing day by day. Do not stop at joining yourself but encourage your friends and workmates to join as well. The club is great value, and most useful of all in the vast number of towns without a decent bookshop. Make one of your aims for 1977 the building of Mail Order Marxism. Write to: Bookmarx Club, Bookmarks. 265 Seven Sisters Rd, London N4.
Some recent titles of interest include Marx For Beginners by Rius, published Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative at £l.00, which will entertain some non-beginners but assumes too much for many beginners. Bad News by the Glasgow University Media Group (at £5.95, so get it from your library) is a detailed study of the ways that the BBC and ITV distort the news, particularly in industrial disputes. It is published by Routledge and Kegan Paul. Bookmarks have asked me to mention that Shelley – The Pursuit by Richard Holmes is available in paperback at the very reasonable price of £2.95.
New this month is Jack London: the Writer, the Rebel by Robert Barltrop (Pluto £4.50 hardback only) to be reviewed in a subsequent issue.
Recently published is The Angry 30s by Julian Symons (Eyre Methuen, £1.95), a lively photographic essay on the 1930s.
February sees the launching in Britain of the Pluto/Urizen parallel publishing programme. Urizen, a new US publishing house, are distributing all Pluto titles throughout North America. The first Urizen books available this month include the excellent novel The Life of the Automobile by Ilya Ehrenburg (£2.70).



Trade Unions Under Capitalism
Tom Clarke and Laurie Clements
Fontana £1.95
Where have you ever found an industrial sociology reader in which an editor has argued that
‘Revolutionary workers’ political organisations are therefore indispensable, not only to generalise the struggle to wider society, but within the unions to fight for militant and uncompromising representation of workers’ interests. In this task it is necessary to secure leaders who are committed and reliable, and also to develop the awareness and involvement of the rank-and-file so that they are less dependent upon the leadership.’?
This book is a very useful collection of 20 articles which examine the limitations and potentialities of trade union organisation. It ranges from the classical analysis of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky, through the historical interpretation of James Hinton and Carter Goodrich, to the Marxist industrial relations of Richard Hyman and Huw Beynon. It includes Hinton’s Theory of Independent Rank-and-File Organisation from his book The First Shop Stewards Movement, a piece on Job Control from Beynon’s Working for Ford, and an extract from Hyman’s Marxism and the Sociology of Trade Unions.
This book deserves to be read by all those workers whose eyes have been opened by the failure of the trade union leaders to defeat the Grunwick management.



The Origins of British Bolshevism
Ray Challinor
Croom Helm £8.50
When the Communist Party of Great Britain was formed out of the unity negotiations of 1920-21 an important section of the membership came from the Socialist Labour Party. These comrades had built a small revolutionary organisation with significant influence in the working class. In this new book, based on many years of dedicated research, Ray Challinor traces the development of the Socialist Labour Party from its formation in 1903 to the early years of the 1920’s.
In examining this period he is covering similar ground to Walter Kendall’s The Revolutionary Movement in Britain 1900-1921. Challinor, however, challenges Kendall’s sectarian interpretation that ‘British Bolshevism’ was a transplant from the continent, showing that revolutionary ideas and organisation developed out of the struggles of the indigenous working class.
The SLP was formed out of a split away from the Social-Democratic Federation in 1903. Those who split from the SDF were fed up with the reformist and nationalist politics of the SDF leadership. They particularly wanted a new approach to industrial struggles and found inspiration in the writing of James Connolly and the American industrial unionist Daniel de Leon.
From the beginning the SLP argued that the fragmentation of working class organisation – for example, the existence of 225 different unions in the engineering industry – must be ended: instead there should be one union of reach industry. They also argued for strong rank-and-file organisation to control the unions and make the leaders the servants rather than the masters of the membership.
When war broke out in 1914 the SLP stood firm against the war, unlike most of the left at the time. As the struggle against the Servile State grew in engineering the SLP played an influential part in the building of the Clyde Workers’ Committee and the spread of the shop-stewards’ movement. The SLP’s paper The Socialist was their outspoken organiser, its production being continually harassed as a consequence. Arthur MacManus was the editor of The Socialist when in 1915 he became the Chairman of the Clyde Workers’; Committee. When Connolly’s The Irish Worker was suppressed in Ireland in 1915, the SLP agreed to produce it secretly on their Party press in Glasgow. MacManus made numerous trips to Dublin carrying the papers in parcels marked ‘Glass’, until the authorities discovered him.
The SLP were extremely rigorous in the educational work, running of huge numbers of pamphlets on their own press and importing large numbers of Marxist classics from the press of Charles Kerr in Chicago.
The Party welcomed; the Bolshevik revolution in Russia as the model of their own view of smashing capitalism. The Socialist in March 1918 said:
‘For 6 years the SLP has been sneered at and jeered at, but now Russia, in the transition towards the Socialist Republic, shows the SLP is right.’
The State did take him seriously. On June 13th 1918 the police raided the SLP headquarters and confiscated 10,000 copies of Trotsky’s pamphlet War or Revolution. On 6th July 1918 the SLP press was raided. All paper and every drop of ink was seized. Two new linotype machines were dismantled. Production of The Socialist was made so difficult that by the end of 1918 the editor worked from a tent in a field at Heald Green, near Manchester.
The October revolution raised the question of building Communist Parties in every country. The ‘Russian Model’ was heatedly discussed at the time and Ray Challinor returns to the arguments with controversial vigour. His chapter Lenin and the British Communist Parties examines Lenin’s advice to British revolutionaries based upon the very poor information he was getting in Russia. Challinor takes issue with Lenin’s view that the British Communist Party had to be based upon the British Socialist Party rather than the SLP. He also suggests that Lenin’s polemic against the anti-parliamentarians was based on exaggerated information about the balance of forces and the nature of the Labour Party.
In the unity negotiations that led to the formation of the CPGB a great deal of sectarian polemic was generated. John MacLean was pushed into the cold, as was Sylvia Pankhurst and the Workers Socialist Federation. In the arguments between the BSP and the SLP Challinor sides with the latter, concluding that the CPGB was ill-informed and ill-named. Many of the SLP members did join the CP while the SLP itself stayed out and collapsed by the end of 1922. Challinor’s argument that the reformism of many of those who joined the CPGB at its foundation made the organisation more susceptible to Stalinism in the later 1920s carries much weight. But given the level of class struggle in the post war years could an alternative formation have made a crucial difference? Ray Challinor’s controversial insights provide much food for thought.



George Ward’s book Fort Grunwick will be published in December by Maurice Temple-Smith. While Ward’s will probably collect the Worst Book Of The Year Prize, a close runner for the title is possibly Patrick Hutber’s The Decline arid Fall of the Middle Class and How it can Fight Back (Penguin 75p) written by the City Editor of the Sunday Telegraph.
New books of better value include Alexandra Kollontai’s Love of Worker Bees published by Virago at £2.50, Gladys Elder, The Alienated: Growing Old Today, published by the Writers and Readers Publishing Cooperative at £1.50, and Wolf Biermann Poems and Ballads (Pluto £1.50).
The Autumn issue of Race and Class includes an article by David Edgar on Racism, fascism and the politics of the National Front that is worth looking out for.
New November titles include two Bookmarx Club choices, Ray Challinor’s John S. Clarke (Pluto £1.50) and Sylvia Pankhurst’s The Suffragette Movement (Virago £2.95).
Two volumes to look out for in libraries are Colin Crouch Class Conflict and the Industrial Relations Crisis (Heinemann Educational £7.50) and Henry Phelps Brown The Inequality of Pay (Oxford £7.95).
Zed is a new socialist publishing house which has been launched with two titles, Malcolm Caldwell, The Wealth of Some Nations (£3.00) and Uri Davis, Israel: Utopia Incorporated (£3.00). Zed’s aim is to publish a range of books dealing with third world issues.
New from Merlin Press is Voices of Czechoslovak Socialists which contains documents of Charter 77 and other dissidents (90p). Socialist Register 1977 is delayed but will be out in November.

tair Hatchett: Reading on the Rank and File Movement (April 1977)



Alastair Hatchett Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Alastair Hatchett
Guide to Reading
On the Rank & File Movement 1910-1926
(April 1977)
All our hopes and revolutionary aspirations are based on the possibility of the total overthrow of International capitalism. We are engaged in the building of a revolutionary party as the nerve centre and co-ordinator of the struggle. Not a party superimposed from above, but made up of workers everywhere building the fighting bodies of a workers’ movement.
In all revolutionary struggles, shop-floor and locally based workers’ committees, workers’ councils and Soviets have been fighting bodies in the struggle for workers’ power; from Russia in 1917 to Portugal 1975. The years between 1910-1926 provided crucial experience of such rank and file organisation in Britain. What should be read on this subject? Preparing for Power by Jack Murphy (Pluto £2.00) covers the ground that many revolutionary workers fought over between the syndicalist unrest of 1910-1914 and the Minority Movement 1924-1929. Murphy, an engineering worker, was a national leader of the shop steward and workers’ committee movement during the 1st World War and was among those who helped found the Communist Party in 1921.
To recreate a picture of the continuity of struggles over this generation start with Bob Holton’s British Syndicalism 1910-1914 (Pluto £2.95). Holton describes the outburst of rank and file revolt against both the employers and the growing trade union bureaucracy; the demands for union democracy and workers’ control; and the syndicalist ideas of transforming trade unions into revolutionary organisations.
With the onset of war the story is taken up in James Hinton’s The First Shop Stewards’ Movement (Bookmarx club and George Allen and Unwin). Hinton examines the engineering workers’ revolt against the increasingly repressive wartime state and the weak-kneed collaboration with the Government of the trade union leaders. The shop stewards and workers’ committee movement built by the engineers became the central instrument in the fight back. Also read J.T. Murphy, The Workers’ Committee (Pluto Pamphlet 20p). This movement goes rapidly beyond the out-moded ideas of syndicalism. The agency of revolutionary change was now seen to be workshop organisation, cutting across union sectionalism and linking shop stewards between the factories and across the country.
The impact of the Russian Revolution crystallised the need for both the building of a revolutionary party and the building of Soviets. Hinton discusses this in his final chapters. Hugo Dewar starts his Communist Politics in Britain (Pluto £1.80) with the British revolutionaries facing up to these tasks. From the Second Congress of the Communist International came a threefold industrial strategy for the new Communist Party. First, communists should work within existing reformist unions to turn them into ‘efficient organs for the suppression of capitalism’; second, they should build, lead and politicize factory committees; third, they should work to build a revolutionary trade union international. Independent organisation of the rank and file was needed ‘to fight the counter-revolutionary tendencies of the trade union bureaucracy, and to support the spontaneous direct action of the proletariat’. How the British Communist Party attempted and subsequently failed to carry out these tasks is discussed by Hugo Dewar, and also by James Hinton and Richard Hyman in Trade Unions and Revolution (Pluto 90p) which focusses on the role of the National Minority Movement and the CP in the General Strike. Trade Unions and Revolution is a controversial book and should be read together with Duncan Hallas’s review in International Socialism 88. For a right wing but detailed study of the Minority Movement you can read R Martin Communism and the British Trade Unions 1924-1933 (Oxford Univ. Press £4.50).
The CP today have disowned this formative period of their history. It is no longer their history, but ours. And one of our tasks is to learn from it.
Further Reading:


W. Kendall, The Revolutionary Movement in Britain 1900-1921 (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)
Woodhouse and Pearce, Communism in Britain (New Park £1.50)
Trotsky, Where is Britain Going? (New Park)
Cliff, Lenin Vol.2: All Power to the Soviets (Pluto £3.60)
Spriano, The Occupations of the Factories: Italy 1920 (Pluto £2.40)
Goodrich, The Frontier of Control (Pluto £2.95).


 



Eleanor Marx Vol 2, The Crowded Years 1884-1898
Yvonne Kapp
Lawrence and Wishart £12.00
THERE are very few biographies of socialist leaders that bring alive the creativity, activity and relevance of their subject. We have works like Deutscher’s Trotsky, Frolich’s Rosa Luxembourg, E.P. Thompson’s William Morris, Cliff’s Lenin; and there is Victor Serge’s autobiography Memoirs of a Revolutionary. Yvonne Kapp’s two volume work on Eleanor Marx now stands with them.
The first volume covered Eleanor Marx’s formative years in the material poverty but exhilarating spirit of the exiled Marx family in London. The second volume covers her life as an active revolutionary. Here we see her as a committed socialist in first the Social-Democratic Federation and then the Socialist League. As working class struggle rose at the end of the 1880s we see her as one of these who transcended the limitations of the small socialist sects throwing herself into the East London agitation.
Unlike most of her contemporaries in the middle-class socialist milieux of London she was at the centre of the new unionism of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers. Her efforts were acknowledged when she came first in the poll for the executive of the Gasworkers Union. On Christmas Day 1889 she wrote to her sister Laura Lafargue:
‘... For my own poor part, look you, life seems to be becoming one long strike. First there was the Dock Strike. No sooner was that over than I was summoned to Silvertown, and for 10 mortal weeks I travelled daily to that out-of-the-world place; speaking every day – often twice a day, in all weathers in the open air.
‘I began to hope for peace – when lo! the Gas Strike begins ...
‘I am a member of the Gas Workers and General Labourers Union, and Secretary of a Woman’s Branch which I started in Silvertown, and that takes up no end of time. How this strike will go it is difficult to say ... The blacklegs in the works are getting very unmanageable. 132 were seriously burnt (through lack of skill) in one week ... Things are moving here at last, and though the methods differ from those on the Continent, the movement is none the less certain.’
Her optimist had been forged in a long apprenticeship: through the inspiration of her father, and her research for Capital; in her long association with Engels; among the exiles of revolutionary Europe; but most of all by the potential demonstrated by working class struggle in the 1880s.
Her creative but ultimately destructive relationship with Edward Aveling is described with clarity and sympathy by Yvonne Kapp. Eleanor Marx’s suicide in 1898 reflected more than a lover’s betrayal. Kapp show’s how Eleanor’s despair was largely a consequence of the crushing of her optimism. The working-class advance was stemmed by the employers’ offensive of the 1890’s. Engels, known to her as ‘the General’, died in 1896, severing her connection to her father’s generation. That tragedy for her was reinforced by her antipathy for the increasingly crude interpretations of Marx’s writings in Britain and throughout Europe.
Had she lived on, wrote Will Thorne of the Gasworkers Union years later,
‘Eleanor ... would have been a greater women’s leader than the greatest of contemporary women.’
Yvonne Kapp has brought her life out of the shadows of history. These volumes of Eleanor Marx’s biography are expensive so order them from your library and rediscover the excitement of part of our history.
 



THE long awaited republication of Edward Thompson’s William Morris is out this month from Merlin Press at £3.90. Another welcome reissue is Richard Wright’s Native Son (Penguin £1.00), the story of Bigger Thomas, a young Black boy from the slums of Chicago, set in the 1930’s. Virago have just published Life as we have known it, edited by Margaret Llewelyn Davies at £1.25. This is a collection of essays by working-class women describing their lives and experiences, originally published in 1931.
Two new books from Pluto this month are Larissa Reisner, Hamburg at the Barricades (£4.80) and Rosa Levine-Meyer, Inside German Communism (£4.80). Both books focus on class struggle in Weimar Germany; watch out for a pre-publication offer.
Don’t end up regretting that you didn’t join the Bookmarx Club this quarter. Watch for the adverts and send off your money to 265 Seven Sisters Road, London N4. All books reviewed or mentioned in this issue are available at the same address.
 



SEVERAL good titles previously in hardback have just appeared in paperback. They include Tony Bunyan The Political Police in Britain (Quartet £2.50), Hobsbawm’s Revolutionaries (Quartet £2.50) and John Foster Class Struggle in the Industrial Revolution (Methuen £2.75). Penguin have just published a new paperback edition of Hugh Thomas’s monumental study of The Spanish Civil War at £3.50. Also new from Penguim are two books on prisons and prisoners. First is Mike Fitzgeralds’s Prisoners in Revolt (£1.00) which examines the prisoners’ protests and demonstrations of the last few years and the reasons for them. Secondly there is Jessica Mitford’s The American Prison Business (£1.00). Both books reflect the same concern summed up by the American socialist Eugene Debs, ‘While there is a soul in prison, I am not Free.’
All the books reviewed or mentioned in this issue are available on mail order from Bookmarks, 265 Seven Sisters Road, London, N4.



FASCIST movements today can be defeated. Fascism in the 1930’s could have been defeated. There is no inevitable historical force which marches forward independently of the working class. Most of both acacademic and popular histories of the rise of German fascism portray a sense of inevitability in the rise of Hitler, echoing the images of Leni Reifenstahl’s Nazi film The Triumph of the Will. For a contemporary polemic on both the strategies and tactics for defeating German fascism in the 1930s we must reread Trotsky. International Socialism republished some of Trotsky’s 1930-34 writings with the title Fascism, Stalinism, and the United Front in 1969; some copies are still available from Bookmarx at 30p. Also available are Trotsky, Fascism: What it is and how to fight it (Pathfinder 35p) and Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Penguin £1.50).
In addition there are: Daniel Guerin, Fascism and Big Business (Pathfinder £2.05), Vajda, Fascism as a Mass Movement (Alison and Busby £2.95) and Ernst Nolte, Three Faces of Fascism (New English Library £1.50). For a good interpretation of some of the problems raised in these, and other writings, dig out a copy of International Socialism 42 in which Peter Sedgwick wrote The Problem of Fascism as a review article on The Nature of Fascism ed. S.J. Woolf and Political Violence and Public Order by Robert Benewick. The latter title was revised and reissued as The Fascist Movement in Britain (Allen Lane £1.60) and is the most readable account of the rise and fall of Mosley between the wars. Two articles by Colin Sparks, Fascism in Britain in IS 71 and Fascism: The Lessons of Cable Street in IS 94, are indispensable. For a very good novel on the impact of fascism on the Italian peasantry read Ignazio Silone, Fontamara (Journeyman, 85p). Another perspective is provided by Reich, The Mass Psychology of Fascism (Penguin £1.00).
 
Further Reading
Franz Neumann, Behemoth (Out of Print, but worth a search); Tim Mason, Women in Nazi Germany (In two parts in History Workshop 1 and 2); Robert Black, Fascism in Germany (2 vols, Steyn Publications £8.50).



Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution is available in paperback again in time for the 60th anniversary of the Revolution (Pluto £5.00). Another valuable reissue is Selected Writings of William Morris (Penguin £1.10).
New this month is Miklos Haraszti A Worker in a Worker’s State (Penguin 85p) which Bookmarx Club have wisely chosen for their list. Having sent your £4.50 off to Bookmarx for the autumn/winter selection you’ll have to go to your library to borrow Ray Challinor’s The Origins of British Bolshevism (Croom Helm £8.50). Challinor provides a detailed history of the Socialist Labour Party at the beginning of this century, up to the formation of the Communist Party.
Islam and Capitalism by Maxime Rodinson (Penguin £1.20) is now in paperback. So too is E.P. Thompson Whigs and Hunters (Peregrine £3.25) which is a major study of 18th century Britain.
Marc Linder Anti Samuelson (Pluto/Urizen 2 Vols, £3.90 each) has recently been published and will serve as a useful antidote for students of Economics. At the end of this month The Socialist Register 1977 will be published by Merlin Press, (£3.00). It contains a major section on The Future of the Left, in which, among others, Duncan Hallas, David Widgery and Ralph Miliband debate the way forward.
Make a note in your diary to come to the first Socialist Bookfair to be held on 3 November at Camden Town Hall. It promises to be a very successful event, giving you an opportunity to meet the publishers, grouse about prices, sign contracts for half finished novels you mean to complete, browse and or buy. A must for all bookworms.



Cruel Habitations: A History of Working-class Housing 1780-1918
Enid Gauldie
Allen and Unwin, £5.75
‘REHOUSING MAY BE looked upon as an insurance ... paid by the rich against revolution.’ (Frank Harris)
Unfortunately the use of this quotation by Enid Gauldie is no indication of the central theme of this book. She has gathered together a wealth of interesting material on what she correctly describes as the ‘cruel habitations’ of the working class in the nineteenth century. Through her examination of the housing, health, sanitation and general living standards of workers in the new industrial cities, we are provided with a clearer picture of the condition of the British working class. As with Engel’s vivid account of 1844, this text does not only focus on the organised, literate minority in the trade union movement, but also on the poor, the unemployed, the unskilled and the generally downtrodden majority of workers.
She shows how, in the growth of the slums and the insanitary conditions, the living standards of the poorest grew worse rather than better. In Liverpool in 1840 62 per cent of the children of labourers died before reaching the age of five. Only an acute shortage of labour would induce employers to provide adequate housing for their workers.
The real weakness of the book lies in the analysis of why housing was so bad and why reforms consistently failed. Where is the analysis of the irrational social policies in the heyday of Victorian profit-lusting? Instead we are told that
‘it seems to me that the failure of all such [housing] legislation to achieve real solutions was caused by the inadequacies, limitations in the aims and attitudes of those who designed it.’
This is history in the tradition of those who talked of Columbus ‘discovering’ America. We learn of the ‘people’ of Britain ‘who were confronted with the appalling conditions in their towns’. For people, read middle and upper classes. Didn’t the working class recognise the appalling conditions under which they lived and worked? Enid Gauldie has little to say about working-class agitation on housing issues, nor does she recognise that all trade union struggles of the nineteenth century involved the ambitious, if not audacious, demand for a better standard of life.
She does however recognise, but only note, that fear played a large part in influencing middle class support for housing reform. Fear of the mob, of the continuing threat of riot and revolution, and fear of the attacks of King Cholera were dominant in the minds of reformers like Chadwick. This fear was recently discussed in a fascinating article by M. Steig entitled Dickens’ Excremental Vision in the journal, Victorian Studies, Vol.13, in which Steig examines the ‘imagery of anality’ in the works of Charles Dickens and suggests that some Victorians had a view of the poor as excrement, their enthusiasm for draining and cleaning the towns being merely a rationalisation of their wish to be rid of the poor.
By the end of the century the political and trade-union organisations of the working class were beginning to have greater effect on local government housing policy. The rise of the Labour Party in the first two decades of this century gave illusions to many workers that housing conditions would change. But changes have always had to be fought for. The lessons of the Clydeside rent strikes of 1916 are not discussed. While the Labour Party dithered, George Lansbury and the Poplar Councillors went to prison for refusing to implement a rates increase.
Housing and the building industry generally have always been among the most corrupt areas of the capitalist system. It should not have been beyond the scope of this book to investigate the world of corruption in which builders, councillors, and landowners profited from the exploitation of working-class families. Robert Tressell’s account of the goings on in Mugsborough reveals a situation which was much more the rule than the exception.
Those who read this book, and I hope Enid Gauldie sends a copy to Anthony Crosland, would do well to bear in mind the words of William Blake.



‘It is an easy thing to talk of patience to the afflicted,
To speak the laws of prudence to the houseless wanderer,
To listen to the hungry raven’s cry in wintry season,
When the red blood is filled with wine and with the marrow of lambs.’



 

