

Over the past 30 years – during all the time we have been told that class is dead – something strange has been happening in the study of health. A generation of epidemiologists who study patterns of death (mortality) and illnesses (morbidity) have been obsessing about social inequality. Journals such as the Lancet and the British Medical Journal have published pieces presenting the latest research that talks about the most basic inequalities and social structures. The concern has been to map the link between health and inequality in a descriptive sense: to show that those with a higher social situation suffer less ill health than those with a lower one.
Stand outside any doctor’s surgery and you will see people carried there by inequalities. Their illnesses, major and minor, physical and mental, are markers of where they stand in society. When it comes to ill health, less is always more – the less your situation, the more likely you are to have a health problem. It is a short step from here to pointing to the use of class as an explanatory category: your class position causes you to be more or less sick, to live more or less long. And from here it is only another short step, though one more establishment researchers are understandably loath to take, to argue that, since capitalism is at the root of class society, it is capitalism that makes you more or less ill. If health problems are the product of social organisation, and if we want to really address them, we have to focus on the social conditions and social organisation that give rise to them. As Sir Michael Marmot, the leading epidemiologist in the UK puts it, “Inequalities in health between and within countries are avoidable”. [1]
Premature death arises from three sources: infectious or communicable diseases such as typhus, typhoid, smallpox, cholera, Aids, etc; non-communicable diseases such as heart disease, cancer, nutritional diseases; and violence. In the past infectious diseases played a much larger part than they do today. It is not that non-communicable diseases did not exist but that infectious diseases carried people off first. The shift towards a predominance of death from non-communicable diseases (and violence) is called the “epidemiological transition”. Infectious diseases have not gone away. In poorer parts of the world such diseases continue to play a crucial role – Aids is one example, alongside diseases of poverty that flow from dirty water, inadequate sanitation and the like. But only in Africa is infectious disease still the major cause of premature death: “Of the 45 million deaths among adults age 15 years and older in 2002, 32 million were due to non-communicable disease and a further 4.5 million to violent causes”. [2]
Not every disease and cause of death shows a clear socio-economic pattern but the most common diseases and causes of death do. Death does not strike randomly. There has always been a general understanding of this. What is different now is the focus on the systematic process of causation and the need to connect up different elements of an explanation of health and ill health, to seek out what has been called “the cause of the cause”. It is this that takes us to the problem of social class and health, and to a view of capitalism as a toxic form of human society.
The way that health is closely moulded by inequality and unequal power and control was set out in 1980 in the UK in The Black Report. Originally sponsored by the 1970s Labour government it was politically sidelined by the first Thatcher government. [3] The opponents of the social approach to health then tried to explain away the evidence of the link between health and inequality. They attacked the reliability of the data, focusing on what is called the “health selection effect”. Causation might run not from society to health but from health to society. For example, as unemployment rises we know that the unemployed will register more illness than the employed. So does unemployment make you sick or does being sick mean that you are more likely to be unemployed? The attempts to focus on health selection, however, have failed. In most instances the causation does flow from society to health: “There is no evidence to support health selection as an explanation of broader social inequalities in health,” wrote Marmot in 1994 and the evidence against the health selection hypothesis has grown. [4]
In 2003 the World Health Organisation published the second edition of a document edited by Marmot and Richard Wilkinson called, The Solid Facts. [5] This attempted to quash such arguments and finally establish that there is a strong “social gradient” of health and ill health. Social conditions mould people’s early lives, their work and leisure, their patterns of consumption, friendship groups, etc, and this can then explain, at the group level, patterns of disease and death to quite an astonishing degree. Wilkinson and Kate Pickett reiterate this same argument in a recent book, The Spirit Level. In rich societies, as the level of inequality rises, so average life expectancy falls and the rates of physical and mental illness rise. Inequality can also help predict levels of obesity, teenage pregnancy, illiteracy, crime, murder, people in prison, happiness – the connections seem almost endless. [6] Greater inequality produces a situation where the same health risks produce different outcomes depending on who you are. Take a group of senior civil servants who smoke and compare them with a lower grade group who also smoke. Which will have the higher death rate? This is the type of question asked in the “Whitehall Studies”, led by Marmot, which tracked ill health among civil servants in the UK for many years and whose results have inspired countless other studies. Here is the answer in Marmot’s words:
An administrator who smokes 20 cigarettes a day has a lower risk of dying from lung cancer than does a lower grade civil servant who smokes the same amount even after pack years (packs per years times the number of years the person has smoked), tar content and the gradient in mortality from coronary heart diseases among non-smokers are taken into account. [7]
To see how this happens we need to go on a journey into the relationship between class, capitalism, health and medicine.
 
Class society and the health issue
Humans have not always lived in class societies. For tens of thousands of years our ancestors lived in small mobile groups, which survived by gathering and hunting. We know little about how these groups functioned save that their lifestyles were based on a basic equality and a communal reciprocity which leads to them being called “primitive communist”. For some commentators the result was lives that were nasty, brutish and short. Infanticide, for instance, was practised to make sure that supplies were sufficient to feed the number of mouths. Others suggest that life was more comfortable and that social deprivation was limited – there was a greater degree of ease than we can easily imagine, even a kind of primitive “affluence” in the satisfaction of basic wants and the absence of modern style artificially constructed needs.
What is more important from our point of view is that, once settled human societies begin to emerge from 10,000 BC to 6,000 BC, class organisation also developed with them. The ruling groups seized control of the social surplus, consuming more of it and also organising society to perpetuate their rule and their control. The paradox of the development of class society is that, although in the long run it develops the material wealth of society, it does so in such a way that the benefits go disproportionately to the few. This led to inequality being marked not only in differing life expectancies but in the degree to which lives are marked by disease.
To make sense of this we need some basic demographic concepts. Infant mortality refers to deaths under the age of one, child mortality to deaths under the age of five and adult mortality to deaths over the age of 15. The fourth crucial concept is life expectancy. This is usually measured from birth. It is an average of the length of time those born live, so if life expectancy is low this does not necessarily mean that there are no old people. Rather life expectancy will be pulled down if large numbers die in the first years of life.
With the development of class society new social forces emerged which moulded the patterns of life and death. Access to material resources now became unequal, along the lines of the class nature of society. This was true of normal times but it was even more true in years of famine. The regularity of famine reflected the interaction between nature and the economic and social systems, and the way that these determined the nature of agricultural production. Malnourishment was extensive. You could often determine a person’s place in society by how they looked physically. As Wilkinson puts it, “The rich were fat and the poor were thin”. [8]
The concentration of population in urban centres, albeit on a scale incomparably smaller than today, created a new vulnerability to infectious disease agents. In the towns not only were social conditions often bad, but also the water supply was polluted, sanitation systems were primitive and the air foul. The result was epidemic diseases such as typhus, typhoid, smallpox and endemic diseases (there all the time) such as tuberculosis. And every so often there was a good chance of pandemic diseases such as plague.
In these settled societies violence now became more organised, whether it was the violence within societies or the violence between societies. War became a regular feature of social development and in its wake came not only death and destruction on the battlefield but social immiseration in the areas through which armies marched and fought. [9]
With low productivity and diseases rife, population grew slowly for thousands of years, as is apparent in table 1.

Table 1: World population and percentage urban share
Source: www.census.gov/ipc/www/worldhis.html early urban estimates Kingsley Davis,
UN World Urbanisation Prospects, The 2005 Revision; The 2007 Revision



 


  


Population
(billions)


  


Percentage
urban




10,000 BC


0.005


 – 




1,000 BC


0.050


 – 




1 AD


0.285


1




1000


0.300


1




1500


0.500


1–2




1800


0.978


2.4




1900


1.69


13




1950


2.52


29




1975


4.07


37.2




2000


6.09


46.7




2030


8.01


57.5




2050


9.19


69.6



The key issue here was the combination of material deprivation, infectious diseases and weakened bodily resistance. The social effects of this were uneven. The rich who ate better could hope to live better. “Countries in which access to nutritious food varies by social class for whatever reasons tend to show class gradients in height and health status,” write two modern researchers. [10] But the rich could not escape from the patterns of infectious disease. In an urban environment epidemic diseases easily jumped from a poor house to a richer one, and both houses might draw on the same water supplies or buy food in the same markets. In 1694 Queen Mary died of smallpox, one of a long line of European monarchs to go this way. Almost 170 years later, in 1861, Prince Albert, the husband of Queen Victoria, was carried off by typhoid. Similarly, lack of knowledge of how to deal with the complications of childbirth could kill rich women as easily as it could poor and in the early weeks all babies were vulnerable.
This helps to explain the fact that, although lifestyles differed considerably between classes, when it comes to measuring mortality rates the class differences were less than might be imagined.
 
Capitalism
In Western Europe capitalism began to emerge from feudalism in the 16th century, and as it did so it began to change the pattern of disease. But the really dramatic shifts came with the industrial revolution and the development of industrial capitalism at the turn of the 19th century. Technological change and increased production created a larger surplus, which allowed societies to begin the “demographic transition”. They shifted from a pattern of high birth rates and high death rates to low birth rates and low death rates. In this transition, however, the death rate initially fell faster than the birth rate. The result was that rapid population growth occurred before a new balance was reached. Table 1 shows how world population has grown and its projected new equilibrium at around nine to ten billion (despite the fears of Thomas Malthus who believed that population growth would outrun the food supply).
In the first instance urban and industrial growth intensified health and mortality problems, not least in the big cities. Britain led the way, becoming in 1851 the first urban state with more than half its population in towns. Others followed in the 20th century. Today on a global scale half the world’s population is now urban, as can also be seen from table 1.
Over time the falling death rate led to an increase in life expectancy. This fall in the death rate is commonly thought to have been bound up with medical advance but this was not the case. Some specific diseases like smallpox were reduced because of medical advance, but until the mid-20th century medical knowledge was so slight (and often mistaken) that it had a limited impact on population growth. Critics like the early 18th century essayist Joseph Addison could comment that “we may lay it down as a maxim, that when a nation abounds of physicians, it grows thin of people”. [11]
There are four genuine causes of the improvement in life expectancy. The first was the increase in the standard of living. Where this occurred better nutrition led to healthier bodies. Height and weight grew, and so did resistance to disease. The second, closely related, was the possibility of better standards of public hygiene. The third was the improvements in public health that came with the development of clean water systems, sewage systems and measures to deal with pollution. It should never be forgotten that one of the greatest killers of infants throughout history is dehydration brought on by diarrhoea. In 19th century England, for example, diarrhoea is reckoned to have killed as many infants every two years as all the 19th century cholera outbreaks put together. [12] Today diarrhoea is still estimated to be the second biggest killer of children worldwide, overwhelmingly in poor countries. The fourth factor worth noting is that some diseases may have mutated into less virulent strains.
These four elements help to explain the ways in which infectious diseases eventually came to be contained by rich countries. The result has been the shift to a pattern of ill health and death from non-communicable diseases to the so-called “diseases of affluence”, except that these now began to fall disproportionately on the lower classes in wealthier societies. Capitalism’s potential to solve humanity’s problems is not and cannot be realised because of the ways in which the system also traps us into putting human need second to profit and competition. To see this we have only to look at the patterns of mortality that exist in the world today.
The first thing to note is the huge gaps in life expectancy that still exist between countries. In 2004 life expectancy in Japan was 82 years; in Sierra Leone it was only 34. This is not because there is a lack of food and other basics. The world today produces more than enough to go round. For decades now global food supplies have risen ahead of population growth. In 1961 there were 2,255 calories available per head of world population. By 2000 the figure was 2,805, a 25 percent increase despite the huge growth in numbers. [13] The resources exist then to create the basis for a healthy life for everyone – the problem is that they are not used this way. In this situation the most vulnerable continue to be the youngest. Infant mortality in Sierra Leone is 316 per 1,000 live births, whereas in countries like Japan and Finland it is only 4.5 per 1,000.
The second element is the size of the differentials in mortality that exist within countries and the fact that, despite improvements in health, such gaps have been widening in key countries. This is not least the case in the UK and the US. These gaps can be measured in the pattern of infant and child mortality, adult deaths and life expectancy. To illustrate this table 2 shows life expectancy gaps in the UK using the official social classification.

Table 2: Changing male life expectancy at birth in the UK
Source: ONS, news release, Variations Persist in Life Expectancy
by Social Class, 27 October 2007



 


 


1972–6


 


1987–91


 


2002–5




Professional


71.9


76.2


80.0




Managerial


71.9


75.0


79.4




Skilled non-manual


69.5


74.4


78.4




Skilled manual


70.0


72.7


76.5




Semi-skilled


68.3


70.8


75.7




Unskilled


66.5


66.7


73.8



There is good reason to think that per capita income (in today’s values) of around $10,000 is sufficient to solve the material problems underpinning health inequality. At this level there is enough go around and enough to provide the resources for adequate public health. What separates societies, therefore, is less the per capita income over this level (in the UK/US case we are looking at roughly three times this) than the degree to which it is unequally distributed, and the scale of relative deprivation between different social groups. The greater the degree of inequality, the greater the health gaps. As Wilkinson has put it, “People in a country can be twice as well off on average as those in another country without benefit to their mortality rates” if the distribution of income and wealth is unequal. [14]
This is explained by a third element, which is the way that capitalism not only generates material inequality, but also social mechanisms, that lead to ill health. The problem is both the material pressures on human beings – our basic work security, the environment, pollution, etc – and the uneven social and psychological means we have for dealing with the unequal outcomes that follow.
This leads to a fourth element, which is that when these patterns are revealed the system can also encourage perverse responses. If society makes you ill, the obvious solution is to deal with the diseases of ill health at the societal level. But the temptation is often to push resources into dealing with the consequences. If the procedures to deal with consequences are themselves a source of profit, then the temptation will be to bend further discussion away from causes and social solutions towards a self-perpetuating pattern focused on medical technologies, drugs, therapies and the like.
Fortunately capitalism also creates a fifth element: the knowledge base to understand the real relationship along with groups of people, those at the bottom and “professionals”, who should better understand the situation and can join together to demand change. However, the extent to which this will happen is a political issue. For a century now the medical profession has been divided between what have been called mercenaries, seeking to exploit ill health for gain, and missionaries, who are concerned to remove its social causes. [15] But the mercenaries have now been supplemented by the managers who have benefited from the commercialisation and privatisation of health and who tell us that the way forward is health markets that they can run jointly with the mercenaries.
 
Class society makes you ill
“I ask myself how, as a physician, I find myself up to my ears with the problems of society,” writes Michael Marmot. It is a question that committed doctors have been asking for several generations as they try to explain and cope with the way that illness is moulded by society. [16] Evidence for the social gradient is astonishingly widespread. It affects us all. It is not just about the contrast between the rich and poor but is so “fine grained” that if we graph illness against some indicator of relative position we see that as relative position improves so does health. Wilkinson calculated that 50 to 75 percent of the differences in average life expectancy in rich countries are now determined by differences bound up in the distribution of income and related factors. Table 3 shows how this is reflected in the pattern of key illnesses in the UK.
Why should this be? Material need cannot be ignored. Income poverty is not the basis for a good life, and societies with the greatest levels of inequality will also have the largest numbers of poor people. But it is relative poverty and position that matter most. So what is going on? The biomedical answer seems to be that vulnerability and susceptibility to illness and death are related to the degree of adversity in our lives. Some exercise is good for you but relentless physical demands in circumstances over which you have no control drain the body. Similarly, some stress is good for you but relentless worrying about job, home, family, etc not only drains you emotionally but feeds back into physical and mental ill health:
The relationship among the nervous system, the endocrine system, and the immune system is emerging as the pathway that can help our understanding of the changes in health which are associated with changing social and economic conditions. [17]
In other words, although illness arises from bodily processes it is really a product of social organisation. And – this is crucial – because health follows the social gradient it is not just about improving the conditions of the poorest. In health terms it is in our collective and individual interest to tackle the problem more systematically. As Marmot puts it:
Much of the discussion about social inequities in heath has focused on the health disadvantage of the lower class. This is analogous to seeing social problems as particular to a disadvantaged minority, rather than a problem for society as a whole. [18]
Table 3: The UK disease pattern by social group 1991–3,
standardised rates per 100,000 for men aged 20–64
Source: Acheson, 1997



 


 


Lung
cancer


 


Coronary
heart
disease


 


Stroke


 


Accidents,
poisonings,
violence


 


Suicide




Professional


17


  81


14


13


13




Managerial


24


  92


13


13


14




Skilled non-manual


34


136


19


17


20




Skilled manual


54


159


24


24


21




Semi-skilled


52


156


25


24


23




Unskilled


82


235


43


52


47



Marmot’s argument here is partly a reformulation of R.H. Tawney’s famous comment that “what thoughtful rich people call the problem of poverty, thoughtful poor people call with equal justice the problem of riches” but it is more. The steeper the social gradient, not only the bigger the health gap between those at the top and those at the bottom, but also the lower the average position of all. “The countries with the longest life expectancy are not the wealthiest but those with the smallest spread of income and the smallest proportion of the population in relative poverty.” There is therefore a problem with thinking that because I am near the top in UK terms (and the level of inequality in the UK is one of the highest) I will live longer than someone at the bottom or in the middle. This is true. But it is also true that you would live longer still if society were more equal. It was realised in the 1990s that “the mortality rate for the lowest social class in Sweden [with less inequality] is less than that for the top social class in the United Kingdom”. [19]
The narrow biomedical mechanism that produces this has three elements. The first is the psycho-social impact of pressure on bodily processes. This is socially determined. The second is our health behaviour and how we respond in terms of what we eat, whether we smoke and drink, take exercise, etc. This too is socially determined. The third is how supportive our family, friends and social networks are. This is also socially determined. Only then does the fourth issue, healthcare, become a central issue and, when it does, it too is socially determined.
If we look at our lifestyles as a whole, their patterns reflect either the accumulation of advantage or disadvantage. The story starts in the womb with fetal development, it is manifest in the early years, at primary and secondary school. It is then compounded by what type of job we get and how precarious our employment is, and so on. But why can this not be explained by people at the top choosing wisely and those at the bottom choosing badly?
The really interesting aspect of the social approach to health is how careful the analysis is of what conditions our behaviour. The cleverness of the Whitehall Studies of UK civil servants is a good example. The researchers took a large group in which the members appeared to be similar and apparently had some more positive elements in their work conditions. They then designed a study of how work, position, life, social situation, etc interacted and combined. This analysis allowed them to nail the myth that top managers are prone to more heart attacks because of “pressure”. They are not and we now know why. With responsibility comes status, power, control, means to relieve stress (membership of the gym, a night at the opera, a holiday villa) often arranged by your secretary and so on. As you move lower down, so people’s lives become more bound up with lower status, less control and the need to battle and juggle a host of other commitments. It is the harassed worker on the shopfloor or in the office who is more at risk of a heart attack and, beneath them, the cleaner doing two jobs on the minimum wage. This also explains negative health behaviours and why these should give rise to different incidences of disease when the same immediate causal factors, eg smoking, appear to be present.
But some readers may be puzzling about a theoretical problem in the link between social class and the health gradient. Those who insist that we live in a class society have to defend themselves not only against those who deny the reality of class but also those who want to define it simply in terms of hierarchy. It is here that we run up against the fundamental weakness of the argument about social gradients in health. It is clear that they exist, but what causes them? What is the “cause of the cause”? To solve this problem we have to look behind the gradients and explore what determines the different incomes, jobs and degree of control that people have over their lives. This means that the central thing has to be class analysis and showing how any gradient is structured by ownership and control and not least, in capitalism, by ownership and control of the means of production.
Here several related concepts are absolutely central – alienation, exploitation, class and class conflict. Inequalities are a consequence of how these interact and it is from this that social gradients and gradients of ill health flow. Marmot makes occasional gestures towards this but they are weak and inconsistent. The same is true of Wilkinson even though he has a more systematic grasp of the social side. To insist on the importance of this is not just about adding an additional layer of possibly superfluous explanation. It makes the argument stronger in terms of its logic and explanatory power, and it gives it a clearer political thrust because it also forces us to consistently address the political economy of both health causation and the limits of reform within the system.
Alienation, for example, is fundamental to explaining both our loss of control of social processes and the way that they are turned against us, and our resulting inability to relate to one another as proper human beings. [20] Exploitation gives us the possibility of understanding how and why the rewards go to the few who make so little contribution to our real wealth. And class and class conflict help us to understand the resulting texture of social relationships and their antagonisms. [21]
We can make these arguments work in a more precise fashion too. As organisations have become more powerful the argument arises about who has effective disposition of capital and labour within them. The key social argument here is that the more your position gives you control over capital and labour, control over yourself, your work, the work and lives of others, the lower the levels of ill health. The more your life is controlled by others the less the level of health. The social gradient is not simply about “who has what” but the capacity to command people and resources – the very issue that is at the centre of class analysis.
But to take this analysis further we need people whose expertise is the analysis of capitalism’s social structures to link up with the people whose expertise is in health and illness. One of the most creative ways of making the connection was set out nearly three decades ago by Eric Olin Wright. Wright took on the argument that class was disappearing in modern society because of the alleged explosion of groups in the middle. These groups appeared to stand between capital and labour; they had what he called “contradictory class locations”. He then devised a way of mapping these contradictions, focusing crucially on how much control of capital and labour they had. It becomes obvious in his analysis that these intermediate groups often have little and are therefore closer to labour than capital. This reflects what many of us understand intuitively: the badge may say manager but we all know that in reality it means some low grade supervisory responsibilities that do not preclude trade union membership and even militancy.
Using these ideas to map how capitalism really operates and divides us has an obvious attraction for those seeking to more systematically underpin the analysis of health gradients, and some researchers have already looked in this direction. But here’s the problem. Almost immediately Wright had set out this argument he retreated under the pressure of the anti-class theorists. This has meant that it has fallen to others to defend this extension of class analysis as a way to understand capitalism. [22] But it has also acted as a disincentive to use the argument to tighten the theoretical and empirical links between class and health.
 
Medical myths and medical madness
But this argument raises other political issues and not least for the medical establishment. Prevention, as everyone knows, is better than cure. “The most sophisticated and effective healthcare in the world cannot produce results as good as simply remaining healthy in the first place.” But “creating healthy societies and individuals largely results from action outside the health sector”. [23] Healthcare can never remove the gradients in causation, only deal with some of the consequences.
This type of argument is difficult to make. We are rightly appalled by inadequacies in healthcare but we tend to take for granted the inequalities in health causation. It is awful that when Julie had her heart attack in her fifties she had to wait 30 minutes for an ambulance; then there was the four-hour wait in accident & emergency and the dirty wards on which she eventually died. But the prior question is why she had a heart attack in her fifties and why Jane, who worked as a cleaner in the same office, had one a couple of years later and died before help could get there?
We need to take any argument about the role of medicine in health in two stages. The first is to stress the absolute importance of what is called primary prevention and not to fall into the trap of thinking that we can leave the causes of illness alone and focus on better treatment. Primary prevention saves lives but primary prevention may not involve medical measures in the narrow sense at all. Only three out of the 39 proposals made by the 1997 Acheson Report of the Inquiry into Inequalities in Health related directly to health service provision. [24] If the problem is a choice between a worse treatment and a better one, we should obviously demand the better one. But the issue should not be about whether we can afford treatments but whether we can afford people to be ill. It is often said that medical costs will always rise. This is an absurd argument in itself because it ignores the way in which the drive for profit is behind the cost rises that exist. But even if it were true, reducing the numbers of ill people in the first place would reduce the cost problems. The less people that you have to treat, the more you can afford to spend on making those who have the genuine misfortune (and not the socially determined one) to fall ill. The real problem then is to alter the fundamentals of the generation of illness caused by class society.
Primary prevention is therefore politically challenging. There has always been a minority tendency in the medical establishment that links health improvement to real social reform, and within this group a smaller one still who continue to insist that so long as capitalism and class society exist we will remain trapped in unequal lives and unequal deaths. [25] But many health professionals also see the immediate attraction of the medical fix. And so do we as patients once we get trapped in ill health. Even the members of the team that produced the original Black Report were split on this issue. According to Sir Douglas Black:
We were all agreed that education and preventative measures, specifically directed towards the socially deprived, were necessary. But the sociological members of the group ... considered that the consequent expenditure should be obtained by diversion from acute services. On the other hand the medical members ... felt that the acute services played a vital role in the prevention of chronic disability and could not be further cut back without serious effects on emergency care, on the training of doctors for both hospital work and for family practice and on the length of waiting lists. We spent a long time, without real success trying to resolve this matter. [26]
This fudge is not enough. Consider the problem of mental ill health. Its burden continues to rise in the advanced world. There is a big question over whether the medical fix actually works. But suppose the evidence was clearer that it did. It would still not be enough for three reasons. First, “it is inconceivable that enough professionals could be trained and employed to treat the many millions of causalities of our psychologically toxic social environment one at a time”. Second, if the problem is the toxic environment then once people are returned to it their symptoms are likely to recur. Third, this approach does nothing to stop new cases appearing. [27] But the same logic applies to other areas. Britain, for example, is acknowledged to have one of the poorest records in the advanced world for longer-term survival after major incidents like cancer and heart attacks. You can now guess that there may be two explanations for this. One is medical – the weaknesses of early identification, treatment and follow up. The other is inequality. If inequality increases your chances of getting a life threatening disease, then however good the medical fix the pressure will be on again once you return to the environment that helped to cause the illness in the first place.
At this point, however, many take fright. It seems easier to imagine that the way forward is to work on medical solutions to ill health and demand more resources for these. But this takes us to the second issue of whether a health system run for profit can ever rationally answer human need. The answer is an unequivocal no. The first simple rule of healthcare is Tudor Hart’s “inverse care law”, which says that “the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with the need for the population served [and this] operates more completely where medical care is most exposed to market forces”. [28] A national health system has to be based on principles of comprehensiveness, universality and equitability. “Supply and demand”, internal and external markets, subvert these principles and undermine the capacity of rational health planning. They even undermine the very sources of information which would make such planning possible. The result is variation in the coverage of basic services. With this comes a huge loss in real efficiency.
A second simple rule of healthcare then emerges: the more the logic of capitalism determines the supply of healthcare, the higher the costs, the larger the management layer, and the greater the diversion of resources away from treatment and care and into private hands. With this level of irrationality in the system we can then move to a third simple rule of healthcare: the more the logic of capitalism determines the supply of healthcare, the more the healthcare system itself may become a threat to social health.
A genuine national health system would seek to minimise the causes of ill health in society at large and to maximise the coverage, comprehensiveness and efficiency of healthcare when it was needed. The focus on “bringing the market in” does just the opposite. It helps to maximise the stresses that produce poor health and it fatally compromises the ability of any healthcare system to rationally deal with the resulting patterns of ill health. In the 1990s attention in the UK was for a time focused on Dr Harold Shipman who turned out to be a doctor who was also a serial killer, dispatching his older patients. But the real story of the last decades is that the biggest serial killer in the health system is the market, and in the dock alongside Shipman should have been all those who pushed it and the consequent break up of the NHS. Sadly, if this sounds like rhetoric, it is supported by a grotesque trail of evidence, and not least in the statistics of lives lost and the stories of grieving relatives, of how healthcare is failing in market driven systems.
In the UK the NHS that was built up after the Second Word War had serious faults and these were not helped by systematic underfunding. But it was based on a developing sense of comprehensiveness, universality and equity, and in comparative terms it was one of the most, if not the most, efficient healthcare systems in the world. Its dismantling through the development of first internal, and then external, markets – the creation of what Allyson Pollock calls the NHS PLC has broken this and begun to reproduce some of the worst irrationalities of private healthcare systems and their scandals. Worse, although this process began under the Tories, if anything it proceeded faster under New Labour. [29]
It is true that over time more money has been pushed into health but the market-based health reforms have also created more routes by which this money could be devoted to non-health outcomes and into private pockets. Part of the systematic underfunding of the NHS in the past has been reflected in low pay in its lower levels, and nobody could object to this being improved. But additional resources have also been sucked to the top and out of the system by the market privatisation process, building better offices for the likes of global accountancy and consultancy firms such as KPMG or PriceWaterhouseCoopers, rather than providing more hospital beds. Health is big business. In Europe the health service consumes around 8 to 10 percent of output. In the US it is nearer to 15 percent. Add in all other forms of healthcare and we are nearer to 10 to 20 percent. This is such a huge amount that the pressure is to grab as much as possible for privatised control and private profit. Any number of examples could be given but it will be sufficient to sketch the perverse consequences in terms of the pharmaceutical industry. It is not the case, as is sometimes argued, that “big pharma” has no interest in cures. Of course it does. The problem is the way it operates under capitalism systematically compromises a rational allocation of resources to meet human need.
First note the scale and interlocking character of this industry – not just the huge drug companies but also biotech, the food supplement manufacturers, the vitamin producers, even homeopathy, far from being “alternative”, are big business. Few in number, these companies are diversified global giants in their own right but they are far from averse to underhand linkages. The biggest corporate criminal fine in history was of $1.5 billion levied by the US government against the “vitamin cartel” for price fixing. [30] But it is easy to see the attraction of fleecing the market. Medical drug sales alone in the UK work out at £200 per person anually or over 1 percent of national income – a huge amount. In the US the figure is nearer 2 percent of national income.
Getting as much of this income as possible means big profits. This helps to explain the fact that the pharmaceutical industry spends only around 14 percent of income on research and development but 30 percent plus on marketing and administration. It also helps to explain the startling fact that 10 percent of the world’s health burden gets 90 percent of the research and development. Money follows the patients and the systems with spending power. Ninety percent of the human health burden gets a mere 10 percent of R&D, and even more grotesquely this is probably less than the amount now spent to provide better drugs for pets in rich countries. Plus all this research is now becoming less effective. In the middle decades of the previous century there were major medical advances in drugs, techniques and treatments but in recent decades the rate of real improvement has declined. That means that companies now have to push copycat, “me too”, drugs that barely differ from one another, or encourage us to believe in new diseases for which they can then sell us old cures. In this battle patents are crucial. Eighty percent of drug expenditure is on patented drugs in advanced countries. Patents keep prices high and allow profits to be squeezed even if the drug could be lifesaving for those who cannot afford it. These same pressures then lead on to the systematic undermining of ethical standards in research as companies pressure researchers into exaggerating the efficacy of their copycat drug over someone else’s.
But the pressure of these big companies is also highly political. They are a formidable lobby, spending billions, and leaning on governments and international organisations. They practise a revolving door system whereby politicians, regulators and top health service people are regularly invited to join them and effectively rewarded for their past compromises. They subvert the health debate. Systematic bribery is practised in the health trade with all sorts of inducements to prescribe one product over another. Front organisations are set up. Some patient groups have stupidly allowed themselves to be compromised by accepting drug company money and becoming advocates demanding costly drugs whose real benefits are doubtful. And if all else fails, these companies follow the trail pioneered by the tobacco industry of sowing doubt where there should be none and intimidating their critics. [31]
This is not a pretty picture. But it is made worse by the way that the drive towards more markets and privatisation in health service provision further sideline real solutions. This is perhaps best seen as an attempt to enable the private sector to plunder the state by means of legalised corruption – the private finance initiative disaster in the UK is the best example. Of course the ideological preference for markets reflects something more than the veniality of the pocket but it is important to stress how much material interest there is in profiting from health privatisation.
What cements this is the managerialisation of state health provision. In Britain this now permeates all levels of the NHS, co-opting medical staff, but the most obvious indicator is the rise in the number of people who are specifically employed as “managers and senior managers”. In 1998 there were 22,000 of them; by 2008 there were 40,000. This has led to a fall in the number of staff per “manager” from 48 : 1 to 34 : 1. [32] And presiding over them all, the NHS board at the very top had eight people in 2004–5 and cost £1.2 million. By 2008 it had 24 and cost £3.5 million. [33] And alongside these are a huge army of management and IT consultants so that the NHS alone vies with UK manufacturing each year for the title of the fourth largest funder of UK consultancy firms. [34] While this may make little sense in its own terms, it is a necessary step in enabling a more systematic distortion of healthcare, leading towards the creation of a “medico-industrial complex”.
But the most disturbing issue is the extent to which healthcare itself can become a source of ill health – indirectly though the diversion of resources and directly through the systematic failure to offer patients the cures that they expect and, on occasion, even giving them new illnesses.
In the previous century enormous progress was finally made in developing medicine that had some hope of curing some patients. But the limitations of medicine are still more serious than is often imagined. Not the least of these is that treatment can have unintended consequences. Cases of adverse drug reaction are well known and these often received huge publicity. But there are bigger issues. Even in the best systems, all hospitals, anywhere in the world, are unsafe places. You can make them better or worse but the problems will never be removed completely, so the best approach is to reduce the numbers needing their services. In the UK, for example, the National Audit Office estimates that as many as one in 12 to one in ten patients will experience an adverse incident. These can range from negative reactions to treatment to mistakes, care and neglect problems and, most serious of all in terms of large numbers, cross-infection. This can lead to illness, disability and death. Unnecessary deaths in NHS hospitals have been as high as 34,000 a year but the government report which gave this figure added that “in reality the NHS simply does not know”. [35]
Most attention has been focused on “superbugs”, such as MRSA and clostridium difficile, to which the weak and elderly are especially vulnerable. The rise of this type of infection appears to be in part a consequence of new antibiotic-resistant strains. But more immediate causes appear to be at work. One is ward cleanliness – what those in the trade call “the mop and matron” problem, looking back to an age when matrons reputedly directly supervised nurse and ancillary staff performance. The second is rates of bed occupancy that are the highest in the advanced world. [36] The third is insufficient appreciation of the danger of cross-infection by medical staff and visitors and therefore their lack of care in contact. The first and second issues are unambiguously related to the NHS profit/target driven culture. And if the three issues were properly addressed in the short term, they could cut cross-infection and death but the threat would still be there. Although better hospital design adds a further long-term element, it seems that we will have to live for the foreseeable future with a greater degree of cross-infection risk. On top of this we can then add poor case management. Again this can unambiguously be related to the profit/target culture, as was revealed in the notorious case in Staffordshire where managers manipulated patients to hit targets, leading to an estimated 400 to 1,200 unnecessary deaths. But as critics pointed out, Staffordshire is only the tip of the iceberg and the practices here, albeit perhaps pursued more systematically, are apparent across the NHS.
 
The case for radical change
In how radical a direction do these arguments really push us? Since inequality varies between countries it cannot be the case that there is no space within capitalism to improve things. Reducing the levels of inequality in the US and the UK to those in Sweden is clearly compatible with the continued existence of capitalism since Sweden is a capitalist country. Moreover this would dramatically improve the lives of people in the US and the UK. This is the obvious case for reform and this is the immediate punch of the inequality argument and the argument of those who appeal to the self-interest of governments in facilitating change. But this is too easy, for even in Sweden the gaps and the inequalities, although less, are real.
In economic terms Sweden is actually a very unequal society. We can measure inequality before and after transfer spending. Transfers are taxes that are paid and then redirected as welfare, social and health spending. A country such as Sweden combines a high pre-tax inequality with a low one after tax and transfers. It allows the basic inequalities of capitalism but offers a “compensating mechanism”. In the rich countries levels of social expenditure run at just over 20 percent of total output. In Sweden they are about 30 percent of output. The result is evident in the comparative poverty statistics. According to one set, before transfers the poverty rate in the UK was 28.8 percent, higher than even the US at 23 percent. Sweden was almost as high as the UK at 28.3 percent. Welfare spending of all kinds transformed this situation. The US poverty rate fell to 18.6 percent, the UK to 16.4 percent but the Swedish to just 3.3 percent. [37] In comparative terms this is an enormous difference. But the big point in terms of the health argument is that the Swedish system is still built around very significant core inequalities and therefore the social processes that generate unequal health. What Sweden is much better at is using welfare and social policies to limit some of the consequences but not, crucially, eliminating them, as workers in Sweden know to their cost.
We know, for example, that the massive rise in unemployment will damage people’s health through its financial and psychological effects. The impact will be worse in a country like the UK where benefits are low, means tested and stigmatising compared to a country such as Sweden where the welfare state is more comprehensive and generous in funding and attitudes. But all the care in the world can only take second place as a solution to not losing your job in the first place and knowing that you can rely on having decent work and a decent life. The best solution to the problem of unemployment leading to ill health is therefore a system which does not put your heath at risk by putting your job at risk in the first place.
In addition, we must not make the mistake of assuming that progress in the longer term will always be positive. Although there have been widespread increases in life expectancy during the past two to three decades, a significant minority of countries have gone backwards. Since the 1990s 16 countries have experienced sharp falls in life expectancy – mostly in Africa but also in the states of the former Soviet bloc. This has been catastrophic for the countries concerned and it is no exaggeration to say that lives shortened and lost run into many millions. [38]
And the recent pressures across the globe, including in countries such as Sweden, have been towards weakening both people’s economic positions and the systems available to deal with the consequences. The extent of real labour market “flexibility” and of precarious work is a matter of dispute, and we should be the last people to exaggerate it. Fear can weaken people’s resolve to defend what they have and a strongly organised labour force is likely to be a healthier one. But we cannot ignore the pressures to undermine past achievements and the attrition that is still ongoing. This is the lesson in the UK of two decades of Labour and Tory commitment to the market, whatever its health costs. [39] State policies to bolster the strength of capital, however they are presented, are not simply based on intellectual errors and misunderstandings. They reflect the intrinsic need of the state to support capitalism. And this is taken to a whole new level during a crisis.
Crisis, by reducing economic activity, cuts some causes of death such as accidents at work and on the road, but it increases others as the pressure of the crisis is felt. The focus on profit now leads to mass unemployment, and governments panic over how much to spend and how much to cut. The pressure of crisis undermines the possibility of making an appeal to enlightened self-interest. The bosses who jump ship or practise crisis management by slash and burn are hardly likely to slow down in the face of appeals about the human misery that will follow. If you are closing a plant at a day or even a few hours notice, the issue of a “fair” redundancy process and the availability of counselling for redundant or surviving workers is unlikely to be a priority. Nor should we imagine that because there has been a catastrophic failure of global capitalism this will in itself prompt a systematic rethinking. Without a fight it will not even necessarily undermine the influence of those who brought about the crisis. It should never be forgotten that the economic crisis of 1929 did not lead to a radical change in establishment ideas. The people running the system in the 1930s were the same as those in charge in the 1920s, or their subordinates or worse. This helps explain why the greatest crisis that capitalism produced what WH Auden dismissed as “a low dishonest decade”. Without a radical alternative we risk the same scenario for ourselves.
This points to the need to understand that the balance of class forces is not only crucial to patterns of ill health and death but also to the solution. We know from history, for example, that war and revolution can radically change patterns of health, illness and health service delivery, and often in a remarkably short time. Problems which are deep rooted do not disappear overnight but they can be confronted in new ways. For instance, in the UK in the Second World War, despite the conflict, civilian health improved as radical changes had a dramatic short-term effect and health delivery was shifted towards a new basis. Elsewhere more rapid political change has had the same effect. It acts this way because it challenges the whole basis on which society is run and resources are allocated, and in so doing leads to a more fundamental questioning of the mechanisms that produce ill health and are supposed to lead to its solution. Not least, it leads to people being able to see themselves less as isolated, alienated and exploited victims than as part of a more collective solution.
The real solution then has to be a radical one and it has to raise the nature of capitalism as a system. But this cannot be achieved by shouting from the sidelines. A battle against the inequalities of the system and the crisis has to be fought at all levels: to sustain and improve conditions in the workplace; to oppose redundancies; to resist budget cuts; to fight against housing repossessions. Those who will be most useful, resilient and successful will be those who understand that not only are such campaigns important in their own right but make best sense if they link up and become part of an argument for a general change. This can then lay the basis of a decent society that will also be a healthy one – one in which social inequality will no longer give rise to unequal lives and unequal deaths.
* * *
Notes
1. Marmot, 2005, p. 1103.
2. Marmot, 2005, pp. 1100, 1101.
3. Townsend and Davidson, 1982.
4. Marmot, 1994, 2003. If causation flowed the other way it would not make “selection” acceptable – merely the process of ill health different. And there is now considerable evidence to show that poor health results from an accumulation of disadvantage that begins in the womb.
5. Marmot and Wilkinson, 2003.
6. Wilkinson and Pickett, 2009.
7. Marmot, 1994.
8. Wilkinson, 1994.
9. Haynes, 2008.
10. Frank and Mustard, 1994.
11. Shorter, 2006, p. 109; Wootton, 2006.
12. Wootton, 2006.
13. Fogel, 2004. There was an 11 percent increase in calories per head in the developed world and a 39 percent in the developing world in this period.
14. Wilkinson, 1994.
15. Widgery, 1979.
16. Marmot, 2003, p. 8.
17. Frank and Mustard, 1994.
18. Marmot, 1994.
19. Wilkinson, 1994.
20. See Yuill, 2005; Crinson and Yuill, 2008.
21. See Muntaner and Lynch, 1999; Muntaner and others, 2003.
22. See Callinicos and Harman, 1987.
23. Evans 1994; Marmot, 1994.
24. Marmot, 2004, pp. 260, 267–276.
25. In the UK the Socialist Health Association is a good example. Its website contains a mass of valuable material but, associated with the Labour Party, it oscillates between radicalism one day and bland commentary the next. See www.sochealth.co.uk. Julian Tudor Hart, associated for many years with the Communist Party, has been a doctor and key individual researcher for half a century pushing for a more consistently radical position see – www.juliantudorhart.org. The Politics of Health group has some excellent material. See www.pohg.org.uk
26. Townsend and Davidson, 1982.
27. Fryer, 2000.
28. Tudor Hart, 1971.
29. Pollock, 2005; Shaw and others, 2005a, 2005b; Player and Leys, 2008.
30. The vitamin cartel included some of the top pharmaceutical companies. For all its faults, the US enforcement agency can be quite blunt: “The international vitamin cartel, which affected over $5 billion in US commerce, was the most harmful and elaborate conspiracy ever uncovered by the Antitrust Division. The members of the vitamin cartel reached agreements on everything from how much product each company would produce, to how much they would charge, to which customers they would sell. The victims who purchased directly from the cartel members included companies with household names such as General Mills, Kellogg, Coca-Cola, Tyson Foods and Proctor & Gamble. However, these companies were just the first to feel the effects of this conspiracy. In the end, for nearly a decade, every American consumer – anyone who took a vitamin, drank a glass of milk, or had a bowl of cereal   ended up paying more so that the conspirators could reap hundreds of millions of dollars in additional revenues” – www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/4523e.htm
31. Widgery, 1979; Goldacre 2008.
32. Calculated from NHS Information Centre, 2009. The full-time equivalent fall was from a ratio of 39:1 to one of 30:1.
33. Independent, 14 November 2008.
34. Every autumn Accountancy Age reports on the fees of UK Management consultancy.
35. National Audit Office, 2005.
36. Orendi, 2008.
37. Bryant and Raphael, 2005.
38. Haynes and Husan, 2003.
39. Shaw and others, 1999, 2005a, 2005b.
* * *
References
Acheson, Donald, 1998, Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health (The Stationary Office).
Bryant, Toba, and Dennis Raphael, 2005, Politics, Public Policy and Population Health in the United Kingdom, in Politics of Health Group, UK Health Watch 2005. The Experience of Health in an Unequal Society, www.pohg.org.uk/support/downloads/ukhealthwatch-2005.pdf.
Callinicos, Alex, and Chris Harman, 1987, The Changing Working Class: Essays on Class Structure Today (Bookmarks).
Crinson, Ian, and Chris Yuill, 2008, What can Alienation Theory Contribute to an Understanding of Social Inequalities in Health?, International Journal of Health Services, volume 38, number 3.
>Evans, Robert, 1994, Health Care as a Threat to Health: Defense, Opulence, and the Social Environment, Daedalus, volume 123, number 4 (autumn 1994).
Floud, Roderick, and others, 1990, Height, Health and History: Nutritional Status in the United Kingdom, 1750–1980 (Cambridge University).
Fogel, Robert, 2004, Health, Nutrition and Economic Growth, Economic Development and Cultural Change, volume 52, number 3.
Frank, John, and J. Fraser Mustard, 1994, The Determinants of Health from a Historical Perspective, Daedalus, volume 123, number 4 (autumn 1994).
Fryer, David, 2000, The Future of Primary Prevention, The Journal of Primary Prevention, volume 21, number 2.
Goldacre, Ben, 2008, Bad Science, (Fourth Estate).
Haynes, Michael, 2008, The Comparative Accountancy of Death in War, History Teaching Review Yearbook, volume 22, http://pers-www.wlv.ac.uk/~le1958/war.pdf [Download – Note by ETOL]
Haynes, Michael, and Rumy Husan, 2003, A Century of State Murder? Death and Public Policy in Russia (Pluto Press).
Marmot, Michael, 1994, Social Differentials in Health Within and Between Populations, Daedalus, volume 123, number 4 (autumn 1994).
Marmot, Michael, 2003, Status Syndrome (Bloomsbury).
Marmot, Michael, 2005, Social Determinants of Health Inequalities, Lancet, volume 365, issue 1099, 19 March 2005.
Marmot, Michael, and Richard Wilkinson, 2003, The Solid Facts (second edition), World Health Organisation, www.euro.who.int/document/e81384.pdf.
Muntaner, Carles, and John Lynch, 1999, Income Inequality, Social Cohesion and Class Relations: A Critique of Wilkinson’s Neo-Durkheimian Research Program, International Journal of Health Services, volume 29, number 1, pp. 59–81.
Muntaner, Carles, and others, 2003, The Associations of Social Class and Social Stratification with Patterns of General and Mental Health in a Spanish Population, International Journal of Epidemiology, volume 32.
National Audit Office, 2005, A Safe Place for Patients: Leaning to Improve Patient Safety, www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmselect/cmpubacc/ 831/831.pdf.
Orendi, Jeorge, 2008, Health-care Organisation, Hospital-bed Occupancy and MRSA, Lancet, volume 371, issue 9622, 26 April 2008.
Player, Stewart, and Colin Leys, 2008, Confuse and Conceal: The NHS and Independent Sector Treatment Centres (Merlin).
Pollock, Allyson, 2005, NHS PLC: The Privatisation of Our Healthcare (Verso).
Shaw, Mary, Dorling Danny, Mitchell Richard and George Davey Smith, 1999, The Widening Gap: Health Inequalities and Policies in Britain (Policy Press).
Shaw, Mary, Dorling Danny, Mitchell Richard and George Davey Smith, 2005a, Health Inequalities and New Labour: How the Promises Compare with Real Progress, British Medical Journal, volume 330, 30 April 2005.
Shaw, Mary, Dorling Danny, Mitchell Richard and George Davey Smith, 2005b, Labour’s Black Report Moment?, British Medical Journal, volume 331, 10 September 2005.
Shorter, Edward, 2006, Primary Care, in Roy Porter (ed.), The Cambridge History of Medicine (Cambridge University).
Townsend, Peter, and Nick Davidson, 1982, Inequalities in Health: The Black report (Penguin).
Tudor Hart, Julian, 1971, The Inverse Care Law, Lancet, 27 February 1971.
Widgery, David, 1979, Health in Danger (Macmillan).
Wilkinson, Richard, 1994, The Epidemiological Transition: From Material Scarcity to Social Disadvantage, Daedalus, volume 123, number 4 (autumn 1994).
Wilkinson, Richard, and Kate Pickett, 2009, The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better (Penguin).
Wootton, David, 2006, Bad Medicine. Doctors doing Harm since Hippocrates (Oxford University).
Yuill, Chris, 2005, Marx: Capitalism, Alienation and Health, Social Theory and Health, volume 3.
 



Boris Kagarlitsky
Empire of the Periphery: Russia and the World System
Pluto, 2008, £40
Boris Kagarlitsky is a prolific commentator on modern Russia who
has also written on wider trends in global capitalism. It is
impossible to read a book by him without learning something, and
Empire of the Periphery: Russia and the World System is one of
his best. It is also impossible to read a book by him and not be
frustrated and irritated as wrong turns are taken, loose ends left
untied and contradictions unresolved.
First, the good stuff. Kagarlitsky’s aim is to write an economic
and social history of Russia locating it as a peripheral state in the
global system. Starting with the formation of an embryonic Russian
state in the early Middle Ages, Kagarlitsky takes us through a
thousand years of history drawing on some of the best historians of
Russian history. His aim – more challenging to a Russian reader
than to one in the West – is to undermine both positive and
negative claims about Russia’s unique position or nature. Anyone
unfamiliar with the history of Russia will find this a readable
account; anyone familiar with it will still learn some valuable things.
More, Kagarlitsky tries to situate this history in a theoretical
framework formed out of three major elements. The first is the sense
of capitalism as a global system where he links “world system
analysis” and more traditional Marxist accounts.
The second, for which we should also be grateful, is a long
overdue recognition of the achievements of the great Marxist
historian of Russia, Mikhail Pokrovsky (1868–1932). Pokrovsky died
before the final consolidation of Stalinism but was an early
posthumous victim as his body of work was systematically rubbished
and then ignored by a lesser generation of propagandists. In fact
Pokrovksy was a brilliant historian and a committed revolutionary, a
researcher, writer and Bolshevik. Some readers will know of his work
through an appendix in Leon Trotsky’s History of the Russian
Revolution where Trotsky takes issue with some of his ideas. But
the depth of Pokrovsky’s achievement needs to be judged from his
whole work, parts of which are available in translation (if often
neglected and indifferent ones).
The third element of the Kagarlitsky schema is the idea of the
Russian economist and Stalin victim Nikolai Kondratiev (1892–1938)
that capitalist development takes the form of long cycles of growth
and stagnation, overlaid on which is the normal economic cycle.
It is at this point, however, that the frustrations set in.
Kondratiev, after the introduction, barely gets a look in. This is
perhaps just as well, given the uncertain state of discussion of his
long-wave theory. No one doubts that capitalist growth is uneven. But
no one has convincingly shown that this unevenness is cyclical or
that a mechanism could exist that adequately explains it.
But this is a lesser issue. The big one is how Kagarlitsky deals
with capitalism as a global system and Russia’s role within it.
Kagarlitsky writes too often from the inside, Russia, looking out at
the whole world system. The evolution of the global economy and the
way that it generates a range of semi-peripheral and peripheral forms
(and for that matter advanced ones too), of which Russia’s
experience was and is one, is less convincingly sketched.
Kagalitsky does not have a strong enough theoretical framework to
understand the global economy and its forms. This includes, most
importantly, the role of the state. He correctly argues that writers
such as Immanuel Wallerstein and Andre Gunder Frank often stumble
because of the lack of a strong political economy focused on
production. But Kagarlitsky too does not address the real debates
about how far we should take the argument that capitalism can only
exist as a global economy. Indeed towards the end of the book he
retreats from some of the important arguments made by Wallerstein.
Wallerstein’s work, despite its problems, is attractive because
of the power of his claim that capitalism is a global system with a
global history. What it needs is a clearer account of the way that
different forms of competition – market, state, military, etc. –
operate and a better grasp of the role of the state including a
proper confrontation with the idea of state capitalism. This is not
only a question of Russia (and its satellites in the Soviet era) but
also of what happens in, for example, capitalist war economies.
Yet in a long footnote Kagarlitsky notes that Wallerstein argues
that the USSR remained part of the capitalist world system throughout
and that, whatever its internal form, it has to be considered as part
of the capitalist world. This is not the place to evaluate this
argument (or Kagalitsky’s summary of it), save to say that readers
of this journal would argue that it is a fudge to imply “of
capitalism, in capitalism but not capitalism”. The problem is that
Kagarlitsky will not even go as far as this. He argues that Russia
effectively dropped out of the capitalist global economy in the 20th
century. The reason is that it ceased to be part of the international
division of labour (at least until the 1970s).
Reducing global capitalism to a market imposed division of labour
unthinkingly replays older claims about capitalism. Do capitalism and
the determining force of the capitalist global system really cease to
exist when the international division of labour is suspended (as in
war) or countries try to control and limit it (state-led development)?
In a book of history we should not expect too much theory but when
Kagarlitsky retreats in this way from a central claim of the book he
surely needs to tell us rather more positively what Russia was
between the revolution and the 1980s? No less, if it was separated
from the capitalist world system did it, as was claimed in Stalin’s
time, exist as part of an alternative non-capitalist world system?
In Kagarlitsky’s analysis we cannot even be sure when capitalism
was abolished because he notes that in the 1920s Russian development
was more heavily affected by the international division of labour
than in the 1930s. Then, from the 1970s, it was on the way to
becoming part of it again, a position that was finally realised in
the 1990s. But even then his account remains uncertain, for he claims
that in the late 1990s parts of the system were still not integrated
(are they now?).
This is not only theoretically confusing but politically confusing
too. What is the enemy in Russia, and where do we look for it? The
lack of clarity in the argument means that politically it can be made
to appeal as all things to all people, which is no doubt part of its attraction.
Kagarlitsky also puts too much emphasis on Russia’s peripheral
status. The account would have been more nuanced had he dealt more
with the idea of Russia as part of the semi-periphery, and taken
seriously the question of uneven and combined development. Russia is
not a peripheral Third World state. It was not a Third World state in
1914. It is not one today, despite an offhand comparison with Zimbabwe.
Overall Kagarlitsky’s historical journey is fascinating. The
long period under discussion allows him to draw some striking
comparisons in his final chapter on modern Russia: the restoration of
agricultural exports in a country of malnutrition, once a
characteristic of the 19th century; the collapse of the livestock
herd in the countryside, once seen as unique consequence of
collectivisation; surviving on a sea of oil, once seen as the
Achilles heel of the Brezhnev regime; and so on. However his implicit
theoretical journey is much less convincing. But the fact that, like
the Russian economy, this mixture is uneven should not prevent
readers interested in Russia and arguments about its past, present
and future learning from this book.
 



Katerina Clark, Evgeny Dobrenko, Andrei Artizov and Oleg Naumov (eds.)
Soviet Culture and Power: A History in Documents, 1917–1953
Yale University, 2007, £35
Big books are fashionable these days. Soviet Culture and Power: A History in Documents, 1917–1953 comes at around 500 pages but it is only a selection of documents in English from a much larger three-volume Russian collection edited by Andrei Artiozov and Oleg Naumov. Together the three Russian volumes contain a huge mass of material, primarily from the Soviet archives. The Western editors, Katerina Clark and Evgeny Dobrenko, have then made their own selection from the Artizov and Naumov selection. In terms of producing a large number of documents in English they have made us all grateful. Sadly, however, this is as much as can be said, for they have produced this collection in such a tendentious way that it needs a severe health warning.
First, Clark and Dobrenko have selected documents that reflect arguments about the fate of major figures well known in the West. They have therefore missed the opportunity to broaden our understanding of the USSR by looking at some of the less obvious issues.
Second, these documents allegedly deal with the period 1917 to 1953, but the first significant document dates from 1921, after four years of bitter civil war and unbelievable destruction and immiseration. We therefore see nothing of the inspiration of the revolution in the area of culture. We see nothing either of the painful way in which the hopes for a world in which the “cultural front” would be the first front were crushed by military necessity and economic dislocation.
It is, rather, as if we were to create a documentary history of the French Revolution which began in 1794, treating what came before as a minor prologue. In this revolution there would be no Wordsworth to be inspired, no bliss to be alive. And there could be no Shelley to rebuke his inconstancy in the face of difficulties driven from the outside and not least from his own country. On the contrary, English counter-revolution would be presented as doing all artists and writers in France a great favour by seeking to release them from the impending rise of the Napoleon-Stalin figure.
The peculiar lack of a reference point in 1917 is part of a wider strategy, which is to create the idea that there was no revolution to degenerate. What there was instead was incipient totalitarianism. The editors disdain the word, but the concept walks like a ghost through these pages, the commentary and the selection.
The editors (not least Katerina Clark) have written well on Russia before, but here there are unpleasant echoes of the way documentary collections were put together under Stalin to reinforce one particular view. We are invited to accept that Soviet Russia would inevitably become a top-down society, driven by a maniacal leader who strove to keep his finger in every pie.
The crudity of the implicit argument is mitigated only by the occasional gesture towards more trendy postmodernist comments, such as the editors telling us that Stalin’s Russia was marked by “textual anxiety”. This focus is then reinforced by the additional selection principle of keeping every document written by or to Stalin or in which his “vote or participation is recorded”. This is not to deny the centrality of repression or the fact that on many occasions Stalin (and lesser leaders) played a “hands on” role. But this is hardly new. The problem is that we need a proper explanation of how this developed, and here the commentary and selection militate against it.
Chapter one, for example, starts with the prohibition on travel for intellectuals and others at the end of the civil war. For the editors this is part of a deliberate attack on “the intelligentsia”. No attempt is made to reflect the context and the painful choices that had to be made when ordinary Russians were dying of hunger and diseases in their millions in a blockaded country. This is not to say that the documents that follow are not interesting and important but they are framed in such a way as to guide the reader to the interpretation that the editors want. This is history more akin to Fox News. Readers should therefore be invited not so much to ignore the book but, as with Fox News, to read it with the sound turned down, interpreting the pictures themselves and wondering what other pictures there are that they cannot see.
In chapter two the Fox News approach to history becomes even more apparent in documents relating to the debate over the status of the Bolshoi Ballet in 1922 (context not discussed – a wrecked country and a famine in which perhaps five million or more die). Here Lenin argues that subsidising the Bolshoi when money was needed to wipe out illiteracy was “an entirely indecent proposal” made by the commissar of education, Anatoly Lunarcharsky.
In fact Lunarcharsky won the argument, but for the authors it was a sign of things to come that the issue was even posed. They do not explain how the Bolshoi then became the privileged core of the Soviet theatre. Or perhaps they do? In true Fox News style there is an explanation, and it is related to wanting to have sex with ballerinas. Readers will excuse the crudity but the framing is not mine: “It was no secret to anyone ... that those involved in its destiny – Lunarcharsky, Kalinin, Yenukidze, and later Voroshilov – were great admirers of the Bolshoi Theatre ballerinas. Stalin took full advantage of this circumstance blackmailing his comrades in arms with the threat of publicity and of being compromised.”
It will then hardly come as a surprise to learn that Leon Trotsky was part of the problem rather than the solution. When he wrote that “the sphere of art is not one where the party is called upon to command. It can and must safeguard, assist and only indirectly guide”, our editors know authoritatively that there is no ambiguity here – textual or otherwise. Trotsky’s words seemingly mean their exact opposite: “This is a revealing statement, since ‘indirectly guide’ meant to define the political course in the cultural sphere.”
This logic inevitably flows into later sections on the periods 1932–41 and 1941–53. We are presented with a partial selection and a partial commentary, which makes it difficult to understand what, other than fear and gestures to nationalism, held the USSR together. Early on the editors ask when Stalin became a Stalinist, but the documents offer fewer clues than we might hope for.
During the Stalin era people lived and loved, watched sport and played it. They sang and danced, listened to the radio, went to the cinema, read books and enjoyed a developing culture in both a narrow and wider sense, even as the gulag was built and a significant minority of the Soviet population were sent there. What is needed is surely some attempt to provide evidence through which this amalgam can be understood.
Clark and Dobrenko stress the repression of those who stepped out of line and the huge material rewards for those who stayed loyal. Both are important, but something more was happening. In terms of mass culture, for example, dream factories were developed in the 1930s in the advanced world but these needed positive nurturing. We see little of this in the documents translated here from Stalin’s Russia. Censorship was only one aspect of this. Another was the privileging of the favoured figures and themes, and yet again the documents chosen throw little light on this. When they do, as in the 1946 instructions of how to remake the film Admiral Nakhimov, Clark and Dobrenko treat this simply as a positive case of “creative censorship”.
Despite these criticisms, in a book of this length there cannot fail to be much of importance. It is safe to say that the documents here will be widely quoted. The plight of many writers and artists is already well known and some documents do little more than pile on the agony. Occasionally we get significantly more. A shorthand report of Stalin’s speech to Ukrainian writers in January 1929, for example, throws considerable light on the emerging logic of “socialism in one country” and how it interacted with nationalism and culture.
Likewise, the comments around the 1934 writers’ congress are invaluable and illuminating. With careful reading much can be teased out about Soviet culture and ideology. The famous phrase from the time is that Soviet intellectuals were expected to be “engineers of the human soul”. To see this simply in terms of manipulation from on high, however, is to miss the extent to which the Soviet leadership themselves both made this world and were trapped within it.
 



In the years between 1910 and the outbreak of the war in August
1914 the British working class went through a period of unparalleled
militancy. In industry after industry workers went on strike, many
becoming organised for the first time as union membership leapt from
2,477,000 at the end of 1909 to 4,135,000 at the end of 1913. Troops
were called in as some disputes grew into local general strikes.
Naval gunboats and army machine guns were made ready in case of need
and several ‘rioters’ were shot and many more injured in clashes
with troops and police. Periodically the strike wave appeared to ebb
and ‘society’ could breathe a heavy sigh of relief. It was in
this vein that the Times wrote in August 1913 that ‘strikes
are no longer of interest except in so far as languid attention may
be given to events 6,000 miles away on the Rand’. But then the wave
of militancy would flood forward again and only a month after strikes
appeared ‘no longer of interest’ the Times had to
breathlessly report that ‘Dublin is now practically in a state of
civil war between Labour and Capital’. [1]
For four long years this pattern was maintained making what
contemporaries called ‘the labour unrest’ the longest period of
sustained militancy in recent British working class history.
It is this that makes an understanding of the whole period so
important. At other times the British working class has seemed a
potentially revolutionary force but it has always been possible to
explain this away as a result of ‘special causes’. In the years
1800–1848 for example, the forces which contributed to the first
‘making of the English working class’ obviously derived in large
part from the transitional stresses of the industrial revolution.
Similarly the militancy of the years 1918–1921 (with its ‘nine-day
echo’ in the General Strike) is in part explained by the
exceptional stress of the war. At all other times the record seems to
be one of the gradual ‘forward march’ of a working class firmly
integrated into capitalism. Except that is for those four years
before the war when the hollowness of all the glib assumptions about
the passivity of ordinary people were exposed by a massive strike
wave which took place against a background of impeccably ‘normal’ conditions.
But if the ‘labour unrest’ cannot be explained away it can be
marginalised and diminished in stature. The very inadequacy of the
contemporary term ‘labour unrest’ at once serves to isolate us
from a full understanding of these years and this has been reinforced
by historical treatment of the militancy.
For early moderate labour historians the revolt was essentially an
irrelevant byway on the road to the development of an orderly system
of industrial relations. The strikes were explained as an
overenthusiastic response to the economic cycle and the increase in
union membership by the encouragement given by the administrative
provisions of the 1911 National Insurance Act. [2]
More recent work has completely marginalised the revolt by stressing
the continued vitality of liberalism in these years. With the Labour
Party very much its junior partner and able to win perhaps only a
dozen seats at most without an electoral alliance preventing liberals
standing against labour candidates the industrial militancy is
pictured as having no political consequences of significance. [3]
Nor have the left wing historians challenged this picture. Rather
their emphasis on the ‘subordinate’ character of the British
working class has reinforced it. [4] The
only challenge to this has come from historians associated with the
forerunner of this Journal, James Hinton, Richard Hyman and Bob
Holton and this challenge has not been sustained Recently Hinton has
described his previous work as being concerned with ‘ghosts’
which presumably now need to be exorcised. [5]
It has therefore been left to two historians in America, at one
remove from the stultifying traditions of British labour history, to
insist both on the importance of these years and their wider
significance. [6]
 
Sectionalism and the long downturn
Table I sets out the three basic government recorded strike series
for Britain from 1895 and the two averages that can be derived from
them. I have discussed the nature and limits of these statistics
elsewhere as well as how they compare with later periods and
internationally. [7] Here our concern
will be to use them as an indicator of changing levels of militancy
and its contours.
It is immediately evident from Table I that the pre-war revolt was
preceded by a long period of downturn in levels of conflict. The
numbers of strikes fell, average size fell and strikes became longer
as workers had to fight harder for any gains or to defend existing
conditions. Our series starts when the 1888–1892 strike wave was
over and registers the bitter defensive battles that took place in a
number of industries in the 1890s. A home boom allowed some workers
such as those in building to push forward offensive demands and so
keep up the overall level of strike activity but after the turn of
the century the depth of the downturn became much more evident and
the number of strikes dropped to an all time low in peacetime years.
[8]




TABLE I
Yearly average strike statistics




 


Strikes
(total)


Strikers
(total)
(000)


Strike
days
(000)


Strikers
per strike
(average)


Strike days
per strike
(average)




1895–99


   793


   172


  7,524


   221


32




1900–04


   495


   103


  2,919


   209


18




1905–09


   456


   144


  4,254


   323


20




1910


   531


   385


  9,895


   725


18




1911


   903


   831


10,370


   920


11




1912


   857


1,233


40,915


1,439


28




1913


1,497


   516


11,631


   345


17




1914 (Jan.–July)


   848


   424


  9,964


   499


24




1914 (Aug.–Dec.)


   151


     30


     147


   198


  5



The defensive character of unionism in these years is important
because it was at this time that many of the distinctive traits of
the labour movement were consolidated. Some left wing historians have
seen the period as one of an heroic battle against a general
capitalist offensive which, assisted by a number of adverse legal
decisions, finally culminated in the Taff Vale judgement. [9]
But this is too simplistic. In areas like shipping and the docks
where conditions made it relatively easy to use blacklegs and the
services of William Collison’s strikebreaking National Free Labour
Association such an offensive is clearly evident. [10]
But elsewhere what stands out is the acceptability of unions to
employers. What was at issue was rather the terms on which unions
should exist. Here it is becoming increasingly apparent that many
employers who were faced with unions saw them as double-edged. While
they might challenge employer prerogatives they could also hold back
and discipline workers as well. On this basis employers were prepared
to work with unions if the balance could be swung in their favour.
[11] It was the need to tilt the
balance this way and not the desire to destroy unions that led to
major set piece confrontations in, for example, cotton in 1893, the
shoe industry in 1895 and, above all, engineering in 1897–1898. At
a national level the employers were spectacularly successful but on
the ground a degree of workplace power still remained. This was
particularly true in engineering where workers were still able to
exercise some degree of shop control. If Taff Vale is seen in this
light it too appears as a legal decision aimed at strengthening
‘responsible trades unionism’ which would respect contracts with employers.
Moreover a significant minority of union members were prepared to
consider accepting this view as well as the conciliation and
arbitration machinery which was increasingly sponsored by the Board
of Trade after the passing of the 1896 Conciliation Act. For a time
Ben Tillett and Tom Mann were both supporters of conciliation and
arbitration and over Taff Vale socialist unionists like George Earnes
of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (ASE) wavered. In part this
is to be explained by the way that the union were being drawn into
uncharted seas but more significant is the way in which the downturn
in militancy in the 1890s had pulled whole sections of the labour
movement to the right in the absence of any strongly argued political
alternative. The result was that the inward and defensive character
of unionism came to be widely shared even on the left.
In this relative political isolation the basis of progress was
what Tillett later called ‘funds and sectional combination’. [12]
Unions would rely on their sectional strength and accumulated funds
which could maintain strikers in localised disputes. Obviously it was
only the craft unions which could operate in this way and the ‘new
unions’ of the semi and unskilled tended to fall by the wayside
unless they too operated on craft lines, becoming ‘cautious,
limited, conservative and sectional. [13]
Where these policies broke down was in the big confrontations such
as the 1898–98 engineering dispute. But no-one on the left was able
to generalise these experiences and workers remained trapped in what
W.F. Hay, a militant South Wales miner, called ‘the bow and arrow
stage trades unionism’. [14] By the
end of 1909, therefore, only some 15% of the workforce was organised.
It is important to remember that this shift made the British trades
unions the most powerful in the world but that power was dissipated
across some 1100 different organisations.
 
The rise of a union bureaucracy
The other side of the coin of this process of sectional
development was the emergence of a trade union bureaucracy in its own
right. There had, of course, been individual officials long before
but the growth of a class of officials was very uneven. In cotton,
for example, they had appeared at a relatively early stage but in
engineering the ASE had only a general secretary and a clerk as late
as 1866. In the next decades officialdom took root with the rise of
central and district officials. The ASE, for example, had a salaried
district staff from 1892. Insofar as we can generalise across a very
varied experience it does seem that officials were stronger the
weaker, more isolated and apathetic the union membership. Thus in
engineering strong shop control kept them in check while in building
their differentiation was much greater. But everywhere there was the
same common tendency towards a developing bureaucracy of officials
with their ‘two souls’.
Unfortunately we still lack an adequate account of this. [15]
Some officials used their positions spectacularly to their own
advantage. The early miners’ leader Alexander MacDonald, for
example, made a modest fortune on the side, enjoying to the full the
high life of meetings with employers. William Abraham (Mabon) the
Welsh miners’ leader earned £700 a year at a time when the best
paid hewers would probably be earning no more than £2 a week at most
and Abraham was also a director and company shareholder as well as a
landlord. In the cotton industry officials could earn £250–£300 a
year and it was a relative commonplace for them to later take
employment with the cotton masters. [16]
But these are extreme examples and the critique of the trade union
bureaucracy does not depend upon the effective bribery, sycophancy or
stupidity of officials. Rather this was a secondary consequence of
the growth of union officialdom. The majority were, no doubt,
‘overworked and underpaid’ and quite sincere in their beliefs and
actions. But this was precisely the problem, as one old engineer told
the Webbs, ‘Alas! It is not bribery. Not his morality but his
intellect is corrupted’. [17]
This arose for a number of reasons. In the first place the
official was removed physically from the discipline of the workplace
and the conflicts of the workers. His own conditions were secure both
from particular workplace pressures and the general ups and downs of
the economy as a whole. Secondly, the development of collective
bargaining machinery gave officials a dual role of negotiating better
terms for their members and delivering the goods to management for
the duration of the agreement in terms of orderly workplace
relations. Anything that broke that routine therefore challenged
their credibility both in their own eyes and those of the management.
The degree of conservatism bred by collective bargaining machinery
varied considerably. Although by 1910 it covered only about a quarter
of the workforce these nevertheless included most trade unionists.
But the focus of this bargaining tended still to be local rather than
national – thus limiting to some extent the degree of detachment of
officials from their members.
Even so, the tension in the officials position was apparent
everywhere and it was reinforced by outside influences. The Webbs
well understood how these pressures worked, ‘the officials of the
great societies found themselves elected to School boards and even to
the House of Commons, pressed by the Government to accept seats on
Royal Commissions and respectfully listened to in the lobby’. [18]
It is interesting that the integration of ex-officials into the
state was particularly pronounced. Typical was John Burnett who had
made his reputation leading the ‘9 hours movement’ in the
North-East in 1871–2. He later became secretary of the ASE and from
1886 Labour Correspondent of the Board of Trade. But he was just one
of many and as state functions increased so did the tendency to draw
in union officials. By 1912, for example, one estimate suggests that
‘nearly 400’ posts created by the liberal government in the
factory inspectorate, Home Office, Board of Trade and National
Insurance administration had been filled by trade unionists. [19]
These widespread pressures to contain the unions did not, however,
go unchallenged. The Board of Trade in the early 1890s, using a very
generous definition of ‘official strikes’, found that over a
quarter of the strikes they surveyed had not been approved for
various reasons. More interestingly still these strikes tended to be
larger on average than approved ones. [20]
What gave these struggles their importance is that they arose out of
informal workplace organisation and an attempt by workers to maintain
the ‘frontier of control’. We know most about these struggles in
engineering and building but scattered evidence from other industries
which has yet to be drawn together shows them clearly to have
extended far beyond these two industries. [21]
The problem was how could they be built upon?
 
Workers in revolt
If we turn back now to Table I and focus on the years 1910–1914
we can see the dynamics of the strike wave in action. The number of
strikes reached a peak in 1913 and on average in these years strikes
were running at twice the level of the previous five years. The
number of strikers and strike-days peaked in 1912 because of the
national coalmining dispute that year. Over the period as a whole
there were 4.5 times more strikers than the previous five years and
just under 4 times as many strike-days. The dimensions of individual
strikes changed too. Column four shows that the average size of
strike grew. Column five reflects indirectly the way in which strikes
paid off. The average length of strikes fell, especially in 1911, as
workers’ militancy brought them quicker gains and intimidated
employers (the increase in 1912 is largely accounted for by the
national coal strike).
These broad dimensions are probably common to all strike waves but
the previous ones had taken place in the pre-statistical age.
Obviously earlier strike waves were absolutely smaller but it is also
possible that they were relatively smaller too (except for the very
earliest ones which started from a small base). But more significant
than mere quantitative comparison is, the way in which the strikes in
this era differed qualitatively from what had occurred before.
In the first place these strikes were not contained within the
existing union organisations. Rather they were a dual revolt against
employers and the established union leaderships and collective
bargaining machinery where it existed. It was these aspects that gave
them their second characteristic, namely violence and aggression.
This was reflected not only in the extensive overt violence against
blacklegs, employers and magistrates as well as in the sabotage of
machinery but also in the way in which working class self-confidence
came to have a belligerent character. In the Black Country in 1913,
for example, strikers marched from factory to factory singing with
considerable intimidation what became their theme song ‘Hello,
hello, here we are again’. [22] The
second factor spilt over into a third distinguishing characteristic –
the strikes came to represent an implicit challenge to the existing
political system. This was only in part a conscious revolt against
parliament. Rather it reflected a deeper challenge to the restrictive
limits of political activity in Edwardian Britain. At a time when
playing street football was a major ‘crime’ of working class
youth the willingness of strikers to engage in street politics, to
march at a moments notice several miles to bring out another factory
served to challenge the closely circumscribed limits of what was
acceptable. [23] And for a few this did
indeed then develop and link into a more conscious and coherent
critique of the nature of the political system.
The detailed history of the major disputes and the related
increase in union membership can be found elsewhere. [24]
Here we will be content to note the bare outlines in order to look
more closely at the characteristics of the whole revolt. The first
phase of open militancy ran from September 1910 to August 1911 and
centred on the South Wales coal held with a mass refusal to accept
the terms negotiated by the union leadership. Eventually the miners
were forced back but not before violent clashes had shaken the
Rhondda and burned the name Tonypandy into Welsh working class
consciousness. Between June and September 1911 the focus switched to
transport strikes, first with the conflicts in the ports which
stopped Hull and Liverpool and then spilling over into national
railway strike. [25] On August 15 two
men were shot dead in Liverpool and a few days later two more were
shot dead in Llanelli.
In the winter of 1911–1912 the focus switched back to mining
with a crippling national strike that involved 93% of all coalworkers
closing 87% of all blast furnaces within 5 weeks and seriously
hitting rail transport after only 3 weeks. [26]
In the spring and early summer attention turned back to transport
again with a crucial dock strike in London at the fore. The defeat of
this strike was a major setback. Sympathy action in other ports,
which had been expected but not planned, did not materialise and the
strikers in London were left isolated. For a time the momentum of the
strike seemed to waver but then in 1913 it surged back once again.
There were renewed strikes on the railways and in the mines but more
notable was the spread of strike activity into new areas: the
‘prairie fire’ strikes in the Black Country engineering and metal
working industry and new conflicts in building. At the same time in
Dublin James Larkin was leading a strike which paralysed and
polarised the city. In the end 656 workers were jailed, and 5 killed
in what was a mini-civil war which threatened religious divisions as
both catholic and protestant workers faced what James Connolly later
called ‘an alliance of Dublin Castle with its police, the
Orange-Tory magistrates, Nationalist employers and the Catholic
hierarchy’. [27]
Larkin’s own position as a strike leader often reflected a sharp
divorce between his ‘theory’ and practice but his denunciation of
the Labour Party leaders as being as ‘useful as mummies in a
museum’ and the TUC as ‘fools who mask as leaders’ was one that
many strikers came to share through their own experience. And his
basic advice to ‘never trust leaders  ...  trust yourselves’ was
an attitude which typified the militancy of this time. It was an
attitude, moreover, which carried the wave of strikes forward to the
outbreak of war in 1914. As Table I shows in the first seven months
of 1914 strikes were running at a record level with a major building
strike in London now capturing most attention. To many worried
observers it seemed as if in the autumn things were bound to get
hotter still.
Equally significant was the development of union organisation.
Membership increased by some 60% and union density rose 23% in 1914.
Anti-union tactics which had been maintained successfully for two
decades in industries like shipping and the railways were simply
blown away. In 1910, for example, only a third of railway workers
were organised. By 1914 the figure was three quarters. But
organisation spread far more widely taking the first significant
inroads among white collar workers and bringing in unskilled workers
to a far greater extent than in the 1888–1892 ‘new unionism’
period. The Gasworkers and General Labourers Union increased its
membership from 32,000 in 1910 to 135,000 by the end 1913. In the
same period the Workers’ Union increased its membership from 5 to 91,000.
But it was not simply organisation. The strikes were also a revolt
against traditional union forms – against bureaucratic leadership
and sectional organisation. Amalgamation committees led from below
sprang up, often opposed by union leaders and with at best usually no
more than lukewarm support. Perhaps the greatest success was the
partial break with sectionalism on the railways which led to the
formation of the National Union of Railwaymen, ‘a triumph of
industrial unionism’, and then in 1914 came the formal attempt to
link the action of 1.5 million miners, transport workers and railway
men in the Triple Alliance. [28]
Of course the wave of militancy did not sweep everything before
it. 75% of the workforce remained outside of the unions and
sectionalism and bureaucracy continued to exist and worked to subvert
the gains of these years. But two decades of union, growth had been
compressed into four years and diverted towards the less skilled and
the old ways had been thrown heavily on the defensive.
 
Strikes and consciousness
The revolt of these years cannot be explained without reference to
economic, social and organisational pressures. But either by
themselves or together this range of explanation is inadequate. Real
wages had been falling as prices had risen while at a more general
level the increasing size of capitalist organisation and a new
intensity of work reinforced the pressures on workers. Then in
1910–1914 unemployment fell sharply creating the basic conditions
for militancy. [29] But the militancy
went far beyond a simple response to changed conditions to develop a
momentum of its own. The rising level of struggle produced a sharp
polarisation, on the one hand between workers and employers and the
state and on the other between the workers and their official
leaderships whether in the unions or the Labour party. The ideology
of labourism was not destroyed but it was thrown back on its heels.
As one militant mason wrote in 1912 ‘we know something about the
men who are going to rebuild our Society (union) if it gets rebuilt,
but those men are not officials ...  The trade union movement is bled
white by officialdom’. [30]
This changing consciousness was far from coherent and it involved
more than just ‘a sense of impending clash’. Its tangibility can
be felt in a number of ways. At its most class conscious level it can
be found in the increasing precision of the militants argument which
can be traced in journals like The Industrial Syndicalist, The
Syndicalist and most notably in the classic pamphlet of the time
– The Miners’ Next Step.
At a broader level it can be found too in the character of the
strikers demands. Holton points out that in the South Wales coal
dispute the strike committee began by calling on workers to ‘Down
Tools’ in support of higher wages and ended by calling on them ‘To
put an end to Capitalist Despotism and do battle for the cause of
Industrial Freedom’. [31] But Such a
progression was by no means unusual. Three years later the strikes in
the Black Country began over simple wages issues but quickly brought
in other elements that threatened to go beyond this: As One worker
said ‘he was looking forward to the time when there would be one
union for every man in England. Something was going to happen that
would shake the foundation of the Midlands’. Union leaders who were
opposed to strike action had to chase after strikers and begin to
talk too of ‘class conflict’ in order to retain their credibility
with the workers. [32]
Strike committees and militants can, of course, frequently run
ahead of the feelings of the mass of strikers, particularly near the
end of a dispute. At these times the sloganising becomes more shrill
and no doubt this often happened in these years. But what is
interesting and different is the extent to which strikers kept up a
high level of activity and a high visibility creating a stronger
unity than before. Mass picketing was a commonplace, daily strike
meetings, frequent demonstrations led by brass bands in a carnival
atmosphere and often directed against specific targets like factories
still working, street collections and so on. [33]
Thus in the South Wales dispute although the men were forced back in
August 1911 on terms they could have had the previous autumn
militancy nevertheless recovered – a feature which is typical of
this period. In these terms the analysis of strike demands and their
relationship to changing attitude must be taken seriously in any
assessment of what was happening. But the most concrete evidence of
changing consciousness can be found in the record of strikes itself.
For contemporaries the most notable aspect of the explosion of
consciousness was the sympathetic strike. In fact between 1911 and
1913 the Board of Trade only recognised 37 genuine sympathetic
strikes involving only 25,733 workers. [34]
The real change in the character of strike profiles has to be
measured less formally than this. One important manifestation was the
explicit linking of strike demands of different groups which tied
together the skilled and the less skilled. This was particularly
evident in the transport disputes. But below this we find a new sense
of confidence spreading through informal channels. These links
particularly benefited those workers in parts of industry which had
never been able to strike before. Here the victories of the strong
gave new courage to the weak. One indication of this is the way in
which strike length changed. As Table I shows the average length of
strikes fell but this was not evenly distributed across all strikes.
In particular in the very smallest disputes the fall was most
dramatic. For example, in 1908–1910 strikes involving less than 25
workers averaged 24.1 days but in 1911–1913 they averaged only 10.4
days. Similarly those involving less than 100 Workers averaged
respectively 23.8 and 12.9 days in the two periods. Since workers
were winning more gains in these years it is highly unlikely that
this is accountable for by small unsuccessful strikes though even a
new willingness to go on strike and be defeated would be an important
sign. This new confidence also affected the duration of strikes in
other ways. Between 1905–1909 39% of strikes lasted less than a
week and 71% less than a month. In the strike wave 46% were settled
in a week and 80% in a month. At the other end of the scale 4.7% of
strikes lasted more than 20 weeks in 1905–1909 but only 2.45% in 1910–1913.
What is being registered here is not only a change in workers
attitudes but also a loss of employer confidence. The Board of Trade
also kept a record of the results of strikes. This could hardly be
objective but it is useful as an index of attitudes. It clearly shows
a close relationship between the number of claimed employers
victories and the total level of strike activity – the more strikes
the fewer victories the employers claimed. Thus in this period we see
a sharp fall in the percentage of employer victories and a
significant increase in the number of ‘compromises’ that were struck.
The strike profile changed in one other way which is crucial. The
new confidence fed into action by women workers on a significant
scale. In 1911, for example, in Bermondsey some 15,000 women in the
sweated trades came out and they were soon followed by charwomen
working for the London County Council. In the Black Country in 1913
too women played a prominent role encouraged by the early successes
of men (Lord Askwith’s account has misled many into thinking it was
women who set off these strikes). Union organisation was also
extended among women by 54% in these years. This was slightly less
than amongst men but it was still significant in that it created a
credible base for women’s trade unionism for the first time in a
number of work places.
These moves did not break entrenched attitudes overnight. A
women’s organiser of the Workers’ Union, for example, partly
pandering to male prejudices, told strikers in Walsall that
‘unorganised women were a real menace, and it was because the men
workers have looked down on them that women have encroached on
industries’. But chinks appeared and were beginning to be prised
open. In the history of the National Union of Boot and Shoe
Operatives, for example, we find the intriguing case of Lizzie
Wilson, a Leicester militant. Shining through the bemused contempt of
the union’s historian comes the story of a woman who led a struggle
to change union attitudes to its women members, in 1910–1911,
condemning the leadership as being incapable of dealing ‘with the
needs of the members of present day, especially women ...’ In the
end she was driven to lead a revolt which led to the creation of an
alternative women’s union in the area which apparently lasted until
the 1930s. [35] No doubt there were
other such cases but until historians take these years more seriously
the story behind this and other episodes will remain unknown.
In the four years 1910–1913 somewhere between 25 and 30% of the
workforce went on strike according to the official statistics. This
was a major transformation but it still left a further 70–75% who
did not strike. No doubt amongst these were a hard core of workers
who remained indifferent to the challenge of the time. But to judge
the revolt like this is misleading. In the first place many strikes
were not included in the statistics because they were not considered
serious enough. Equally some strikes were strategic and victory in
them enabled other workers to make significant gains without
themselves going on strike. But more important than either of these
points is the way in which the strikes that did take place fed upon
and fed into a growing opposition based in the working class
community as well as in the factory.
Reactions to strikes very often became community reactions not
only because strikers were from these communities but because a
related dynamic of community protest linked into industrial struggle.
A major tangible grievance, for example, that has been insufficiently
discussed was rents. The Black Country strikes were preceded by what
landlords and the local press chose to call a ‘Tenants War’
against rent rises and this problem similarly affected other areas.
The result was that strikes developed into ‘riots’ such as those
which shook Tonypandy in 1910. [36] In
Hull and Liverpool too the working class community was involved in
attacking police and attempting to rescue arrested strikers, bringing
together both catholics and protestants at the same time. [37]
The strikers themselves assisted this process by not being afraid to
take their demands into the communities, holding house to house
collections and evening meetings to gather support. All of this
therefore acted to involve those who were not on strike, other
workers, women at home and even in 1911 a rash of strikes by
schoolchildren. [38] And when the state
reacted with violence this only served to intensify solidarity
against what was seen as a hostile force whether represented on the
ground by troops or the police.
 
Crisis and the state
But the nature of crisis cannot only be discussed in terms of one
side. We have also to look at how the ruling class, through the
state, failed to resolve the problems it faced in these years. Before
1914 governments did not have a coherent policy towards ‘industrial
relations’. Only the Board of Trade worked consistently,
encouraging ‘responsible bargaining’ but aiming at the same time
to keep the State at one remove from strikes. The revolt strained
these designs to breaking point. The Board of Trade was overwhelmed
by the immensity of the strikes and time and again its chief
conciliator George Askwith was brought in at the last moment to
resolve conflict. For a time he became almost a folk hero dashing
through the night from one crisis to another. When the South African
government asked to borrow his talents the British government refused
because it could not afford for him to be out of the country for so long.
Where Askwith was not sufficient government ministers tried their
hand but in the succession of crises such interventions worked to
diminishing effect. The way in which control threatened to be lost is
powerfully illustrated by the way in which the repressive face of the
state was brought to the fore. A Royal Commission in 1908 had
recommended against the use of troops in strikes but they were soon
widely in use. At first they reinforced the local police and the
Metropolitan Police whose task it was to act as the first line
national back-up in a crisis. Then in August of 1911 Churchill
ordered the troops in to do the strikers work in the transport
strikes of that month. [39]
The sensitivity on this issue was shown by the prosecution of Tom
Mann and others for issuing a leaflet calling on troops not to shoot
on strikers. The crisis was most acute in August 1911, panic seized
local government as transport ground to a halt. Troops were
dispatched to over 30 towns and opened fire in Liverpool, Llanelli
and London. Territorial Army weapons were immobilised or removed in a
number of places for fear they would be turned on regular troops by
strikers or their sympathisers. Although the worst panic only lasted
a few days its seriousness is often not understood. Almost every home
based regiment was mobilised and on August 19th army officers were
given the right to deploy their men independent of civilian control. [40]
If this military crisis passed the general problems for the state
did not. The crucial issue was the ambiguity of ‘collective
bargaining’. Under the pressure of the unrest union recognition
spread and formal collective bargaining machinery was extended. But
worried contemporaries did not see this as it was later seen as ‘the
great social invention that has institutionalised industrial
conflict’. One of the more intelligent contemporary attempts to
assess the strike wave concluded that ‘bargaining cannot abolish
strikes and lock-outs any more than diplomacy can abolish war’.
[41] The problem was that control of
this machinery did not lie securely in the hands of the national
leaderships of the unions. Most collective bargaining remained local
opening up the possibilities of militants using it to their own
advantage. This ‘rank and filism’ was not widely theorised but it
was no less real for that. It did, however, inform The Miner’s
Next Step which marked a major advance in the attitudes of
militants to their unions. This started from the assumption that ‘so
long as the system of working for wages endures, collective
bargaining remains essential’ but then went on to explore how rank
and file militancy could push it in favour of the workers. The
problem with the analysis in the pamphlet was that it placed
excessive reliance on bringing union leaderships to heel rather than
building an alternative leadership in the mines and factories, whilst
still working within the existing unions. But even with this
important limitation the problem of control was still a very real
one. [42]
An important expression of this was the increasing scepticism
about conciliation and arbitration machinery. In fact in these years
the whole machinery of conciliation and arbitration set up by the
state was dangerously exposed. The spread of conciliation was
effectively halted as a means of resolving disputes. The extent to
which this occurred has been obscured by the fact that in one
industry there was a massive increase in conciliation cases making it
look as if the total number of cases rose dramatically, but in
reality there was hardly any increase at all elsewhere. At the same
time in major conflicts the success of conciliation came to depend
heavily on the personal qualities of Sir George Askwith – obviously
a dangerously narrow base to depend on. Moreover it was not just the
workers who came to doubt the value of this machinery. By 1913
employers too were beginning to look for stronger solutions. The
difficulties were symbolised when Sir Charles Macara who was a
leading member of the Industrial Council – a body designed to bring
employers and unions together to restore harmony – suddenly
appeared as the intransigent leader of the cotton employers in the
lock-out of Lancashire cotton workers. [43]
Again these basic problems were clear to many contemporaries:
it is notorious that the machinery of the present
(Conciliation) Act ...  has proved altogether inapplicable in most of
the more widespread of recent labour troubles ...  the parties to
such disputes have shown no readiness to agree upon arbitration. The
Board of Trade has therefore been compelled in such cases, to fall
back on its vaguer powers under the Act ...  a power which, it need
hardly be said, has failed to be efficacious in some of the gravest
emergencies. [44]
There was thus a basic ambiguity in the response to the
institutions designed to contain the workers militancy. Very often
the militancy pushed through these limits and a minority of militants
began to see at least part of the way in which these actions could be
taken further. The Triple Alliance well illustrates this. In one
sense it was no more than a simple extension of trade unionism
designed to increase pressure on the state and hold the militants in
check. In these terms it was ‘the cripple alliance’ from the very
outset. But it also had another side which the militants fought for
and before the war it was not obvious that the officials would
succeed in using the Triple Alliance to divert action rather than
lead it.
For the state this was precisely the problem. The pragmatic policy
that emerged was one of co-opting union leaders. In May 1911
Churchill could on this basis encourage union membership, ‘I
consider that every workman is well advised to join a trade union’.
But rank and file protest undercut this process and in 1912 Buxton
from the Board of Trade had to report to the Cabinet that ‘the
leaders have lost influence and consequently self-confidence, and
naturally are unwilling to take the same responsibility as they would
gladly have taken, and did take, under former conditions’, it took
the first world war itself to consolidate this integration of the
union leaderships into the state itself. [45]
 
The failure of the left
The trade union leaders, almost to a man, deplored it,
the government viewed it with alarm, the ILP regretted this untoward
disregard for the universal panacea of the ballot box, the SDF asked
‘Can anything be more foolish, more harmful, more ...  unsocial
than a strike’; yet disregarding everything, encouraged only by a
small minority of syndicalist leaders, the great strike wave rolled
on, threatening to sweep everything away before it. [46]
History abounds with missed opportunities but unfortunately they
too often exist only in the mind of the historian. Yet some stand
out, and the years 1910–1914 have a serious claim on our attention
in these terms. How was it that the left was unable to capitalise on
this tide of revolt?
On the eve of the ‘labour unrest’ the left consisted of three
main organisations. The oldest and most radical was the Social
Democratic Federation. This was a ‘Marxist’ organisation but of a
very peculiar kind – Second International Marxism mediated by the
foibles of its founder, financier and still dominant personality,
H.M. Hyndman. [47] In spite of many
difficulties it had survived a number of breakaways and in 1909 had a
membership of some 10,000 plus. Alongside it stood the more moderate
Independent Labour Party founded in 1893 and now with some 30,000
members. The ILP was in theory a socialist organisation but its
leaders had always been prepared to subordinate their socialism to
the task of winning seats in parliament. This led them to act as the
midwife to the founding of the Labour Representation Committee in
1901. When candidates of the LRC won 29 seats in the 1906 elections
the basis for a viable parliamentary Labour Party was created.
But the cost of this electoral success was high. To the extent
that it existed socialism was now subject to a double subordination.
Unlike on the continent the early socialists were faced with an
already strong trades union and co-operative movement. They therefore
had the choice of trying to win it over to socialism or compromising
their socialism and trying to come to some sort of arrangement with
it. In terms of winning a parliamentary victory the second road
seemed to offer a short cut and the ILP leaders jumped at it. For
their part the trades unions, holding the purse strings, were happy
to tolerate the occasional piece of socialist rhetoric in the
narrower interests of using parliamentary representation as a
pressure to win limited legislative gains – most notably the
reversal of the Taff Vale judgement. It was in these terms that Keir
Hardie and others constructed their ‘Labour Alliance’. But there
was also a second element of subordination to a sometimes secret,
sometimes open alliance with Liberalism. [48]
Again this was dictated by the belief that it offered a short cut to
parliamentary influence, if not power.
There were important differences between the SDF, the ILP and the
Labour Party in parliament though a concentration on the leaders and
formal ideologies has obscured many instances of cooperation between
local branches. [49] But for the
purposes of understanding their role in the years 1910–1914,
however, it is what they have in common that is important. Here the
most significant point is their common focus on parliamentary and
local government elections. This meant that not only were they
committed ideologically to parliamentary methods but their structures
had developed to support this commitment. As a result they were
ill-fitted to respond to a strike wave whose very essence was
extra-parliamentary and whose militants openly denounced parliament
as a charade.
In this they were not, of course, alone. The European left
generally was trapped in this framework and although there were
important differences between the social democratic parties of Europe
the particular weaknesses of the British left encapsulate in this
sense the general weaknesses of the European left before 1914. The
one major exception to this was to be found in Russia. There the
repressive policies of the Tsarist state meant that ‘the social
democratic model of a broad mass party representing the whole of the
working class was simply impossible. [50]
Instead the Bolsheviks were forced to organise in the workplace
rather than on the geographical lines of parliamentary
constituencies. Politically too the depression imposed a much greater
unity and made the party a more homogeneous working class one. At the
same time there was no layer of functionaries at the top whose power
depended upon either trade union or parliamentary position. Instead
leadership depended more on the ability to convince members of the
correctness of actions and politics. Thus prior to 1917 the practice
of Bolshevism had already emerged even if the theory still awaited
its final completion. But much of the theory was there too in
outline. Already Lenin and those around him had begun to see these
elements as having a merit in themselves and not just to be shrugged
off once a parliamentary system was created.
It was this that separated them from other groups on the left in
Russia and in Europe more generally. It is obviously foolish to
idealise the coherence of a party structure that had to operate in
the chaotic conditions of the Tsarist Empire but the significance of
the break that the Bolsheviks had made in political organisation and
their ability to link political and economic struggled was apparent
with hindsight before 1917. In fact between 1912 and 1914 they were
able to use a strike wave to gain a commanding position amongst
Russia’s small but militant working class and so succeeding where
the British left failed.
But the ways in which the SDF, ILP and Labour Party developed were
also self-defeating even in their own more limited terms. Not only
did the focus on parliament mean that they were subject to all of the
pressures that social democratic parties are normally subject to. It
also meant that their appeal was effectively emasculated by the
parliamentary system itself. The problem here was that the franchise
operated in such a way as to exclude some 70% of all adults (it was
one of the narrowest in the whole of Europe). On top of this
electoral boundaries were drawn in such a way as to minimise the
number of working class constituencies while the costs of winning
seats in ‘the best club in Europe’ imposed huge financial strains
that could not help but affect the way in which the parties were
organised. [51]
Access to parliament was seen as being necessary in order to
implement state control or ‘collectivism’. Again they suffered
here from the general failure of social democratic parties to come to
terms with the nature of the capitalist state. But the failure was
compounded too by the consequent inability to make contact with the
widespread and deeply ingrained tradition of working class hostility
to the state. There was thus a basic barrier between what socialists
advocated and the instinctive reactions of ordinary people. [52]
This problem was simply explained away in terms of the blindness
of the working class to what was being offered them. For their part
the parties were equally blind to working class actions such as
strikes, a politically ‘disruptive’ activity to which they were
indifferent and at worst opposed. With largely middle class
memberships they were a part of the labour movement but they did not
organise within it. In fact many socialists went further in that they
shared a deep and ill-concealed contempt for ordinary people who were
too ‘stupid’ to recognise the abstract attraction of their
socialism – an attitude typified in Robert Tressell’s novel The
Ragged Trousered Philanthropists. Organisationally too they had
much in common in that they were all bureaucratically centralised
with only limited internal democracy. In practice this meant that
decisions were hard to enforce, with the result that the branches
were constantly pulled in different directions by their own
memberships. [53]
But this was obscured as were the oligarchic cliques running them
by another shared characteristic – namely their moralistic concern
with socialism as a form of abstract propaganda. This at one and the
same time pulled them together as organisations and isolated them
from the cold realities of the world. Behind it socialism could
become ‘a milch-cow to those who made careers through it, a ladder
to bureaucratic jobs outside, or a comforting ideology for
professional intellectuals’. [54]
There is a tendency to imply that there was a certain
inevitability about the way in which these characteristics developed.
But what is interesting is the recurrent history of revolt against
these traditions. The early days of the SDF, for example, were marked
by William Morris’s objections to the parliamentarism of Hyndman.
In the ILP in the early 1890s Hardie’s conception of the ‘Labour
Alliance’ had to overcome the arguments of Tom Mann and others that
any serious socialist party should be equally opposed to Liberalism
and Toryism and see work in the trade unions as one of its main
tasks. Again in the late 1900s various opposition currents emerged in
both of these organisations. Sometimes the desire was only to make
them more effective in their own terms but again some began to
question the terms on which they had been built. [55]
None of these critiques were fully developed with the result that
there tended to be an oscillation between temporary sharp internal
criticism before differences were sunk in the wider interests of the
party or movement and an attempt to maintain purity through extreme
sectarianism such as that found in the Socialist Labour Party – a
breakaway from the SDF. As a result the left entered the strike wave
without any organisation capable of capitalising on it. Instead it
was out of the failure to come to terms with the strikes that the
elements of the questioning of the existing forms began to come
together prefiguring parts of the model which existed, as yet
unknown, in Russia though without ever completing it before 1914.




TABLE II
The state of the political left 1909–1914 [56]
(Branches and membership estimates)




 


ILP


SDF-BSP (1912—)


SLP




1909


887


na


na




1910


842


235


20




1911


796


189


25




1912


745


343–370 (40,000?)


28





1913


713


na (15,313)


na




1914


672


na (13,755)


15 (300)




The Labour party, the ILP, and the BSP
The scale and unofficial character of the revolt struck at the
very heart of the carefully constructed alliances on which the Labour
Party was based. MPs found themselves faced with the choice of
defending the officials whose unions paid them or supporting the
actions of the workers whose support they rhetorically invoked. To
his credit Keir Hardie chose the later path though his actions were
often less radical than his words, ‘syndicalism’, he declared,
‘is the direct outcome of the apathy and indifference of this House
towards working class questions, and I rejoice at the growth of
syndicalism’. [57] But the rest of
the party many of whom were current or former union leaders remained
Silent. And when the silence was broken it was only to lecture
strikers. In 1911 Arthur Henderson and three other labour MPs
proposed a bill to make strikes illegal without 30 days notice. But
at least they allowed for strikes. Phillip Snowden, known for his
radicalism as the ‘English Robespierre’, came out against strikes
at all in the labour press and in a more qualified way in his book
Socialism or Syndicalism. [58]
The value of outbursts like these as a weapon with which to attack
strikers was not lost on the press. Snowden’s condemnation of
syndicalism was published just as the 1913 strike wave was gathering
momentum in the Midlands. His argument was immediately taken up by
the local press:
Mr Snowden’s writings have frequently given us the
impression that he has become a great deal more impressed since he
entered Parliament by the wisdom of things as they are ...  We are
quite at one with Mr Snowden in his condemnation of Syndicalism and
the General Strike. [59]
The fact that the Labour Party was acting as a bulwark of the
existing order was not just a figment of the militants’
imagination. Lloyd George saw its role in exactly these terms.
‘Socialism’, he said, meaning the Labour Party, would destroy
‘Syndicalism’ – ‘the best policeman for the Syndicalist is
the Socialist’:
there is this guarantee for society, that one microbe
can be trusted to kill another, and the microbe of Socialism, which
may be a very beneficient one, does at any rate keep guard upon the
other, which is a very dangerous and perilous one. I have, therefore,
no real fear of the Syndicalist. [60]
These positions accentuated the emerging crisis in the ILP and the
other groups that made up the grass roots of the Labour Party. One
indication of this is the failure of socialist and co-operative
society affiliation to the Labour party to grow. Between 1905–1910
membership in this category rose by 85% but in the years 1910–1914
it rose by only 7%. Behind these figures lies the particular problem
of the ILP. During these years, says its historian, the Party
‘appeared irrelevant and tired’. Its ideological standing
diminished, the circulation of the Labour Leader declined and finally
a significant minority of rank and file members broke away. [61]
One expression of this paralysis was the way in which many
intellectuals moved to a fundamental questioning of the nature of
parliamentary socialism. While the columns of the Daily Herald from
1912 gave such people a wider platform which was used for bitter
political and personal attacks on the labour leadership they tended
in their own politics to support a proliferating number of marginal
and utopian groups. GDH Cole was typical in trying to subvert the
Fabian Society ‘to permeate the permeators’ in order to create an
‘intelligence department’ for the labour movement and a purged
Labour party led by, amongst others, Phillip Snowden! [62]
Rank and file opposition, by contrast, did have a practical edge
to it and it came to a head in 1911. Under the impact of their own
quickening radicalisation and the pressure of socialists like Victor
Grayson, a dissident group led particularly by Leonard Hall (who had
been an ILP member since its foundation) finally despaired of
changing the ILP. A measure of the significance of their loss can be
seen in the consequent decline in ILP branches in Table II. It is
evident too in the decline in affiliation fees which slumped by 25%
between 1910–1912 and a further 11% between 1912–1914. [63]
The dissident ILPers left to join the British Socialist Party
(BSP) which was an attempt to bring together all those groups to the
left of the ILP. In the autumn of 1911 a Socialist Unity Conference
was held in Salford with over 200 delegates including 41 from ILP
branches and 86 from SDF branches and then in May 1912 the founding
conference of the BSP was held. The new party thus drew together the
old SDF with an amalgam of local socialist groups and the former ILP
members. The latter represented a developing critique which centred
on support for industrial action against parliamentary action. The
Manifesto of the Birmingham section of the BSP spoke of ‘the
machine gun action of all vast armies of Labour organised as a
national, union of all workers in all industries’. [64]

At the unity conference it was claimed that 35,000 socialists were
represented and the founding conference of the BSP claimed to
represent 40,000 members. These figures have been widely quoted but
they were probably exaggerated. However, even if only half that
number were genuinely represented the BSP still presented a
potentially formidable, force.
Unfortunately within a year the promise had disappeared. The
problem lay not so much with Hall and the ex-ILP contingent as the
old SDF which still made up the core of the BSP. Under the pressure
of the unrest the old leaders around Hyndman had begun to move to the
left in their rhetoric but all of the ambiguities towards strikes,
parliament and even nationalism remained. It did not take long for
them to come out. When Hall tried to get full support for the
industrial revolt he could only muster a third of conference support
in 1912. After this the old guard came out in the open rehearsing
increasingly right-wing arguments on nationalism and above all
opposing strikes:
All workers, whether they like it or not, are
consumers as well as producers, citizens as well as wage earners ... 
Any policy failing to act upon this must be a disruptive agency, at a
time when working class consolidation is crucial. [65]
For the militants this was the last straw and they began to drift
away. With them went the hope that it was possible to turn the
existing political organisations into fighting alternatives. The
logic was now for the BSP to liquidate itself given that as a
parliamentary organisation the Labour party was obviously more
effective and this is just what happened. In 1914 the BSP applied to
affiliate to the Labour party and it was finally accepted in 1916.
 
Syndicalism
Outside of the ILP and the BSP the most important political
expression of the workers militancy was the syndicalist movement. The
leading force behind syndicalism was Tom Mann helped by a small
number of able publicists and militant rank and file workers like
Noah Ablett a South Wales militant and part author of The Miners’
Next Step. Mann had begun to publish The Industrial
Syndicalist after he returned from Australia in 1910. This was a
monthly for direct action and 11 in all were published. The first
issues fell on fertile ground and in December 1910 the Industrial
Syndicalist Education League (ISEL) was set up. Syndicalist influence
continued to grow though 1911 and 1912 encouraging both the militancy
and the splits in the ILP that we have discussed. The Industrial
Syndicalist ceased publication at the height of the strikes in
1911 and Mann replaced it with the Liverpool based Transport
Worker. Then in December 1911 the first edition of The
Miners’ Next Step was published only to be sold out within
three months.
In 1912 the ground seemed even more promising. In January
publication of The Syndicalist began and then in the spring a
massive boost came first, from the arrest of Mann and Bowman over
their Don’t Shoot leaflet issued to troops, then the
national coal strike and finally the publication of the Daily Herald
which had begun as a printers strike sheet. During the summer of
1912, The Syndicalist had a circulation of 20,000. The
culmination came in the Autumn when the ISEL conference drew together
delegates from unions, trade councils and rank and file amalgamation
committees representing a claimed 100,000 workers. Their purpose was
to unify syndicalism and create a more coherent and effective
organisation. ‘The 1912–13 reorganisation of the ISEL represented
the highpoint of formal organisational cohesion within the
syndicalist movement before the war’. [66]
Yet within months the ISEL too had splintered and syndicalism as a
movement fragmented. The split came on the issue of reorganising
existing unions or creating new dual unions. Except in the short-run
the latter position has always proved disastrous in Europe but its
apparent success in America gave it sufficient credibility for some
to use it to divide the impressive unity of 1912. Syndicalism though
did not simply die away. Locally it remained important and one of the
largest fragments – the Industrial Democracy League led by Mann
with its Journal Solidarity had wider influence. But the
promise had clearly failed to materialise.
The normal explanation for this is somewhat trite. Syndicalism, it
is argued, ignored politics and paid the price for it. Syndicalists
did declare themselves to be ‘anti-political’ and some did mean
it literally but for most ‘anti-political’ meant
anti-parliamentary and anti-Labour party. This ambiguity was a
weakness but not as damning as it is often made out. The syndicalists
did have an impressive theoretical critique which recognised that
parliament was a faÃ§ade
that hid the real bases of power and saw state control not as the
liberation of the working class but as the development of (their
term) state capitalism. Against this they held out for the value of
direct action by the working class through strikes not only
nationally or internationally. These elements were not all held to
the same extent by everyone, nor were they always expressed
unambiguously and coherently but they did mark a major step forward.
The problem was not so much then the lack of a theory as the lack of
an organisation to use it.
J.T. Murphy, a militant who first entered politics as a member of
a syndicalist inspired union amalgamation committee later described
the tasks of revolutionaries as to be ‘in the unions, of the
unions, but not determined by their limitations’. Syndicalism met
the first two criteria but as Murphy recognised, in going beyond it,
syndicalism broke itself on the last. [67]
Simply working within the unions was not sufficient. This was
apparent in a number of ways. When major crises broke the
syndicalists lacked an organisation capable of supporting their
militants and enabling them to maximise the potential in strikes. In
the national coal strike in South Wales, for example, the militants
seem to have held themselves back. In the 1912 dock strike in London
Tom Mann recognised the need to argue and win other ports support for
the London dockers but others did not and in any case there was no
political organisation available to do this. [68]
Then during periods when militancy turned down the syndicalists were
deprived of a focus of action which could sustain both themselves and
their periphery. Equally when it came to the links with the community
the trade union focus too served to limit their impact. The
syndicalists great achievement was to recognise clearly where the
real power of capitalism lay and where the potential power of the
working class was but they could not themselves link the industrial
and the political. The fragmentation of syndicalism only perpetuated
these problems as it turned into sectarianism in 1913, and in 1914 it
intensified them.
Outside of these groups the only other group worthy of note was
the Socialist Labour Party (SLP). This had been formed in 1903 as a
breakaway from the SDF and it had come under the influence of
American industrial unionist Daniel De Leon. As is clear from Table
II it was a minuscule group though it had some industrial in strength
on the Clyde and its militants had played a key role in the Ruskin
College revolt of 1909 when the working class Students had revolted
against the teaching offered. What makes the SLP important is that
alone amongst the political groups it had a serious industrial
orientation and in one case – at the Singer factory on the Clyde in
1911 it briefly held perhaps 1500 out of 10,000 workers in its trade
union organisation.
For this it certainly deserves respect but Ray Challinor has gone
further and argued that in the SLP we can find ‘the origins of
British Bolshevism’. Certainly the SLP shared some theoretical
elements in common with Bolshevism before 1914 but it was not alone
in this and it is difficult to see why it should be singled out.
Equally it had many of the worst sectarian traits and its dual
unionism did no service to itself or to the militancy in general. The
super-discipline imposed by rigid control from the top, the knowledge
of marxism enforced by an exam system, the opposition to any
unofficial or branch leadership positions in unions and other related
features made it the very opposite of Bolshevism which was based upon
the development of a layer of self-reliant militants. [69]
 
The aftermath
But the problem with looking around at groups and individuals to
find ‘origins’ at this time is that it claims both too much and
too little. It claims too much in the sense that no-one had found the
model of a revolutionary political party that could steer between the
twin dangers of sectarianism and simple liquidation into the
parliamentary activities of the ILP and the Labour party. It claims
too little in the sense that it obscures what Bob Holton has called
‘an indigenous dynamic’ that was leading a whole series of
diverse rank elements towards the need for a political party along
the lines of that created by the Bolsheviks in Russia. That it needed
the impact of the first world war and the Russian Revolution to act
as a catalyst to cause these elements to fuse together should not
prevent us from recognising the importance of the militancy of
1910–1914 in creating them.
This needs to be insisted upon partly because some historians,
most notably Walter Kendall, argue that the Communist Party when it
was formed ‘was an almost wholly artificial creation which wrenched
the whole course of the (labour) movement’s left wing out of one
direction and set it off on another’. [70]
But at a much wider level than this it also needs to be insisted upon
against those on the left who argue both that the British working
class is ‘non revolutionary’ and that the existing political
forms have contained and can contain – perhaps with modification –
working class revolt. What the experience of 1910–1914 shows is
that at a time when the Labour Party and the trade unions were far
more flexible than they are today militants still found through
bitter experience that they were inadequate and that the fight for
socialism requires much more than these. The tragedy was that the
lesson had not been learnt before and so little was made of the
militancy. And, of course, to the extent that it is still denied each
generation is doomed to its cost to learn it too by even more bitter experience.
Did the militancy then find no political expression? Some
historians who have concentrated on parliamentary by-elections as an
index suggests not. But this ignores two factors. Firstly, the
militancy acted to increase the alienation of many from participation
in parliamentary politics and elections altogether. It has been
argued that this effect can be seen in some union elections but the
point has wider validity. This is not just a question of apathy. What
often happened was that ‘indifference’ to the political system
changed under the impact of militancy to a conscious rationalisation
that participation produced nothing. How widespread this was is
difficult to say but further investigation may show it to have been
significant. [71]
The second factor is that parliamentary by-elections are subject
to too many variables in terms of constituency differences and are
too few in number to make any reliable judgements possible about
underlying changes in working class consciousness. There does however
exist an index which while not removing these problems does minimise
them somewhat. This is the evidence of local government elections.
What this shows was a clear swing to the left. This, while being an
indicator of changing consciousness, was far from a vote of
confidence in the existing parties or system. The evidence for this
lies in Table III.




TABLE III
Local government performance of Labour candidates [72]




 


(1) Average no.
candidatespresented


(2) % total vote
to Labourcandidates


(3) % opposed
candidateselected




1906–09


356


32.4


21




1910–13


333


37.3


33



Column 1 shows the organisational loss of momentum of the Labour
party and the ILP. The average number of candidates fell and is only
as high as it is during the period because of the large number
standing in 1913. Column 2 shows that there was indeed a significant
5% swing to the left and column 3 shows how this was rewarded in
terms of elected candidates. Typically the article from which this
data is taken makes no mention of the impact of the ‘labour unrest’
in explaining electoral performance. But the militancy cannot be
written out of history so easily. Our suggestions is that it caused a
swing to the left which was caught in these statistics and which took
place in spite of rather than because of the antics of the
parliamentary left. Certainly their leaderships drew no comfort from
these results. In this sense too it would be unwise to use the
problems of the Labour party as support for the proposition that
Liberalism was healthy. For a minority, perhaps a significant one,
the question mark hanging over the relevance of both to ordinary
people was bigger than ever in 1914.
Then in August 1914 it was all over. Weeks after a relatively
minor assassination Europe was at war. ‘The great General Strike of
1914’ wrote George Dangerfield, had been ‘forestalled by some
bullets at Sarajevo’. [73] But had
it? Even if we ignore this overblown scenario does not the collapse
of the militancy seen in Table I and the mass voluntary enlistment of
workers show that it was all an illusion?
But things are not so simple. In the first place it is debatable
whether the working class had been moved on a significant scale by
imperialist war before and, in the second place, ‘enthusiasm’ for
the war was general across Europe. [74]
What we need to understand therefore are the specifics of each
situation and their relation to what went before.
If we pursue this a number of obvious points stand out. The war
was with a major European enemy and not one on the outposts of the
Empire and to this extent it was qualitatively different, the left
had certainly compromised itself by its jingoism and nationalism in
the past and the government had played on this using international
tension as an appeal to moderate conflict on the railways in 1907 and
again in 1912. Perhaps against this background what is remarkable is
the slowness with which working class support for the war was
generated. This might sound perverse in view of the huge voluntary
enlistment that emerged within weeks but to repeat a shopworn phrase
‘a week is a long time in politics’ and the way that support
snowballed is important.
One indication of this can be found in the only study of working
class recruitment between July and September 1914. This shows that in
spite of the gathering war clouds from July 25 there was no
discernible impact on recruitment before war broke out. When war was
declared the initial demands were for skilled men who were offered
much higher rates of pay than were available in civilian life and for
middle class groups like motorcyclists who were offered considerable
‘bounties’ if they enlisted with their machines. So far as
recruitment into the ranks is concerned the early pattern of
recruitment involved an intensification of the pre-war pattern –
largely unskilled workers though with a tendency for average age to
rise. And this recruitment took some days to snowball. [75]
It did so against a background of panic and disarray on the left.
Few socialists came out openly against the war, some abstained but a
majority quickly capitulated and openly supported the war effort.
This did have a real and legitimising influence for it gave the
propaganda claims about the war a credibility. It also gave
credibility to attempts to halt the militancy in its tracks. The
strikes did not simply stop by a vote of acclamation by workers fired
with a lust for war. What happened was that union executives used the
excuse of war and the confusion it caused to resolve their own crises
of leadership by imposing executive decisions on the strikers. [76]
It by no means follows from this that a stronger anti-war stand
would have pulled a majority of workers away from their initial
enthusiasm for war. This is plainly untrue. But it is legitimate to
suggest that a stronger anti-war base was possible. And small though
it was such a base did exist amongst workers and this is not to be
accounted for simply by the dominance of liberal pacifism. Nor was it
so negligible in comparative terms. [77]
This may not seem much to hold onto in the face of the catastrophe
of a world war. But the limited socialist opposition to war in August
1914 was to grow and feed into the next period of revolt when workers
protest in Britain was to go beyond the limits of 1910–1914 and for
a time be part of a general European revolutionary wave.

Notes
1. Quoted in Lord Askwith, Industrial
Problems and Disputes, 1920, pp. 259–260. Askwith was the
state’s chief industrial conciliator.
2. E. Phelps Brown, The Growth of
British Industrial Relations, 1959; H. Pelling, The labour
unrest, 1911–1914, in H. Pelling, Popular Politics and
Society in Late Victorian Britain, 1968. The ideological
background to these interpretations is briefly discussed in J. White,
1910–1914 reconsidered, in J. Cronin & J. Schneer
(eds.), Social Protest and Political Order in Modern
Britain, 1982.
3. There is now a large literature
expressing this view, see in particular T. Wilson, The Downfall of
the Liberal Party, 1914–1935, 1968; P. Clark, Lancashire
and the New Liberalism, 1971; R. Douglas, Labour in decline.
1910–14, in K. Brown (ed.), Essays in Anti-Labour
History, 1974.
4. For a survey which supports this
view see K. Nield, A symptomatic dispute? Notes on the
relation between marxian theory and historical practice in Britain,
Social Research, vol. 47 no. 3, autumn 1980.
5. R. Hyman, The Workers’ Union,
1971; Hinton, The First Shop Stewards Movement, 1973; B.
Holton, British Syndicalism 1900–1914, 1976. For Hinton’s
comments on ghosts see his Labour and Socialism: A History of the
British Labour Movement, 1983, p. ix.
6. J. Cronin, Industrial Conflict
in Modern Britain, 1979; R. Price, Masters, Unions and Men:
Work Control in Building and the Rise of Labour 1830–1914,
1980. It is far from my intention to endorse everything that Cronin
and Price have argued since there are important problems in both that
I have explored elsewhere, but they have the considerable merit of
looking in the right direction.
7. M. Haynes, Strikes, in J.
Benson (ed.), Neglected Lives: the Working Class in England
1875–1914, (forthcoming 1984).
8. In the years 1893–1914 building
strikes were 20% of all recorded strikes but only 6% in the years 1902–1910.
9. Notably J. Saville, Trade unions
and free labour: the background to the Taff Vale decision, in A.
Briggs & J. Saville (eds.), Essays in Labour History, 1967.
10. See P. Bagwell, Transport,
in C.J. Wrigley (ed.), A History of British Industrial
relations 1875–1914, 1982.
11. A good indication of this is
that consistently over two thirds of strikes were settled by some
form of negotiation. In the 1890s around 13% were settled by
replacing workers and this fell to around 10% in the 1900s.
Throughout, strikes settled in this way were roughly a quarter of the
size of the ‘average strike’ suggesting that this was a resort of
small rather than big employers.
12. The Industrial Syndicalist,
vol. 1 no. 6, December 1910, p. 10.
13. E.J. Hobsbawm, Labouring Men,
1964, ch. 10.
14. The Industrial Syndicalist,
vol. 1 no. 5, November 1910, p. 22.
15. An awareness of the importance
of bureaucracy is central to K. Burgess, The Origins of British
Industrial Relations, 1975, but there are important weaknesses in
his account which are explored in R. Hyman, The birth of the trade
union bureaucracy, International Socialism (first series),
no. 90, July–August 1976, pp. 23–4.
16. On MacDonald, see R.
Challinor,Alexander MacDonald and the Miners, Our History,
pamphlet no. 48, winter 1967–8; on Abraham and the cotton
officials see Burgess, op. cit., pp. 16, 249–50.
17. E. Hunt, British Labour
History 1815–1914, 1981, p. 390.
18. S. & B. Webb, The History
of Trade Unionism, 1920, p. 325.
19. Burnett’s career is discussed
in detail in J. Bellamy & J. Saville (eds.), Dictionary
of Labour Biography, 1974, volume 2; the estimate of the numbers
drawn in after 1906 is Halevy’s quoted in D. Rubenstein, Trade
unions, politicians and public opinion 1906–1914, in C. Cook &
B. Pimlott (eds.), Trade Unions in British Politics, 1982.
20. Annual Report of Strikes and
Lockouts for 1894, (BPP 1895 xcii) and for 1895 (BPP 1896 lxxx).
21. Hinton, First Shop Stewards
..., op. cit., on engineering; Price op. cit., on
building and more generally, V. Gore, Rank and file dissent,
in C.J. Wrigley (ed.), op. cit.
22. Wolverhampton Express and
Star, 30 June 1913.
23. In 1911 132 out of 605 children
in court for non-indictable offences were there for playing street
football. M. Blanch, Nationalism and the Working Class in
Birmingham, Unpublished Ph.D. Birmingham, 1975, p. 290.
24. Holton’s book on British
Syndicalism is the best account and Cronin, op. cit., sets
these strikes in their wider context.
25. On Hull see K. Brooker, The
Hull Strikes of 1911, 1979; on Liverpool see H. Hilkin, The
Liverpool general transport Strike of 1911, Trans. Historical
Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, vol. 113, 1961.
26. Annual Report of Strikes and
Lockouts for 1912, (BPP 1914 xlviii).
27. J. Connolly, Labour in Irish
History, 1983.
28. The characterisation of the NUR
is that of K.G.L.C. Knowles, Strikes – A Study in
Industrial Conflict, 1952, p. 177.
29. The impact of real wages was
stressed at the time by G.D.H. Cole, The World of Labour, 1913
and later Phelps Brown, op. cit.; for new work pressures see
Holton, op. cit. and P. Stearns, Lives of Labour, 1975.
30. Holton, op. cit., pp. 20,
76–7, Price, op. cit., p. 256.
31. Holton, op. cit., p. 84.
32. Wolverhampton Express and
Star, May-June 1913, passim.
33. These comments are based in
particular on the Black Country strikes of 1913 which can be followed
in the local press but the secondary studies of strikes in other
areas indicate similarly high levels of activity.
34. The statistics in this section
are drawn from various issues of the Annual Report on Strikes and
Lockouts issued by the Board of trade.
35. A. Fox. A History of the
National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives 1874–1957, 1958, pp. 309–313.
36. D. Smith, Tonypandy 1910:
Definitions of Community, Past and Present, no. 87, 1980.
37. Holton, op. cit.;
Brooker, op. cit.
38. D. Marson, Children’s
Strikes in 1911, 1973.
39. G. Marshall, The armed forces
and industrial disputes in the UK, Armed Forces and Society,
vol. 5 no. 2, Feb. 1979, pp. 271–3. Askwith secretly
reported to the Home Office from Hull in July 1911 that ‘they have
hidden the ammunition and drawn the bolts of the rifles in the
(territorial) barracks so as to prevent a raid in the city itself’.
Brooker, op. cit., p. 20; weapons were also withdrawn in
the 1912 coal strike, Holton, op. cit., p. 114.
40. Marshall, op. cit., p. 271.
41. Unionist Social Reform Committee
(J.W. Hills, W.J. Ashley & M. Woods), Industrial Unrest: a
practical solution, 1914, p. 8.
42. The Miners’ Next Step,
1912 (rep. 1973), p. 18.
43. I hope to explore this in more
detail elsewhere. The total number of conciliation cases rose because
of the hyperactivity of the tinplate board. Elsewhere it was a
different story.
44. Unionist Social Reform
Committee, op. cit., p. 16.
45. Rubinstein, op. cit.,
pp. 59–60; K. Middlemas, Politics in Industrial: the
Experience of the British System since 1911, 1979.
46. W. Kendal, The Revolutionary
Movement in Britain 1900–1921, 1969, p. 26.
47. C. Tsuzuki, H.M. Hyndman and
British Socialism, 1961.
48. The Labour Party did not have
individual membership at this time. Membership came through its
affiliated organisations – trade unions, co-ops and ILP. James
Hinton analyses this double subordination in his Labour and
Socialism ..., op. cit. Its practical consequences in
terms of the first generation of MPs are well analysed in D. Martin,
The instruments of the people? the parliamentary Labour Party in
1906, in D.E. Martin & D. Rubinstein, Ideology and the
Labour Movement, 1979.
49. See for example. Tsuzuki, op. cit.
50. J. Molyneux, Marxism and the
Party, 1978, pp. 38, 65–69.
51. There is a large literature on
these constraints which is well summarised in W.L. Arnstein,
Edwardian politics: turbulent spring or indian summer?, in A.
O’Day (ed.), The Edwardian Age, 1979. Briefly – all
women were excluded from the vote, approximately 12% of males failed
to gain the vote under the various franchises in operation and a
further 30% who did get a vote lost it because they failed to meet
the registration requirement of living in the same house for 12
months. The wealthy, also had plural voting rights. Election costs
were huge – the ILP had to raise £20,000 for the few candidates it
stood in 1894: so that money had to be got from trade unions or
wealthy ‘philanthropists’ like Andrew Carnegie the American steel
industrialist or George Cadbury. Constituency boundaries were also
drawn so as to minimise the number of working class constituencies.
52. This was first brought out by
Pelling, op. cit., who argued that ‘there was nothing
“bourgeois” about this popular distrust of state intervention. On
the contrary, it can be readily associated with the view of the state
taken by Marxists, that it was an organisation run by and for the
benefit of the wealthy’, p. 5. Reynolds, op. cit.,
gives a graphic description of this attitude with a keen
understanding of its rationale.
53. D. Morris, Democracy,
oligarchy and the ILP. 1906–1914 (mimeo), 1982.
54. S. Yeo. A new life: the
religion of socialism in Britain. 1883–1896, History
Workshop, no. 4. Autumn 1977, p. 16. This important
article tries to push the ‘golden age’ of socialism back to the
1880s and early 1890s when parties were embryonic. But while
indicating some of the ways in which the ‘fall’ came Yeo fails to
explore how the ideological forms of socialism which he (with some
justice) celebrates also both allowed the ‘fall’ to occur and
acted as a theoretical cover for it.
55. See Holton, op. cit.,
part 1 and R. Groves, The Strange Case of Victor Grayson, 1975.
56. Compiled from Kendall, op.
cit.; R. Dowse, Left in the Centre, 1966; R. Challinor, The
Origins of British Bolshevism, 1977.
57. Quoted in I. McLean, Keir
Hardie, 1975.
58. Labour Leader, 2–23
October 1913; Snowden, Socialism or Syndicalism, 1913, pp. 39, 222–3, 236–7.
59. P. Snowden, op. cit.;
Wolverhampton Express and Star, 22 May 1913.
60. Henderson and Snowden are warmly
quoted at length by Askwith in his account, op. cit.,
pp. 145–147, 198–9, 260; Hansard, 19 March 1912,
vol. xxv, p. 1774 for Lloyd George’s speech.
61. Membership figures of the Labour
Party from H. Tracey (ed.), The British Labour Party,
1948, volume I, pp. 3–4; R. Dowse, op. cit., p. 19.
62. Cole. op. cit., p. 258.
J. Winter, Socialism and the Challenge of War, 1974, pp. 102,
113.
63. R. Dowse, op. cit.,
p. 19. See also D. Morris. The origins of the British
Socialist Party, Northwest Labour History Society Bulletin,
no. 8, 1982–3.
64. C. Tsuzuki, op. cit.,
p. 174. Kendall, Morris and Tsuzuki all give different figures
for the number of delegates. Here we follow the latter.
65. Ibid, p. 187. See also
Morris, op. cit., and Kendall, op. cit. Kendall
stresses the way in which the old SDF leadership also attempted to
inculcate its nationalist and chauvinist attitudes in the BSP.
66. Holton, op. cit., pp. 140–1.
67. J. Murphy, The Workers’
Committee, 1917 (rep. 1972); J. Murphy, Preparing for Power, 1972.
68. Holton, op. cit., p. 119.
69. Challinor, op. cit.,
especially chaps. 4–5. The SLP is also discussed though less
reliably in chapter 4 of Kendall, op. cit.
70. Kendall. op. cit., p. xii.
71. Price, op. cit., pp. 253–4.
72. M.G. Sheppard & J.L.
Halstead, Labour’s municipal election performance in provincial
England and Wales, 1901–1913, Society for the Study of
Labour History Bulletin, no. 39, Autumn 1979. Labour here
refers all left wing candidates but the overwhelming majority were
ILP–Labour Party.
73. G. Dangerfield, The Strange
Death of Liberal England, 1966, p. 351.
74. On the lack of imperialist
sentiment in the Boer War see Pelling, op. cit. and R. Price,
An Imperialist War and the British Working Class 1899–1902,
1972; for a contrasting view see Blanch, op. cit.
75. Blanch, op. cit., ch. 16.
76. Price, op. cit., p. 266
shows how this happened in building.
77. See F. Carsten, War Against
War, 1982.
 

ke Haynes: Theses on the Balkan War (Appendix 1)



Mike Haynes Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Mike Haynes
Theses on the Balkan War

Appendix 1
Making and Remaking the Balkans
NATIONALISM, WAR AND GREAT POWER INTERVENTION




 


Gained from


Lost to




Greece




1830


1821–1829 independence war.
1827 by Treaty of London England, France, Russia support autonomy and defeat Turkish-Egyptian fleet.
1828–1929 Russo-Turkish War leads to 1829 Treaty of Adrianople and 1830 London Conference which recognises and protects a limited Greece consisting of what is today Southern Greece


 




1864


Ionian Islands ceded by Britain


 




1881


Thessaly and Arta region of Epirus ceded by Ottoman Empire under pressure from Great Powers


 




1897


Loses war with Ottoman Empire over union with Crete.
Despite displeasure of Great Powers they still guarantee Cretan autonomy


 




1912–1913


Two Balkan wars increase land area by 70 percent and population from 2.8 to 4.8 million.
Gains include Aegean Islands, Salonica, Crete and part of 'Macedonia'.
Denied Northern Epirus by Great Power decision to recognise it as part of new Albania


 




1914–1918


Ruling class splits pro-Entente v. pro-Central Powers.
Allies blockade and attempt landing to support pro-Entente section


 




1919


Allies reward pro-Entente government with support for Greek troops taking Smyrna (in part to thwart Italian occupation)


 




1920


Treaty of Sèvres:
(i) recognises sovereignty of Aegean islands;
(ii) awards most of Western and Eastern Thrace;
(iii) awards Smyrna for five years to be followed by referendum.
Greece exists as a Greece of 'the two continents and the five seas'


 




1920–1922


Turkey rejects Treaty of Sèvres.
War leads to Greek humiliation and recapture of Smyrna but Britain opposes too great a Turkish victory


Turkey regains Smyrna




1923


Treaty of Lausanne recognises Turkish victory but also limits gains.
Leads to huge officially endorsed population Exchange


 




1940


Italy invades Greece


 




1940


Greece counter-attacks and pushes into Albania


 




1941–1945


German invasion leading to tripartite division.
German, Italian and Bulgarian occupation


 




1944–1949


Greek Civil War.
Stalin stands by while left defeated by Western supported forces


 




1947


Dodecanese Islands from Italy


 




1960


Separate independence for Cyprus in part to forestall union with Greece supported by pro-Greek forces


 




1974


Failed Greek sponsored coup precipitates Turkish invasion of Cyprus and division of island


 







Serbia




1804–1813


First Serbian revolt leads to independence backed by Russia in 1807 as part of Russo-Turkish War 1806–1812


 




1813–1815


Turkish reconquest


 




1815–1817


Second Serbian revolt leading to autonomy within Ottoman Empire


 




1830


Treaty of Adrianople (as a result of Russo-Turkish War 1828–1829) further defines autonomy within Ottoman Empire


 




1876–1878


War with Turkey


 




1878


Fully Independent Kingdom under Treaty of Berlin


 




1885


Failed Serbo-Bulgarian War for territory and restoration of local balance of power after Bulgarian union with Eastern Rumelia


 




1912–1913


Balkan Wars – large territorial gains, including Kosovo


 




1918


Core of new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (from 1928 Yugoslavia)


 




1941–1945


German invasion and puppet government sponsored by Axis powers


 




1991


Independent state following breakup of Yugoslavia


 







Yugoslavia





1918


Formed as Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes


 




1919


Loses Fiume to Italy (annexed finally 1924)


Italy




1922


Rappalo Treaty awards Nettuno to Italy


Italy




1941


Conflict in ruling class over whether to support Allies or Axis


 




1941


Italian, German, Hungarian, Bulgarian division
Dalmatia annexed by Italy
Puppet Croatian state


 




1945


Reconstitution of Yugoslavia


 




1991


Breakup of Yugoslavia


 







Croatia




Pre-1918


Part of Hungarian part of Austro-Hungarian Empire


 




1918


Part of Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes/Yugoslavia


 




1941


Following German invasion puppet fascist kingdom


 




1944–1945


Reintegration into Yugoslavia


 




1991


Independence


 







Slovenia




Pre-1918


Part of Austro-Hungarian Empire


 




1918


Formed from Lower Styria, Carniola and part of Carinthia as part of Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes/Yugoslavia


 




1941–1945


Fascist occupation


 




1945


Federal republic of Slovenia part of new Yugoslavia.
Includes 1918 lands plus parts of Istria, Venezia, Giulia


 




1991


Independence


 







Bosnia-Hercegovina




1878


Autonomy within Ottoman Empire but under Austrian administration


 




1908


Annexed by Austro-Hungarian Empire


 




1918


Part of Yugoslavia


 




1945


Federal Republic in new Yugoslavia


 




1991


Independence


 




1995


Division under Dayton agreement


 







Macedonia




 


Historical concept of a Macedonian land highly controversial


 




1903


Special province of Ottoman Empire under European powers


 




1912


As a result of First Balkan War much of land taken by Bulgaria


 




1913


As a result Second Balkan War redivided Greece, Serbia, Montenegro


 




1944


Yugoslavia includes ‘Macedonia’ and recognises language


 




1991


Independence of ex-Yugoslav version of ‘Macedonia’


 




1994–1995


Blockade by Greece


 







Montenegro




1878


Independent under Treaty of San Stefano


 




1910


Kingdom


 




1912–1913


Balkan Wars – allies first with Bulgaria, Greece and Serbia against Turkey and then in 1913 with Serbia and Greece against Bulgaria, Turkey, Romania


 




1918


Incorporation into Yugoslavia


 




1991


Independent


 







Albania




1913


Created from Ottoman Empire Independent principality under International Control Commission


 




1914


Invasion by Austria and allies


 




1917


Italian protectorate


 




1920


Independent but Italian supervision


 




1940


Greek counter-attack against Italy leads to invasion


 




1941


Italian invasion.
Part of Greater Italy


 




1944–1945


Partisan led liberation


 







Romania




1831–1832


Russia writes Organic Statutes of Wallachia and Moldavia to create autonomous principalities within Ottoman Empire


 




1848


Revolt suppressed by actions of Russia and Ottoman Empire


 




1853


Russian occupation of principalities helps precipitate Crimean War


 




1856


Paris Treaty puts control of two principalities under International Commission.
Russian influence weakened


 




1859


Principalities elect Cuza as joint Prince


 




1861


Union recognised by Ottoman Sultan


 




1878


Romanian independence as a result of Russo-Turkish War and Congress of Berlin


 




1881


Kingdom


 




1916


Joins First World War on Entente side


 




1918


Seizes Bessarabia from Russia


 




1919–1920


Rewarded under Treaties of St Germain, Trianon, Neuilly nearly doubling size by acquisition of land from Hungary (including Transylvania) and Austria plus recognition of seizure of Bessarabia.


 




1940


Loses Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to Stalin’s Russia


 




1940


Loses Southern Dobrudja under Treaty of Craiova


Russia




1940


Loses part of Transylvania to Hungary under Vienna Award


Bulgaria




1941


Allies with Hitler hoping to regain land


Hungary




1944


Switches to Allied side to maintain position – regains Transylvania


 







Bessarabia




1812


Taken from Ottoman Empire by Russia


 




1918


Seized from Russia by Romania


Russia




1940


Seized back by Russia


Romania




1991


Part of independent Moldova following breakup of USSR


Russia







Bulgaria




1878


Under Treaty of San Stefano huge principality dominating Balkans


 




1878


Within months reduced in size by Treaty of Berlin


 




1885


Incorporation of Eastern Rumelia


 




1885


Serbo-Bulgarian War


 




1908


Independent


 




1912–1913


First Balkan War – huge gains.
Second Balkan war – huge losses


Greece




1915


Joins First World War on German side


Serbia




1919


Treaty of Neuilly cedes territory to Greece, Romania & Yugoslavia


Greece, Romania




1940


Gains Dobrudja from Romania under Treaty of Craiova


Yugoslavia




1941–45


Invades Greece and Yugoslavia in support of Germany.
Occupies Thrace and ‘Macedonia’


 




1944


Brief war with Russia (September)


 




1944


Switches sides to attack German forces


 







Eastern Rumelia




1878


Autonomous province of Ottoman Empire


 




1885


United with Bulgaria


 



 



1) Capitalism is inherently a competitively expansionist and therefore conflict ridden system
The 20th century began with war in the Balkans and it is finishing with war in the Balkans. In the years between the first Balkan War that broke out in 1912 and NATO’s war with Serbia in 1999, more wars have occurred, resulting in more military and civilian deaths, than in any other period in history. At each point it has seemed as if the 20th century, which potentially offered so much, has trampled hope down in the most brutal and nightmarish way. Its record as the ‘century of extremes’ is being carried through to its last days and the dawn of a new century.
Conflict, warfare and conquest seem to have been an ever present part of human history. The rise of the first class societies took collective control of human affairs away from the many and gave it to the few, who looked with envy on what their neighbouring rulers had. At the same time, they strove to protect their own property both from the equal avarice of their neighbours and the threat from those below who might rise against them. But capitalism has given this struggle a new intensity. Firstly, it has built competition for profits, resources and markets into the heart of the productive system itself. Secondly, through its continual technological revolution, capitalism has imparted a dynamic of military change not present in earlier societies. Thirdly, through the way in which capitalism has contributed to the development of a world of nation states, it has helped to divide the world and to consolidate the institutions of the state, and allow its huge resources to be mobilised in the fight for world power.
The forms of capitalist expansion have evolved over time, intensifying as capitalism has developed, so that the destructiveness of conflict has been more terrible in the 20th century than any other. In this process the early developing capitalist powers were able to conquer large parts of the rest of the world. By 1800 some 35 percent of the world’s land surface was, or had been, a colony of a European power. By 1878 this figure had risen to 67 percent and by 1914 to 84 percent. [1] This led many to reduce the expansive drive of capitalism to formal colonialism and to equate formal colonialism with imperialism. This was a mistake. The expansionism of capitalism preceded formal colonialism and has taken many other forms. Formal colonialism, on the other hand, proved more transient with the widespread decolonisation of empire after 1945. Imperialism was, and is, something more. Imperialism is a modern phenomenon and it expresses the way in which the central axis of international competition is subordinated to interstate competition, with military force an ever present factor. The struggle over formal colonies was a part of this, but by no means the whole. [2] Instead the central axis of international competition was now over the control of the heartlands of the world economy. It was this that led to the First World War, the Second World War and the Cold War. Today these factors remain present. Despite talk of a ‘globalisation’ which transcends the boundaries of nation states, state power and military power cannot be relinquished. They remain essential ingredients underpinning the pseudo-‘global’ forms, helping to direct the process of international competition.
The optimism that the end of the Cold War might lead to a new world order has been shown to be false. The hope that it would release a peace dividend that would enable a new generosity in international relations has been belied by experience, as some of us sadly predicted it would. [3] Though the arms burden has declined, there has been no outpouring of aid to Eastern Europe, no new ‘Marshall Plan’. The result has been that the burden of change has fallen on the broad masses of the population, wrecking lives across the old Soviet bloc in general and in one of its poorest components in south eastern Europe in particular. According to the World Bank, the number of people living in poverty (defined as having less than $4 a day) in the former Soviet bloc has risen from 14 million in 1990 to 147 million in 1998. [4] Worse still, the advanced countries have continued to reduce further the miserly sums they devote to aid to the even poorer areas of the world. The OECD countries are rhetorically committed to an aid target of 0.7 percent of their output. In 1990 they gave 0.35 percent, and by 1997 the figure had fallen to 0.22 percent, with the United States under this heading giving 0.09 percent of its output, a figure in startling contrast to the expenditure devoted to destruction. [5]
 
2) In the period 1945–1989 this conflict appeared to take the form of a Cold War between the military alliances of NATO and the Warsaw Pact representing two qualitatively different sides. But this idea obscured the similar roots of conflict on both sides and it enabled the US and Russia to make wider interventions under the guise of the East-West conflict
Already at the beginning of the 20th century the US had emerged as the most powerful capitalist economy in the world, but at this point it did not have a world role commensurate with its growing power. The fundamental imperialist clashes therefore took place in Europe both in 1914 and 1939 in the form of conflict between a British led alliance and a German led alliance. In the first instance the US intervened in 1917 to tip the balance in favour of the British led alliance. In the second instance, when the US came into the war in 1941, its power quickly made it the dominant force in the alliance. The result was that in 1945 it was in absolute and relative terms the most powerful economy in the world with, on some calculations, 50 percent of world manufacturing output. It now had a role of global leadership to match. This produced a degree of friction with Britain and France – powers in relative decline which still hankered after their old role. But this was minimised as a result of a more fundamental clash that now emerged with another former wartime ally in the anti-Hitler alliance, Russia. The result was the Cold War that lasted until 1989.
On both sides the Cold War was claimed to be something different from earlier imperialist clashes. Russia claimed to be socialist, though Stalin’s regime and its successors developed on the ashes of the aspirations to real socialism as dictatorships with great power designs of their own. For their part, propagandists in the US and Western Europe claimed that their side of the Cold War was motivated by an attempt to halt Soviet imperialism and totalitarianism where they stood. For them, the Cold War was ‘the brave and essential response of free men to Communist aggression’. [6]
The arguments were smokescreens obscuring the rapacious way in which both sides acted in their own interests and against the populations they claimed to defend. Those who argued that the point was to support neither Washington nor Moscow, but to take an independent stand and challenge both, were right then as they are right now – no matter how difficult the stance is to take.
But this is not to say that the Cold War was a clash of equals. Throughout there remained a fundamental imbalance of power. If the US was a global power in fact and name, the USSR was only a global power in name. In reality it was a regional power with some global aspirations but no means to achieve them. The dismissive phrase that was later attached to it – ‘Upper Volta with rockets’ – was a woeful mischaracterisation of its economic power, but it captured in an exaggerated form the imbalance with which Russian leaders had to deal.
But the fact that the clash of interests could be presented as a global ideological clash – especially by US apologists – meant that friends could be rewarded and enemies penalised on an international scale as part of the fight against Communism, even though the real motivation, sometimes only half consciously understood by US leaders, lay elsewhere. In most of Western Europe, however, the democracy that had been achieved through past popular struggles, though limited, looked – and was – far superior to the forms of dictatorial rule that existed in the Eastern bloc, and not surprisingly, when people there got a chance to vote with their feet, in 1989 and beyond, in so far as the choice was ‘West’ or ‘East’, they chose ‘West’. But this did not stop the US and its ‘democratic allies’ in Europe supporting the existing fascist dictatorships in Spain and Portugal, a succession of unpleasant regimes in Turkey, and encouraging military rule in Greece between 1967 and 1974. Beyond the boundaries of Europe, support for brutal regimes and intervention under the guise of the Cold War produced an even more sorry record to shame those who believed that their ‘pro-democratic stance’ invested them with moral supremacy over the dictatorships of the East.
 
3) When the Cold War ended it produced a more unstable world, but one in which new justifications had to be found for selective intervention in terms of a moral crusade against demonised opponents
When the Cold War ended it briefly appeared as if the basis for a new world order had been laid. Formal colonialism was now largely in the receding past. The great ideological divide in Europe and the wider world had disappeared with the triumph of the market, and in Fukuyama’s famous phrase ‘history’, in the sense of the great clash of principles, ‘had ended’. Democracy would not fight democracy. States based on the market and private property – linked by global business – would not fight one another. To popularise the idea some even talked of the ‘McDonald’s effect’ – no two countries with a McDonald’s restaurant, it was claimed, had ever gone to war against one another. Henceforth there would only be residual conflicts with leftovers of the old order. [7]
But far from being more stable, the post Cold War world has turned out to be less stable. The Cold War had, to an extent, produced a degree of international discipline – supported by the leverage of the US-USSR in their respective spheres of influence. Now this disciplining factor disappeared. Worse still, the less stable conditions in the world economy, accompanied in places by the strains of transition crisis, acted to inflame local antagonisms. Beyond this the big powers in general, and the US in particular, still needed to act to allow competitive expansion to continue and to deal with truculent states and minorities who refused to conform to the terms on offer.
For this to carry support at home, new justifications or reworked old ones had to be developed to support the deployment of power. Contrary to what is often imagined, earlier examples of imperialist action were rarely justified in terms of naked self interest. The claim was always that they served a higher purpose. Kipling’s famous poem The White Man’s Burden, where he gives advice to a US awakening to the first realisation that it has a global role, recalls this in its famous opening verse:



Take up the White Man’s burden –
Send forth the best ye breed –
Go bind your sons to exile
To serve your captives’ need



The First World War was, of course, famously conducted for ‘humanitarian’ ends on both sides, as was the Second World War. It is often not appreciated that when fascist or quasi-fascist states acted they were no less anxious to cloak themselves in altruistic humanitarianism. When Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931 the formal justification was to save the Manchurians from ‘Chinese banditry’. When Mussolini invaded Ethiopia it was to bring the benefits of Italian civilisation. Hitler was no less adept at the argument, marching into Sudetenland to save the Sudeten Germans from ‘Czech nationalist bullying’ but intending to ‘safeguard the national individuality of the German and Czech peoples’ and ‘filled with earnest desire to serve the true interests of the peoples dwelling in the area’. [8]
But now, after a Cold War invested with an apparently even nobler purpose and with what are deemed to be fickle mass electorates – it has become even more important to present the deployment of power and influence, of intervention (however selective, one sided and brutal in practice) as motivated only by benign intentions, benevolence, democracy, humanitarian concerns. It also became important to demonise your enemies to justify your actions even though, perhaps only months before, they had acted as your ‘client’ leaders or men ‘with whom you could do business’. Thus international terrorist conspiracies were invented; pariah state supporters of terrorism isolated; drug states vilified; fundamentalist states made the objects of new crusades and ethnic nationalists seen as the recalcitrant leftovers of a past era.
And as this happened, as in other propaganda wars, it became more and more difficult to distinguish between the real atrocities and the imagined ones, to distinguish between the atrocities to which ‘we’ turned a blind eye (East Timor in Indonesia – perhaps 250,000 dead – or the ethnic cleansing of Kurds in Turkey where in a 15 year period an estimated 4,000 villages were destroyed, 30,000 killed and as many as 3 million displaced), atrocities which we looked at full in the face but bemoaned ‘our’ impotence to intervene in (Rwanda), and those which came to embody grounds for intervention as a new ‘moral imperialism’ (Iraq, Serbia).
None of this is to deny that a real tension exists between the aspirations to guarantee all people basic human rights regardless of their state and the fact that the world is organised by states which claim sovereign immunity. The United Nations tried to act as an international forum for the resolution of this tension. It could not achieve this because it remained a prisoner of the interests of the big states. International law existed as something to regulate and protect the strong rather than the weak. For this reason socialists have always been suspicious of the claims made on behalf of the UN. But so long as states remained committed to the UN in however loose a way it at least existed as a formal restraint on any state or group of states arrogating to themselves in a completely anarchic way the right to develop their own self defining pretexts for intervention. Now the US-UK led NATO action has specifically removed such intervention from the formal sanction of the UN, allowing it to become a self defining pretext for any other state or group of states to use. To do this they will only have to quote the justification offered by George Robertson, the British defence secretary: ‘There can be no doubt ... that NATO is acting within international law. The legal justification for air strikes rests upon the accepted principle that force may be used in extreme circumstances without the [UN] Security Council’s express authorisation in order to avert humanitarian catastrophe’. [9]
 
4) Whilst the US has been prepared to intervene on its own in many conflicts, in the central area of Euro-Atlantic relations there has been a growing tendency to redefine and widen the purpose of NATO to orchestrate intervention
NATO was created primarily by the US and the UK as part of the Cold War in 1949. Its formal function, set out in Article 5 of the original Washington Treaty, focused on the Russian threat:
The Parties agree that an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against all of them and ... that, if such an armed attack occur, each of them, in exercise of the right of collective self defence recognised by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, will assist the Party or Parties so attacked by taking ... such action as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force.
Article 6 then defined the geographical area to which this applied:
For the purpose of Article 5, an armed attack on one or more of the Parties is deemed to include an armed attack: on the territories of any of the Parties in Europe or North America...on the territory of Turkey, or on the islands under the jurisdiction of any of the Parties in the North Atlantic area north of the Tropic of Cancer.
The organisation’s first secretary-general, Lord Ismay, more brutally defined NATO’s real role as keeping the US in Europe, keeping Russia out and keeping Germany down.
Even as late as 1991 an attempt to consolidate what is called the Alliance Strategic Concept formally held to this narrow definition of NATO’s role, saying that ‘the Alliance is purely defensive in purpose: none of its weapons will ever be used except in self defence’. [10]
But at the end of the Cold War the question arose as to why NATO should continue to exist at all. This question was at the heart of the development of a new strategic concept for NATO: ‘History shows that traditional military alliances disappear once victory has been won. But NATO did not disappear ... During the 1990s NATO has evolved to the extent that crisis management and conflict prevention are now its primary missions’. [11]
To understand how this happened it is important to realise that in a competitive world powerful states with similar interests have always needed to ally with one another to manage their joint interests, create a united front against other big states and police minor challenges to their detailed interests. Formally the UN exists as an organisation of all states to achieve this. Idealists therefore see it as the supreme expression of the collective interests of the community of states. It cannot, however, operate in this way. In many respects the UN is even weaker than its much maligned predecessor, the League of Nations. Not only does it lack its own forces but it was designed to give expression to the interests of the most powerful states. It can only act if the permanent members of the Security Council (the US, UK, France, Russia and China) are united, and since each member has veto powers it will never be able to act when their fundamental interests conflict. One logical way of resolving this problem would be to diminish the power of the Security Council in favour of a real decision making forum of all states, something which has sometimes been allowed to happen in minor matters. But this would mean that the big powers would then be constrained by the smaller powers including those that they might wish to act against. They have therefore no interest in allowing this to happen on a significant scale and, to the extent that the US has been a victim of such alliances on minor matters, it has punished the UN by withholding its contributions. [12] The UN can therefore only ever be impotent when the big powers clash; it can only act in a unified way when their interests coincide, which will more often than not involve action against smaller and more minor players in the world economy.
When the Cold War ended, therefore, these wider factors encouraged all members of NATO to look for a continued and redefined role for the organisation through which their military and other interests could be orchestrated. This led to new policies which had four dimensions to them:

widening the European membership of the organisation, initially from 16 to 19;
 
out of area actions with the unresolved question of how far afield NATO can operate – North Africa, the Middle East, the Caucuses or even wider? (NATO troops have already carried out training exercises in Kazhakstan);
 
new forms of intervention – a rapid reaction force, the development of peacekeeping and policing roles, ‘humanitarian’ intervention;
 
within NATO some attempt to rebalance its internal relations through an attempt to create a European Security and Defence Identity.

The internal debate over a European Security and Defence Identity has had a number of elements. One is the attempt to restructure the balance of effort in NATO. It is accepted throughout NATO that the US will continue to play the major role but there is US pressure for Europe to take up more of the burden. While NATO’s European armed forces number 2 million, those of the US number 1.2 million, but two thirds of NATO defence spending is undertaken by the US and the US has not only led but carried NATO’s past involvements. In the war on Serbia between 70 and 80 percent of the resources deployed and missions undertaken have been American.
This encouragement of a more ‘European defence identity’ in NATO has been welcomed by European leaders but they have been divided over its interpretation. For the British government and Tony Blair there is no question of it leading to an independent ‘European’ role. His vision is of a self financing European defence role explicitly subordinate to the US, what its pro-’European’ critics call the ‘Indian army of the Raj’ scenario by analogy with the way that Britain ran its empire in India using Indian troops financed out of taxes on the Indian population. The alternative view, more evident amongst the French and German leaderships, toys with a ‘defence identity’ in which ‘Europe’ would be more of an equal partner with the US.
Beyond this the idea of a ‘European defence identity’ has a broader ideological role. It is supposed to enable the creation of a ‘European security architecture’ which will include not only the old NATO core, but its new members and the currently excluded members who are part of the ‘Partnership for Peace’ of which the most important is Russia. This is supposed to lead to what Solana, the secretary-general of NATO, calls ‘a region of stability from Vancouver to Valdivostok’. [13] In addition this talk of ‘defence identities’ and ‘security architectures’ also helps to broaden terms on which NATO can intervene both on a wider European scale and beyond. If we take Solana at his word then, breathtaking and nightmarish though the idea might be, it is not illogical to suggest that guaranteeing such a zone against external destabilisation might mean that NATO’s southern flank could extend from Mexico to Beijing.
The debate on these broader issues was still going on as the Yugoslav crisis erupted. Even as NATO was mobilising, its propaganda magazine was being issued with an article by Helmut Schmidt which accepted a wider role but explicitly argued, ‘From a democratic standpoint, we urgently need a profound debate – similar to the quality of the euro debate that has taken place throughout Europe in the last few years – before fundamentally broadening or reshaping the aims of the Alliance’. [14] It seems likely therefore that one dimension of the Yugoslav crisis was that it provided an opportunity for NATO to decisively mark out on the ground its developing new strategic concept. It also enabled the internal debate to be short-circuited, ending what some have dismissively referred to as a ‘partnership for prevarication’.
 
5) Intervention in Yugoslavia came to be seen as a crucial test of credibility of the evolving NATO strategy and US capacity for ‘crisis management’
When Iraq invaded Kuwait the West’s formidable firepower was turned on Iraq and much of it still remains focused on that country today. By contrast far worse problems, including initially those in the former Yugoslavia, were ignored or even encouraged to fester. The very clear material interest that the West had in oil supplies provided an obvious explanation for these double standards. In the dismissive phrase of the 1991 Gulf War debates, to have ‘carrots rather than oil’ was to fall beneath of gaze of the West’s concern. The subsequent intervention in Bosnia and the sustained assault on Serbia in 1999 have led some to speculate that behind the rhetoric there are rather more substantial material interests at stake in the former Yugoslavia than ‘carrots’.
Given the fulsome declarations of humanitarian motivation that have underpinned the rhetoric of NATO, it is important to recognise that crude material self interest does exist in the form of the anxiety of arms manufacturers for sales, the needs of oil companies for secure pipelines across the Balkan region for oil from the Caspian Sea, the interests of Western business in the former Yugoslavia, the role of the IMF-World Bank, the pressure of expatriate groups in the US and so on. More broadly still, it appears that the US State Department has been under considerable pressure from US business and Wall Street to push increased access to global markets as part of its strategy for endorsing the benefits of ‘globalisation’ as an ever wider open door for US business. No less on the Serbian side the equally fulsome rhetoric which claims Kosovo as the historic birthright of the Serbs helps to obscure the material interests of the Serbian regime in the rich mines of Kosovo as well as the interests of local Kosovan Serbs in extending their control of land in the countryside.
But to conceive of NATO’s role in the Balkan War in direct material terms is to miss the wider role that Yugoslavia has come to play in the establishment of a world order under Western supervision – quite simply the former Yugoslavia, beginning as an irritant, became the test of credibility of US-NATO strategy and its capacity for what its propagandists call ‘crisis management’.
That the growing crisis in Yugoslavia in the 1980s might lead to explosive consequences was long feared if not fully foreseen by Western leaders. According to the former German leader Helmut Schmidt:
As far back as 1980, several European leaders, assembled for the funeral of Marshal Tito, concluded that this composite state, cobbling together at least eight nations and ethnic minorities and previously held together by the talented dictator and his brutal methods, would collapse in five or ten years at the most. No one suggested the possibility of Western intervention to deal with this, though there were certainly fears of Soviet military action. As it turned out, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia collapsed simultaneously. [15]
Yet despite this initial reluctance to get involved as the former Yugoslavia disintegrated, Western meddling not only failed to control this process but materially assisted it. At each stage of the process the West has been drawn in deeper. In the 1980s it had intervened primarily by economic methods. The World Bank-IMF complex encouraged austerity programmes which would guarantee the repayment of Yugoslavia’s large debt, even if they intensified the internal economic difficulties. Then as pressures leading to the break up of Yugoslavia developed the issue arose as to which states should be recognised and so granted legitimacy. Then the eruption of the Bosnian crisis eventually created the ‘need’ for direct intervention and Kosovo has seen this occur on a much greater scale.
Kosovo posed Western policy its sharpest dilemma. On the one hand there was recognition of the enormous weight Serb nationalism placed on Kosovo. One expert and policy adviser expressed the problem this way in 1992:
A poor, wretched land, Kosovo is important because the Serbs have deemed it so. Indeed, it cannot be emphasised too strongly that the future of Kosovo is non-negotiable as far as Serbia is concerned. The importance which the Serbs attach to Kosovo as the historic, cultural and spiritual centre probably knows no parallel except that of Jerusalem for the Jews, although even that comparison is inadequate since Jerusalem is a holy place for three religions. [16]
On the other hand there was also a long standing recognition that the predominance of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and past Serb oppression made the situation potentially as explosive as the Bosnian one internally and more explosive externally since it might spill over to help unravel the borders of the successor states to the old Yugoslavia and perhaps the Balkans more widely.
To stabilise this situation, therefore, Western leaders were happy to go to Belgrade to do deals with Milosevic and, as the tension mounted, to denounce Milosevic, the Serbian side and the Kosovo Liberation Army, which had been formed in 1993 to conduct a more radical and, if necessary, violent campaign to defend the oppressed Kosovan Albanian population. A succession of UN resolutions called on both sides to reduce the level of conflict. But such appeals had little effect on either side. As the crisis developed, Western leaders and NATO had to decide between doing deals with Milosevic and making an example of him.
The threat to make an example of the Serb leader had been made as early as 1992 when George Bush apparently warned Belgrade that ‘in the event of conflict in Kosovo caused by Serbian action, the US will be prepared to employ military force against Serbs in Kosovo and Serbia proper’. [17] Since every deal that failed to stick was seen as a mark of failure the balance began to tip against Milosevic and Serbia. This was helped by Milosevic’s own inadequacies as a nationalist leader. He was not the only Yugoslav leader to come to power trying to play both a reformist and a nationalist card. Tudjman in Croatia had done the same and in the process woken just as many local fears about Croatian aggrandisement as Milosevic raised locally about Serbian aggrandisement. But Tudjman better managed not to rock the boat with the West. Milosevic and his group played their cards with much less finesse and, however well this may have gone down with Serb nationalism, it served only to create more Western suspicion of him and his power base.
So far, therefore, from being able to offer a constructive way out of the crisis by helping rebuild a shattered region, Western leaders were trapped in a series of ever narrowing options. In the summer of 1998 awareness of the worsening situation in Kosovo led to NATO renewing the threat of air attacks on the Milosevic regime. This forced a retreat in the autumn of 1998, as it had done earlier in Bosnia. Milosevic agreed to allow international observers into Kosovo and agreed to pull out Serb troops. But Serbian repression continued and the KLA fought back. Then in early 1999 the discovery of a massacre by Serbian forces at Racjek either appears to have convinced key figures in the Clinton administration that the time had now come to move, or provided them with the excuse they were looking for. While internal debate continued, pressure was put on the KLA to accept the Rambouillet Accords which required Serbia to allow NATO to police a peace – a demand which was highly unlikely to be acceptable to the Serbian leadership and which led eventually to the Serbian rejection of the accords and war.
The National Security Council in the US and wider policy circles reviewed what Clinton called ‘a bunch of bad options’ and apparently believing that there might be a ‘hot Spring’ in Kosovo they decided, after some last minute prevarication, that they could wait no longer and that they had now to carry out their threat to make an example of Milosevic whatever the resulting costs.
Undoubtedly they were helped in this by their recognition of more particular interests. No doubt too key ‘hawks’ like Madeleine Albright might have played an important role in tipping the balance. But to explain what happened in these terms is to localise the problem and to miss its wider logic that derives from NATO’s attempt to police a competitive world in its interests and on its terms.
 
6) NATO made a major miscalculation about the ease with which its objectives could be attained
It is a commonplace of military strategy in the 20th century that it is necessary to strike hard, fast and at full strength to achieve your objectives. If successful, such a blitzkrieg tactic can create chaos for the enemy, demoralisation and a speedy surrender with minimum casualties to your self. Locally air strikes and ground troops should be combined fully and in quick succession. There is every indication that in narrow military terms this was the NATO High Command’s view of the ideal military scenario in Kosovo.
But at the same time there appears also to have been a widespread belief among both political and military leaders that a demonstrative military action might be enough to achieve a humiliating Serbian retreat and so establish NATO’s authoritative capacity to deploy minimum military force to achieve the maximum political ends. NATO operated, in Madeleine Albright’s words, with the view that its objectives would be ‘achievable in a relatively short period of time’. [18] The faulty intelligence on which this disastrous miscalculation was based need not detain us. It led to an underestimation of the air power needed (it took ten days to reach the level of intensity of the first night of the Gulf War), and it woefully encouraged the Serb regime by portraying the campaign as ‘self limiting’ in the refusal to deploy ground troops.
The result was catastrophic. Whatever Milosevic’s intentions before the withdrawal of OSCE monitors, this signalled the impending attack while the effective breathing space that was created allowed the mass of the Kosovan population to be driven out through the combined impact of fear of the bombs, fear of actions of organised Serb forces and fear of the actions of ad hoc Serb civilians and paramilitaries. The victims of Milosevic’s brutal nationalism became the victims of the incompetence of NATO’s brutal power politics. Secondly, the huge refugee movements created an enormous destabilisation in neighbouring Albania, Macedonia and Montenegro – precisely the effect on Serbia’s neighbours NATO claimed its action would avoid. Thirdly, the bombing solidified support for Milosevic in Serbia itself (and even more amongst the remaining Serbs in Kosovo), partly through the natural effect of a regime under attack coming together on reactionary terms and partly through the possibilities it afforded him to continue his destruction of all forms of opposition as, in effect, NATO traitors and betrayers of the national interest. [19] Finally the failure of NATO to achieve its objectives quickly in such a visibly incompetent way threatened the credibility of NATO, Britain, the US and their supporters far more than the original crisis.
Ironically it was this very fact that drew the NATO alliance more closely together. The open admission of NATO defeat by an otherwise tinpot leader of a tinpot state in the backward Balkans would have devastating consequences for the US, NATO and the West:
Failure will not just ensure that despots everywhere take heart. NATO is not serious, they will say. It has no stomach for a fight. When the fate of innocent Kosovars is in the balance that is bad enough. When Western national interests are at stake it will be grave indeed. [20]
More immediately failure would put at risk the sometimes precarious coalition governments in some NATO member countries (for example, Germany). Failure would also threaten the governments of the NATO members closest to Serbia which were in an even more difficult situation (Italy and Greece), and also put a question mark over states like Romania, Bulgaria and Slovakia that have been denied NATO membership and the promise of first wave EU membership, but to whom the carrot of some eventual linkage has been held out if they support the action. [21] Doubts were therefore suppressed and even those realists inside and outside the policy making circles who were critical of the original errors nevertheless insisted that the war had to be prosecuted to a visible victory for NATO. As one put it, ‘We are committed to a policy that is quite frankly idiotic but which in a way would have to be continued to save some credibility’. [22]
Yet it is equally clear that the contradictions of a NATO victory will be no less devastating for the region, as we shall note in more detail later. On a global scale the ever widening ramifications threaten to set in motion a new round of tensions with implications barely foreseen at the start of the conflict. From the point of view of those who believe in the rightness of might this, however, will be acceptable if it ensures that the US can operate on a wider world scale with the continued support of its European allies.
 
7) In resolving these difficulties the interests of the wider Balkan peoples, the mass of the Serbian population and the mass of the Kosovan population will take second place to doing a deal with the Serbian leadership
The West claims that this is a humanitarian action designed to stabilise Kosovo, Serbia and the wider Balkans in the interests of the people there by bringing a local rogue government into line. But this is belied by the process that led to war, the way the war is prosecuted and the way it will be ended.
So far as the cause of the war is concerned, the collapse of Yugoslavia was underpinned by growing economic crisis and international debt in which the response of the West was to pressure first the Yugoslav government, and then its successors, to impose policies of ‘structural adjustment’ or more accurately an impoverishing process of readjustment which increased want and resentment on a huge scale while enabling Western loans to be repaid.
More specifically, so far as the Kosovans themselves are concerned, the callousness of Western policy is reflected in the indifference to the refugee problem. While we might allow that the enormous scale of the problem could not have been foreseen, the fact remains that not only was there no real planning for any significant movement but prior to the start of the war the refugee problem that already existed had been neglected. In September 1998 – eight months before the start of the aerial war – Kofi Annan officially reported for the UN on the earlier conflicts saying:
The hostilities triggered a dramatic exodus of the civilian population from Kosovo. According to the statistics of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the number of refugees and displaced people in the province amounts to 230,000 people, 60,000 of whom have chosen to leave Kosovo. Under considerable pressure brought to bear by the international community, the Serb authorities have taken action to attract the refugees back to their permanent places of residence, offering them material aid. However, this has elicited a tepid response from the Albanian population, which is suspicious of Serb guarantees. Humanitarian aid deliveries to Kosovo have so far been unequal to the situation on the ground. [23]
Once the war was under way the prime consideration was, contrary to NATO’s protestations, neither the Kosovan population nor the Serb population but the destruction of the infrastructure of the Serbian state – if necessary at the expense of both the Kosovan and Serb populations. This did not simply flow from errors which were inevitable in any scenario. NATO may well have tried to err on the side of civilian safety within the terms of its rules of engagement but these were set in such a way as to make this concern for civilians a marginal issue – good for propaganda but little else. NATO’s real military policy was well characterised by Carl Bildt (the ex Swedish prime minister who played a leading role in the Bosnian ‘settlement’) as being ‘one of minimum risk to itself and maximum risk to those it was supposed to protect’. [24]
This has been reflected in the reluctance to commit ground troops for fear of casualties; the form of the air war which has involved high altitude bombing for fear of risking the air crews, guaranteeing ‘mistakes’ and high levels of ‘collateral damage’ (or the mass destruction of civilian buildings with attendant deaths); and finally the gradually widening of the definition of what is a military target. [25]
So far as the bombing is concerned it remains for us to restate that ‘smart bombing’ is a myth. Firstly, as in the Gulf War, the vast majority of bombs dropped are not merely old bombs but often more deadly versions such as bombs tipped with depleted uranium and cluster bombs which leave a legacy of what are land mines by another name. [26] Secondly ‘smart bombs’ are only as ‘smart’ as the intelligence information that goes into their targeting and this is often at fault. [27] But in addition the oft quoted Pentagon data from the Gulf War suggests a high failure rate for ‘smart weapons’ with only a 60 percent success rate for laser guided bombs and only a 53 percent success rate for cruise missiles.
NATO policy can also be judged in terms of the treatment of refugees once the war had begun. While Western politicians were happy to have a photogenic day out in the camps, the real levels of aid that have been given have been pathetically inadequate not only to the task but in comparison to the military costs. As the Macedonian interior minister Pavle Trajinov bitterly remarked, ‘They declare that they want to help the refugees but is it enough just to come to the camps, take photos with the refugees, and then tell the whole world, “See. We’ve done so much for the refugees”?’ No less can policy be judged in terms of the unseemly wrangling over the movement of refugees in which the most disgraceful role has been played by Britain. As Trajinov put it, ‘We’ve seen it before in other places, and it’s happening here. They pass judgement on how the refugees are being cared for. At the same time, they come up with 300 excuses why they themselves shouldn’t [take any refugees]’. [28]
At the time of writing it is not clear whether ground troops will be used before a ceasefire but it is already clear that the bombing has been intensified, widened and stretched so as to set the economies of both Serbia and Kosovo back a generation. Two scenarios now exist. One is an early ceasefire with a peace treaty with the Serbian leadership based on an assurance that NATO will achieve its major military objectives. The second is a widening of the war to achieve this through the use of ground troops. The common premise of both scenarios is the same greater intensification of the aerial campaign to bring a repentant Serbian government to heel or to prepare the way for enforcing that on the ground.
There is no suggestion, however, that NATO is prepared to invade Serbia and impose a different government on the country. This means that any deal must be with Milosevic or, if he is killed or removed, with a leader whose power base derives much of its support from his acceptance of the Serbian nationalist agenda. Therefore, even if a more amenable leader appears or Milosevic backs down and agrees to the creation of a largely independent Kosovo (whether greater or smaller), the full claims of either side will not be achieved or explicitly defeated but only supported/suppressed by superior force. Despite the war induced talk of a ‘generous peace’, there is absolutely no indication that the NATO countries are prepared to commit the massive long term aid necessary both to restore and improve the situation as well as to commit the military resources to police the peace.
 
8) So far from it being the case that social democracy and liberalism has a record of opposing Western imperialism, they have played a key role both in legitimising it and in leading it in times of conflict
The enthusiasm with which the war has been taken up by most liberal, social democratic and Green leaders in the NATO countries has come as a surprise to many on the left, as a considerable number of these leaders had only a few years before been prominent in peace movements. It is important to understand therefore that this is no momentary aberration. When confronted with past crises and wars, liberal and social democratic leaders have not only supported their governments but played a leading role in them. The scale of the betrayal in the First World War is too well known to require rehearsing. But the signs of this betrayal were already in the air before 1914 – social democracy’s ‘internationalism’ only existed when it could be made to coincide with ‘national interests’. ‘Social democracy can never be anti-national,’ the French socialist leader Jules Guesde told the Balkan socialist Christian Rakovsky on the eve of 1914. [29] That key European leaders of the newly developed Green parties should similarly fail the test of war at the end of the 20th century is no less surprising given the nature of Green politics and the more benign view of the role of the state and parliamentary government that it shares with liberalism and social democracy.
The idea that all of these groups would have a more resolute anti-imperialist position today than in the past rested on a misunderstanding of recent history. In particular the anti-war movements in the US and Europe that developed in the 1960s over Vietnam and against the Second Cold War were very much a product of the unravelling of the US assault on Vietnam. Creditable though the opposition to this war was, it cannot be allowed to obscure the fact that in origin the Vietnam War was similar to other wars this century in being a ‘liberals’ war’. This was so not only in the sense that the liberal hero Kennedy played a leading role in its escalation, defining it ‘a righteous crusade’, but also in the way in which the liberal establishment initially swung behind it in the US, supported by the social democratic establishment in the West. This position reflected their earlier role in not merely endorsing but propagandising the Cold War. It was only when the Vietnam War began to go dramatically wrong and a peace movement developed outside these circles put pressure on them that they began to vacillate.
The role that left of centre political forces have played and continue to play in capitalism’s wars can be explained in two main ways. One is their belief in the need to work within the system to change it, a view which means that in the short run they must accommodate themselves to its logic and assume the trustworthy character of capitalism in general and its institutions and leaders in particular. Their criticisms, doubts and hesitations are therefore only ever partial and they remain trapped by the logic of power – a logic that is manifested in an acceptance of the limited choices that capitalism’s conflicts appear to create as well as the institutions that condition these choices.
But there is a second strand to the relationship of the left to capitalism’s wars. It is often mistakenly assumed that the best interests of capitalist states are represented by the forces of the right. This is sometimes the case, but it is far from always so. Although the exact link between foreign policy and domestic politics and economic forces needs to be analysed on a case by case basis, as a generalisation we can say that the narrowness of the vision of the right often creates a space in which the policies of liberalism, social democracy and even the Greens, better reflect capitalism’s needs. Faced with foreign policy conflicts the right tends to fracture. One part – usually the most backward – is often isolationist. Another section, priding itself on its realism, does not oppose action in principle, but wishes to tie it narrowly to its perception of the ‘national interest’, which may often paralyse action.
But, as we have argued, although capitalism is built on a competitive world of states it cannot just exist as an anarchical society. It is here that liberal and social democratic forces with an ostensibly wider vision of the ‘national interest’ can play a crucial role in developing the global institutions of capitalism and enforcing their domination or at least the domination of those institutions like NATO that they can control.
 
9) The intensity of the national question in the Balkans is the product of the late development of capitalism and the interests of the Great Powers in having a fragmented and competitive state system there
Many outsiders who look at the Balkans see a seething cauldron of irrational ethnic hatreds, which they would do well to steer clear of in person and also to steer clear of intellectually. But the Balkan peoples are no different from those anywhere else in the world and the enormous instability of the region is simply explicable in terms of the interaction of three factors.
The first is that this whole area was for centuries part of the Ottoman Empire (the word ‘Balkan’ derives from the Turkish for high range – reflecting the way the area is made up of mountains interspersed with broad plateaux). As part of the Ottoman Empire the region escaped the process of nation building that took place in Europe from the 16th century onwards. From the 15th century to the 17th century the Ottoman Empire was the most powerful political force in the world, controlling lands the size of the old Roman Empire whose eastern capital, Constantinople, the Ottomans took over. From the 18th century onwards, however, the Ottoman system began to fall into decay and this accelerated in the 19th century so the empire became, in the Russian Tsar Nicholas I’s famous words, ‘the sick man of Europe’. All of the major states in the Balkans derived from fragments of the Ottoman Empire (supplemented by fragments of the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires). As children were taught in late 19th century Britain, the Ottoman Empire ‘has, from 1672, been gradually dwindling ... Kingdom after kingdom, state after state, has been cut out of it by Russia and Austria, with the consent of the other Great Powers’. [30]
In the 19th century the internal and external enemies of the empire condemned its rule as the ‘Ottoman’ or ‘Turkish’ ‘yoke’, attacking it as an ‘uncivilised’ and ‘barbarous’ ‘Asiatic’ relic in Europe. As central control weakened and in some areas it became hard to distinguish local rulers within the empire from bandits, ‘the yoke’ did come to lie more heavily. But in general terms the key thing to understand is that in comparative terms, throughout its history, Ottoman rule was relatively loose. In the West, for example, when Spain was unified in 1492, within a century Jews had been expelled (with an important community fleeing to sanctuary in the Ottoman Empire, including its Balkan lands) and so had the Muslims, and the Inquisition had done its worst.
There was nothing to compare to such attempts at expulsion and forced homogenisation under Ottoman rule. Instead Ottoman rulers were happy to allow different religions to develop and local peculiarities to exist provided that they did so in an ordered way and the resulting communities paid their dues to the empire. They therefore created a structure of rule which involved relatively autonomous and religious led organisations. So successful was this that at the high point of Ottoman power, despite later claims of forced conversions, some groups voluntarily converted to Islam and willingly identified themselves with the empire’s aspirations. [31] Overall though it was the compromise with localism that was important because this allowed local traditions and differentiation to develop and be maintained at a time in which in western Europe they were being much reduced by the operations of capitalist development and the state. [32] Some 19th century romantic nationalists would claim that these traditions extended back to the glories of an imagined medieval independence and, in some instances – Greece or Macedonia, for example – even farther back to the glories of the ancient world. But these genealogies of nation were as spurious as those invented in western Europe around Robin Hood, William Tell, Joan of Arc and so on.
The second element in the instability of the Balkans was the eruption of capitalism in the 19th century. This came first as a demonstration effect. The economic development of western Europe, and more particularly the romantic vision of the French Revolution as the ‘self proclamation’ of the nation and of the ‘nation in arms’, encouraged stirrings among intellectuals within the Ottoman Empire but also, more importantly at first, in the expatriate communities on the borders of the empire. [33] Where Britain and France had gone before, they argued, now an independent Serbia, Greece, Bulgaria, Romania and so on could go in the future. Amongst the mass of the population who were peasants and whose life was bounded by their locality, such visions of national freedom had little resonance. [34] For them to be generalised a second element was needed in the form of the arrival of capitalism on the ground and the manipulation of state power to encourage the process of national identification. In the second half of the 19th century capitalism began to more fundamentally transform eastern Europe in general and south eastern Europe in particular. But while it began to unravel the old relationships and to create new ones, it failed to produce the prosperity that the nationalists hoped independence would bring. [35] The economic gap (measured roughly in output per head) between western and eastern Europe grew from around 20 percent in 1800 to perhaps 60 percent in 1860 and 80 percent in 1900. The overall levels of ‘national’ integration were also lower than in the west. But there also developed a marked pattern of uneven development with some regions developing faster and becoming more closely linked in a positive way to the world economy. [36] This enabled local differences to be played on and interpreted as part of a pattern of superiority and inferiority, domination and oppression, a pattern that soon trapped the new states that emerged from the Ottoman Empire. ‘Building the nation’ inevitably therefore involved a twin process of inclusion and exclusion.
To this was then added the third element – the interests of the Great Powers – Britain, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary and then from the 1870s Germany and Italy. As the ‘sick man of Europe’ the Ottoman Empire was ripe for picking off. [37] Russia (driving to the south and trying to accumulate more land, looking for an outlet to the Mediterranean and therefore eyeing control of Constantinople and the Straits, and playing on mythologies of Slav solidarity) had a major interest in its destruction. Numerous wars therefore took place between Russia and the Ottoman Empire. [38] But the last thing the other Great Powers wanted was that Russia should either seize or control land. These powers (Austria-Hungary, Italy) aspired to a strategic position that would allow them to dominate the others (Britain, France, Germany). Britain in particular was concerned with the threat both to its interests in south eastern Europe and more importantly to its strategic interests in the route to India through the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal. It was this that created the famous ‘Eastern Question’ that figured so prominently in the history of Europe between 1850 and 1945, but which for a period the Cold War division of Europe would turn into a half forgotten historical curiosity for most of the world. As one British expert told the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London in 1924, ‘The Balkan problem, we must not forget, is not which town shall be Serb and which Greek ... but which European race shall eventually hold the gate of Europe and Asia and control Europe’s destiny’. [39]
The resulting power plays were sometimes breathtaking. At one point Russia would move against the Ottoman Empire, ‘supporting the Slav peoples’. Then it would decide whether its interests lay in the empire’s weakened survival rather than its complete destruction. Then it would turn against it again fearing that the newly independent Balkan states might themselves become too independent and challenge its interests in the region. [40] No less Britain and France viewed the Ottoman Empire with suspicion as the oppressor of Christians but then backed it as a better guarantee of their interests in the Balkans and the wider Mediterranean than a region controlled by Russia. Then, as demands for independence grew from different groups in the Ottoman Empire, this involved encouraging the fracturing of the Balkans into competing states (Balkanisation) which were often mutually hostile to one another and which could be played upon to secure the rival interests of the powers. As the competition increased, each of the powers, supplemented from the 1870s by the newly formed Italy and Germany, tried to maintain a grip on some part or other of the Balkans. German imperialism in particular began to look in a south eastern direction as its power grew before 1914 and then again in the 1930s under Hitler as it vied for the position of dominant power in the region. In the 1920s Mussolini paved the way for him and then acted as a truculent junior partner.
 
10) Local nationalist movements have always tried to work with particular great powers to gain leverage against enemies backed by other great powers
The paradox at the heart of the nationalist argument in the 19th century and beyond has been that, although nationalist movements have spoken in the name of ‘peoples yearning to be free’, nowhere have they gained enough support from these people to achieve their objectives. Their best hope therefore lay in movements from above which have often met with at best incomprehension and at worst opposition from the local populations but which have been able to lean on the support of the Great Powers which could then tip the balance in favour of national independence.
Since, however, the Great Powers had (and have) interests of their own and have rarely failed to be conscious of the disastrous results that might occur (as they did in 1914) if they fell out amongst one another, they rarely allowed those demanding national independence to get all that they wanted. This left these competing nationalisms with an unfinished agenda for a Greater Greece, a Greater Serbia, a Greater Romania, a Greater Bulgaria and, later, a Greater Albania. These agendas involved seizing territory and people from both the Ottoman Empire and sometimes the Austro-Hungarian Empire, as well as from one another. But to win these aims favour had to be continually curried with the Great Powers in the hope that one or other of them would force the others to accept the realignment of territory. [41]
Greece, on the fringes of the Ottoman Empire and seen by the Western powers as both a stabilising force as well as the mythical inheritor of the glories of the ancient world, was able, with one major exception in the early 1920s, to play this game spectacularly well. [42] Romania too managed to expand its lands by using the crisis of the Balkan Wars, joining the right side in 1916 in the First World War, joining the wrong side in the Second World War but then switching sides before it was too late. Bulgaria by contrast lost out. Having been a victor in the first Balkan War it became the country that the others ganged up against in the Second Balkan War. It joined the losing side in the First World War and then made the same mistake in the Second World War and then, unlike Romania, changed sides too late for it to make a difference.
But if state formation under Great Power supervision created a pattern of conflict over claims to external lands, the same process created the basis for internal destabilisation as nationalist movements developed (and were often tacitly encouraged externally) which claimed the right to secede and join the ‘mother’ country. Inevitably this accentuated the internal ‘minority’ conflicts within new states where concepts of identity were insecure. One consequence of this in the inter-war years was that as nationalist movements were driven to the right the attraction of Italian fascism and then German Nazism as both model and ally came for some groups to be overwhelming. This happened in Albania with Italy and Croatia with German fascism. Appendix 1 sets out in detail the growth of the Balkan states, their wars and claims and counter-claims that led to the bloody history of the region as it was buffeted by these forces.
But another consequence was that as common lands were fought over by different groups startling shifts in the position of nationalist movements could occur. Here the Macedonian case is perhaps the sharpest. No land or identity has even more disputed. [43] The complexity is reflected in the way in which the term macédoine came to be taken up in 18th century France to mean a mixture, being applied then to macédoine de fruits (fruit salad) and macédoine de légumes (hotchpotch). It is also reflected in the competing conceptions of the Macedonian lands and their rightful location. In each case the search for some authentic Macedonia, deriving from some ancient lineage, makes no sense at all but is best understood in terms of the interaction of Great Powers and local states with dissident nationalist groups struggling to carve out a niche for themselves.
Greek nationalism has always claimed the title of Macedonia as part of the ancient heritage of the Greek state going back to Alexander the Great, and speculated on the lands that might define this heritage. An area of land and a people with leaders claiming to be Macedonian were incorporated into Yugoslavia in 1918 emerging with the breakup of the country as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. This phrase is bizarrely the correct title of the new state because Greek protests prevented it simply being called Macedonia lest this tarnish Greek claims to hold that land. [44] From the late 19th century, however, an even stronger case was developed that Macedonia was part of the Bulgarian inheritance and the lands that were supposed to be associated with should therefore be part of Bulgaria.
From the 1890s, however, a nationalist movement developed, based in Bulgaria, that looked to an independent Macedonia within a Balkan federation that would unite all the supposed Macedonian peoples. Known as the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation, it had a long history of wrecking itself in internecine warfare and Bulgarian politics more widely as it allowed itself to be a pawn of wider interests inside and outside the region. Its history has some striking echoes in the early life of the Kosovo Liberation Army and offers a telling vision of what its future might be. As one critical account from a previous generation expressed it:
The Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation was a perfect example of a degeneration of a peasant movement which began as a real revolutionary movement but whose leaders, instead of accepting help for their pursuit of their own policies, became willing to take such help and to pursue the policies of the giver of aid. The Comintern tried originally to steer the IMRO movement away from individual terror and into alliance with the mass movement of the workers. The terrorists fell out among themselves over this policy and murdered each other. Then the movement degenerated completely and became a bandit racket. [45]
These amalgams of Great Power rivalries, interstate conflicts and conflicts within states meant that while the best Balkan socialists supported the idea of national self determination as a general principle they could never simply and uncritically ally with national demands and nationalist movements. The result was that the most determined socialists were often abused and attacked by all sides as they stood out for a socialist solution that went beyond competing local interests and Great Power rivalry. And however real failings become visible with hindsight, there existed an admirable history of socialist argument and courage that is largely unknown in the West and which the socialist movement here, that often failed lesser tests, would do well to consider more seriously. In the Balkan Wars, for example, although some socialists supported their governments, many did not. Even more spectacularly in 1914, when the First World War broke ostensibly to protect Serbia from bullying by the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Serbian socialists courageously denounced the war as an imperialist one and suffered terribly for this. What inspired them was not simply the general vision of international socialism but a recognition that there was no solution to the problem of the Balkans so long as it remained a prisoner of the Great Powers and competing local leaders willing to beat the nationalist drum for their own ends. Against the prospect of permanent tension, national conflict and warfare they offered a prospect in the form of a socialist federation of the Balkan peoples which they hoped would allow the creation of a society that could eliminate the destructive roots of national conflict by attacking its roots in both local and international capitalism. But, like so much else in 20th century socialism, this alternative hope for a union of free peoples was first to be distorted and then destroyed by Stalin and his supporters in Russia and the system that they eventually helped to impose in Eastern Europe after 1945.
 
11) Stalinism in Eastern Europe in general and the Balkans in particular suppressed interstate and intrastate conflict, but attempted to co-opt the nationalist agenda for its own purposes
The Russian Revolution acted as a beacon for discontent throughout Europe, and in the Balkans a significant part of the left saw in the internationalism of the Bolsheviks and in their revolutionary policies the beginnings of a politics that could break with the disasters of the past. [46] But tragic errors were made, most notably in Bulgaria in 1923 when the Communist Party stood aside as sections of the ruling class turned on each other before the victorious group then turned on the left. Similarly the international Communist movement gave support to dubious peasant based parties such as that in Yugoslavia which turned against the Communists when a better ally appeared in the form of the Yugoslav king.
The detail of these mistakes can be found elsewhere. [47] The point is that they were never corrected. As the revolution degenerated in Russia under Stalin’s leadership, mistakes were consolidated. The Communist parties in the Balkans, as elsewhere, became instruments of Russian foreign policy. In the Russia itself ‘socialism in one country’ became part of an ideology of national development in which, in foreign policy terms, the Russian leadership incorporated many of the earlier imperialist aims of Tsarist Russia. At the end of the First World War the various peace settlements had encouraged the consolidation of the Eastern European states as buffer states against Bolshevism. Now the Communist parties, under Russian guidance, were pushed to the left or to the right as it suited Russian interests. But essentially they tried increasingly to incorporate a nationalist policy arguing for an independence from the West that would take the Eastern European and Balkan states into what was portrayed as the ‘anti-imperialist’ camp. Instead of these states being the West’s buffer against Russia they would therefore act as Russia’s buffer against the West.
In 1944–1945 the Russian army was able to push Hitler’s armies back to Berlin. At first it appeared as if it might be possible to agree a new carve up of the Balkans between East and West. In the infamous informal percentages agreement Stalin and Churchill in October 1944 (half drunkenly) divided the Balkans between themselves. According to Churchill’s own account:
I wrote out on half a sheet of paper:



Romania: Russia 90 percent, the others 10 percent.
Greece: Great Britain (in accord with USA) 90 percent, Russia 10 percent.
Yugoslavia: 50 percent, 50 percent.
Hungary: 50 percent, 50 percent.
Bulgaria: Russia 75 percent, the others 25 percent.



I pushed this across to Stalin, who had by then heard the translation. There was a slight pause. Then he took his blue pencil and made a large tick upon it, and passed it back to us. It was all done in no more time than it takes to set down. [48]
But as the Cold War developed, Greece and Turkey were pulled into the Western bloc and Romania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia and Albania into the Eastern bloc. But in consolidating its grip on the region the Russian leadership had to look two ways – against the West and for signs of disloyalty in its new bloc. This latter problem became serious in 1948 as a dispute with Yugoslavia developed. Yugoslavia was the only country in the region where the liberation had occurred without major direct intervention by the Russian army and where the local Communist leadership therefore did not need to kowtow to Stalin. This led Russia to establish an early pattern of rule which was likened to a wheel. On the rim of the wheel were the satellite states-able on minor matters to communicate with one another but controlled by spokes from the hub and having in major matters to relate to one another through Moscow. In particular early discussions of the most limited kind of Balkan federal unity were crushed as they appeared to be dangerous to Moscow rule. [49] Instead the countries were divided from one another by Soviet rule and encouraged to adopt their own ideologies of socialism in one country which had the additional advantage that it provided, in the short run, a way for the new ruling class and the ruling parties to sink some roots into the local populations. In the longer run it produced ideologies which reproduced nationalist agendas. Officially they were ‘national in form, socialist in content’; in reality the socialist element was little more than ‘form’, if that, and it was the content that was nationalist. Ultimately though this was also to prove part of the downfall of the regimes, for their nationalism was compromised by their contamination with Russian interests.
 
12) The fracturing of Yugoslavia in particular was a product of the manipulation of a growing social crisis by competing sections of the ruling class to divert conflict and to secure their control over the remnants of the old society
The pattern of uneven development characteristic of capitalism took on an especially sharp form in Yugoslavia. As early as 1910 it is estimated that the per capita income of Slovenia was three times higher than that of the area that is today Kosovo. [50] After 1945, although Yugoslav governments made gestures to deal with this uneven development that helped to underpin national antagonisms, the Yugoslav system in the long run ended up reproducing these inequalities. For those who believed that there was some kind of socialism in Yugoslavia the explanation for this was often attributed to the imbalance of plan and market elements. But more centrally planned economies in the rest of Eastern Europe failed to solve these difficulties and more market economies in the West also failed to fundamentally restructure national economies so as to eliminate the problem of uneven development within countries, let alone between them. [51] The real explanation for the perpetuation of these inequalities lay in the effect of three main factors – class, international military-economic competition and the nationalist character of the Yugoslav (and other) regimes.
Despite its pretence of socialism the Yugoslav regime after 1945 remained one built on the alienation and exploitation of the mass of the population. Those in control directed the system in their own interests. This involved not only pressure on those below, but conflict for control over resources at the top. Different internal wings of the Yugoslav ruling class competed with one another, taking advantage of the language of nationalism when necessary both to consolidate support and paper over social divisions within the constituent republics and as part of a bargaining process between them.
The impact of military and economic competition increased this problem. No country’s development takes place in a vacuum. After the split from Russia, Yugoslavia was caught between East and West, more nervous of Russia for much of the time and therefore accepting Western support but never really confident of European and US motives. To maintain Yugoslavia’s independence, therefore, the government had first to pursue a policy of rapid growth which meant that, whether in terms of ‘plan’ or market’, most resources had to be devoted to the areas of greatest return. This limited its ability to redirect resources on a large enough scale to make a serious impression on the problem of inequality. This was compounded by the strategic problem. Yugoslavia needed a strong military based on a strong military-industrial complex. But there was no point in locating this in areas that were vulnerable to outside attack. Ironically this meant that neither the more advanced nor the more backward areas benefited most from military expenditure, but an area in the middle. As Misha Glenny put it in 1992, believing that Yugoslavia was threatened by possible invasion from both East and West, ‘Tito transformed Bosnia-Hercegovina into a huge fortress capable of resisting foreign aggression long after Zagreb, Belgrade, or Skopje had fallen. Although Bosnia-Hercegovina makes up only one fifth of the territory of Yugoslavia, 60 percent of the country’s military industries and installations [were] there’. [52]
The third element was that Yugoslav governments, although they opposed local nationalisms, developed their own form of socialism in one country and therefore instead of challenging nationalism by real internationalism they challenged one form of nationalism with another form. The result was to legitimate the language and ideas of nationalism whatever the arguments about particular forms of it.
For a long period economic development allowed these tensions in the Yugoslav project (as elsewhere in Europe) to be submerged. But from the 1970s the impact of the decline in growth in the world economy began to affect the internal economy of Yugoslavia and to reinforce the latent tensions. Investment rates fell, unemployment and inflation rose and foreign debt accumulated to considerable levels. Austerity programmes became the order of the day as the government was encouraged to answer the demands of its financial creditors in the West.
By the 1980s these pressures were creating elements of radicalisation in the Yugoslav system. Milosevic understood better and earlier than most the triple value of nationalism as a means of diverting this discontent, as a means of consolidating his grip in his ‘own’ area, and as a means of strengthening his position in the infighting for the control of Yugoslavia’s wealth. But other leaders in other republics also soon realised that if they were to ride out what at first appeared as centripetal tendencies and then a forthcoming implosion they too had to build support in the same way.
 
13) There is no way in which state structures can be made ‘ethnically pure’ without ethnic cleansing. This is why all Balkan wars have been dirty wars on all sides
The images of the television news reports bring home the brutalities of ‘ethnic cleansing’ and etch its horror for us in the tear stained faces or in the silent incomprehension of the victims at the scale of the brutality that has been inflicted upon them. Yet as the black and white images of refugees and mutilated bodies in the newsreels of past conflicts this century also show, this is not a new phenomenon. War has always brought with it refugee trains – people are forced out or flee and fall by the wayside and die as support is insufficient and takes second place to military priorities or creates complications in which the belligerents or neutrals prefer not to involve themselves. War too brings rape and sexual degradation. Whether it has been used systematically in the Balkans remains unclear – that it is everywhere present is clear for it has been in existence on a massive scale in every war, known to specialists but tucked far away from the concerns of those who glory in the heroic side of military history. And so too is the history of ethnic cleansing. The term is new – the phenomenon is not. Stinking, disease ridden refugee camps of ‘cleansed’ peoples litter the history of the 19th and 20th centuries, as do the graves of those who never made it to their relative safety. The scale of this forced movement and its extent throughout Europe and not just the Balkans is often not appreciated but, as one recent survey puts it:
In the 19th century, involuntary migrations were counted in thousands and tens of thousands; the Balkan conflicts [of 1912–1913] increased their numbers to hundreds of thousands, and World War One generated millions of them ... The apogee of forced migrations came during World War Two and its aftermath when the uprooted were counted in tens of millions.
One estimate is that 60 million were displaced in the Second World War itself and another 20 million after it. This forced movement resulted in the ostensible partial ‘purification’ of the ethnic base of European states by reducing ‘national minorities’. These were reduced from 25 percent of the population of central Europe as a whole in the 1930s to 7.2 percent of the population in the 1970s. [53]
Not only have peace settlements rewarded such ethnic cleansing but they have often brought with them new rounds as people continue to be forced out or flee to escape location in a state that remains hostile to them and of which they might be rightly suspicious. Appendix 2 sets out some of the elements of the horrific process that this has created in the Balkans in this past century. It is solely concerned with the most identifiable movements of people, of ‘ethnic cleansing’ approved and unapproved. It says nothing of the deaths of those who died in the wars in the area or on the marches between countries.
What lies behind the sorry tale set out in Appendix 2 is the fact that state boundaries can never be drawn in such a way as to exclude all who are not of the right ‘national’ group and to include all who ‘are’. The attempt to try to homogenise states must involve complicity in ethnic cleansing.
But the contradiction is that to defend state boundaries also involves in nationalist terms defending the subjugation of people who may wish to assert their difference. It is here that the simple, naive endorsement of an unqualified abstract right to self determination for everyone also founders, for if every self defined national group has the right to demand self determination we are looking potentially at a process without end. If socialists must never support the subjugation of peoples, their support for self determination cannot equally be a support for endless ‘national’ conflicts.
State boundaries of whatever kind are all artificial creations that divide people – Serbs as much as Croats, Slovenians as much as Bosnians. But this applies too with just as much force to the state boundaries of the US, Britain and France or wherever. Indeed the talk of the myth of nation and common nature of humanity is not worth a penny or a cent or a centime if it does not start with the attack on such myths in the West and the unqualified support of the right of peoples everywhere to free movement including to the West – the litmus test on which so much spurious internationalism comes to grief. The internationalism that bespeaks the need to make interventions in the name of humanity becomes the nationalism that denies humans the right to move freely, that passes immigration laws, denies asylum, builds walls around Europe and finances the erection of barbed war fences and the deployment of gunboats to ensure that people cannot even come ashore. The argument about the artificiality of boundaries then becomes no more than a cover to advance the interests of the most powerful at the expense of those who are weaker.
In the case of the former Yugoslavia there is no logical path that can be picked through the claims and counterclaims that does not endorse some at the expense of the others. The brutality of the Milosevic regime cannot in any way devalue the truth of its argument that the borders of the old Yugoslavia were simple administrative boundaries that in key areas bore no necessary relation to what people perceived to be realities on the ground. It cannot obscure the fact that the entirely justifiable demand of the Kosovans to be free of the brutality of Belgrade is also the same right that the Serbs in the Krajina were denied, their right to be free of the Croats. The internationalism that is prepared to support the former and not recognise the latter (or to accept it but cast it aside in the interest of realpolitik) demonstrates its spurious character by this very act of denial. In so doing, it tolerates one kind of deportation rather than another and so builds up problems for future generations.
Arguments about self determination only make sense if they are part of a wider challenge to the policies that divide and rule people whether they come from local leaders or the big powers. That challenge should have come from a strong socialist movement in the former Yugoslavia, built around internationalism – attacking the politics of the leaderships in Belgrade or Zagreb and defending the rights of the oppressed everywhere. But the destructive power of the myth of ‘Soviet socialism’ in general and ‘Yugoslav socialism’ in particular has meant that no such socialist force existed when Yugoslavia collapsed. In its absence the peoples of the former Yugoslavia have again become the playthings of local nationalist leaders and behind them the interests, direct and indirect, of the bigger powers.
 
14) The impact of the war will further destabilise the Balkans for at least a generation
Every day the war has gone on, its ramifications have widened even without the disasters of NATO’s bombing failures. The immediate death toll in Kosovo, Montenegro and Serbia from the actions of both sides will only be more accurately known when post-war investigations strip away the propaganda, but it seems likely to be substantial.
What is already clear is that in terms of physical destruction the war has been more damaging than the combined impact of Nazi and Allied bombing in the Second World War in the area and has wrecked much of the economic infrastructure in both Serbia and Kosovo. ‘Like Iraq, like Yugoslavia. Every day the definition of “military” subtly expands to embrace something we hadn’t thought of’, wrote one Western reporter who was observing the destruction. [54]
The evidence of past wars is that communications and transport can be relatively quickly restored and Western construction companies are already salivating at the prospect of the contracts that will come their way as ‘aid’ is sent to the Balkans – and then back out again to them. The reconstruction of the battered oil refineries, car plants, petrochemical works, engineering factories, even of the cigarette factory that has been destroyed, is another matter. So too is the reconstruction of the public facilities, the schools, the hospitals and the damaged housing stock.
Then there is the refugee problem. There is no prospect that the mass of refugees will return to the homes that they have left. This has not happened in Bosnia and it will not happen in Kosovo even if NATO achieves its widest objectives. In the Bosnian case, since the December 1995 Dayton Accords which effectively divided Bosnia and made it a UN/NATO protectorate, 75 percent of the 2 million displaced persons have not returned. Within Bosnia four main factors militate against return: fear of persecution in disputed areas; the destruction of housing stock, estimated at 60 percent; the legacy of land mines with some estimates as high as 2 to 3 million; and the dire economic and employment situation, with per capita income at two thirds of its 1990 level, but achieving that in part because of aid, as industrial production is 20 percent of its 1990 level. In Kosovo similar factors will be at work. Some will go back to their homes. Others will return but to other homes, possibly in the cities, near the NATO bases, to new camps and overcrowded slums. Still others, perhaps tens of thousands, will stay in camps either side of the Kosovo border in Europe’s new ‘Gaza strip’. [55]
The protectorate that NATO will create will itself become a new source of instability. Internally there will still be an aggrieved Kosovan population living in part on Western largesse, such as it will be, parasitic on serving the needs of Western forces stationed there but also disdainful of NATO’s failure to deliver their real liberation. Perhaps too there will be a small population of Kosovan Serbs no less embittered against both the Kosovan Albanians and NATO. Across the border in Serbia, forced to retreat or be defeated, will be a population facing a bleak future with intensified grievances about NATO’s actions and what will be portrayed as ‘favouritism’. And, as in Iraq, the legacy of the war will be there not only in the memories, not only in the everyday view of the destruction that has not been remedied but in the aftermath of continuing deaths from environmental pollution, depleted uranium, unexploded cluster bombs and so on.
Beyond the immediate area of Kosovo and Serbia the ramifications will remain too. There is the uncertain position of Albania – already wrecked by a brutal ruling class that the West backed after 1989 because they embraced the free market with such alacrity. These selfsame heroic Albanian apostles of the free market established pyramid schemes that fleeced the whole population. When the bubble burst Albania was quickly dumped by its Western enthusiasts, save for a cynical aid effort whose sole motivation was to keep poor Albanians in Albania rather than allow them access to Europe. Then there are Macedonia, Montenegro and Bosnia – what of them? Or even Croatia caught between a triumphalism that the Serbs are ‘getting it’ and fear that it is suffering too as vital tourist revenues plummet, with prospects for the future dim. And what of Bulgaria and the other Danubian states? They neighbour the areas of conflict and have had their trade and economies disrupted by the blocking of the Danube and by the sanctions that they are expected to impose on Serbia.
No doubt some aid will be swung to all these, but it will not be enough. Nor will the foreign investment that was supposed to be private enterprise’s contribution to the area be any more likely to come than it has in the past. Moreover in aid terms the key word is ‘swung’, for though there might be some increase in the aid budget simply to help resist chaos, part of it, on past performance, is bound to be redirected from other areas. The plans for EU expansion are now in chaos, as what appeared to be a central European and Baltic thrust which could ignore the south now at least has to consider south eastern Europe, not as part of a serious programme for EU entry, but as a competing and constraining area of interest.
Then there is Russia. Its economy has been firstly wrecked by the transition and then overwhelmed by the financial aspects of the economic crisis that developed in 1998. Even before the crisis in the Balkans developed, its leaders feared that NATO expansion was directed against them – an opportunity to take advantage of Russia while it was down to ensure that it would never be able to get up. The effect of the war has been to consolidate a huge opposition bloc and to give new authority and legitimacy to the right, offering confirmation of some of their wildest fantasies.
And the consequences have rolled on. Even before the start of the war informed observers were worrying that the crisis and NATO’s determination to impose a more aggressive ‘out of area’ policy might have even wider implications beyond Europe. One aspect of this has been the pressure to increase the level of arms spending to 3 percent for all NATO members which if carried through would begin to ratchet up global military spending and do nothing to assist the arguments for disarmament elsewhere. [56] But perhaps more important than this is the indirect impact NATO’s action might have on the arms race in Asia. Who can now trust the US and NATO to act, or not act, for it is the US-NATO bloc that now appears more than ever as the destabilising element in the international system. Consider, for example, the arms race between India and Pakistan. This has in part been provoked by India’s uncertainty about the extent of Western support for them as the ‘world’s largest democracy’.
Instead Western policy has seemed to offer as much support or more to Pakistan and China – two countries with which India has had tense relations. All the more need, it is suggested, for India to have its own ‘deterrent’. In its heart of hearts, is the leadership of India any more confident of Western support today? On the contrary, the West’s willingness to intervene on such a massive scale on terms that it defines without the formal sanction of the UN seems likely to encourage doubt and suspicion.
But this policy has done nothing for relations with China either. Even before the bombing of the Chinese embassy, Chinese fears about the character of US-NATO policy had been growing. The bombing of the embassy has confirmed these. Thus the US and NATO have alienated a supposed ‘friend’ in the form of India to placate a supposed ‘enemy’ in the form of China, only to destroy whatever credibility they had gained there. The issue here is less the short term impact than the potential long term one. Diplomats are skilled at papering over cracks and massaging the public image. They are less skilled at repairing the deeper damage that breeds distrust and conflict and sets in motion processes that build more tension into inter-state relations.
 
15) No politics which does not challenge both the local ruling classes and the international ruling classes offers any way forward
There is a tendency to believe that when policies go badly wrong they do so because of mistakes or poor leadership and can be rectified by better policies and better leadership. The pressure to believe in the ultimate goodness of the system in which we live is considerable. If it is not a question of good versus bad, then it is the ‘not so bad’ versus the ‘much worse’.
This illusion affects not only people in the West, but those who look to the West for support like the KLA. If only they cloak themselves in the Stars and Stripes or Union Jack then they will get the aid that they need to realise their dream. What NATO’s Balkan War shows is that none of our rulers can be trusted because what drives them to act are motives that are in fundamental contradiction with the real needs and interests of humanity. What hope does NATO offer after its role in Kosovo-Serbia? What hope does Milosevic offer, or the rest of the Serbian leadership? What hope does Rugova or the moderate Kosovan Albanian leadership offer?
To create an alternative it is necessary to develop the different approach from below that real socialists have always argued for. But this alternative has to be built around fighting oppression and exploitation wherever they exist. Real unity can never come about from the denial of real grievances. Even less can it come about if those grievances are merely treated with fine words and gestures. Building the confidence that can overcome national hatred will not be easy. It requires workers and socialists in the oppressing country to fight for and make real sacrifices for workers and socialists in the oppressed country, otherwise they will be swept aside by the forces of national hatred. They too must respond in kind, but the burden falls overwhelmingly on those in the oppressor country, for it is there that the root of the problem lies and it is there that a solution can be found. This means in the West and in Europe there is a need to attack the very basis of NATO’s power. In local oppressors like Serbia it means an opposition that is not seduced by nationalism but resolutely attacks it in all its forms to the extent of being prepared to argue for self determination – only then can the foundations of an alternative be laid.
There is always the temptation to hope that someone else will do this hard work for us. But what NATO’s Balkan War shows is that more than ever it is necessary to develop this alternative in the West, for it is here that the power lies for our rulers to create global chaos and it is here that the power lies to reverse the process by reining them in and overturning them. Only this can create an opportunity to use the wealth of the world for the people of the world – it is this that is the real and only humanitarian policy.

Appendix 1 [57]

Appendix 2 [58]

Notes
1. D.K. Fieldhouse, The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey From the Eighteenth Century (London 1982).
2. Indeed those who bother to read what Lenin said will see that he dates the imperialist era from the time when the process of colonisation had been completed.
3. See M. Haynes, The Rhetoric and Reality of Western Aid to Eastern Europe, European Business and Economic Development, vol. 1 no. 2 (September 1992), pp. 13–18.
4. World Bank, World Development Indicators Report, quoted in The Guardian, 27 April 1999.
5. OECD, Development Cooperation 1998 Report (Paris 1999).
6. This is Arthur Schlesinger’s famous characterisation of the liberal view of the Cold War – see his Origins of the Cold War, Foreign Affairs (1967).
7. There are several McDonald’s restaurants in Belgrade.
8. I have drawn these quotations from an essay by Noam Chomsky circulated on the internet.
9. The Guardian, 6 April 1999.
10. Quoted in R. de Wijk, Towards a New Political Strategy for NATO, NATO Review (Summer 1998), p. 15.
11. Ibid., p. 15.
12. And in so far as small powers ally with Security Council members the veto then operates. The Security Council has 15 members, ten of which rotate. Power lies with the five permanent members, each of which has veto powers. There is therefore no real accountability to the General Assembly. It is not often appreciated that the most frequent users of the veto in the Security Council have been the US and the UK. In the period from 1976 to the start of the Kosovan crisis in March 1999 the US used its veto 60 times, Britain 19, France 11, Russia 8 and China twice.
13. J. Solana, The New NATO, The Guardian, 22 April 1999. Solana saw the 50th Anniversary NATO Summit as putting ‘the finishing touches to the new NATO: an Alliance committed and designed for enhancing stability and security for the entire Euro-Atlantic area through new mechanisms, new partnerships and new missions, well into the 21st century.’ J. Solana, The Washington Summit: NATO Steps Boldly into the 21st Century, NATO Review (Spring 1999), p. 6.
14. H. Schmidt, The Transatlantic Alliance in the 21st Century, NATO Review (50th Anniversary Commemorative Edition, 1999), p. 23.
15. Ibid., p. 23.
16. J. Zametica, The Yugoslav Conflict (International Institute of Strategic Studies, Aldelphi Papers, London 1992), p. 25.
17. This is according to the New York Times as reported in The Guardian, 26 April 1999. The warning was issued on 24 December 1992.
18. In interview on US television on 24 March as reported on Panorama, BBC1, 19 April 1999.
19. Veran Metic, editor of the opposition radio station B92, banned by Milosevic at the start of the war, illustrated the dilemma of the Serbian opposition by quoting the opposition mayor of Nis: ‘Twenty minutes ago my city was bombed. The people who live here are the same people who voted for democracy in 1996, the same people who protested for 100 days after the authorities tried to deny them their victory in the elections. They voted for the same democracy that exists in Europe and the US. Today my city was bombed by the democratic states of the US, Britain, France, Germany and Canada! Is there any sense in this?’ Matic commented, ‘NATO’s bombs have blasted the germinating seeds of democracy out of the soil of Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro and ensured that they will not sprout again for a very long time’ (The Guardian, 14 April 1999). Earlier he had speculated that NATO plans did not see the Serbian opposition as an ally – it preferred there to be no opposition since this allowed demonisation. NATO’s aim was ‘to destroy and silence all alternative democratic voices and peace initiatives in order to make Yugoslavia a European Iraq and a pariah state for the next ten years’ (The Guardian, 5 April 1999). Whether or not NATO was quite this cynical in intention, this was certainly the immediate result of its policy.
20. The Economist, 3 April 1999.
21. Several off target NATO bombs had fallen in rural Bulgaria, for example, but the government nevertheless fought off local opposition to get agreement to open Bulgarian air space to NATO. This decision had just been obtained when, to the government’s consternation, a NATO missile dropped into a suburb of Sofia.
22. The Observer, 18 April 1999 – the phrase is that of Johnathan Eyal.
23. United Nations, Report of the Secretary General relating to Resolution 1160 (1998) of the Security Council, 21 September 1998. My emphasis.
24. Quoted in The Guardian, 13 April 1999.
25. Despite their technological sophistication planes are vulnerable at low levels to the low technology fire of anti-aircraft guns. Four British Tornados were lost this way in the Gulf War.
26. Bombs are tipped with depleted uranium because it is heavier than lead or steel and can stand high velocities but it is also suspected of leaving a legacy of post-war civilian ill health from radioactive dust.
27. The bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade has made this obvious but it is worth recalling that previous US intelligence failures include the 1998 bombing of a Sudanese pharmaceutical factory wrongly identified as a chemical warfare factory. In 1991, in the Gulf War, the Al-Amiriyah civilian bomb shelter in Bhagdad was wrongly identified as a military command post and destroyed with the loss of several hundred lives. In 1988 the USS Vincennes identified an Iranian airliner as hostile and shot it down with the loss of all 290 lives of those on board.
28. Quoted in The Independent, 16 April 1999. For what it is worth we should remind readers that refugees with a well founded fear of persecution under the UN convention have a right to demand safety in any other country. The talk of quotas, however large, is not therefore an act of ‘generosity’ but a violation of international refugee law.
29. See Rakovsky’s autobiographical essay in C. Rakovsky, Selected Writings On Opposition in the USSR 1923–1930 (Alison & Busby 1980), p. 70.
30. J. Micklejohn, A New Comparative Geography (London 1889), p. 184.
31. Historical debate has raged over such conversions, because for nationalist historians they are central to the history of the ‘oppressed nation’ and therefore must have been forced. English relations with the Ottoman Empire in the 16th and 17th centuries throw an interesting light on the issue and perhaps reveal the real state of affairs because in a number of instances Englishmen abroad found the empire an attractive home compared to the England of their day – a powerful 16th century Ottoman eunuch, Hasan Aga, was Samson Rowlie of Great Yarmouth; in the Algerian part of the empire one Moorish king’s executioner turned out to be Abd-es-Salaam or Absalom, a former Exeter butcher; one General of the Janissaries was an Islamic convert known as Ingliz Mustapha (he had been born in Scotland). In 1606 the English consul in Egypt found Ottoman ways sufficiently attractive to convert to Islam. A half century later when Charles II attempted to pay the ransom for a group of enslaved sailors, his emissary found that they all refused to return to Restoration England. Having themselves converted to Islam they were now happily ‘partaking of the prosperous Successe of the Turks’. The positive toleration which continued to exist alongside the more negative aspects of the Ottoman Empire was reflected in the argument in 1798 of an Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem who suggested that the Ottoman Empire was a divine creation of god to protect Orthodoxy from contamination by the Catholic west.
32. See C. Harman, The Return of the National Question, in J. Rees (ed.), Marxism and the New Imperialism (London 1994).
33. See the excellent discussion in L.S. Stavrianos, Antecedents of the Balkan Revolutions of the Nineteenth Century, Journal of Modern History, vol. xix (December 1957), pp. 335–348. The first Greek newspaper was published in Vienna in 1790; a Serbian paper was also published there in 1791; the first printed book in Bulgarian was published in Wallachia in 1806. Novi Sad, then in the Hungarian part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, was known as the ‘Serbian Athens’. Expatriate groups in the US and Europe today still exert a direct influence on internal Balkan politics.
34. Largely illiterate peasants with local visions – even their leaders often lacked the capacity to identify with the national cause and its myths, though the intellectual leaders of nationalism were happy to try to use them. In the Greek struggle for independence in the 1820s one scholar told the prominent peasant outlaw leader Nikotsaras that he was the equal of Achilles only to report that ‘Nikotsaras was deeply offended that he should be compared to an unknown. “What nonsense is this,” he replied indignantly, “and who is this Achilles? Did the musket of Achilles kill many?”’ – quoted ibid. Subsequently state education would make sure that national myths were commonly known. As one British source put it at the end of the 19th century (with considerable exaggeration given the actual spread of education in Greece at this time), ‘Schools have been established in nearly every village; and the little Greek boy learns whole passages of Homer by heart every week’ (J. Micklejohn, op. cit., p. 189).
35. See the discussion in M. Haynes and R. Husan, The State and Market in the Transition Economies: Critical Remarks in the Light of Past History and the Current Experience, Journal of European Economic History, vol. 27 no. 3 (Winter 1998), pp. 609–644.
36. D. Aldcroft, Europe’s Third World? The Peripheral Nations, in his Studies in the Inter-War European Economy (Ashgate 1997), pp. 196–197.
37. Our concern here is with the Balkan question but the Ottoman Empire at its height arched around the eastern Mediterranean including much of the Middle East and North Africa. Nearly 50 modern states emerged from its fragmentation – a process which everywhere involved the balancing of the competing interests of the Great Powers and the local leaders. For a full listing see G. Barraclough (ed.), Times World History Atlas (London 1978).
38. Russia was at war with the Ottoman Empire in 1735–1739; 1768–1774; 1787–1792; 1806–1812; 1828–1829; 1853–1856 (part of Crimean War); 1877–1878, 1914–1917 (part of the First World War).
39. E. Durham, The Balkans as a Danger Point, International Affairs (May 1924), p. 139, emphasis in the original.
40. At the end of the Second Balkan War Izvolsky, the tsarist Russian minister and diplomat, wrote from Paris in August 1913 of the defeated Bulgaria, Russia’s supposed pet Balkan state, ‘Events have taken a favourable course for us ... Had Bulgaria come out victor it would have been very disadvantageous and dangerous for us ... A great Bulgaria might have served as a base for ulterior Bulgar plans against Constantinople’ (quoted in E. Durham, op. cit., p. 143).
41. One term used to describe this is ‘irredentism’ – the advocacy of the ‘restoration’ of territory. The idea involves a ‘restoration’ since nationalists believe the land was always part of their ‘nation’. Irredentism derives from the Italian word irrendenta – unredeemed – and reflects the way in which Italian nationalists too laid claim to the restoration of what they believed to be Italian land on the other side of the Adriatic.
42. ‘Greece ... is the young rising power in the Balkan peninsula, and the one which has the greatest future before it’, a late 19th century British audience was told. ‘Turkey is the old, sinking, despairing, and dwindling power on the Peninsula; Greece the young, hopeful, and growing’ (J. Micklejohn, op. cit., p. 186, p. 188).
43. In the Ottoman Empire the lands of the now disputed area of Macedonia were considered to be incorporated into the three vilayets of Salonika, Monastir and, ironically, Kosovo.
44. 1992 saw huge nationalist protests in Greece about the creation of a separate state in the former Yugoslavia calling itself Macedonia. In March 1992 possibly a million marched in Salonica. In December 1992 another million or so were on the streets of Athens around slogans like ‘Macedonia has been Greek for 3,000 years.’ Socialists who stood out bravely against this hysteria were arrested.
45. J. Weber, The Balkans, Fourth International (June 1941), p. 145.
46. The Balkan Communist parties were often soon forced underground but in Yugoslavia, for example, in 1920, the Communist Party had some 60,000 members and in electoral terms was the third largest party with 12 percent of the vote.
47. See D. Hallas, The Comintern (London 1985) for a brief discussion of these errors.
48. W. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. vi (London 1954), p. 198.
49. See, for example, J.M. van Brabant, Socialist Economic Integration (Cambridge 1980), ch. 1 passim.
50. D. Aldcroft, op. cit., p. 197.
51. For an analysis of some of the components of this process see M. Haynes, The European Union and Its Periphery: Inclusion and Exclusion, Economic and Political Weekly, vol. 33, no. 35 (1998), pp. PE87–PE97.
52. M. Glenny, Yugoslavia: The Revengers Tragedy, New York Review of Books, 13 August 1992, p. 38 – even more ironically for Serbia two thirds of these industries were located in the Moslem and Croat areas of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
53. D. Stola, Forced Migrations in Central European History, International Migration Review, vol. xxxi no. 2 (1992), pp. 324–341. It should be stressed also that this pattern is quite independent of the normal migration pattern.
54. R. Fisk in The Independent, 26 April 1999.
55. The refusal to allow larger numbers of refugees to leave the area is clearly not explained by the reluctance to ‘play Milosevic’s game’ so much as Western governments bowing to racist immigration agendas. There is also a fear that not only might the refugees not return from Western Europe but once there they might use it as a base for opposition to any settlement that failed to meet their hopes. As one Italian critic has put it, what governments fear is that ‘Kosovo’s “refugee bomb” can explode twice: creating within the European states the “Kurdisation” of the Albanians and a new disintegration within the Balkan countries’ (A. Ferrari in Corriere della Serra, 7 April 1999, quoted in The Guardian, 10 April, 1999). Details of the continuing plight of all refugees in the former Yugoslavia can be found on the UNHCR website.
56. ‘Defence spending levels below 3 percent of GDP are not adequate for Europe to play an important role in a system of collective defence’, L. Maria de Puil, European Security and Defence Identity Within NATO, NATO Review (Summer 1998), p. 8.
57. For an overview of the competing claims in the Balkans see H.L. Kostanick, The Geopolitics of the Balkans, in B. and C. Jelavich (eds.), The Balkans in Transition: Essays on the Development of Balkan Life and Politics Since the Eighteenth Century (Berkeley 1963). Kostanick’s account includes details of some more minor territorial disputes that I have excluded from this table for the sake of brevity.
58. This table focuses on the Balkans defined as Greece, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria, Romania and the lands disputed by them. Lest readers fall into the trap of thinking that ‘ethnic cleansing’ is a peculiar Balkan disease we should remind them that in the Second World War forced Balkan migrations were perhaps only 10 percent or more of total forced migrations. All figures are approximate. Those followed by a ? are even less certain than the others. The fact that none of these figures is known with any accuracy is itself a reflection of the way that victims literally ‘do not count’. They are what one historian calls the ‘unwanted’ of Europe in the 20th century. The table is drawn from D. Stola, op. cit.; D. Kirk, Europe’s Population in the Inter-War Years (Geneva 1946); E.M. Kulischer, Europe on the Move. War and Population Changes, 1917–1947 (New York 1948); M. Marrus, The Unwanted. European Refugees in the Twentieth Century (Oxford 1985); R.P. Magocsi, Historical Atlas of East Central Europe (Washington 1993); UNHCR website.
 

ke Haynes: Theses on the Balkan War (Appendix 2)



Mike Haynes Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Theses on the Balkan War


Mike Haynes
Theses on the Balkan War

Appendix 2
Forced Migrations in the 20th Century Balkans




Dates


Who


From


To


Numbers




Balkan Wars


‘Tens and hundreds of thousands ran in all directions’ (Sola)




Including




1912


Turks


Macedonia


Turkey


100,000




1912


Macedonians


Macedonia


Bulgaria


15,000




1912–1913


Greeks


Western Thrace


Greece


70,000




1912–1913


Turks


Bulgaria


Turkey


50,000




1913


Greeks and other groups


war areas


Greece


90,000?




1913


Turks


Western Thrace


Turkey


40,000–50,000




1913


Treaty of Adrianople between Bulgaria and Turkey – first interstate treaty to provide for transfer of peoples




1913–1914


Bulgarians


Greece, Serbia, Turkey


Bulgaria


250,000




1913–1914


Greeks


post-war forced movement by Greek-Turkish agreement from Turkey –
interrupted by 1914 war


Greece


?




World War One


even larger movements similar to Balkan Wars




Including


 




1914–1918


Serbs


internal and external displacement of over one third population including:


All directions


750,000–1,000,000?




1914–1918


Serbs


Serbs as forced labour, about 10 percent of population


Bulgaria/Hungary


250,000–300,000?




1914–1918


Serbs


march to Adriatic – Serb army and civilians (huge death toll)


Adriatic


200,000–500,000?




1914–1918


Bulgarians


former ‘Bulgarian lands’


Bulgaria


300,000?




1916–1918


Romanians


Dobrudja (taken by Bulgaria)


Romania


?




post-war




1918–1924


Hungarians


Romania (Transylvania)


Hungary


200,000




1918–1924


Hungarians


Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia


Hungary


200,000




1918–1926


Bulgarians


Greece (Greek Macedonia and Thrace)


Bulgaria


120,000




1918–1928


Greeks


Bulgaria


Greece


50,000




1922–1923


Greeks


forced exchange from Turkey under Treaty of Lausanne


Greece


1,200,000




1921–1928


Turks


Greece


Turkey


400,000




1921–1939


Turks


Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia


Turkey


200,000




World War Two




1939–1940


Romanians
Germans
Hungarians


Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina taken by Russia


Romania
Germany
Hungary


40,000 plus




1939–1940


Jews


Romania


Russia


70,000?




1939–1941


Romanians


Suspect population Bessarabia


Russian camps


100,000?




1940–1941


Yugoslav (Serbs/Jews)


flee before invading German/Hungarian armies


Yugoslavia


300,000?




1940


Romanians


Transylvania (ceded to Hungary)


Romania


220,000




1940


Hungarians


Romania


Hungary


160,000




1940


Romanians


Dobrudia annexed by Bulgaria


Romania


100,000




1940


Bulgarians


resettled Bulgarian Dobrudja


Bulgaria


60,000




1941


Greeks


‘Greek’ Macedonia and Western Thrace occupied by Bulgaria


Greece


90,000–100,000




1940–1944


Ethnic Germans


Romania, Croatia, Bulgaria, Serbia


German areas


300,000




1940–1945


Serbs


‘Yugoslav’ Macedonia occupied by Bulgaria


Serbia


500,000




1940–1945


Serbs


Banat taken by Hungary


Serbia


?




1940–1945


Slovenians


Slovenia taken by Italy/Germany


Southern Slovenia/Serbia


120,000




1940–1945


Serbs


Croatia


Serbia


120,000




1940–1945


Croatians
Hungarians


Serbia


Croatia and
Hungary


70,000




1941–1945


Forced labour


18,000 Bulgarians,
9,000 Romanians,
103,000 Yugoslavs


Nazi Germany


130,000




1941–1945


Jews


Romania 270,000–400,000,
Greece 60,000,
Bulgaria 10,000
Yugoslavia 55,000–60,000


Nazi camps/death


400,000–500,000




1943–1944


Italians


Albania and Dodecanese


Italy


40,000




1944–1945


Germans


Romania to west fleeing ahead of army


West


100,000




1944–1945


Germans


Yugoslavia to west fleeing ahead of Partisans/Red Army


West


35,000




1944–1945


Hungarians


ahead of Red Army and return of Transylvania to Romania


Hungary


?




1944–1945


Balkan captives


Balkans


Russian camps


?




1944–1945


ethnic Germans


deportation from Romania, Yugoslavia


Germany


170,000?




1944–1945


ethnic Germans


deportation of those left behind from Hungary, Yugoslavia, Romania


Russia


200,000?




1945 on


Bulgarians


Greek and Yugoslav territories occupied in war


Bulgaria


120,000




1945 on


Hungarians


Romania, Yugoslavia (and Czech lands)


Hungary


185,000




1944–1947


Poles


Bosnia (community from 1890s)


Poland


17,000




1945–1946


Italians


New Yugoslavia


Italy


130,000




1946


Hungarians


New Yugoslavia


Hungary


40,000




1946


Serbs and Croats


Hungary


Yugoslavia


40,000




1945–1948


Jews


Bulgaria


Israel/West


50,000




1945–1948


Jews


Romania


Israel/West


40,000




Greek Civil War




1946–1949


 


(a) 600,000 plus displaced from Greek Macedonia to Athens/Salonica
(b) 90,000 cross borders
(c) Albanians of South Epirus


Yugoslavia and
Balkan states
Albania


700,000 plus

25,000




Communist Era




1949–1950


Turks


Bulgaria


Turkey


150,000–250,000




1970–1989


Turks


Bulgaria


Turkey


300,000




post-1989




Croatian War 1991




1991


Croats


Eastern Slavonia


Croatia


77,000




1991


Serbs


Croatia


Serbia and Montenegro


120,000




Bosnian War 1992–5




 


all but especially Muslims


internal displacement


Bosnia


1,000,000




 


All incl.


External displacement


25 countries


1,000,000




 


Muslims/Croats


Republika Srpska


Croatia


45,000




 


Bosnian Serbs


Bosnia


Serbia/Montenegro


250,000




1995


Croatian Serbs


Croatia/Krajina


Skpska/Serbia


180,000



 



Was the Russian Revolution a mistake? Eighty years on the answer would appear to be yes, not simply for the right but for the victims of the Soviet regime and for its erstwhile supporters in the West. The historian Eric Hobsbawm describes October as a ‘freak result of war’. For another penitential ex-Communist it was ‘a mistake of truly historic proportions’. But this view depends on two other arguments. The first is that there was a basic continuity between 1917 and what came later. Far from betraying the revolution, as Trotsky claimed, Stalin and his successors in some sense fulfilled it. When the regimes that were created in Eastern Europe by the Red Army after 1945 collapsed and when the Soviet Union itself collapsed in 1991, they therefore carried away with them the whole of the past back to 1917. The second argument is that there was another choice in 1917 – that the Bolsheviks and their supporters were wrong to take power as they did and they therefore have primary responsibility for what came after.
Since the first argument is extensively treated elsewhere, our concern here will be with the second one – the rewriting of 1917 itself. Our argument is that the Russian Revolution was an attempt to escape from the bloodiest war that capitalism had yet produced, a war which was creating internal crises everywhere, and which in Russia demanded radical solutions. This war, a product of capitalism at its most barbaric, created a polarisation in Russian society. Workers could either go forward or risk being crushed by chaos and counter-revolution in a way that was subsequently to happen many times in the 20th century. In striking out to overthrow capitalism in Russia the Bolsheviks refused to become ‘heroic failures’. Their hope of success, however, depended not only on themselves but on whether the revolution could spread, enabling the Russian Revolution to break out of its isolation. In the event, despite coming close, the hope of a wider revolution was defeated and the revolutionaries in Russia were left isolated. For this isolation the socialist leadership in the West must take primary responsibility for had they taken their opportunities then the result might have been different.
But rather than rehearse familiar arguments to support this analysis, our aim here will be to consider the revolution from another angle and ask why it was that a credible bourgeois democratic alternative could not emerge? Instead of looking at the revolution from the bottom up, from the perspective of the workers, peasants, soldiers and sailors who formed the mass movement, we can explore it from the top down and ask what imperatives led the different sections of the ruling class to act the way they did and what the choices were from their perspective? [1] Only at the end will we return to the agenda of the revolution from below to ask a different question. Why, with clear evidence of support for a soviet-based socialist coalition government without the bourgeoisie, the two other leading socialist parties, the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks (and the Menshevik Internationalists), not only refused to support the Bolsheviks but effectively abandoned many of their own supporters in favour of a fruitless attempt to hold out a hand to Russia’s ruling class over a now unbridgeable gap. While this decision has won them renewed plaudits from those hostile to the Bolsheviks in 1917 we shall argue that it contributed to the very situation they wished to avoid, namely a weakening of the broad front of the popular movement. Contrary to the many historians who see the Bolsheviks as the only dynamic force after October 1917, the policies that emerged in the first months of the revolution must in part be understood in the context of the action and inaction of this part of the left.
 
Pre-Revolutionary Russia
Within the space of a single article it is impossible to review the complex debate on Russian development before 1914 as well as do justice to 1917 itself. We will therefore content ourselves with making three points about how Russian development should be analysed. Firstly, development in Russia was not an autonomous process. It occurred in the context of the deepening and widening of the capitalist system which increasingly tied Russia to the world economy through economic, social, political and military links.
Secondly, this process of capitalist integration created in Russia, as it created elsewhere, structures of uneven and combined development. Development was uneven in that different areas of the country, sectors of the economy and sections of society developed at different speeds. Some, at times, showed little sign of change or even moved absolutely backwards. But this does not mean that we can simple counterpose the new to the old, the modern to the traditional, the changing to the unchanging. Development was combined in that these forms fed off one another and helped in some ways to mutually reinforce the unevenness of change. A simple but telling example is the link between agriculture and industry. The backward nature of Russian agriculture meant that there was limited demand for agricultural equipment. This held back the development of the Russian agricultural machinery industry in the face of limited demand and foreign competition. Native businessmen in this industry therefore campaigned for protective tariffs and pursued monopolistic practices which kept prices up and so helped to perpetuate the backwardness of the countryside. It was this type of interaction, occurring not only in the economy but across society, that Trotsky was trying to address with his famous concept of ‘uneven and combined development’.
Thirdly, when the revolution came it did so in the midst of a world war that was itself a product of the competitive tensions within the wider capitalist system of which Russia was a leading great power. Unless the war is seen as a product of miscalculation or some autonomous political process then both it and Russia’s part in it must be seen as expressions of the wider contradictory dynamics of capitalism at the start of the 20th century.
Though in one sense these three points might appear straightforward they nevertheless go against the grain of much recent writing on the origins of the revolution in Russia. This has tended to look at Russia’s links to the wider world as an afterthought, is obsessed by the contrasts between the apparent domination of tradition and the few ‘islands’ of modernity, and introduces the war as an external factor or one which emerges detached from any basis in capitalism in general and Russian capitalism in particular. [2]
By themselves, of course, our three arguments present no more than points of departure for a more detailed analysis of Tsarist Russia that we cannot follow through here. In Russia before 1986 it was common to paint a one-sided and gloomy picture of Tsarist development. Now many have gone to the opposite extreme and see it as a golden age. [3] Since we are primarily interested in the way that the contradictions established before 1914 had an impact in 1917 we will simply draw attention to three more empirical observations about the pattern of development.
Firstly, Tsarist Russia was developing and changing – there was considerable absolute progress without which it is impossible to understand how the revolution became possible. Secondly, this growth was not sufficient to close the relative gap that existed between the Russian economy and those of more advanced capitalism. Despite periods of good growth, the long run growth rate of the Russian economy was not high enough to allow it to close the gap. Whereas in 1870 Russian per capita income was roughly 34 percent of the UK level, by 1910 it was 32 percent – a performance markedly inferior to much of the rest of eastern Europe. [4] Thirdly, although the result of the 1905 Revolution was some political and agrarian reform which it has been argued began to move Russia towards a more liberal democratic path, this argument failed to convince people before 1914. ‘No one at the time seriously believed that the autocracy was liberalising,’ says a recent historian. [5] Nor has it convinced those who have looked in detail at the patterns of constitutional change, and change in agriculture and the wider economy.
It does not follow from this, however, that we should then agree with those accounts which place so much stress on the extent to which the class structure reflected the continuing weight of tradition that they reject the idea that Tsarist Russia was capitalist. Instead such historians call it feudal or semi-feudal or, like Richard Pipes, define it as a ‘patrimonial society’ or put it in some other special category – anything which weakens the claim that revolution in 1917 was directed against capitalism. [6]
Such arguments start from two correct observations. The first was well put by the economist and historian Peter Struve, then a Marxist, in the 1890s, that ‘the further to the east one goes in Europe, the weaker in politics, the more cowardly, and the baser becomes the bourgeoisie’. [7] Relative economic backwardness meant that a socially weak bourgeoisie had to contest for power with a strong ‘old order’. The second was that as Russian society advanced much of it did indeed display an outer shell of tradition. In particular society was formally divided into social estates (soslovie) such as those of ‘noble’, ‘merchant’, ‘peasant’ which looked back to society as it existed in the 18th and early 19th centuries. The only national census held in Tsarist Russia used this formal classification, measuring only in a distorted way the real class divisions that were emerging in Russian society at the of the century. [8] Similarly the state administration was divided into uniformed grades, each divided by status, decorations and titles to such an extent that the civil servant obsessed with his position became a stock figure in Russian literature. But we must beware two mistaken developments from these two points.
The first is judging the development of Russia or any other society against some ideal model of ‘bourgeois development’ – an ideal which has never been able to occur anywhere. The bourgeoisie ‘betraying its historical mission’ has become such a staple of liberal and left wing historical writing that this idea has become a real hindrance to understanding. It detracts from analysing what actually happened in favour of speculation about ‘what should have happened’. The second mistake is then to fail to take into account the variety of forms through which the rule of capital can be expressed. Whereas socialism must depend on the political and economic rule of a self conscious working class for it to have any meaning, the rule of capital is founded at the economic level. It operates more or less effectively through a wide variety of social and political structures. The task of historical analysis is therefore to tease out the ways and extent to which this is taking place. [9]
In fact our knowledge of the complex real history of the ruling class is remarkably sketchy. Too often even its broad contours remain vague. Just as there has been a tendency to reduce the working class to the factory workers and miners (the famous 3.5 million of 1917) ignoring those in transport and distribution, building, small scale production, domestic service, agricultural labour, and seasonal work, as well as the families they had, so too the discussion of the ruling class has tended to reduce it to the study of a few groups. Here we can only alert readers to the danger of this as space will force us too to focus on the broad components of class structure.
Much attention has been paid to the way in which the influence of the industrial bourgeoisie was fractured before 1914. [10] A part of Russian industry was owned by foreign capital. In St Petersburg modern banks and engineering firms dependent on state orders had to a degree come to terms with Tsarism. In Moscow and the Central Industrial Region a textile based bourgeoisie was freeing itself of the traditions of the past and speaking with more independence. So too were businessmen in the south who were based around the mining and iron and steel and in the south west around the sugar industry. But although there was some coming together based on the growing concentration of production and distribution, a question mark still hung over the vigour with which the bourgeoisie could influence the process of change. The liberal theorist and politician Miliukov famously said that it was the professional groups in the zemstvo and urban intelligentsia who ‘filled the anaemic body of Russian liberalism with red blood [and] gave it at the same time a more advanced and democratic character’. [11]
But a modern bourgeoisie was becoming more articulate and assertive, especially as the economy boomed in the last years before the war. In the Novoe utro, the journal of the ‘progressive business class’, one of their supporters could say just before the war:
Our New Year’s toast is raised in honour of the bourgeoisie, the Third Estate of contemporary Russia: to this force which is gaining strength and growing mightily, which thanks to the spiritual and material riches inhering in it, has left far behind the degenerating nobility and the bureaucracy which controls the country’s destiny. [12]
We can appreciate this thrust better now as one of the side effects of the collapse of the Soviet regime has been to encourage the publication of studies of Russia’s lost private capitalists and millionaires.
However, three other pressures were drawing the different elements of the ruling class closer together even as they disputed for power. The first was the fear of revolt from below. The 1905 Revolution with its urban demonstrations, strikes, soviets, peasant led uprisings in the countryside, and mutinies in the navy quickly confirmed the worst fears not only of the established order but of many just below the top who would have liked to see power move towards them. They therefore began to see clear limits to how they should construct their struggle against Tsarism. As a result it was commonplace on parts of the left to argue that a future Russian revolution would not simply be a bourgeois revolution – even if few were prepared to go as far as Trotsky in his embryonic formulation of the theory of permanent revolution. Outside Russia too, observers like Karl Kautsky reinforced the view that there was a fatal divide between the popular movement and the forces wanting a more modern capitalist society. In his pamphlet The Driving Forces and Prospects of the Russian Revolution he argued that:
At the present time the proletariat is no longer a mere appendage and tool of the bourgeoisie, as was the case during bourgeois revolutions, but is an independent class, with independent revolutionary aims. But where the proletariat comes out in this manner, the bourgeoisie ceases to be a revolutionary class. The Russian bourgeoisie, in so far as it is liberal at all and pursues an independent class policy, undoubtedly hates absolutism, but it hates revolution still more ... And in so far as it wants political freedom it does so mainly because it regards it as the only means of putting an end to revolution. Thus, the bourgeoisie is not one of the driving forces of the present day revolutionary movement in Russia ... The proletariat and the peasantry alone have the firm community of interests during the whole period of the revolutionary struggle. And this is what must serve as the basis of the entire revolutionary tactics of Russian social democracy ... [13]
The second pressure pulling the ruling class together was a sense of its imperial mission within Russia. Great Russians made up only 43 percent of the empire’s population but their leaders ruled over an empire covering around one sixth of the world’s surface. This empire was the result of continual expansion over the centuries. However, in the 19th century pre-capitalist pressures to expand became overlaid by new economic interests and the development of a new sense of Russian ‘national identity’ as part of the ‘nation making process’ that was general in Europe at the time. No less in the constituent parts of the empire intellectuals began to develop programmes of ‘national independence’ which challenged the right of this ruling class to control the destinies of the populations they ruled. This challenge to the destiny of the empire began to bring the old Russia and the new Russia together. In particular those concerned with the economic future of Russia looked to the agriculture of the Ukraine, its coal, iron and steel, the oil of Baku, the cotton of central Asia, while railway and financial interests tied the economy closer together. Liberals were therefore in a dilemma. They opposed the oppressive policies of Tsarism against the national minorities, even to the extent of supporting some autonomy and minority rights, but they cast their arguments within the framework of the continued existence of a greater Russia. [14] Struve, speaking now for conservative liberalism, offered a bridge between the two groups, condemning Ukrainian separatism in particular for the way in which it threatened ‘a gigantic and unprecedented schism of the Russian nation, which, such is my deepest conviction, will result in veritable disaster for the state and for the people’. [15]
The third pressure derived from imperialism in the wider sense of a shared interest in ensuring that Russia maintained its position as a great power. Bismarck had said of Russia, ‘Let her go eastward. There she is a civilising force.’ His hope was that this would reduce tension in Europe and allow the unmolested expansion of German influence in central Europe. But whatever the attraction of exotic internal colonies, Russia’s rulers never had any doubt that Russia’s ‘really vital interests’ were in the west, the arena of the main battles with Germany, and for influence in the Balkans and Straits:
By circumstance, if not by choice, Russia’s rank as a Europe Great Power had come in the half-century that had preceded the downfall of the monarchy to depend primarily on her position and strength in the Balkan peninsula. That fact and not Pan-Slavic ideology or the dream of Constantinople dictated the Russian response in the supreme crisis of July 1914. [16]
We can no more cut imperialism out of Russian policy making than we could for any other great power in this period; it was, as its best historian puts it, ‘an integral part of the political system in imperial Russia’. [17] It was Struve who again set out the modern logic of Russian imperialism in this wider sense. To sustain itself as a world power Russia’s rulers needed external power but this required a powerful and modern internal state. [18] While this led him to argue for reform it also led him to challenge liberalism for being too hostile to the interests of ‘Great Russia’: ‘Russian liberalism will always doom itself to impotence until such time as it acknowledges itself to be Russian and national.’ In the end Struve felt that this union was never achieved but we can argue that the war and February Revolution went a long way towards realising just this link.
Indeed when European war came in 1914 Russia played a key role in the crisis, not only in a diplomatic sense but in the way that its conflict with Germany created part of the underlying tension from which the war emerged. In this case, as Norman Stone puts it, ‘it was, indeed, the economic “take-off” that men had been predicting for Russia, that ... in a sense, caused the First World War since German apprehension of it ... led Germany’s leaders into provoking a preventative war’. [19]
 
Caught between war and revolution
Everywhere throughout Europe war brought unity between the ruling class and much of the rest of society. In Russia the central committee of the Cadet party announced: ‘Whatever was our relationship to the internal policy of the government, our over-riding duty is to support the one and indivisible fatherland and to preserve its position as one of the great powers, which is now being challenged by the enemy we have. We set aside internal disputes, we will not give them even the slightest cause to hope that our differences will divide us’. [20]
Recent historical research has painted a more positive picture of the performance of the Tsarist armies but this is relative. [21] Everything that can be said about the horrors and strain of war on the Western Front can be said about the Eastern Front and worse. The physical conditions were often more difficult, the trenches shallower on the Russian side, their troops were more badly equipped (lacking not only munitions but even tin hats), the medical backup inadequate, the food supplies worse, and so on. Hindenburg, the German general, recorded how ‘sometimes in our battles with the Russians we had to remove the mounds of enemy corpses from before our trenches in order to get a clear field of fire against fresh assaulting waves.’ On one estimate in the first ten months of the war alone the Russian armies lost 300,000 men a month, dead, wounded or taken prisoner. [22] On average until the ceasefire in late 1917 Russia’s average monthly losses were around 40,000 dead, 120,000 wounded and 60,000 missing or taken prisoner.
The government proved quite unable to create the structure that could sustain this war effort. Into the gap came voluntary organisations headed by liberals but including leading industrial capitalists. The Union of Zemstvos headed by Prince G.E. L’vov played a crucial social role including caring for many of the wounded. Industrial production and war supplies were assisted by the creation of voluntary War Industry Committees. The central organisation was headed by the industrialist A.I. Guchkov; the Moscow organisation by Pavel Riabushinskii, that in Kiev by the sugar industrialist Mikhail Tereshchenko. Then on 25 August 1915 the Cadets and the Octobrists in the Duma joined with other groups to form the Progressive Bloc to bring pressure on the government to improve the war effort through co-operation with it.
The response of the Tsar and the government was to hold these organisations at arms length. As late as the winter of 1916–1917 the Tsar banned a Moscow conference of the zemstva, the role of the War Industries Committees was progressively restricted and on 17 December the Duma was suspended. Even the Tsar’s brother could lament as 1916 developed that at the top ‘there is no real power, not a shadow of any kind of programme, or desire to understand Russia’s actual situation and position in the present troubled days’. [23]
This threw the opposition into a quandary. It is important to understand that although there was a growing belief that the government had to be changed, this was quite different to a commitment to democratisation. In March 1916 Miliukov told the Duma, ‘I know that a revolution in Russia will definitely lead us to defeat. If I were told that organising Russia for victory meant organising for revolution I would say, “better leave her as she is, unorganised, for the duration of the war”.’ But as problems rose it became more difficult to hold this position and Miliukov was forced to make more outspoken attacks. What the leading Cadets wanted was what the newspaper Rech called in November 1916 a ‘dictatorship enjoying the confidence of the public’. [24]
But if the Tsarist government did not respond to the overtures of the opposition how could it be made to change its views? Guchkov expressed the difficulty well: ‘We are almost powerless to struggle with this evil. Our means of struggle is double edged and by encouraging the mood of the popular masses we might put a spark to the fire, the scale of which we can neither foresee or isolate’. [25] Even at the very top Rodzianko, the president of the State Duma, continued to restrain action until the very end. As one recent historian has put it, ‘Their aim was not to conduct a thorough social revolution in Russia but to prevent one from developing. They wanted to restructure the political and economic system to provide more opportunities for enterprise, capital and the market.’ In the end they waited so long that the matter was taken out of their hands. ‘The guilt, if we can speak of the historical guilt of Russian society,’ wrote Guchkov, ‘consists of this, that Russian society in the form of its leading circles has not been sufficiently aware of the need for this overturn and has not taken it into its own hands, but has allowed blind, elemental forces, moving without a definite plan, to complete this painful operation’. [26] But removing the monarchy proved more than a tidy piece of surgery; it redefined the whole political landscape in Russia.
 
The trauma of the February Revolution
On 23 February 1917 textile workers in Petrograd inaugurated a wave of strikes and demonstrations which grew daily with control slipping from the authorities. On 27 February the first troops in the city began to go over to the demonstrators and this continued on next day until, on 1 March , the majority of the garrison was in revolt. As news arrived at the military headquarters the now isolated Tsar decided to abdicate. But how would a new government emerge and with what mandate?
On 27 February Rodzianko still refused to allow the Duma to officially reconvene but he was prepared to allow an unofficial meeting which, since it was boycotted by the right, effectively became a meeting of the Progressive Bloc. This elected a Provisional Committee under Rodzianko who was quickly displaced by the Cadet leader Miliukov. At the same time the embryo of the Petrograd Soviet was created. For our purposes the detail of the internal conflicts in the Provisional Committee, between it and the Tsar and between it and the soviet, can be left to the side. Suffice it to say that key figures in the Provisional Committee were anxious to create some form of constitutional monarchy but were prevented from achieving this by more radical members of the Committee and the pressure of the soviet. [27] The soviet leadership saw the revolution as a bourgeois revolution and therefore had no desire to rule but they were determined to be rid of the Romanovs and to ensure that the Provisional Committee upheld a more democratic view of the revolution. The result was not only the abdication of the Tsar and his family but the creation of a Provisional government under Prince L’vov, the zemstvo leader, on 1 March with its composition being agreed with the soviet the next day.
The interesting question for us is the nature of the political structure that came out of this February Revolution and to understand this we need to appreciate the extent to which the revolution pulled the political spectrum to the left leaving the idea of ‘bourgeois democracy’ hanging in the air – precisely the scenario that the liberals had feared before 1917. Just how great this movement was can be seen in the symbols of 1917. The red flag flew everywhere, including over the Tauride Palace where both the Provisional government and the Petrograd Soviet met and over the Winter Palace when Kerensky took up residence there. The holidays institutionalised by the Provisional government were often socialist holidays – most notably May Day. The renaming of things began after February as a symbol of the new era. To be associated with the old order was to be disparaged and threatened and this applied as much to the idea of what was ‘bourgeois’ as what was ‘aristocratic’ or ‘Tsarist’. On 22 March Russkoe slovo lamented: ‘Bourgeois. It seems that this word, with its abusive meaning, occupies a position between “scoundrel” and “swine”, and its wide usage is explained, apparently, by its polemical convenience.’
We have therefore a paradox. The Provisional government, trying to stabilise a bourgeois democratic system, had problems in even giving this project its name. One contemporary summed it up as ‘the fashion for socialism’, ‘the general aspirations of a huge number of Russians to declare themselves, no matter what, to be socialists, to the amazement of foreigners.’ The socialist newspaper Vpered in its first issue noted ironically that ‘the yellow street press calls itself non-party socialist. The financial newspapers repaint themselves with the protective colour of ‘realistic socialism’, while the banks try to protect themselves by raising the red banner of revolution over their buildings.’
Alongside the more obvious revolutionary elements, the factory and soldiers committees, the soviets etc., this seismic shift in the political spectrum destabilised political parties and institutions that would normally be the basis of the consolidation of a new order. Even the church was affected. While sections of the hierarchy looked on in horror some turned towards moderate Christian socialism. Still others went further. Vvendenskii, one of the most radical of the clergy, saw no contradiction between Bolshevism and Christianity: ‘The struggle on behalf of the poor is the basic principle of socialism, and it is our own Christian struggle.’ With these views he was elected to the Petrograd Soviet to represent the ‘democratic clergy’. The Orthodox Church even created a special ‘Committee on Bolshevism in the Church’ as it tried to puzzle out how to deal with the phenomenon. [28]
This created an embarrassing political problem for both the Provisional government and for those who later claimed that the October events represented the imposition of an illegitimate government over a legitimate one. What was the basis of legitimacy of the Provisional government? At one level this produced an apparently bizarre discussion of constitutional theory. More widely, it reflected the ambiguous political legitimacy that the Provisional government had both in respect of the mass of the population and the existing institutions of the state. [29] There was general agreement that a proper constitutional basis of power had to derive from a Constituent Assembly which would create the new constitutional and state structure of a democratic Russia. But until the Constituent Assembly met and deliberated, on what basis could the Provisional government claim to legitimately rule?
There were three possible answers. The most dangerous was that given by Miliukov in a moment of frustration when he stood outside the Tauride Palace on 2 March and someone shouted from the crowd, ‘Who elected you?’, his reply was ‘We were chosen by the Russian Revolution’. [30] But if the Provisional government was chosen by the ‘revolution’ then what was to stop the ‘revolution’ getting rid of the Provisional government? Such an idea implicitly thrust the government into the hands of the street, legitimising the role of the soviets and endorsing those leaders who were only too ready to stress the degree to which the Provisional government needed them. Steklov, then editor of the newspaper of the Petrograd Soviet and a member of the Contact Commission set up to liaise between the soviet and the Provisional government, delighted in taunting ministers: ‘You must remember that we have only to wish it, and at once you will no longer exist, since you have no independent importance and authority’. [31]
The second solution was to argue that the authority of the Provisional government derived from the old Tsarist Duma. There were, however, two obvious difficulties with this – the first was that the Duma was elected on a narrow basis, entirely unrepresentative of the country. [32] The second was that the Tsar had prorogued the Duma on 27 February in the midst of the crisis. Technically therefore the Duma was not in session to make any decisions at all. The problem was more than a technical one. In the French Revolution the Third Estate resisted the king and declared itself in permanent session gaining the initial stature to turn the Estates General into a National Assembly in the summer of 1789. In Russia the Duma and its leaders meekly obeyed the Tsar’s ruling, committing ‘suicide’, as Miliukov put it, ‘without protest’. [33]
This left the third possibility, that the Provisional government might claim legitimacy from the Tsar. Yet constitutionally and politically this was no less satisfactory although in a technical sense this is exactly what happened. The best legal minds of the Cadet Party struggled to make sense of this and to give it an appearance of authority. The difficulty was that in abdicating the Tsar should have allowed the throne to pass to his son under a regent. But, fearing for his son’s health and future, he abdicated for him too – something which constitutionally he had no power to do. [34] The throne then ‘passed’ to the Tsar’s brother, the Grand Duke Mikhail, who in turn ‘abdicated’. Mikhail did not want to be thought of as having accepted the title of Emperor even for a moment. But the Cadet constitutionalists prevailed on him to ‘formally’ pass on his ‘authority’ to the Provisional government to give it some sense of legitimacy. Even Kerensky went along with this pretence of a transfer of power, pretentiously telling the Grand Duke that ‘we will carry the precious vessel of your authority to the Constituent Assembly without spilling a single drop’. [35] The constitutional importance of this was, as Nol’de and Nabokov (the two key authors of the constitutional fiction) put it, that the ‘act of 3 March was in essence the only constitution during the period of existence of the Provisional government’. [36]
Yet it remained impossible to bind the February Revolution in these constitutional limits. [37] What was necessary was for the Provisional government to maintain a popular base. One way of doing this was to include representatives from below – this was the attraction of the appointment of Kerensky. Shingarov, defending Kerensky’s appointment to the first Provisional government, argued, ‘we must detach from the revolution one of its leaders ... Of them Kerensky is the only one... Much better to have him with you than against you’. [38] Another was to keep confidence by reform. Russia quickly became, as Lenin happily recognised, the freest country in the world. The Provisional government was a reforming government supporting a Constituent Assembly based on universal suffrage; universal suffrage in local elections implemented in 1917; the abolition of racial and religious discrimination; freedom for religion; freedom of speech and assembly; the right to strike; soldiers to be citizens in uniform. But there were limits to how far it could go. Russia remained a class society in which the political possibilities were structured by the conflicting interests of those at the top and those at the bottom of society. The programme of the Provisional government therefore ‘was a charter of democratic freedoms, not a programme for the transformation of society’. [39] It was the failure to hold the line at such a charter that would lead to Russia being split apart. To see how this happened we need to explore why it was so difficult for liberal democracy to find a mass base in 1917.
 
The missing base of bourgeois democracy
To understand the difficulties of creating a stable party political system that might be the agency of capitalist rule it is necessary to explore the pattern of party support in 1917 in some detail. One aspect of this was the initial fragmentation of the party structure. This is not unusual in new democracies but it nevertheless complicated the task of creating a stable political base with more than 100 parties contesting for power. [40] But within this mass of organisations there were half a dozen which were significant on a national scale. Three were on the centre right, the Trade Industrialists, the Union of House Owners, and the Cadets. In 1917, however, it was the Cadets who were the main capitalist party. Cadet ideologists had tried to maintain that it was a liberal supra-class party which could speak ‘for Russia’.
Now, in the post-February period, the more conservative Nationalist and Octobrist parties were marginalised by the swing to the left and the Cadets became the home for the centre right. Symptomatic was the decision of the conservative Prince Trubetskoi to join the party after a decade of attacking it for failing to protect the interest of property. Leading figures worked closely with key industrialists like Alexander Konovalov and Mikhail Tereshchenko, with the All Russian Union of Trade and Industry, and with Pavel Riabushinski and Sergei Tretiakov even though some key figures in business continued to dislike the way in which the party looked more positively on state industry and agrarian reform than they did. But the party was increasingly able to draw pro-landlord and pro-business support around it because it was seen as the only viable party for the articulation of the interests of property within the democratic party spectrum.
Within the party the balance of power began to tip away from the left which had been more sympathetic to reform and building links with popular democracy towards a centre right position. ‘The party’, says Rosenberg, ‘was...increasingly regarded by left and right alike as the political core of bourgeois Russia’. The dominance of the centre right was reflected in its capacity to defeat the left by a two to one majority on key issues and then in the effective marginalisation of the more radical Nekrasov and the left. As Kerensky put it, the Cadets now ‘organised all the political and social forces of the country representing the interests of the propertied classes, the high command, the remnants of the old bureaucracy, and even fragments of the aristocracy’. [41]
The debate on what the vote for the Constituent Assembly represented for the left depends crucially on whether the Socialist Revolutionary (SR) vote is seen as support for the right and centre SR position of opposition to revolution or for left SR support for revolution and we will take this up later. Here we are interested in another aspect of the results. Table 1 shows that in the elections for the Constituent Assembly in November 1917 the Cadets and others managed to get only 6–7 percent of the vote with a mere 17 representatives out of 700. This in no sense represented a decline in the party’s influence – in some respects it was as strong, or stronger at this point than it had been earlier precisely because it was now seen as the alternative on the centre right. It had a membership of some 100,000 and the best financial base of the major parties. Moreover it was undoubtedly the best organised national party in conventional terms. During 1917 it had local organisations throughout Russia that could stand its slate in 80 percent of Russian towns. [42] Why then was the Cadet Party and the centre right more generally so weak in terms of the votes it could attract?



Table 1: MAJOR PARTIES IN THE ELECTIONS
TO THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY [43]




 


Percent
vote


 


Number
of seats




All-Russian Socialist parties




Socialist Revolutionaries


 


  38   


 


299




Left Socialist Revolutionaries


—


  39




Bolsheviks


  24   


168




Mensheviks


    3   


  18




Other socialist


    1   


    4




All-Russian Non-Socialist parties




Cadet


 


    5   


 


  17




Other


    1   


—




Cossacks


    2   


    9




Christian (various)


    0.5


—




Major Ukrainian Parties and Joint lists




Uk Socialist Revolutionaries


 


    6   


 


  83




Uk Socialist bloc


    9   


—




Other




Mohammedan


 


    2   


 


—




Other nationalist


    4   


  66




Unclassified


    5   


—




Total


100   


703



The underlying reason was that Russian business and landed circles had not been able to establish a mass base as they had in the west where they could draw on a growing middle class, a property owning peasantry and a body of working class conservatives to bolster their otherwise small numbers. In the countryside the numbers of landowners, even with their families and hangers on, was small and even if we accept the dubious estimates that there were some 2 million rich peasants and assume that they would be attracted to the centre right that still leaves a very small base. The situation was better in the towns but even here there were problems both in respect of the size of the potential social base and the lack of a tradition of mobilisation of it or indeed a capacity to mobilise it in the direction of the centre right. [44] This problem was then compounded by the radicalising effect of the revolution which pulled the political spectrum even further to the left – for example, in Petrograd even in the Vasilevsky Island district where most of the university was located and where the Cadets hoped to do especially well they managed to mobilise only 18 percent of the vote in the spring local elections.
Indeed the analysis of the general urban electoral performance of Cadets, Trade Industrialists and House Owners shows that everywhere they made up only a minority force. [45] As Rosenberg, the leading historian of the party, puts it, ‘Russia’s first elections of the revolutionary period showed the Cadets with a staggering loss of city influence and prestige in the two strongest areas of past support.’ In Petrograd, whereas they had got 61 percent of the votes for the first Duma after the 1905 revolution, in the May 1917 municipal elections they now got 22 percent. In the Moscow municipal elections they managed only 17 percent compared to 63 percent a decade earlier. ‘Socialists overwhelmed Cadets even in parts of the city that were heavily bourgeois.’ When later local provincial results came through they were just as bad. In Kursk and Samara where they had won every seat in the first Duma they had only 17 and 9 percent of the votes respectively. [46] The pattern of local urban voting reveals what Rosenberg calls ‘a remarkable fact ... the small success of right wing groups in almost all large towns ... in larger centres dumas fell almost entirely under socialist control.’ In fact, as Rosenberg shows, non-socialist party voting was inversely related to the size of town with the Cadets doing rather better in medium sized towns and the Trade Industrialists and House Owners doing better in the backwater towns of provincial Russia which were often no more than administrative and market centres. [47]
At no point in 1917, therefore, could unambiguously pro-capitalist parties have come anywhere near achieving a respectable minority vote in any electoral test. Their dilemma was echoed by Russkaya vedomosti in July: ‘The Cadet organisation has little influence in the present revolutionary moment of our history.’ Yet the Cadets were the driving force of the Provisional government. Thus we can say that the very possibility of the leading bourgeois democratic party surviving depended on its ability to limit democracy for fear that it would be swept away. As Rosenberg put it, ‘With their own limited national constituency, the Cadets themselves could never claim to rule on the basis of representative principles’. [48]
 
The Constituent Assembly
On 3 March the Provisional government announced the ‘immediate preparation ... on the basis of universal, equal, direct and secret ballot’ for a Constituent Assembly ‘which will determine the form of government and the constitution of the country’. [49] But the lack of real commitment to the Constituent Assembly, especially on the right is often vastly underestimated. Even Kerensky from the outset accepted much of the argument for the delay in the Constituent Assembly. [50] But the most powerful resistance came from the Cadets. Despite the Provisional government’s proclamation, the very next day Miliukov told the French ambassador that he was trying to avoid the setting of any precise date for elections. Indeed a significant part of the Cadet leadership hoped that elections might be delayed until the end of the war. Behind the arguments of the Cadets was a twofold fear. The first was party political. Until the summer of 1917 the Cadets were transfixed not by the fear of a pro-Bolshevik vote but a massive pro-Socialist Revolutionary vote in the rural areas so that, as Kochan puts it, ‘it was a matter of political self-preservation for the Cadets to delay the elections.’ From the summer the threat became that of the even more radical Bolsheviks. [51]
This led on to the second fear that with minimal influence the Constituent Assembly would legitimate a radical social revolution in both town and country. Thus to maintain both the role of the party and to stabilise Russia it was necessary to delay the Constituent Assembly as long as possible. Maklakov, one of the founders of the Cadets, told the Duma in May that ‘Russia had received in the revolution more freedom than she could manage’, while the Cadet paper Svobodnyi narod argued that ‘the larger part of the dark masses of people simply are not able to understand the present meaning of freedom.’ To paraphrase Nabokov, instead of the Constituent Assembly being the basis for the creation of order, the creation of order had to be the basis of the Constituent Assembly. [52]
It is not surprising therefore that it took three weeks to announce the commission to decide the election procedures, that it then took two months for it to complete its nomination process only for it then to become bogged down in wrangling over whether the voting age should be 18, 20 or 21; whether deserters could vote; whether members of the Romanov family could vote, and so on. When the Provisional government announced on 14 June that elections would be held on 17 September it did so only as an explicit attempt to draw the teeth of the near half a million strong pro-Bolshevik demonstration in Petrograd on 18 June. Moreover it only did this despite the opposition of the electoral commission under its Cadet leader Kokoshkin. Miliukov and the Cadet leadership inside and outside of the election committee then tried to delay things further. Significantly Kokoshkin was replaced by Nabokov, another Cadet, who would ideally have liked the elections postponed until the end of the war and who had initially threatened, in the face of the September date, that the Cadets might boycott the Constituent Assembly. Success in further delaying the elections came after the July Days when part of the price that Miliukov was able to extract for Cadet participation in the second coalition was the postponement of the elections until 12 November, announced on 9 August (in the midst of the build up toward the failed Kornilov coup). Whether elections would have been held then and with what effect had the revolution not have taken place remains an open question.
 
The imperatives of war
Every account of 1917 stresses the extent to which the continued strain of war contributed more than anything else to the disintegration of Russian society. Chernov, the SR leader, told the first All-Russian Congress of Soviets that ‘the war is a great pump which sucks out the strength of the country. Here is the danger, and one all the greater because no one knows if the revolution can live through it.’ And looking back Kerensky would say that ‘it was precisely the war, and only the war ... with all its material and psychological consequences, that provoked the collapse of the democratic government’. [53] Why then did the Provisional government not simply cut its losses and leave the war or even try just to hold the front without engaging in serious military action? Was this the great missed opportunity of 1917? [54]
To argue in this way is to misunderstand completely what was at stake in the war effort and why the major part of the Russian ruling class remained committed to it until the bitter end. The Provisional government certainly would have been happy with a general peace but it did not falter in its commitment to the war. In this it had the whole-hearted support of the majority of those with power in Russian society. ‘A separate peace with Germany and Austria was rejected out of hand by every political group ... no matter how one sifts the evidence, a general peace appears to have been out of the question in 1917’. [55] As we have seen, participation in the war in 1914 was a direct expression of Russia’s imperial interests as a great power. This was then accentuated by the impact of the February Revolution which was ‘created by a high enthusiasm of patriotism which flatly refused any thought of the possibility of a separate peace’. [56]
Already early in 1917 the fear was that Russia’s problems were leading to it being marginalised in Allied discussions and therefore credibility needed to be restored by even greater efforts. If the point of the February Revolution was to create a more modern Russia then that had to be a ‘great power’ Russia. There could be and was argument over what this might mean but there was a widespread acceptance that a Russia that withdrew from the war would inevitably have to take second place to whoever won it. The worse case would be a German victory since German capitalism was the immediate threat, but a victory for the Allies without Russia might create as many difficulties in the longer run since it too would imply Russia’s subordination. And lest it be thought that this fear was unfounded we should recall that in 1918 when Russia’s old rulers were in exile but still hoping they might be restored, Clemenceau brutally dismissed their claims for ‘Russian’ influence in any post-war settlement: ‘Russia is a neutral country which has concluded a separate peace with our enemies. The friends of our enemies are our enemies’. [57]
Then there was the fact that the war was begun ostensibly in a ‘Slavonic cause’. Interest in this was heightened by the specific gains that might be made in the Balkans. In theory these were ‘guaranteed’ by the infamous secret treaties signed to carve up the weaker parts of Europe when the Allies won. In particular Russia would gain Constantinople and the Straits, Galicia, Bukovina, Turkish Armenia and parts of Persia. Rodichev told the seventh Congress of the Cadets, ‘Citizens, they say that these are the strivings of Russian imperialism and seizure. No! This is not seizure. It is the foundation of Russian independence.’ This line was echoed by Miliukov, ‘probably the strongest imperialist in the country’, suggested Arthur Ransome. According to Nabokov, Miliukov:
… was absolutely alien and hostile to the idea of peace without annexations and indemnities. He considered that it would be absurd and simply criminal of us to renounce the ‘greatest prize of the war’ (as Grey, the British foreign secretary, called Constantinople and the Straits) ... But, most importantly, he believed that this prize had not actually slipped from our grasp.
These arguments were not aberrations, they reflected what Geyer calls ‘the astonishing fixation which both Russian policy makers and the public showed for this region’. [58]
Pressure too came from the army. Leading officers were especially committed to these imperial ideals: ‘We reject the very idea that a Free Russia should be denied the free access to the Mediterranean which will ensure the economic well-being of the population, and we consider that the sole guarantee of such freedom of access would be either general disarmament, or, in default of that, military control over the Straits by Russia’, said a motion passed at the Congress of Officers in April 1917. [59] But beyond this the generals expected to fight. The aim was to go on the offensive two to three months after February. And if this did not have strategic military justification (and there was widespread belief that it did) then it certainly had justification in terms of morale. Alekseev, commander in chief at the time of the June offensive believed that only an offensive would restore morale. Kerensky echoed this view:
To say to an army in the midst of war that under no circumstances would it be compelled to fight is tantamount to transforming the troops into a meaningless mob, useless, restless, irritable and therefore capable of all sorts of excesses. For this reason, and to preserve the interior of the country from the grave wave of anarchy threatening the front, it was incumbent upon us...to make of it once more an army, ie to bring it back to the psychology of action, or of impending action. [60]
Thirdly there were the wider societal implications of any withdrawal from the war or effective suspension of it. There was concern in the army that peace might encourage further disintegration Even before he resigned as foreign minister, Miliukov told Nabokov, ‘Perhaps it is due to the war that everything here is somehow still holding together, and without the war everything would still collapse’. [61] Finally we should note that internally there was still optimism that the war was still winnable. This was especially the view at the centre of the Cadet Party. ‘Our party’s policy constantly strove to maintain this official optimism,’ wrote Nabokov. [62] American entry in particular strengthened this hope.
Beyond these internal factors was the way that Russia was tied to the wider international war effort of the Allies. In allied capitals the February Revolution was welcomed precisely because it seemed to promise more commitment to the war effort. ‘It must be remembered’ wrote The Times somewhat later, ‘that the Revolution – as a Russian movement – was intended to make the war efficient’. [63] The very fact that Russia might be the means of opening up the question of peace without complete victory provoked consternation. ‘It is difficult to imagine with what keen apprehension and often unconcealed irritation diplomatists in 1917 received our formula of a “democratic peace”,’ wrote Kerensky. [64] ‘If only we can keep them in line until the autumn perhaps some day they will be grateful to us at home,’ wrote the British ambassador of his role in keeping up pressure on the Provisional government. A British Labour and French Socialist delegation was even sent to keep up pressure. There has been much discussion of German subsidies to the Bolsheviks but there was another large, but less talked about, Allied flow of cash into the funds of defencist groups and parties. [65] Behind Allied demands that Russia should continue to play a leading role were both its role in the wider imperialist deals that were part of the war effort and the particular military logic of the time. The infamous June offensive, which crumbled after preliminary success and so helped the wider demoralisation of the army, had originally been planned in 1916 as part of a joint Western and Eastern Front attack on Germany. Indeed the Provisional government boasted to the Allies that it had prevented Russian exit from the war in spring 1917 and that ‘the greatest number of German divisions throughout the war was concentrated on the Russian front during the summer of 1917’. [66] Even as late as September 1917 Allied representatives and ambassadors continued to pressure the Provisional government, prepared to have in the background the threat that credits and loans might be affected if Russia withdrew.
Under pressure from the soviet the Provisional government was forced to make gestures towards a general peace. But it did so with no belief in what it was doing, happy to hide behind the Allies who, as Wade says, destroyed any peace possibilities with little resistance from their own socialists. [67] There were those at the top who did speculate that Russia had to be pulled out of the war but what is interesting is how little hearing they got. [68] Even Kerensky, who could appear quite radical criticising the war as a struggle for world mastery, grew more committed rather than less over time. After the July crisis his biographer notes that ‘never again did he call for a peace without annexations or contributions’. [69] In September and October, when ‘the plight of the troops went from unbearable to the unimaginable’, General Verkhovsky, the minister of war called not for a separate peace but a stronger initiative for a general peace and he was simply sent on sick leave, so wild did those at top still consider this idea. [70]
 
The battle for landed property
Maintaining Russia as a great imperial power would mean nothing if the ruling class could not retain control of its economic power and in 1917 this meant that the decisive battles were over land and industry. Yet in respect of land, the polarisation was already huge in the spring of 1917. Shingarev, the first Provisional government minister of agriculture, said in May that he was receiving 100 telegrams a day about the arbitrary rule of peasant committees and the threat to private land ownership. In that month too Read notes:
The first major congress representing the popular movement was the national Congress of Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies that met in Petrograd in early May. It had 1,115 delegates. Fourteen were Bolsheviks. Almost half were SRs. Its main action was to pass overwhelmingly a resolution on land that declared, ‘The right of private property in land is abolished forever ... Hired labour is not permitted’. [71]
Peasant attitudes are sometimes portrayed as irrational but the resentment of landlordism reflected in motions like this had grown up over the generations and was socialised into each new generation and reinforced by the poverty and oppression of everyday life that so many rural inhabitants experienced. Kirnosov, a peasant deputy in the first Duma, dismissed a landlord defence of property rights with the cutting comment that peasants well understood what was at stake: ‘We know your idea of property; my uncle [a serf] was exchanged for a greyhound.’ Observers in 1917 found the same bitterness when peasants were told to wait for the land: ‘My grandfather, my father and I paid so many taxes for our five dessyatins [13 acres] here, that the land could be quite covered with the money that we gave for it. My father and I were made to pay 36 roubles every year, and to get that money in the old days cost us plenty of sweat and blood’. [72]
Nothing less than the confiscation of the landlords’ land would satisfy the aspirations of the peasantry but this encountered several difficulties. An immediate one was that land redistribution might disrupt the war effort, but behind this were two other problems. One was that the landlords could hardly be expected to be enthusiastic (and they were not simply the aristocracy as the land sales had been going on apace since 1861). [73] The second was that much of the financial system rested on loans that were secured on land so that any confiscation threatened the wider stability of the economy. The Provisional government (and indeed in the past the Cadets) argued that it had nothing in principle against land redistribution provided it was supported by the Constituent Assembly and went through proper channels. However, a different agenda was clearly in place at the top of Russian society. [74] As critics on the left pointed out, the talk of the dangers of land confiscation, turmoil and disturbances in the villages, and financial instability all suggested that what was at stake was not respect for the Constituent Assembly but resistance to the confiscation of land itself. ‘This argument applies in general to the confiscation of land even if it were undertaken by the Constituent Assembly. It is advanced therefore by supporters of landowners and large scale capital who do not want any real change in the countryside, who want to consolidate the influence of the landowners and money lenders’. [75]
It is not surprising then to find Russia’s landowners organising increasingly vigorously throughout 1917 to oppose the revolution. The biggest landowners began to organise a pressure group. In 1905 the All-Russian Union of Landowners had been formed but this had withered with the decline of peasant unrest after 1907. Then in late 1916 there were attempts to create a new union, bringing together those with more than 50 dessyatins, to assist in the war effort. After the February Revolution this union became the organising force for the defence of landowners’ interests, joining with the Cadets to try to resist change in the countryside. District and province meetings were held and in May 1917 some 300 delegates from 31 provinces came together in Moscow for the Constituent Congress of the All-Russian Union of Landowners and Farmers. ‘Your property, your labours and your expenditures are in danger,’ wrote the secretary of the newly formed Council of the Congress. [76] Policies were clarified, not least by the effective alliance with the Cadets, to fight against any attempt to confiscate land worked by those owners who were developing their holdings. On 25 May a draft law was issued banning land sales pending the Constituent Assembly. The union attacked this as a violation of the rights of property, working with the banks who saw the draft law as a threat to the stability of financial markets which was underpinned by existing and potential land sales. As a result, to the dismay of many peasants, the law was effectively dropped. Then in the first week of July the union held its All-Russian Congress with 400 delegates, resolving that if landowners were to ‘fulfil their duty to the motherland and to hand over the harvest to it, then [the government] should categorically forbid land committees to take away land, equipment and livestock and to deprive them of labour’. When Chernov became minister of agriculture the union kept up a constant war of attrition against him. [77] Pressure from the landowners was also increased when the Assembly of Notables met in early August and this fed into the Kornilov revolt at the end of the month. The landowners’ union also intensified the attempt to use the courts to hold back the peasantry.
This brought direct conflict with the peasantry. ‘One can only be struck by the solidarity of [their] community,’ writes Read. The scale of peasant violence is a much debated issue but Read suggests that it may have been kept down due to the belief that finally the Constituent Assembly would deliver the land. [78] But one reflection of the success of the landowners can be seen in military actions the Provisional government was persuaded to take against the peasantry. Between May and June there were only 11, whereas in July and August 39 took place and in September and October there were 105 military actions along with arrests of up to 2,000 land committee members responsible, as the government and local authorities saw it, for going too far. Many of these were small but the rising scale was not lost on observers. Moreover in September they culminated in a major confrontation in Tambov where peasant hostility was such that the local landowners, local government and the national government were forced to compromise and back down, prefiguring the surge of peasant hostility and land redistribution that would follow the October Revolution.
 
The frontier of control in industry
But if the survival of bourgeois Russia meant the defence of land ownership then it depended even more on the control of industry. If the revolution was no more than a bourgeois revolution what rights and long term future did the factory committees and soviets have? Already in May Miliukov attacked radicalism, asking, ‘What reason is there for continuing the revolution?’ Skobelev, the Menshevik minister of labour, argued similarly at the end of May that ‘we find ourselves in the bourgeois stage of revolution. The transfer of enterprises into the hands of the people would not at the present time assist the revolution’. [79]
In fact the attitude of industrialists changed during 1917 as their position worsened. In the early days of the revolution the initiative in industrial circles passed to businessmen like A.I. Konovalov, a cotton entrepreneur and vice-chairman of the Moscow stock exchange, whose firms, said Miliukov, ‘were famous for the brilliant way in which they handled the labour question’. [80] With some other businessmen from the Moscow region Konovalov had aspired to more modern ‘European’ business and labour practices. This led him into conflict with the Tsarist government and industrialists in the Petrograd area who, he believed, too much favoured workplace and government repression of labour rather than the enlightened self interest of more positive workplace policies. After February he and like minded businessmen had a decisive sway. Pavel Riabushinskii could even describe the first Provisional government as ‘our regime’. [81] In the so called ‘honeymoon period’ of March and early April it looked possible to reconstruct labour relations by recognising unions, conceding the eight hour day and a large wage increase to take account of inflation, and establishing conciliation boards to deal with conflicts. Debates still existed over the wisdom of this programme and some industrialists were unhappy that the government should play a role in what they considered ‘their’ field, but there can be no doubt that there was considerable movement.
But the growing class contradictions of 1917 soon undercut this strategy and employers who, like workers, were organising apace in various associations soon began to swing in a more hostile direction. In opposition to the growing demands from below Konovalov, in Miliukov’s words, ‘preferred to resign on 18 May without even finding a replacement for himself. In vain he was urged to remain at his post ... This was the first answer from the “bourgeois” members of the [first] coalition to the unfeasible part of the coalition’s programme.’ By the summer of 1917 ‘pessimism, suspicion and intransigence had come to dominate the entrepreneurs’ dealings with the Provisional government, with their socialist partners in the cabinet and above all with the workers’. [82]
This was because the employers perceived a threat to stability, their profits and the very existence of their firms. During 1917 the economic crisis continued to develop. [83] Inflation soared as the Provisional government struggled to finance the war but found it difficult to raise taxes or get its loans taken up. Industrial production continued to be squeezed by the war. This helped to perpetuate a vicious circle where peasants were reluctant to sell grain to the towns which were producing little they wanted to buy. Attempts to fix prices and even early examples of grain requisitioning failed to alleviate the difficulties. The strain on transport grew too, further disrupting the distribution of food, raw materials and finished goods. In June 1917 a Conference on Defence Supplies was told that ‘the state of industry is catastrophic’. By August the Ministry of Supplies could say that the ‘country is faced with the grim spectre of famine’. [84]
The situation was made worse by the increasing expectations of workers and the fact that the indecisiveness of local and national government meant that industrialists could no longer confidently trust it as ‘theirs’. This was reinforced by the pattern of strikes which went down immediately after February but rose from April to the July crisis, declining in July but rising prior to the Kornilov coup, falling in early September as the coup was defeated and then rising again in late September to early October 1917. [85]
Much has been made by some social historians of the fact that when the workplace committees spoke of workers’ ‘kontrol’ the Russian term has a weaker meaning than ‘control’ in English, suggesting more the idea of supervision. But if the early demands of the factory committees for ‘kontrol’ were less radical than is sometimes imagined then the growing crisis forced a redefinition. As Smith puts it, ‘The policy of workers’ control of production was first and foremost an attempt by factory committees to stem the tide of industrial chaos’. [86] But to stem the tide the conception of ‘kontrol’ had to move closer and closer to that of ‘control’ in the English sense. [87] From the employers’ point of view this meant that their prerogatives were increasingly challenged as the frontier of control was pushed outwards by the factory committees and workers were radicalised by the crisis. In reply employers tried to draw the line, ‘We are now prepared to rebuff the attack on private property,’ said one. ‘You must defend yourselves by establishing an organisation that will establish unity.’ As Galili puts it, ‘In the post-July period the Moscow industrialists, both those led by Riabushinskii in the All-Russian Commercial-Industrial Union and those headed by Guzhon in the Moscow Society of Factory and Mill Owners, made confrontation their declared aim’. [88]
This switch in position by the most ‘progressive group’ is easily understandable in terms of not only their disappointment with the results of February but also the specific way in which the economic crisis affected them. The core of the early difficulties was in the textile industry of the central industrial region, especially the provinces of Moscow, Vladimir, Riazan, Kaluga and Kostroma. Here shortages of fuel and raw materials immensely complicated the problems of industrialists and caused plants to close. In the March-July period 133 plants shut in these provinces with an average of 530 workers each, making up 68 percent of recorded jobs lost. Overall 8 percent of cotton plants closed with 12 percent of the industry workforce and 30 percent of the silk workforce lost their employment. It was in August-September that the crisis hit the metal working industry harder. Until then only 91 of the plants that had closed had been in this sector with an average size of 120 workers. Now around a third of the 231 plants closing were in metal working with an average of over 300 workers each, making up some 55 percent of the incompletely reported workforce losses. Moreover the spiral was continuing downwards throughout 1917. In the Donets only 80 million poods of coal were mined in October when 52 million poods were needed for the railways alone. Industrial supplies were to be only one third of what was needed. [89]
As we shall see this led sections of the industrialists straight into the arms of Kornilov. Even after his coup failed the pressure remained to fight to push back the frontier of control. This accounts for the way in September that, to the consternation of those on the left who believed that some comprise with capital remained possible, even moderate groups of workers suddenly found themselves under pressure from the employers. [90]
 
Russia – one and indivisible
As we have seen, the concept of Russia ‘one and indivisible’ was a unifying force in the ruling class before 1914. Some liberals might have thought in terms of a ‘United States of Russia’ or looked admiringly at the supposed integration of the British Empire as alternatives to Tsarist oppression but they shared a concern to maintain the integrity of the Russian state. This was challenged in 1917 by left-leaning nationalist movements but, rather than make generous concessions, liberals tried to hold on to a larger Russia. The Cadet leadership was even prepared to do this though it antagonised its own members in areas like the Ukraine.
The one concession that was quickly made was the acceptance of independence for Poland. However, this was less radical than it appeared since Poland was under enemy occupation and if Germany was defeated and a new Polish state was created it would have to include parts of what were Germany and Austria. This could be to Russia’s advantage, as could the fact that Poland would be a large buffer state in central Europe. Beyond this there was resistance to change even amongst those who ostensibly supported claims for national self determination. Kerensky told the First Congress of Soviets, ‘Today I say only one thing – I recognise the rights of the Ukraine and Finland, but cannot agree to their separation until the Constituent Assembly of the Russian people has sanctioned it ’. [91] This argument was especially provocative in Finland where, when Nicholas abdicated as emperor of Russia he also abdicated as Grand Duke of Finland (a title he held separately). Power should therefore have reverted to the Finnish assembly. Moreover this assembly had, for the time, relatively impeccable democratic credentials, having been elected by universal suffrage. In addition deputies from Finland were not to be elected to the Constituent Assembly making nonsense of the argument for waiting for ‘self determination’.
Nevertheless when the Finnish Sejm voted for autonomy in July 1917 the Provisional government dissolved it. It did not take much to see another agenda at work here. Not the least of the problems was that granting Finnish independence might encourage other national groups to demand the same rights to self determination especially those in the Ukraine. Then it was argued that ‘Russia’s interests’ in the war had to have priority and Finland, where pro-German elements were powerful, might become a base for the enemy close to Petrograd. This was overlaid by the idea that fine words from the Provisional government should be taken at face value and could somehow dissipate the suspicion of Russian motives inculcated by Tsarist oppression, an idea which to the oppressed nationalities looked like great Russian chauvinism dressed up in democratic clothes.
The issue of the Ukraine was even more sensitive because it was so much more central to the idea of ‘Russia’. Moreover in the Constituent Assembly elections in the Ukraine over 70 percent voted for nationalist parties. This radicalisation reflected complex motives, and the conflict between the idea of ‘Russian’, ‘Ukrainian’ and other local identities versus the possibility of more internationalist ideas has recently received much attention. But while Russia’s new rulers were happy to implement some form of autonomy, what mattered above all in Moscow and Petrograd in 1917 was keeping the Ukraine in Russia. It was the Ukrainian issue that broke the first coalition of the Provisional government. On 10 June the Ukrainian Rada proclaimed the autonomy of the Ukraine and called for a national assembly. Members of the Provisional government agreed to recognise the Rada if nationalists reduced their demands until the Constituent Assembly met. But this was too much for the Cadets who saw separatism as German inspired and ‘yet another link in the German plan to break Russia up’. For Miliukov it represented ‘the chopping up of Russia under the slogan of self determination’. It was, as he says in his memoirs, the ‘betrayal of Russia’s interests’. While he recognised the need to make some gesture towards autonomy his attitude is reflected in his language: both the Finns and Ukrainians were ‘striving to take advantage of Russia’s troubles’ but whereas the Finns were ‘cautious and subtle’ the Ukrainian nationalists were ‘fanatics’. [92] As the Cadets left the Provisional government, Kerensky denounced them. ‘On the front, thousands are giving up their lives – and you here, you desert your posts and smash the government.’ But Miliukov and the Cadet leaders well understood both their support for the idea of ‘Russia’ and the politics of July. Once the insurgency of the workers in the capital in early July was defeated they were able to exercise a controlling influence over the new second coalition government whose Cadet ministers were ‘virtually hand-picked by Miliukov’. [93]
This attempt to hold the line against the claims of national self determination continued into the autumn. Even on the eve of October the minister of foreign affairs, Tereshchenko, who reputedly could not even pronounce the word Ukraine, was still denouncing the idea of independence for even the Baltic states as inconsistent with the position of Russia as a great power.
 
The Kornilov coup
All of these conflicts pointed to a fundamental choice in the summer of 1917 which Miliukov formulated as ‘Lenin or Kornilov’ – the general who attempted a coup. In reality the ‘coup’ that resulted was a disaster, a confused attempt to take power which collapsed without shots being fired in anger. But in the process it destroyed any remaining credit that the government, army high command and the political class had with the mass of the urban population. The hostile reaction to it caused a renewed national surge to the left whose main beneficiary was the Bolshevik Party. Controversy continues to rage over whether it was a coup at all and how serious a threat it presented. George Katkov denounces the idea that a coup was ever intended as a ‘lunatic theory’, a product of Kerensky’s fevered imagination. [94]
Such dismissals fail to engage with the tensions and uncertainties that afflict both left and right alike in revolutionary situations. No less than a revolutionary seizure of power, a coup from the right is a leap in the dark that cannot be meticulously planned. If it works then everything that happened was intended and a tribute to the foresight of the plotters. If it fails then the defence becomes it was never really intended, the coup organisers had misunderstood what was meant and so on. All of this is clearly apparent in the story of the Kornilov coup. Had it worked key sections of the Russian political class were ready to line up behind it as its ‘loyal supporters’. But when it failed they cashed in their insurance policies in an attempt to get themselves off the hook.
The attempted coup was the result of the coming together of two logics. The first was the concern of sections of the officer class in the army to impose order on the troops and to have a government that would support the military. [95] General Kornilov was appointed commander in chief of the Russian armies on 18 July to replace Brusilov who had lost the support of all sides. On the South Western Front Kornilov had adopted ‘an uncompromising stand towards the military committees’ in the army. By late June when the offensive of the Eighth Army brought some success he was convinced that ‘a firm statement from the commander coupled with determined action was necessary to arrest the army’s disintegration’. On the 7–8 July, now commander in chief on the South Western Front, to stop the retreat, he:
… at once demanded that the commanding officers take decisive measures against traitors and renegades, notifying them that I was assuming full responsibility for such action. I ordered that deserters and looters be shot, and that the bodies of those executed be displayed prominently at the roadsides, with appropriate inscriptions attached to them. [96]
Meetings at the front were banned and shock battalions of officer cadets were formed ‘to combat desertion, marauding and violence’. His elevation to commander in chief therefore was a clear political statement by the Provisional government, and Kornilov was just as anxious that they should understand his position. He immediately tried to impose three conditions. Rather than reject them the Provisional government fudged and conceded that he should be responsible to his conscience and the nation (ie not the government); that there should be no interference with his operational orders or appointments; and that measures applied at the front, including the death penalty, should also be applied to the army in the rear. [97] He then moved to try to insist on a more total militarisation of the whole war effort telling a conference at General Headquarters on 30 July, in words he recalled a month later, ‘We must have three armies: one fighting in the trenches, another workers’ army in the rear and another consisting of railwaymen.’ The implementation of this was a task for the Provisional government but ‘such armies should be governed by the same iron discipline as now at present enforced in the armies at the front’. [98]
The second logic arose from the wider class struggle and the coming together of sections of the ruling class around a more determined defence of capitalism. It was defeat of the partial uprising of the July Days in Petrograd that marked the change in climate. L’vov, though forced out of office in favour of Kerensky as prime minister, saw this clearly: ‘It is my firm conviction that our deep breach on the Lenin front has incomparably more importance for Russia than the breach made by the Germans on the South Western Front’. [99] This was reflected in the character of the new second coalition of the Provisional government. In the words of Miliukov, ‘With a slight preponderance of socialists, the actual preponderance in the cabinet unquestionably belonged to the convinced partisans of bourgeois democracy.’ To which Trotsky later famously added his comment that ‘it would be more accurate to say bourgeois property’. [100]
A succession of measures quickly followed as the atmosphere at the top of society grew more hostile to the revolution from below in all its forms. On 8 July the military regulations were tightened; the death penalty reintroduced on 12 July and a major meeting of the government and the generals took place on 16 July. In the countryside a public order decree of 6 July made it an offence to incite attacks on private property, on 8 July the government again insisted that land seizures were not allowable. By mid-July Chernov, the new and ostensibly more left wing minister of agriculture, was trying to define and limit the powers of land committees. In areas at the front under the control of the army, peasant demonstrations were banned. In industry too the turn was clear and by mid-August Skobolev, the Menshevik minister of labour, was trying, under pressure, to reduce the power the factory committees.
On 3 August at the Trade Industrialists Conference in Moscow Riabushinbski had insisted that ‘we ought to say...that the present revolution is a bourgeois revolution, that the bourgeois order which exists at present is inevitable, and since it is inevitable, one must draw the logical conclusion and insist that those who rule the state think in a bourgeois manner and act in a bourgeois manner ...’ This signal was understood not only by the left. For Rech, the Cadet paper, this was ‘an occasion where the bourgeoisie finally strikes back ...’ [101] At the Moscow State Conference (between 12–15 August) Kornilov spoke but, left it to General Denikin to represent what was been called ‘the authentic voice of the Russian generals’, and the polarisation became even clearer. Even the sceptical Katkov is forced to admit that:
One thing that was crystal clear to all present was that a gathering like this could never beget a new parliament, or indeed any other body representative of the whole nation, on which the government could rely. Not even the most innocently worded resolution could now be put to the vote without revealing the chasm that had opened up in Russian society. [102]
But the bourgeoisie was actually split on how to move forward. Already in the spring V.S. Zavoiko, a man with wide business links which stretched from Petrograd to the Baku oil industry, had helped to link together leading Petrograd industrialists and bankers as well as other interested parties like the publisher B.A. Suvorin. Zavoiko also helped to reinforce connections for this group with sections of the army. Related to them was the industrialist A.I. Putilov who established the Society for the Economic Rehabilitation of Russia. Their initial aim had been to produce conservative propaganda to limit the revolution and to support right wing candidates for the Constituent Assembly. But as the revolution developed perceptions began to change. The All-Russian Congress of Trade and Industry at the start of August, followed by the State Conference, both held in Moscow, allowed contacts to be developed. The exact story of the plotting and meetings remains disputed but it is clear that the liberal Moscow based businessmen, while growing increasingly hostile to the revolution, still wished to bide their time. This was the direction of Riabushinskii’s infamous speech at the Trade Congress from which the phrase ‘bony hand of hunger’ is often quoted out of context. What he actually said was:
Therefore, gentlemen, we have to wait – this catastrophe, this financial-economic failure, will be inevitable for Russia, if we are not already facing catastrophe, and when it becomes obvious to everybody only then will they feel that they have been taking the wrong road ... We feel that this is inevitable. But unfortunately it is necessary for the bony hand of hunger and poverty to grab the false friends of the people by the throat, the members of the committees and soviets, in order that they should understand this. [103]
However, the Petrograd group was much more active. Deriving from those sections of capital which had developed the closest links with Tsarism (including through military production) they more naturally looked to the army for support after February and now saw in Kornilov a way forward. They were supported in this by wider sections of the upper classes fearing for their future and seeing him as a potential saviour. Individuals wrote to him urging action. ‘Letters’, he said, ‘came flooding in from all over the country describing acts of violence perpetrated against landowners and a complete breakdown in every sector of national life’. [104] The Cadet party began to debate what position it should take. Throughout July and August it had moved further to the right. Although the Cadets were a secular party it was even beginning to make its peace with the Orthodox Church whose leadership were anxious about their future role in Russia. Tyrkova, on the right of the party, told the Cadet leadership on 20 August that the Cadets ‘must support a dictator even more than Kerensky; there is no other way, only through blood.’ Miliukov, said his fellow Cadet Maklakov, treated the possibility of a coup as ‘an accomplished fact’ and therefore the only issue was ‘to find the right attitude to take towards it’. To this end Miliukov was happy to allow Kornilov to believe that he had his active support whereas he was in fact trying to have a foot in both camps in case Kornilov failed. According to General Denikin, Maklakov told him at the time, ‘Tell General Kornilov that we are all of us inciting him to act, Miliukov especially. In fact nobody is going to support General Kornilov – they are all going to watch from the sidelines’. [105]
What was happening was clearly sensed by sections of the popular movement. As Read puts it:
From the ordinary soldiers’ and sailors’ point of view... the new conjuncture was clear. The authorities were on the offensive in the army and navy just as they were in the factories and villages. The period from July to August saw the most concerted effort of the whole revolutionary period to slow down and even control the popular movement. [106]
Tension rose throughout August. On 20 August Riga fell to the Germans and then news arrived that a major munitions supply dump in Kazan had exploded with the loss of a million shells and 12,000 machine guns. The officer class was further antagonised by the news that troops had murdered General Hirschfeld and a prominent political commissar, Linde. What happened next is still surrounded in confusion. Essentially, it appears that at some stage the pretext of a Bolshevik uprising in Petrograd (some officers even had to be dissuaded from creating a riot to simulate this) would be used as the justification for sending troops into the capital. At the last moment Kerensky, having either by his complicity or weakness done nothing to stop the build up to decisive action by Kornilov, saw a chance to denounce him and remove his challenge and, he hoped, restore his declining credibility with the popular base of the revolution. By turning on Kornilov at the key moment he may have unwittingly saved the revolution but his desperate gamble failed not least because no fighting took place to back up his own account of his stand against the general. Instead General Alekseev successfully mediated with Kornilov as his troops faded away under the impact of the denunciation of Kornilov’s actions and the propaganda of the rapidly mobilised workforce of Petrograd. Without the glory of a whiff of ‘grapeshot’ to bolster him Kerensky suddenly found his own actions exposed to the glare of publicity and humiliation. He had temporarily removed a challenge from the army but was himself now in an even weaker position in terms of public support.
 
Political choices post-Kornilov
A revolutionary crisis, it has been said, is a moment of truth when the divisions in a society are exposed and a political choice stands starkly before the contesting classes. We have already argued that far from the policy of the Provisional government being a series of ‘mistakes’, what happened between February and August reflected the way in which the interests of the ruling class conflicted with those of the popular movement without ‘bourgeois democracy’ offering the possibility of a solution. The Kornilov coup was a response on the part of sections of the ruling class to this dilemma. When it failed, the initiative, at least for the moment, passed to the left but the underlying problems that divided society remained unresolved. Indeed the pressure grew worse in September and October making the political response of the parties concerned the supreme question.
In our understanding of this, however, we encounter something of a paradox. In one sense we are better informed of the dynamics of the popular movement in the final revolutionary crisis than ever before. This is a result of the mass of fine work produced in the West in the last two decades. But much of this work has come from social historians who have been so concerned with the popular movement that they have dangerously devalued the political choices made in late 1917. This has had a number of unfortunate consequences. Two are crucial here. The first is the devaluation of what we can call ‘the party political choice’ – the understanding of the way in which the political, policy and organisational strengths and weaknesses of parties were ruthlessly tested in the crisis. The second devaluation can be seen in the ‘sociologism’ of the analysis of the popular movement (and especially the factory workers) where the swing to support the Bolsheviks is almost presented as a gut response to crisis rather than an expression of a conscious political choice between competing political alternatives.
This failure to build a properly political dimension into the understanding of the crisis has left the analysis of many of these ‘social historians’ of the revolution vulnerable. Faced with the resurgence of a more conservative approach to the revolution many have beaten a hasty retreat rather than refine their work. The result is what we can call a ‘Menshevik’ approach to the ‘moment of truth’ in October. On the left the term Menshevik has so often been used as a term of abuse that we hesitate to use it here lest it be misunderstood as simple pejorative labelling. But the term is the correct one in two senses. Firstly some historians, most notably Vladimir Brovkin, openly identify with the Menshevik case in developing a critique of the Bolshevik seizure of power. Secondly, the wider discussion echoes the basic Menshevik claim that the Bolsheviks took advantage of a temporarily favourable conjunction to take power in such a way that they could not hope to maintain their popular base for more than a short time. They would therefore be forced to rule over it, rather than with it. In some cases this weakness in the understanding of the political in the autumn of 1917 is then reinforced by another historiographical retreat in the form of a lurch towards postmodernism. If political choices are constructed at the level of language and ‘discourse’ then the clarity of the moment of truth at the top is diminished – it is not so much a creation of objective circumstances as the ‘ideological prism’ through which the situation is understood. Equally the swing to the left at the bottom becomes even less an expression of a politicised consciousness and more a response constructed from distorted symbolism and a language of conflict and violence. [107]
In order therefore to conclude our discussion of why ‘bourgeois democracy’ failed in 1917 we must first address the issue of the ‘party political choice’ in the autumn before dealing more briefly with the nature of the choices made in the popular movement.
 
The crisis intensifies
In the wake of the Kornilov coup the second Provisional government coalition fell apart as Cadet ministers were discredited and resigned. Kerensky desperately tried to form a ‘third coalition’ but the question was now whether the bourgeoisie and the Cadets had not so harmed themselves as to be completely untrustworthy partners. This question was made more pointed still by the fact that although the balance of power had swung to the left nothing else had changed – there was still conflict over democracy, the war, land, the factories and the empire – all splitting Russia apart. Kerensky therefore formed a five man ‘directory’ on 1 September to run the government while a new coalition was put together, which took until 25 September. [108]
The weeks of the directory and then the final month of the third coalition saw the further crumbling of authority of the government which vacillated erratically as it clung to power. Ignoring the argument that no fundamental changes could be made without the Constituent Assembly, Kerensky tried to improve his standing by declaring Russia a republic on 5 September. This outraged the Cadets who argued that he had no authority for the move. The Senate – which had survived from the pre-February days, declared against the move until, on 6 October, Kerensky dissolved it and the old state Duma (which had continued to have meetings since February although without a formal role). [109] On the other hand, the government kept up pressure on the peasants and outraged many on the left by declaring martial law in Tashkent. As September progressed into October Kerensky began to look towards a confrontation believing that he could smash a Bolshevik uprising. He told Nabokov, ‘I would be prepared to offer prayers to produce this uprising ... I have greater forces than necessary. They will be utterly crushed’. [110]
To try to get some base for the government the executives of the urban and rural Congresses of Soviets, in conjunction with Kerensky, called an All-Russian Democratic Conference from 14-22 September. The 1,582 delegates (including 532 SRs, 172 Mensheviks, 136 Bolsheviks and 55 Trudoviks) were immediately paralysed by the question of whether there could be a coalition with the bourgeoisie in general and the Cadets in particular. [111] Before the conference closed it elected the so called Pre-Parliament or Provisional Council of the Republic which eventually met on 7 October. Having helped to call these bodies into existence Kerensky refused to submit the Provisional government to them on the grounds that it was the supreme repository of state power until the Constituent Assembly met and therefore responsible to itself. The Cadets even objected to the title since Russia had not been legally made a republic in their eyes. The same polarisation again emerged. As Galili puts it, ‘Census Russia again seemed bent on a strategy of confrontation’. [112] The Bolsheviks therefore boycotted the Pre-Parliament, followed by the Petrograd Soviet. They also brought considerable pressure on the reluctant Executive of the Soviets to call the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets. Despite their fears of the composition of such a Second Congress the existing Soviet Executive was forced to agree and on 23 September called the Second Congress for late October.
The confrontation evident at the political level continued also in the economy. Employers were now finding it hard to survive and it is difficult to distinguish between workers being dismissed because of difficulties in maintaining production and those dismissed because employers were getting out while they could. The Provisional government and the Soviet leadership again equivocated in their response. In Petrograd, for example, ‘the Putilovtsy faced the October Revolution with one third of their factory facing redundancy thrust upon them by their own supposed representatives in the Soviet and the Provisional government’. At the Fourth Congress of Factory Committees Skrypnik said ‘We are no longer standing in the ante-chamber of economic collapse; we have entered the zone of collapse itself’. [113]
Petrograd, located in the far north of Russia and dependent on supplies from the centre and the south, felt the crisis in an extreme way. Food was growing scarce. In the first days of October only 30 grain wagons arrived instead of the 500 needed to supply the city. ‘In Petrograd’, said a writer in Rabochii Put’ in mid-October, ‘there is no bread, meat, milk – least of all for the poor classes, for the workers and employees; though there is always sufficient quantity for the well-to-do strata of the population. All these goods are always available to the capitalists.’ Rationing became more widespread; when supplies diminished, rations were cut and even these then proved hard to deliver to the mass of the population.
The government’s response continued to falter and in trying to solve one problem it seemed to accentuate another. Trying to raise the price of grain, said a motion pushed through the Petrograd City Duma:
… is only advantageous to the owners of large grain stores ...; the greatest weight falls with scandalous unfairness on the urban poor and the needy strata of the peasantry. And therefore the City Duma, forced to raise a tax on bread [by putting up prices], disclaims all responsibility for this, placing it wholly on the policy of the Provisional government. [114]
In the popular movement it seemed that only the attempt to organise things from below was holding the line against chaos. ‘The organisation of workers’ control is a manifestation of the same healthy activity in the sphere of industrial production as are party organisations in the sphere of politics, trade unions in employment, co-operatives in the domain of consumption and literary clubs in the sphere of culture,’ said the First All-Russian Congress of Factory Committees, just prior to the revolution in October.
The working class has much more interest in the proper and uninterrupted operation of the factories...than the capitalist class. Workers’ control is a better security in this respect for the interests of modern society, of the whole people, than the arbitrary will of the owners, who are guided only by their selfish desire for material profits or political privileges. Therefore workers’ control is demanded by the proletariat not only in their own interest, but in the interests of the whole country, and should be supported by the revolutionary peasantry as well as the revolutionary army. [115]
At the political level this meant that a new government was needed that would end the compromises of the Provisional government in all its forms. As Leonard Schapiro put it, ‘Any objective and honest student of 1917 in Russia cannot fail to observe the fact that by September or October the majority of the articulate portions of the Russian population had rejected the leadership of the middle class parties, and stood for a soviet government composed of a coalition of all socialist parties represented in the soviets throughout the country’. [116] The question was now how would the left respond?
 
The Bolshevik response
It is commonplace to accuse the Bolsheviks of being opportunist in October 1917. But this charge fits ill with the evidence of intense debate between 1914 and 1917 on the nature of the crisis and its resolution within the party. If we are able to use hindsight to reformulate the argument that emerged with more sharpness, this does not alter the fact that the shift in ideas was far more impressive than that in any other group, left or right. The explanation for this, though hostile historians are loathe to admit it, is that the Bolshevik Party was both theoretically and politically more flexible than the rest of the left and had to travel less far in terms of its politics in 1917. Thus despite the debates within the Bolshevik Party the effect of the radicalisation in 1917 was to remake the party and drive it towards revolution, a quite different impact from that which it had on the rest of the left.
The starting point for Lenin, Trotsky, Bukharin and others was that they were living in a new and increasingly integrated world of imperialism in which the capacity for autonomous development was limited by the growing power of advanced capitalist states. These were prepared to supplement economic competition with military competition and, if necessary, war. This created two tendencies which worked to the advantage of socialism. One was a tendency to ever greater state control, what Bukharin called state capitalism, in which the ever growing units of private capital intermeshed with units of state capital and so made democratic socialist control a more realistic possibility. The second was the way the ever growing integration made it possible for workers in a state like Russia to be able to inaugurate what was a process of more general revolution – part of the basis of what Trotsky called permanent revolution. War accentuated these tendencies further. But the daily bloodshed on the Western and Eastern fronts as well as in the ‘sideshows’ also exemplified that the choice could be one between ‘socialism and barbarism’. Even if the war were brought quickly to a close, internal and external conflicts no less barbaric would emerge.
Within Russia the specific crisis had created the most militant working class in the world alongside a peasantry and army whose revolt was also growing by the day. It had also created democratic structures of committees and soviets the like of which the world had not seen before. Within these the Bolsheviks had been pushed to the fore:
We are on the threshold of a world proletarian revolution. And since of all the proletarian internationalists in all countries only we Russian Bolsheviks enjoy a measure of freedom – we have a legal party and a score or so of papers, we have the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies of both capitals on our side, and we have the support of the majority of the people in a time of revolution – to us the saying, ‘To whom much has been given, of him much shall be required,’ in all justice can and must be applied.
Not to take this chance risked enormous dangers. The unprecedented scale and speed with which the crisis was still developing meant that either the revolution would succeed or the Tsarist empire would collapse in on itself or be held together by a second Kornilov revolt which would not only destroy the Bolsheviks but carry away the other parties of soviet democracy and its very institutions with them. ‘History will not forgive us if we do not assume power now’; ‘It is impossible to stand still in history in general, and in wartime in particular. We must either advance or retreat,’ Lenin kept insisting:
The complete disruption of Russia’s economic life has now reached a point where catastrophe is unavoidable, a catastrophe of such appalling dimensions that a number of essential industries will be brought to a standstill, the farmer will be prevented from conducting farming on the necessary scale, and the railway traffic will be interrupted with a consequent stoppage of grain deliveries to the industrial population and the cities involving millions of people. What is more, the breakdown has already started, and has affected various industries. [117]
These positions were not arrived at automatically. They involved debates that were if anything sharper than those in other left parties. In April the Bolshevik Party was divided, again in July, again in September-October over the issue of taking power and then again and again after October. These debates continued into the 1920s until they were finally crushed by emerging Stalinism. Far from Lenin dominating a monolith as both Stalinist and right wing historical writing in the West suggests, the party in 1917 was suffused with debate. Indeed we can stand the normal argument on its head and say that it was just because the party had both a focus on the popular movement and a vigorous tradition of sharp and serious debates that it was able to generate the clear positions that allowed it to function as well as it did. The contrast with its competitors could not be clearer.
 
The political failure of the SRs and the Mensheviks
It is possible to have an argument with the Bolshevik analysis but what is striking is the failure of both SR and Menshevik theorists to advance a counter-argument of any depth. Instead they remained stuck in an argument that had not advanced beyond the pre-war days. Both the main groups of SRs and the Mensheviks still operated with the more or less coherent idea that the revolution had to be a bourgeois one. [118] Yet by now they were also arguing that it was no longer possible to work with the bourgeoisie which had opposed the revolution and was looking to civil war. Equally, however, they rejected the idea of a socialist coalition which would include the Bolsheviks since this would alienate the bourgeoisie and risk throwing such a coalition government into the hands of the ‘extremists’. Instead they tried to occupy the middle ground supporting a coalition with the right socialists (with or without Kerensky). This produced a position which was theoretically and politically unworkable and this was clear both to the right and the left, and often to the SR and Menshevik leaderships themselves. One interpretation of this is that the Menshevik and SR leaders were afraid of taking power themselves. Lande later wrote that ‘lacking confidence in their own ability to govern, they found the theory of the bourgeois character of the Russian Revolution a reassuring excuse’. [119] But this is too easy. Harding is much nearer the mark when he argues that the problem was not courage but politics and though his comment applies specifically to the Mensheviks it can be extended to the centre of the Socialist Revolutionaries:
None of the prominent theorists of Menshevism attempted to keep pace with, or offer substantial criticism of, the theoretical premisses which Bukharin and Lenin elaborated in the period 1914 to 1917. The Mensheviks remained rooted in the synthesis of 1905 (economic analysis – comparatively low development of Russian capitalism, derivative political practice – the realisation of the democratic revolution). In 1917 they bitterly criticised Lenin’s proposals for an advance to socialist practice but made little or no attempt to confront the theoretical basis from which this was derived. It was they who bucked the argument. [120]
It was Lenin who in 1917 ‘cut the knot’, as Fedor Dan put it. The Menshevik theorists Dan, Martov, etc., failing to cut the knot themselves, floundered between the idea of ‘bourgeois revolution’ and something beyond it; ‘Dan did not appeal to the traditional conception in its pristine purity. Too many holes had been punched in it by the Mensheviks’ own amendments, adjustments, and explanations of 1905 and 1917’. [121] Unable to disentangle themselves in any coherent way from the idea of a ‘bourgeois revolution’ they continued to wriggle on the hook they had created for themselves.
From the right the Cadets hammered away at this inconsistency. By now the party had adopted what Rosenberg calls ‘a fully fledged civil war mentality’ and its leaders were anxious to draw lines. [122] Miliukov insisted that if the left genuinely believed that the revolution was bourgeois and could not go beyond a bourgeois stage then they had to follow the consequences and accept what Sukhanov had argued for after February, namely that they should allow the bourgeoisie ‘to stand at the head of that revolution and carry out their bourgeois affairs’. They argued that a bourgeois revolution without the bourgeoisie, over the opposition of the bourgeoisie, on the backs of a socialist coalition, was simply ‘unfeasible’ and the mess the attempt achieved vindicated this view. [123] In the Council of the Republic Nabokov and other Cadets made the same argument immediately insisting that the key issue was order and the fight against Bolshevism. As Nabokov saw it, ‘Our “leftist friends” were incorrigible, and...all our efforts to reach agreement and support for authority in its fight with anarchy and rebellion had almost gone to waste.’ Speaking to Dan and the Mensheviks, Nabokov and the Cadets argued that ‘your present attitude is again the old ambiguous, uncertain, “in so far as” kind of confidence which is no help whatever to the government and does not facilitate its task’. [124]
From the right of the Socialist Revolutionaries, Kerensky and the group around him made the same challenge to the centre of his party and the Mensheviks:
The Bolsheviks, Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries ... are for everything that causes anarchy, refuses to defend the country, or is against unity. Their front is one, and the devastation of Russia moves at a gigantic rate. And the other part of the democracy – the one that sits in session at the Alexandrovsky Theatre – its front united, and what does it intend to do? Does it seriously imagine that it is possible to support the Provisional government...and to continue to seek compromises with ... those who sow discord and hostility throughout the Republic, who repudiate at bottom what it asserts ...
Postresov, who led the right wing of Menshevism, denounced the refusal of a coalition with the bourgeoisie, saying this ‘is worse than Bolshevism. This is absurdity’. [125]
But how could you have a coalition with a bourgeoisie defending its class interests, wishing to see the popular movement suppressed and toying with counter-revolutionary generals? On what terms should support be given to a succession of ‘irresponsible’ governments which had failed to satisfy the popular agenda? Yet the revolution had to be ‘bourgeois democratic’. This produced a series of bizarre theoretical twists. The left had shifted since February from the position of allowing a bourgeois government to carry out bourgeois tasks; to participation of socialists in a bourgeois government to carry out bourgeois tasks; to opposition to a government of the bourgeoisie in favour of a socialist government which would limit itself to bourgeois democratic tasks. To support this it was now argued in the Menshevik Party that the bourgeoisie had failed so the initiative was passing over to a socialist led revolutionary democracy which could carry out the bourgeois revolution with the support of the ‘revolutionary’ petty bourgeoisie. This bizarre idea owed more to a desperate analogy with the French Revolution than a credible assessment of the situation in Russia in 1917 which, for all its weaknesses, one of the biggest industrial powers in the world. [126]
The problem was that the situation had changed but the analysis had not, so that, as Galili argues, whereas between February and July 1917 Menshevik ideas ‘made for several viable alternatives’ the period after July ‘was one of mounting hopelessness for the Mensheviks’. [127] The theoretical twists were complimented by political ones. By late September both the SR and Menshevik parties were formally supporting a ‘democratic coalition’, excluding Cadets, only to find that when Kerensky managed to form the third coalition (in negotiation with leading figures in these parties) it included Cadets and Mensheviks and SRs. Chernov, the most prominent centre SR now under pressure from the left, was outraged when the central committee of the party agreed to endorse the coalition. Amongst the Menshevik leadership an agonised debate took place as they too tried to distance themselves from what the Internationalists called their ‘non-representatives’ in the government while not going so far as to break all connection with it.
As the agonising continued Kerensky kept up the attack from the right in the Council of the Republic:
I believe (Kerensky addressed the Internationalists) that everyone at the present time must decide whether he is on the side of the republic, freedom and democracy, or against these. (Prolonged applause on all benches, with the exception of the Internationalists) And if there are people who believe that the truth is on the other side, then they must manfully take their place in those ranks, and not behave themselves as they do now. (Storm of applause from the right and centre; noise from the left)
’Noise from the left’ but no answer since Kerensky’s taunts again exposed from one side of the polarisation the indecision that the Bolsheviks exposed from the other. In turn Dan, one of the key leaders of the Mensheviks, argued that the Bolsheviks had ‘openly taken advantage of the real dissatisfaction among the broad masses whose needs have not been met’ because of the obstruction ‘by classes whose representatives are sitting on the right side’ but he then returned to the plaintive cry that the government should deliver a solution on peace (while being forced to recognise that the minister of foreign affairs ‘did not say a single word about raising the question of peace negotiations at the Allied Conference’) and land.
 
The collapse of SR and Menshevik support
With these political problems and inconsistencies it is not surprising to find that while Bolshevik support grew rapidly, support for the SRs and Mensheviks flooded away in the summer and autumn of 1917. The pattern of urban elections shows the Bolsheviks were a small minority but a growing one in provincial Russia throughout 1917. In the larger urban centres, however, they were a major presence. Nationally everyone recognised that their performance in Petrograd and Moscow was the litmus test. Both cities had two elections to their city dumas in 1917 and although turnout fell sharply in the second elections large numbers still voted. Rosenberg, the Western historian who has studied these elections most closely, suggests that absenteeism was as much caused by frustration with the lack of progress as apolitical apathy.



Table 2: PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF VOTE IN PETROGRAD AND MOSCOW
DUMA AND CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS [128]




 


Petrograd
27–29 May


Petrograd
20 August


Petrograd
November


Moscow
25 June


Moscow
24 September


Moscow
November




Cadet


21.9


20.9


26.2


18.0


26.6


34.5




Minor non-socialist


  1.3


  1.4


  6.9


  0.2


  2.8


—




Socialist bloc (mainly SR)
Socialist Revolutionaries


44.2
  7.4


 
37.4


 
16.1


 
56.2


 
14.4


  8.1
  4.6




Minor socialist


  1.4


  2.6


  2.2


  1.5


  1.2


—




Mensheviks


  3.4


  4.3


  3.1


12.6


  4.1


  2.8




Bolsheviks


20.4


33.4


45.0


11.5


50.9


47.9




Other


—


—


—


—


—


  2.0




TOTAL VOTERS


784,910


549,350


942,333


640,142


379,639


764,763



In Petrograd the second election took place on 20 August. It shows the recovery in Bolshevik strength after July before the Kornilov coup had occurred (indeed the likely result may have added to the case for action from the right). Table 2 clearly demonstrates the swing to the Bolsheviks away from, especially, the Mensheviks in Petrograd but also to some extent the Socialist Revolutionaries. Analysing the results the journal of the Union of Towns commented that:
The most striking fact of the elections is the colossal strengthening of the Bolsheviks. The mood in the social democratic masses of Petrograd is going to the left. In this connection the Petrograd elections only confirm those facts, already known to us earlier; the ousting of the Mensheviks by the Bolsheviks in the factory committees, in the district party organisations, the conquest of the trade unions by the Bolsheviks, the victories of Bolshevik-Internationalist resolutions [i.e. Bolshevik and left wing Menshevik] over Menshevik ones in the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ deputies. [129]
Coming a month later the Moscow urban elections demonstrated the further radicalism produced by the Kornilov coup and the intensifying crisis. On the one hand, the Cadets’ relative position was strengthened as their absolute vote barely diminished. But on the left the Menshevik vote slumped relatively and fell absolutely from 81,000 to 16,000 – a fall of 80 percent. The Socialist Revolutionary vote collapsed even more spectacularly from 360,000 to 55,000 – an absolute fall of almost 85 percent. The Bolshevik vote by contrast rose from 12 to 51 percent and absolutely from 184,000 to 194,000. By continuing the analysis beyond October to include the results for the Constituent Assembly elections held in the November (based on a massive turnout) this basic pattern can be confirmed.
In the countryside too support was dissolving rapidly for the SRs, ‘while local militants in the uezd and guberniia peasant committees and soviets were still inclined to stick to the party line, the patience of the peasants themselves was running out and direct action coming to the fore ... The chiefs were allowing themselves to be transformed into the main prop of authority at the local level’. [130] Viewed in these terms the Constituent Assembly results were no fluke in being an overwhelming left vote with the Bolsheviks gaining 25 percent and a clear victory in the industrial areas and key fronts in the army – a result all the more impressive if the balance between the right SR and left SR vote is properly understood as we will try to show in a moment.



Table 3: PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF DELEGATES
AT THE FIRST THREE CONGRESSES OF SOVIETS
BY PARTY AND PARTY TENDENCY [131]




CONGRESS


BOLSHEVIK


SOCIALIST REVOLUTIONARY


MENSHEVIK


OTHER


NON-PARTY




 


Left SR


Maximalist
SR


Centre right
SR


Menshevik
Internationalist


Centre right
Menshevik


 




FIRST
3 June


13


—


—


34.5


4   


33   


8.5


  6




SECOND
25 October


52


15


—


13   


7   


  7   


1.4


  4




THIRD
10 January 1918


53


21


1.7


  3.2


2.1


  2.1


1.2


15



Thus the better known swing away from the SRs and Mensheviks in the soviets and factory committees was a reflection of a much wider trend clearly apparent in the local government elections in the two biggest cities. Since a discussion of the trend in the committees and soviets can easily be found elsewhere we will here simply draw attention to Table 3 which shows the changing position in the first three All-Russian Congresses of Soviets
Once again the swing to the Bolsheviks is evident. Secondly, the weakening appeal of both the SRs and the Mensheviks is clearly apparent reflecting what Read terms ‘their refusal to go along with their constituents’. [132] Thirdly, we can see that within these parties the centre right weakened, producing a much more even balance with the left in the delegates of the Mensheviks and SRs at the Second Congress. The left SRs formed a separate party after the Second Congress, ensuring their domination of SR support at the Third Congress. Behind these figures lay a complex process of division and weakening in both the SRs and the Mensheviks. If, as we have argued, the revolutionary upsurge remade the Bolshevik Party and pushed it towards revolution, its impact on the SRs and Mensheviks was the opposite – parts of the parties began to split and move towards counter-revolution while the mainstream equivocated before drifting into opposition.
 
The internal divisions and weakening of the SRs
As we have seen, the Socialist Revolutionaries were the biggest party on the left. Their initial success was based on the combination of an appeal to the towns with socialist demands and an appeal to the peasants based on support for their right to have the land. In the spring of 1917 this enabled the SRs to dwarf other parties with a membership of at least half a million and possibly many more, grouped in 60 province organisations as well as organisations in the army and fleet. By the summer membership may even have gone as high as a million as whole villages and army units joined up.
But the Socialist Revolutionaries were always loosely organised and disparate, divided by the war and then split wide apart in 1917 itself. Although to some extent an oversimplification, three tendencies resulted – a right, centre and left. The right was led by Kerensky, Breshkovskaya and Savinikov grouping politically around the paper Volia naroda. The centre, until the summer the dominant force, was led by Victor Chernov. But from the spring a left Socialist Revolutionary group developed, grouped around the Novy put and Znamya truda journals and led by Spiridonova, Natanson and Kamkov. The growing isolation of the right within the party was reflected in the way in June Kerensky was excluded from the central committee and, after the failure of the Kornilov coup, Savinikov was expelled. From the other side Chernov, removed from his position as minister of agriculture, in part as a concession to property owners, also felt free to attack the Provisional government and the right even more in September 1917.
But the main beneficiaries of this disillusion were not so much the centre as the left Socialist Revolutionaries. In September 1917 they won control of the Petrograd committee of the party and as popular support haemorrhaged the left looked set to gain control of the party as a whole in the autumn. What the left SRs lacked, however, was control of the party apparatus and when October came Chernov and the centre effectively sunk their differences with the right using their control of the party to oppose the taking of power and drive out the left SRs who, though they could not command the leading organs, clearly had a mass of support in the base of the party. When the left SRs decided to stay in the Second Congress of Soviets, the central committee of the party expelled the 79 who remained. Then on 11 November the Extraordinary Congress of Peasant Soviets met in Petrograd with some 195 left SR delegates against around 65 right and centre SRs. Even if there are doubts about particular mandates this shows the massive swing that had taken place.
This Congress too voted to support the revolution and the left SRs formed a party of their own on 24 November, joining the Bolsheviks to create a revolutionary coalition. When the full Second Congress of Peasant Deputies met on 26 November with roughly 350 Left SR delegates against some 300 centre and Right SRs (and around 90 Bolsheviks) Spiridonova, the leader of the Left SRs, defeated Chernov to be elected chair. He immediately took the Right and centre SRs out of the Congress to try to create a parallel body. Far from embodying a superior claim to ‘democracy’, the mainstream leadership of the SRs were only able to act as they did by manipulating their control of the party.
The elections for the Constituent Assembly merely enabled them to take this manipulation a step further. Although historians hostile to the revolution dwell on the fact that the SRs were the largest party, they neglect the absence of evidence that the position espoused by its leadership had real support beyond the top echelons. The SR electoral list had been drawn up before the full impact of the polarisation to the left outside and within the party. The list therefore gave an enormous preponderance to the Right and the centre to such an extent that when some 420 SRs were elected only around 40 of them were from the Left. As the analysis above should make clear, this in no sense represented the true balances of forces during the last days in which the SR party was united. But the SR leadership had no qualms about seizing this further opportunity to weaken the revolutionary front in favour of its failed policy of compromise.
When the Constituent Assembly was so casually disbanded its obvious lack of mass support exposed the SRs claim to have a mass popular base to legitimate their obstruction of the new government. The Constituent Assembly, with effective SR dominance, in its limited life refused to endorse the government’s policy on land, even though this was to all intents the historic policy of the SRs. This demonstrates the impasse to which the party had come and how Chernov and other centre left leaders had allowed it to be marginalised in their support of the chimera of some wider class compromise in 1917.
 
The internal divisions and weakening of the Mensheviks
Similar processes of division could be found within the smaller Menshevik Party in the summer and autumn. Figures of party membership remain uncertain partly because of the chaotic state of party organisations in 1917 and partly because in the peripheral areas Menshevik and Bolshevik groups sometimes remained united during 1917, occasionally splitting only after October. Miller suggests that a realistic evaluation of the comparative dynamics of Bolshevik and Menshevik membership shows the Bolsheviks with some 10,000 members in February rising to 40,000 by the time of their April conference and around 200,000 in the summer. By October he accepts the traditional figure of some 350,000 members. In comparison the Mensheviks grew much faster early on – to some 100,000 in April. A rough equality was reached in August with the Mensheviks having around 200,000 members but then in the remaining months they failed to grow any more. Their relative weakness was also reflected in their heavy dependence for members on areas like the Caucuses (around 50,000 members in Georgia alone) whereas the Bolsheviks dominated the industrial heartlands of Russia. The Mensheviks also had a weaker proportional working class base and drew fewer workers into positions of leadership. Whereas at the summer 1917 conference of the Bolshevik Party some 40 percent of delegates were workers, in the Menshevik conference the figure was closer to 20 percent. This was partly related to the party’s failure to focus to the same extent as the Bolsheviks, or in some instances the SRs, on working class issues. Many years ago, for example, Ward pointed out that coverage of the factory committee movement was better in the SR paper, Delo naroda, than Menshevik papers and the main Menshevik paper in Petrograd did not even discuss the May–June Factory Committee Conference in the city. [133]
The Mensheviks, like the SRs, had three main tendencies. On the right, led by Postresov, were those who had supported the war before and after February – the so called Defencists. These were few in number – at the Menshevik conference in August they had the support of only around 5 percent of delegates – but they were a powerful influence on those who participated in the Provisional government and those who supported participation. By August around 55 percent of members supported the centre – the so called Revolutionary Defencists, led by Mikhail Liber and Fedor Dan. Around 30 percent supported the party’s left wing (with another 10 percent supporting a United Social Democratic-Internationalist strand) amongst whom Martov was the leading figure although his personal influence in the party at large was much wider. Moreover it was in the ‘Bolshevik belt’ (as Larin described it in September 1917) of industrial Russia that the Menshevik Internationalist wing was the stronger part of the party reflecting the way that the base of the party was being pulled to the left. [134]
The Menshevik leadership’s difficulties presented an obvious problem. If they had the correct analysis why was the working class turning away from them? Their answer was crassly reductionist. Real class conscious workers, they argued, supported their more moderate position. Therefore those who did not support them could not be class conscious workers but were instead socially less stable groups including a mass of soldiers. Indeed Postresov had earlier prefigured this argument claiming that truly class conscious workers would have supported the war effort and working class opposition to the war was therefore a manifestation of its social dilution. Later Martov, who saw Postresov’s view as absurd, found himself caught up in the same reductionist logic on an even larger scale arguing that the post-war wave of radicalism across the Western world – ‘world Bolshevism’ was a reflection of a war-induced dilution of the Western working class including the influx of women untrained in the class struggle. [135]
The trouble was that even their own members felt this pressure in October. In Petrograd on 24 October, as the Mensheviks in Pre-Parliament had some last minute success in forcing it into a more oppositional stance to the Provisional government, they could not even call demonstrations to support their pressure on Kerensky least the demonstrators reflected Bolshevik ideas. [136]
 
The issue of power
When the third coalition government was announced on 25 September the Petrograd Soviet immediately passed a motion which read:
We, the workers and garrison of Petrograd will give no support whatsoever to a government of bourgeois omnipotence and counter-revolutionary coercion. We express our complete assurance that the news of the new government will meet with one answer alone from all the revolutionary democracy, ‘Resign!’ And, basing our actions on this unified voice of true democracy, the All- Russian Congress of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, will create a true revolutionary power. [137]
The prediction was correct. When the Second Congress convened, there were some 670 delegates from 400 soviets, including 300 Bolsheviks, some 200 SRs of whom around half were Left SRs and 33 Menshevik Internationalists. As the delegates began to convene they were asked their views on the question of power. Table 4 sets out the results.



Table 4: VIEWS OF THE DELEGATES TO THE SECOND CONGRESS
OF SOVIETS ON GOVERNMENT [138]




For ‘All power to the soviets’


 


505




For ‘All power to democracy’


  86




For a democratic coalition without Cadets


  21




For a democratic coalition with the Cadets


  58



Thus only 79 delegates were prepared to consider a coalition with the bourgeoisie and only 58 with the only serious bourgeois party.
It can be argued, therefore, that had the Bolsheviks not played the role they did in October in pushing for a decisive response to what was seen as the continuing hesitations of the Provisional government, there would still have been a push for power from below. On the Military Revolutionary Committee, for example, although the Bolsheviks played a leading role they had only 53 out of some 80 members and the remaining 27 were by no means less militant.
In fact, as we know with hindsight, the seizure of power in Petrograd on 24–25 October was easy because the Provisional government no longer had support. ‘When a power was not defended by those who organised it – was it needed?’ asked Malyantovich, the last minister of justice in the Provisional government. [139] The Second Congress of Soviets met on 25 October, after revolutionary workers, troops and Red Guards had seized the key centres of power in Petrograd. But with the outcome still uncertain, the Socialist Revolutionary and Menshevik leaderships now had to cease equivocating and respond. Dan, for the Mensheviks, predictably still proposed an homogenous democratic coalition. Martov went further, calling for a socialist coalition and this call generated support from both the Left SRs and the Bolsheviks and was approved unanimously. At this point the representatives of the main Menshevik groups turned on the Congress and the new leadership denouncing them and walking out with the right SRs and Bundists, leaving Martov plaintively echoing his call for unity with those who had left. The situation was now different. ‘We all accepted Martov’s proposal to discuss peaceful ways of solving the crisis,’ said Lunarcharsky, ‘… but a systematic attack was launched at us ... Without hearing us out, without even discussing their own proposals, they immediately tried to separate themselves from us ... to isolate us’. [140] Having had the ground pulled from under him by his own comrades, Martov was then forced to choose between the Congress and his party. Fatally he abandoned the Congress leaving with most of the rest of the Menshevik Internationalists to what Trotsky famously called ‘the dustbin of history’.
 
The popular movement
The devaluation of the political choices made in 1917 extends in another direction, as we suggested earlier. This is the direction of the political choice made by the workers. In some analyses it is as if revolutionary ideas float above the working class – in the Bolshevik Party – until workers, driven by the pressure of events, converged with the Bolsheviks in October. Any serious account of radicalisation has to give prominence to the real forces affecting the development of the popular movement. But there is an additional political dimension to radicalisation that also needs to be incorporated but rarely has been. Politics is there in the way in which the individuals who made up the popular movement made choices between alternatives, formed in the context of political debates, however poorly or inarticulately they were formulated. Yet in some accounts it is almost as if workers, faced with growing pressure, were the subject of blind forces which drove them towards the Bolshevik Party in the autumn of 1917.
Suny unwittingly expresses this view when he writes that ‘by early fall 1917 a coincidence of lower class aspiration and the Bolshevik programme resulted in elected Leninist majorities in the soviets of both Petrograd and Moscow and the strategic support of soldiers on the Northern and Western fronts.’ Read goes further still arguing that ‘the popular agenda – a better deal for workers, land redistribution, protection from economic crisis, greater direct democracy and a just end to the war – remained a relatively stable programme in search of implementation’ and that the workers only turned to the Bolsheviks because neither the SRs or the Mensheviks would carry out this programme, concluding that ‘the popular movement did not turn towards Bolshevism because they became converts to its basic philosophy’. [141]
But even were this completely true, workers’ actions would still involve a double political choice. There was the choice of the established parties that we have already noted. There was the political judgement that workers then made (and which they had not made earlier) that these parties were no longer to be trusted and that the Bolsheviks were a better guarantee of their aspirations would be realised. Ignoring this political element creates an account that converges with that offered by Menshevik theorists in the autumn and winter of 1917. According to this the ‘coincidence’ of interest between the popular movement and the Bolsheviks was based on no more than a temporary conjuncture. The Bolsheviks should have understood this and rejected power. For their part the ‘socialist’ opposition to taking power in October was justified in opposing it since a gap was bound to open up as the popular movement fell away. At this point the Bolsheviks’ opponents could say, ‘We told you so,’ and reap the benefit of their stand. Even worse, the devaluation of politics lends support to those like Pipes, Figes and many modern historians in Russia who, in their different ways, see the social movement as a mob. Whether intentionally or not these historians therefore allow themselves to play a trick which devalues the need to explore and understand the nature of political commitment in 1917, implicitly legitimises the anti-Bolshevik position on the left in 1917 and then removes the need to explore how the actions of the anti-Bolshevik parties during and after October might themselves have contributed to the problems of trying to stabilise the revolution.
The difficulty with their argument is threefold. The first problem is what the Bolsheviks were doing during 1917. Sukhanov in an oft quoted passage writes that they were ‘at the factory benches and in the barracks every blessed day. For the masses, they had became their own people, because they were always there.’ Did this mean that they were standing there like some mute magnetic pole of attraction drawing inert iron filings towards them? Of course this was not the case. They were there winning and losing arguments, selling or failing to sell their newspapers, successfully or unsuccessfully collecting money, carrying or failing to convince the people over political issues. And their opponents, less often present, if Sukhanov is correct, were doing exactly the same when they were there. Secondly, to the extent that workers made a pro-revolutionary choice we can argue that this was a better political choice than that made by their leaders who were abandoning them. The argument that the revolution had to go forward made sense in terms of the experience that workers were having. It made sense in terms of what at other times might disparagingly be called the ‘low politics’ of their everyday lives. Conventional politics, of course, is high politics, conducted from afar with human beings as its subjects. In 1917, however, high politics became ‘low politics’ just because the political process could no longer be contained in palaces, chancelleries and parliaments. And finally, put in these terms, the onus is thrown back on those whose politics, at the crucial moment, led them to stand aside or oppose the popular movement. As in any social conflict, to stand aside at the crucial moment is perhaps to live to fight another day but it is also to weaken your side, perhaps fatally. [142]
 
Compounding the error
Accounts of the October Revolution too often end with Lenin standing in the Second Congress of Soviets late on the night of 25 October 1917. In fact the revolution was a process which began in Petrograd on 24–25 October but continued over several months as it spread across Russia. In the spring the problem of consolidating the revolution merged with the brief but spectacular advance of the German armies which forced the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Then a couple of months later it merged with the beginning of the civil war. Soviet accounts dealing with this as ‘the triumphal march’ of Soviet power made a nonsense of the complex problems that consolidating power entailed. Apart from the important issue of the continuing dynamic of the revolution from below, analysing the consolidation of the revolution also requires attention to the policies of the SRs and Mensheviks after the October events in Petrograd. Since the pattern of response was set in the first few days, we will conclude our discussion by setting out how these new divisions confirmed the choices made on 24–25 October.
Few historians have resisted the temptation to treat the emergency measures of the first months of Soviet power as the outcome of imminent tendencies in Bolshevism or opportunistic volte faces from earlier positions held. But it is here that what is traditionally seen as the historians’ question of ‘what happened next?’ becomes important. Much of the recent history of the revolution has been written in terms of the deeper structures which help to determine historical events. But this does not mean that the history of events can be ruled out completely and even less that ‘events’ are predetermined by structure. Things happen one after another as contexts and problems change and then a grasp of chronology and movement becomes crucial. This is even more so in a revolution because the speed of events accelerates. Bukharin put this well just before the October events:
In a time of revolution with its inevitable ebb and flow of the tide, when, like in the cinema, the situation, historical picture, faces, figures change quickly and events scarcely allow one to keep hold of oneself, it is completely natural that institutions, developing at the beginning of this violent historical tornado, repeatedly change their role and significance. [143]
The immediate consolidation of the revolution in Petrograd faced three explicitly counter-revolutionary challenges – the military opposition outside the city; a threat from officers inside the city and a strike of white collar employees designed to prevent the state apparatus being taken over. In addition, the Mensheviks and SRs who had left the Congress of Soviets then grouped with others opposed to the revolution (including Cadets) in a Committee for the Salvation of the Revolution and the Motherland. The left wing of this committee was close to the left in the soviets while the centre and right had contacts with those prepared to fight against the revolution. The problem was further complicated by the equivocation of the leadership of the railway workers’ union over whether it should support the revolution or not, with its inclination being to draw back from the most radical measures.
It needs to be stressed at this point that neither Lenin, nor Trotsky, nor the Bolsheviks as a whole wanted an all-Bolshevik government to emerge from the taking of power. Indeed tensions in the Bolshevik Party led some who feared isolation to temporarily resign from the party in early November. Why then did a coalition not emerge? Swain, following the tendency of recent historians to endorse the position taken by the SRs and the Mensheviks, has argued:
… that the successful campaign to discredit the third Coalition Government and overthrow it within the parliamentary atmosphere of the ‘Pre-Parliament’ did not result in the formation of a democratic coalition was the fault of the Bolshevik Party – Lenin ... succeeded in seizing power not from the bourgeoisie and the liberals, but from democracy, and its dominant voice, the SR party. [144]
In fact the Committee for the Salvation of the Revolution immediately reproduced all of the divisions about political power that had been apparent on 24 October and before. Should the opposition unite with bourgeois forces against the revolution? Should it be a ‘socialist opposition’ against both the Bolsheviks and the bourgeoisie and for what? Should it defend the Provisional government (and Kerensky?) or look for a new government that was neither Bolshevik nor from the old Provisional government?
While many on the left which grouped around the committee argued that by forcing the issue of power the Bolsheviks had opened the way for a later counter-revolution, Postresov argued that the seizure of power was the counter-revolution and therefore there could be no compromise with it. It had to be opposed by the socialist opposition uniting with the bourgeoisie (effectively to defend the bourgeois limits of the revolution). Martov, equivocated – seemingly far more concerned not to lose contact with the right wing of the Mensheviks than the Bolsheviks and the soviet. It is symptomatic of the political confusion in the committee that when on 29 October a group of officers and cadets staged an unsuccessful rising in Petrograd they did so under the flag of the committee and with the support of some of its SR and Menshevik members.
What crystallised these problems was the action of the railway workers’ union. The executive of the union (VIKZHEL) tried to push all sides back into talks (supporting its position with the threat of a railway strike) about a new coalition government which effectively meant negotiations between the Bolsheviks, the Left SRs and their representatives in the Second Congress of Soviets, the centre Menshevik and SR leadership and those forces grouped around the Committee for Salvation.
Despite Swain’s argument that the Bolsheviks were responsible for the failure of these talks the evidence points in the opposite direction, including that which he quotes in his account. When negotiations began the Menshevik and SR leaders immediately demanded a coalition which would exclude the Bolsheviks, despite the talks being aimed at an all-socialist coalition. On 28 October the union reported to its Moscow headquarters that ‘the Bolsheviks are making concessions ... the Committee for Salvation is irreconcilable; but we will exert pressure on it’. The next day Gendelman, who had led the SRs out of the Congress of Soviets, rejected the participation of the Bolsheviks in a coalition telling the Committee for Salvation that ‘even in the democratic camp there are moments when it is necessary to decide an agreement with weapons.’ No comment could have been more unfortunate for the right because that same day officers and cadets in Petrograd staged their insurrection under the flag of the committee. The railway union was therefore forced to condemn the right and those who toyed with them from the centre as ‘the madmen who at this moment ... do not want compromise. Instead of striving for a compromise, the right part of democracy ... put to the Bolsheviks the impossible demand of total capitulation, quite unconcerned for the consequences.’
Under pressure from the union and groups of workers the debate then moved to the possibility of a coalition which would include both right wing socialists and Bolsheviks but not Lenin and Trotsky, with Chernov, the SR leader, as prime minister. From the point of view of the centre right the attraction of this was that it might split the Bolsheviks and allow their influence to be diminished. Not surprisingly therefore the proposal provoked sharp differences within the Bolshevik leadership as their negotiators inclined to support it. But before anyone had a chance to respond part of the right wing of the SR’s and the right of the Mensheviks broke away arguing that there could be no compromise and that the revolution had to be opposed. While the Bolsheviks were debating the issue the central committee of the SRs also broke off leaving only a rump in which the Menshevik leaders were prominent. As their own side of the coalition dissolved, undercutting the whole basis of the negotiations, their hopes were briefly raised by the appearance of a split at the top of the Bolshevik Party as a leading group resigned for fear of the revolution being isolated if a compromise was not reached. Dan even boasted, ‘Thanks to our tactics, the Bolsheviks are already splitting’. [145]
Against this Lenin and Trotsky argued that any coalition had to recognise the shift in power that had occurred and allow the Bolsheviks a leading role. Power could no longer hang in the air or between competing institutions, it had to be based in the soviets, the Bolsheviks had to be a major part of any coalition and the presence of Lenin and Trotsky themselves was important not for personal reasons but as a reflection of agreement that something significant had changed. A coalition which dropped the leaders of the major party was a nonsense. ‘Nothing whatever can come of merely leaving a few Bolsheviks in a coalition government,’ said Trotsky; ‘We have taken power – and we must also bear the responsibilities’. [146]
The talks crumbled not because of an objection in principle to a socialist coalition on the part of the Bolshevik leadership but because the SRs and the Mensheviks were not prepared to negotiate a meaningful coalition and because, as they prevaricated, their own side was falling apart. In the short term this had two consequences. Those members of the Bolshevik leadership quickly returned, chastened, to the fold. Secondly, the process of break-up of the SR party was hastened with the Left SRs forming a new revolutionary coalition government with the Bolsheviks and against their former comrades. It was this revolutionary coalition that would take the revolution through its first months before it was split by entirely different issues in the spring of 1918.
Now isolated, the old SR leadership and the Mensheviks looked to the Constituent Assembly and beyond to establish a third force which they imagined would allow them to stand between the revolution and the bourgeoisie. In so doing they merely built on their past errors. Although it had not been apparent in October, it was increasingly clear that the basis of the Constituent Assembly and the soviets was a competing and not a complementary one. This is why the right now put so much emphasis on the Constituent Assembly. The Cadet Nabokov, for example, now argued on the eve of elections that he had not wanted, occurring at a time he had opposed, with an electorate he despised, that ‘it is necessary to hold the elections whenever there is the slightest possibility of doing so. The gravest responsibility towards the country will be insured by all who dare to cast doubt on the correctness of the elections of the Constituent Assembly on which the whole country is henceforth setting its hopes’. [147]
Although the swing to the Bolsheviks and Left SRs was continuing post-October it was clear that the united SR ticket was going to emerge as the major force in any assembly because of the huge peasant vote. But the SR leadership could only interpret this as a vote for stability if they ignored the split in the SR party and the further radicalisation of the peasantry. Beyond this the party complexion was to an extent irrelevant since the majority of delegates elected to the Constituent Assembly were clearly elected by a population voting for peace, for land redistribution, a transfer of power to the workers and, in many areas, self determination. The Constituent Assembly could only prevent this if it became the basis of yet another government that would rule over the people. As Bukharin had put it, in a revolution the film moves faster and institutions and parties change their role: the Constituent Assembly, once the symbol of revolutionary progress, was now the symbol of something else. But the ultimate fate of the revolution would now be decided by how a much bigger question was answered.
In the period 1917 to 1921 the Bolsheviks would undoubtedly make many mistakes but they would make them against a background of a revolutionary opportunity in the West that could have helped them but was missed. There, revolutionary crises were pushed to the brink but there was no Bolshevik Party to respond. The socialist equivalents of the SRs and the Mensheviks held out against revolution and assisted consciously or unconsciously in the process by which the crisis was diffused. In 1921 they could look proudly at their handiwork. The crisis had been successfully negotiated in the West, and in Russia, though victorious in the civil war, the Bolsheviks were weakened enormously, the working class destroyed and the remnants of the revolution isolated. But their success was an illusion. A year later in Italy Mussolini came to power, then in 1933 Hitler came to power in Germany. In both East and West there was a high price to pay for the failure of international revolution.
Already in the summer of 1917, before October, a writer in the Spartakus journal in Germany argued, ‘Here begins the fatal destiny of the Russian Revolution. The dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia is destined to suffer a desperate defeat compared to which the fate of the Paris Commune was child’s play – unless the international proletarian revolution gives it support in time.’ Whoever wrote this could not have foreseen that in Russia the defeat of the revolution would take the form of Stalin’s counter-revolution but he saw the essence of the problem. So too did Rosa Luxemburg. She did not fear to criticise what she thought were the mistakes the Bolsheviks might be making but she also saw where the blame would lie if they failed. Writing to Luise Kautsky from prison in 1917 she saw something else:
Are you happy about the Russians? Of course, they will not be able to maintain themselves in this witches’ sabbath, not because some statistics show economic development in Russia to be too backward as your clever husband has figured out, but because social democracy in the highly developed West consists of miserable and wretched cowards who will look quietly on and let the Russians bleed to death. [148]

Notes
1. Readers unfamiliar with the argument about the movement from below in both Russia and Europe can be recommended two excellent review articles, D. Howl, The Russian Revolution, International Socialism 62, Spring 1994; D. Gluckstein, Revolution and the Challenge of Labour, International Socialism 61, Winter 1993.
2. O. Figes, A People’s Tragedy. The Russian Revolution 1891–1924 (Cape 1996) is the latest attempt to rewrite the history of the revolution. The ideas criticised here permeate this discussion so that capitalism and the ruling class almost disappear from his account as social forces.
3. Not all right wing accounts view Tsarist Russia optimistically. Martin Malia argues that ‘it would have required a near miracle for Russia to have evolved organically and peacefully into a constitutional democracy had she been spared the shock of the First World War.’ But he then argues that the most likely scenario was a failed revolution producing a ‘national conservative regime’ which would have created an authoritarian regime (like Franco’s Spain) preferable to the totalitarianism which he believes did result from 1917. M. Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia 1917–1991 (Free Press 1994).
4. This relative weakness is confirmed by the work of Paul Gregory who has reconstructed Russian national income from the Tsarist data itself. Gregory has recently offered himself as a historian whose work lends encouragement to the view that market capitalism can transform the prospects of modern Russia. But his figures of long run growth per head show that Russia simply did not grow faster than advanced Western Europe and therefore could not have been on a convergence path. Nor does it help to extrapolate from Russia’s highest pre-1914 period of growth since on his own admission this was shorter than equivalent periods in other countries. P. Gregory, Russian National Income 1885–1913 (Cambridge University Press 1982).
5. C. Read, From Tsar to Soviets. The Russian People and their Revolution, 1917–1921 (UCL Press 1996), p. 34. Although we will later suggest some problems with Read’s account it is much to be preferred to Figes’ account. Unfortunately it has not received the same attention as Figes’ repudiation of the revolution.
6. The idea of patrimonialism is summed up in a sentence of Tsar Nicholas II: ‘I conceive of Russia as a landed estate of which the proprietor is the Tsar, the administrator is the nobility and the workers are the peasantry.’
7. Quoted in R. Pipes, Struve: Liberal on the Right, 1905–1944 (Harvard University Press 1980), p. 175.
8. G. Freeze, The Soslovie Paradigm and Russian Social History, American Historical Review, vol. 91, no. 1, 1986; L. Haimson, The Problem of Social Identities in Early 20th Century Russia, Slavic Review, vol. 47 (1988).
9. Thus the idea, argued in different ways by Perry Anderson, Tom Nairn and Arno Mayer (and going back to Joseph Schumpeter and beyond) that the aristocracy remained the dominant force in Europe in 1914 because it had contained and ‘feudalised’ the bourgeoisie can be stood on its head. The aristocracy remained a powerful force precisely because key sections of it had adapted to capitalism, becoming subject to ‘embourgeoisement’ where it mattered.
10. The best study is A.J. Reiber, Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Imperial Russia (Chapel Hill 1982).
11. Quoted in M. Ferro, Nicholas II The Last of the Tsars (Viking 1991), p. 200.
12. Quoted in R. Pipes, op. cit., p. 177.
13. K. Kautsky, The Driving Forces and Prospects of the Russian Revolution. This pamphlet was widely translated in Russia after 1905.
14. See P. Miliukov, Political Memoirs 1905–1917 (University of Michigan Press 1967), pp. 287–288, 308–309.
15. Quoted in R. Pipes, op. cit., pp. 73, 210–218.
16. R.H. Johnson, Tradition Versus Revolution. Russia and the Balkans in 1917 (Columbia University Press 1977), p. 172.
17. D. Geyer, Russian Imperialism. The Interaction of Domestic and Foreign Policy, 1860–1914 (Berg 1987), p. 255. Geyer points out that the failure to develop a specific theory of imperialism applied to Russia before 1917 leads to Russian expansion being seen as ‘a natural law of Russian history’. In its place he offers an approach largely in terms of the model of social imperialism developed by German historians like Wehler and Fischer: ‘internal tensions’ were ‘deflected’ outwards into imperial conquest and the fulfilment of ‘traditional desires’ in conflicts with ‘ancient enemies’ (p. 345–346). This approach is illuminating, but as in German historiography, can be misleading if it becomes the whole story since it underplays economic interests and fails to locate the more ‘modern’ capitalist drives behind expansion. See D. Blackbourn and G. Eley, The Peculiarities of German History: Bourgeois Society and Politics in Nineteenth Century Germany (Oxford University Press 1984).
18. ‘Imperialism’ is frequently confused with ‘colonialism’. The Marxist theory of imperialism was developed to explain the expansive clash of state power in the heartland of capitalism in 1914 not the scramble for Africa or anywhere else. For a brief review of Russia’s great power role see P. Struve, The Balkan War and Russia’s Task, The Russian Review, vol. 2, no. 2, May 1913, pp. 11–13. See also R. Pipes, op. cit., pp. 88–97, 180–186, 201–210, 216, 243.
19. N. Stone, The Eastern Front (Hodder & Stoughton 1975), p. 285.
20. Quoted in V.V. Shelokhaev (ed.), Politicheskaya istoriya Rossii v partiyakh i litsakh (Moscow 1993), pp. 101–102.
21. The best account remains N. Stone, op. cit..
22. Sir B. Pares, Russia (Penguin, 1941), pp. 88–89.
23. Quoted V.S. Daikin, The Leadership Crisis in Russia on the Eve of the February Revolution, Voprosy Istorii, no. 3, 1982, translated in Studies in Soviet History, vol. Xxiii, no. 1, Summer 1984.
24. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution. The Constitutional Democratic Party, 1917–1921 (Princeton University Press 1974), pp. 43–45.
25. Quoted V.V. Shelokhaev, op. cit., p. 295.
26. C. Read, op. cit., p. 44; Guchkov quoted in Shelokhaev, op. cit., p. 296.
27. Sometimes this was brought home personally to the politicians. As he was on the way to help resolve the crisis at the top the Cadet constitutionalist Nabokov recalled being stopped by a man in the street who told him, ‘Do not leave any Romanovs, we have no use for them.’ V.D. Medlin and S.L. Parsons (eds.), V.D. Nabokov and the Russian Provisional government, 1917 (Yale 1974), pp. 42–43.
28. B.I. Kolonitskii, Anti-bourgeois propaganda and anti-“Burzhui” consciousness in 1917, The Russian Review, vol. 53, April 1994, pp. 183–196.
29. ‘While the three of us – Nabokov, Miliukov and myself – were pondering how to enlist the promulgation of Grand Duke Mikhail’s abdication of the throne ... we were interrupted by telegrams about sailors executing admirals and officers in Sveaborg and Kronstadt.’ wrote Baron Nol’de. It is fortunate that two of the major insider memoirs of the formation of the Provisional government are translated in the same volume, V.D. Medlin and S.L. Parsons (eds.), op. cit.. Nabokov was the legal expert of the Cadets. The volume includes two memoirs by him, The Provisional government and The Bolshevik coup d’état, and a third by B.E. Nol’de, who was effectively his assistant, V.D. Nabokov in 1917. They will be referred to separately below. The quotation from Nol’de is on p. 16.
30. P. Miliukov, op. cit., p. 406. Miliukov’s memoirs contain his own thoughts on the problem of the legitimacy of the Provisional government.
31. When L’vov mentioned that he had a mass of telegrams of support for the Provisional government Steklov replied ‘We could show you right now far more, ten times as many, telegrams endorsed by hundreds and thousands of organised citizens, which demand that we take power into our own hands.’ V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government, op. cit., p. 125.
32. The fourth Duma elected in 1912 included in its 436 members 150 anti-Semitic far right members, 130 Octobrists and their allies, 55 Cadets, a mere 20 representatives of the national minorities, and some 13 social democrats and 9 Trudoviks representing the mass of peasants and workers.
33. P. Miliukov, op. cit., p.391.
34. V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government, op. cit., pp.49–53.
35. B.E. Nol’de, op. cit., p. 20.
36. B.E. Nol’de, op. cit., p. 20. See V.D. Nabokov’s almost identical formulation, The Provisional government, op. cit., p. 53. To maintain this idea of a legitimate transfer of power Nabokov insisted from the start that the essence of February had not been a ‘revolution’ but a ‘coup d’état’ since a coup preserves the basis of state power while a revolution might be considered to challenge it.
37. Almost immediately L’vov as head of the Provisional government was forced beyond them when he was pressured into dismissing the heads of the provincial governments of Russia which seemed to confirm that in a constitutional sense February was a revolution and not a coup. Worse from the constitutional perspective on 7 March the Tsar who until then had been technically free was arrested and confined to his Tsarkoe Tselo palace outside Petrograd – a decision which Nabokov believed confirmed the image of a Tsar being ‘dethroned’ rather than freely ‘abdicating’.
38. R. Abraham, Alexander Kerensky. The First Love of the Revolution (Sidgwick & Jackson 1987), pp. 123–124.
39. R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 146.
40. V.V. Shelokhaev, op. cit., p. 105, gives the figure of over 100; W. Rosenberg’s study of urban council elections in 1917 found 68 different organisations standing including 9 religious groups, 24 minor non-socialist groups and 20 nationalist parties; W. Rosenberg, The Russian Municipal Duma Elections of 1917: a Preliminary Computation of the Returns, Soviet Studies, vol. xxi (1969), pp. 131–163.
41. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., pp. 90, 190.
42. By comparison the Trade Industrialists ran slates in 35 percent of towns; the Union of House Owners in half of towns. On the left the Bolsheviks could only manage independent slates in 27 percent of towns though they stood in some others as part of a socialist bloc.
43. O. Radkey, The Elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly of 1917 (Cambridge, Massachusetts 1950), pp. 16–21. This is the main source but some minor inaccuracies probably exist because a complete set of official results was never published.
44. The potential national problem of the Cadets was already apparent in 1906 in the first Duma elections when they got 39 percent of the urban vote but only 11 percent in landlord assemblies and 4 percent of the peasant vote. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 27.
45. Local elections took place quickly partly because the Provisional government needed a responsible administrative base and partly because it hoped that the framework of local politics could be conditioned by national control, and therefore if local circumstances put radicals in power they would be constrained by the wider national framework. Russia in 1917 therefore presented the paradox of a political society where at the national level the argument was that elections had to be postponed while at the local municipal level perfectly adequate, if not on occasion model, electoral procedures were in place which built on the Municipal Electoral Statue of 15 April 1917.
46. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., pp. 161,164, 166, 188.
47. W. Rosenberg The Russian Municipal Duma Elections of 1917, op. cit.
48. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p.55, 188.
49. R.P. Browder and A. Kerensky (eds.), The Russian Provisional government of 1917 (Stanford University Press 1961), p. 135.
50. R. Abraham, op. cit., pp. 148–149.
51. L. Kochan, Cadet Policy in 1917 and the Constituent Assembly, Slavonic & East European Review, vol. xiv (1967), pp. 183–192.
52. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 90, 190.
53. M. Philips Price, In the First All-Russian Congress of Soviets, in M. Jones (ed.), Storming the Heavens: Voices of October (Zwan 1987), p. 28; A. Kerensky, The Provisional government 1917, Slavonic Review, 1930, p. 2.
54. L. Erwin Heenan, Russian Democracy’s Fatal Blunder: The Summer Offensive of 1917 (Praeger, 1987), is the major attempt to argue this. Her account does contain some useful information but on the central issue she shows a remarkable naivety over the dynamics and constraints which determine the actions of a great power.
55. R.A. Wade, The Russian Search For Peace, February–October 1917 (Stanford 1969), pp. 143–147.
56. A. Kerensky, op. cit.
57. Quoted R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 341. Russia’s declining influence during the war is well brought out by Heenan even though she does do not appear to understand the full implications of this argument. See L.E. Heenan, pp. 3–9.
58. V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government op. cit., p. 106.
59. Quoted in G. Katkov, Russia 1917: The Kornilov Affair. Kerensky and the Break-Up of the Russian Army (Longman, 1980), p. 14.
60. R. Abraham, op. cit., pp. 192–193.
61. V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government, op. cit., p. 87.
62. V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government, op. cit., p. 86.
63. The Times, 5 January 1918.
64. A. Kerensky, op. cit., p. 11.
65. Quoted H. Pichter, Witnesses of the Russian Revolution (Murray 1994), pp. 82–83.
66. A. Kerensky, op. cit., p. 9.
67. R.A. Wade, op. cit., pp. 145–146.
68. See R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 278; R.A. Wade, op. cit., pp. 146–147, on Tereshchenko’s negative role; Miliukov approvingly said of Tereshchenko that he ‘quietly pursued my very policy and successfully deceived the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies’, P. Miliukov, op. cit., p. 424.
69. Kerensky did not accept the idea of annexations in the west but he had a strong sense of Russia having a role as a great power as well as its civilising mission in the east. See R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 12, 99, 174, 237.
70. C. Read, op. cit., p. 138; R. Abraham, op. cit., pp. 309–310.
71. C. Read, op. cit., p. 153 (my emphasis – MH). [Note by ETOL: There is no emphasis indicated in the printed version.]
72. B. Pares, op. cit.; H. Pichter, op. cit., p.145. Much of the recent writing on the Russian peasantry has criticised earlier attempts to argue that there was serious class differentiation amongst the peasants. I have a qualified sympathy with this ‘revisionism’ but to the extent that it is correct it would seem to undercut even more any argument that the rural revolt could have been appeased by anything less than wholesale handover of land to those who worked it.
73. The question of how much land was owned by landlords and others is often shrouded in confusion. For a good contemporary account see L. Litoshenko, Landed Property in Russia, Russian Review, vol. 2, no. 4, November 1913, pp. 185–207.
74. It might be objected to this argument that land reform was ‘successfully’ undertaken at the end of the war in a number of Eastern European countries and was therefore possible in Russia too. But the post-war context of land reform was very different in these countries; so too was the relative power of different sections of the ruling class and the state; but above all concessions were encouraged and minds concentrated by the different experience of Russia.
75. K. Tverdovskii [pseudonym: N.I. Bukharin], K voprosy o zemel’nuikh zakhvatakh, Spartak, no. 7, 16 September 1917, reprinted in N.I. Bukharin, Na podstupakh k oktyabru, statii i rechi, mai–dekabri 1917 g (Moscow 1926), p. 113.
76. The lack of a wide base of support for private land ownership is also reflected in the fact that formal landowner parties got only 171,245 votes in the elections for the Constituent Assembly.
77. This discussion is based on J. Channon, The Landowners in R. Service (ed.), Society and Politics in the Russian Revolution (Macmillan 1992); T.V. Osipova, Vserossiskii soyuz zemel’nykh sobstvennikov v1917g, Istoriya SSSR, no. 3 (1976).
78. C. Read, op. cit., p. 118.
79. Quoted W. Rosenberg, Liberals op. cit., p. 124–125; P. Avrich, Russian factory committees in 1917, Jahrbücher fur Geschichte Osteuropas, 1963, part 2, p. 167.
80. P. Miliukov, op. cit., p. 424.
81. Konovalov became minister of trade and industry; Guchkov was the first minister of war and Tereshchenko, the sugar businessman from the south west, became minister of finance.
82. P. Miliukov, op. cit., p. 463; Z. Galili, Commercial-Industrial Circles in Revolution: the Failure of “Industrial Progressivism”, in E. Rogovin, J. Frankel, B. Knei-Paz (eds.), Revolution in Russia: Reassessments of 1917 (Cambridge University Press 1992), p. 188.
83. The best short summary account of the economic problems of 1917 remains N. Stone, op. cit., ch 13.
84. Quoted in L. Schapiro, 1917: The Russian Revolution and the Origins of Present Day Communism (Penguin 1984), p. 97.
85. W.G. Rosenberg and D. Koenker, Strikes and Revolution in Russia 1917 (Princeton University Press 1989).
86. S.A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories 1917–1918 (Cambridge University Press 1983), p. 146.
87. The ambiguity and changing balance of meaning can be seen clearly in the main resolution of the first All-Russian Congress of Factory Committees – easily available in J. Reed, Ten Days that Shook the World (Penguin 1966), pp. 295–296.
88. Z. Galili, Commercial-Industrial Circles in Revolution: the Failure of “Industrial Progressivism”, op. cit., p. 204.
89. The Disorganisation of Russian Industry, Russia: A Journal of Russian-American Trade, May 1918, pp. 11–13.
90. L. Lande, The Mensheviks in 1917, L. Haimson (ed.), The Mensheviks from the Revolution of 1917 to the Second World War (University of Chicago Press 1976), p. 41.
91. Quoted H. Pichter, op. cit., p. 114.
92. C. Read, op. cit., p. 136 ; R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 219; P. Miliukov, op. cit., pp. 471–472.
93. P. Miliukov, op. cit., pp. 464–474; W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 198.
94. The most detailed account of the Kornilov coup is by G. Katkov, op. cit.. Katkov combines a detailed command of the sources with a defence of highly questionable arguments. He seeks effectively to defend Kornilov and to condemn Kerensky. Despite the mass of valuable information he offers, his account can be faulted in four key areas, firstly in his desire to defend Kornilov he places the most charitable interpretation on his actions and the least charitable on that of his opponents; secondly, he fails to adequately rebut charges that Kornilov had important meetings with interested groups before the coup; thirdly, and most seriously, he abstracts his account from the social dynamics of the situation and the balance of changing class forces, especially at the top of Russian society; finally, he minimises the role of Allied and especially British involvement which although certainly hesitant was not insignificant. For more politically astute accounts of the coup see J.D. White, The Kornilov Affair – a Study in Counter-Revolution, Soviet Studies, vol. 20, October 1968, pp. 187–205; M. Ferro, October 1917: A Social History of the Russian Revolution (Routledge 1980); for a survey of the historiography of the coup which criticises Katkov’s more narrow interpretation see J.W. Long, Kornilov Redivivus: New Data on the Prelude to Bolshevism, Russian History, vol. 11, no. 1, Spring 1984, pp. 1–10. Most recently, G. Swain, The Origins of the Russian Civil War (Longman 1996), ch. 1, is good on the coup.
95. The traditional Russian officer corps was a highly conservative force in Russian society. It celebrated its anti-intellectual stance even in military matters and lacked an appreciation ‘that the Russian army’s weakness was caused by the backwardness of Russia’s society and economy’. A ‘young Turk’ group had arisen before 1914 but with limited effect. Now the war to some extent democratised the lower ranks but there was still insufficient time for this to penetrate to create the high army structure. See P. Kenez, Russian Officer Corps Before the Revolution: the Military Mind, Russian Review vol. 31 (1972), pp. 226–231; D.R. Jones, The Officers and the October Revolution, Soviet Studies, vol. xxviii, no. 2, April 1976, pp 207–223; and most usefully, A. Wildman, Officers of the General Staff and the Kornilov Movement, in E.R. Frankel, J. Frankel and B. Knei-Paz (eds.), Revolution in Russia: Reassessments of 1917 (Cambridge University Press 1992).
96. Quoted G. Katkov, op. cit., p. 166.
97. R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 227. It is unclear how many soldiers were shot after the restoration of the death penalty. Officially few death penalties were sanctioned at the top but actions may have been taken by local commanders. Kerensky boasted to General Knox that within a week Kornilov had 147 men shot but this may have been said for effect.
98. Quoted in G. Katkov, op. cit., p. 169.
99. Quoted in M. Leibman, The Russian Revolution (Cape 1970), p. 189.
100. C. Read, op. cit., p. 52.
101. Quoted in W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 209–210.
102. R. Abraham, op. cit., p. 233; G. Katkov, op. cit., p. 63.
103. Quoted in V.V. Shelokhaev, op. cit., p. 316.
104. G. Katkov, op. cit., p. 175; G. Swain, op. cit., ch. 1.
105. G. Katkov, op. cit., pp. 141, 143; W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 223. The same attitude was apparent in the contacts between Allied representatives and the General Headquarters. Buchanan, the British ambassador, clearly would have been happy with a successful coup but felt that he could not be seen to give any open support before the event. He therefore held supporters of a coup at arms length while doing nothing to dissuade it. At the Stavka, on the other hand, the British liaison officer was happy to be swept along by events and to encourage Kornilov.
106. C. Read, op. cit., p. 140.
107. Sadly, two of the best social historians of 1917 have retreated towards post-modernism. See S. Smith, Writing the history of the Russian Revolution After the Fall of Communism, Europe-Asia Studies, vol. 46, no. 4 (1994) pp. 563–578; R.G. Suny, Revision and Retreat in the Historiography of 1917: Social History and its Critics, Russian Review, vol. 53, April 1994, pp. 165–182. For a brief critique see J.E. Marot, A post-modern approach to the Russian Revolution? Comment on Suny, The Russian Review, vol. 54, April 1995, pp. 260–264.
108. The directory consisted of Kerensky, Tereshchenko as foreign minister, Verkhovsky and Verderevsky in charge of the war and navy, and Nikitin in charge of posts and telegraphs.
109. So far as I am aware there is no study of the Senate and Duma in 1917 which is unfortunate as they were centres of reaction after February.
110. V.D. Nabokov, The Provisional government, op. cit., p. 78.
111. The conference passed a motion in support of coalition with the bourgeoisie by only 766 to 688 but then rejected the idea of a coalition with the Cadets – the only serious bourgeois party. When the vote for coalition was put a second time it was decisively lost, which Figes ascribes to the way ‘the basic skills of parliamentary decision making proved beyond its leaders’; O. Figes, op. cit., p. 466. We would explain it more simply in terms of the scale of the polarisation which now existed.
112. Z. Galili, The Menshevik Leaders in the Russian Revolution: Social Realities and Political Strategies (Princeton University Press 1989), p. 389–390.
113. C. Read, op. cit., p. 70; S.A .Smith, op. cit.
114. V.M. Kruchkovskaya, Tsentral’naya Gorodskaya Duma Petrograda v 1917g (Moscow 1986), pp. 60–63.
115. J Reed, op. cit..
116. L. Schapiro, op. cit., px.
117. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 26, pp. 21, 74–77; vol. 25, p. 340; vol. 24, p. 513.
118. On the changing conception of bourgeois revolution in 1917 as it was articulated by the Mensheviks, see L. Lande, The Mensheviks in 1917, in L. Haimson (ed.), The Mensheviks from the Revolution of 1917 to the Second World War (University of Chicago Press 1976), pp. 15, 17–18, 25–26; B. Sapir, The Conception of Bourgeois Revolution, ibid., pp. 366–388
119. L. Lande, op. cit., p. 25.
120. N. Harding, Lenin’s Political Thought, vol. 2 (London 1981), p. 150.
121. B. Sapir, op. cit., p. 369.
122. W. Rosenberg, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 250.
123. P. Miliukov, op. cit., p. 457–463.
124. V.D. Nabokov, The Bolshevik Coup d’état, op. cit., p. 149–50.
125. Volia naroda, 20 September, translated in R.P. Browder and A. Kerensky, op. cit., p. 1641; L. Lande, op. cit., p. 29.
126. L. Lande, op. cit., pp. 17–19.
127. Z. Galili, The Menshevik Leaders in the Russian Revolution: Social Realities and Political Strategies, op. cit., pp. 6, 338.
128. W. Rosenberg The Russian Municipal Duma Elections of 1917, op. cit.; O. Radkey, op. cit..
129. Gordodskoi vestnik vse Rossiiskovo Souza Gorodov, quoted in V.M. Kruchkovskaya, op. cit., p. 47.
130. C. Read, op. cit., p. 119.
131. Figures do not add up to 100 because of rounding. N.N. Smirnov, Tretii Vse Rossiiskii S’ezd Sovetov (Moscow 1988) pp. 62–63.
132. C. Read, op. cit., p. 159.
133. B. Ward, Wild Socialism in Russia, the Origins, California Slavic Studies, vol. 3 (1966) p. 142.
134. I have followed the analysis in V.I. Miller, K voprosy o srvanitel’noi chislennosti partii Bol’shevikov i Men’shevikov v 1917 g, Voprosy Istorii KPSS (1988), part 12 pp. 109–118. See also L. Lande, Some Statistics of the Unification Congress, August 1917, in L. Haimson (ed.), op. cit., pp. 389–391.
135. L. Lande, op. cit., pp. 4–5; B. Sapir, op. cit., p. 374.
136. L. Lande, op. cit., p. 43.
137. Quoted in B.D. Gal’perina, The Petrograd Soviet in September and October of 1917 (New Data), Voprosy Istorii, no. 10 (1978), translated in Studies in Soviet History, vol. xxiii, no. 1, Summer 1984, pp. 89–90. This Soviet study contains some useful information to supplement more familiar Western accounts.
138. Z. Galili, Mensheviks …, op. cit., p. 392, A. Rabinowitch, The Bolsheviks Come to Power: The Revolution of 1917 in Petrograd (New York 1976)
139. Malyantovich in S. Jones, op. cit.
140. Z. Galili, Liberals in the Russian Revolution, op. cit., p. 394.
141. R.G. Suny Revision and Retreat in the Historiography of 1917: Social History and its Critics, op. cit.. p. 167; C. Read, op. cit., pp. 148, 158 (my emphasis).
142. I have benefited enormously from an excellent critique of the social history school: J.E. Marot, Class Conflict, Political Competition and Social Transformation: Critical Perspectives on the Social History of the Russian Revolution, Revolutionary Russia, December 1994, vol. 7, no. 2.
143. N. Bukharin, op. cit., p. 128.
144. G. Swain, op. cit., pp. 48–53. It should be made clear that when Swain speaks here of ‘seizing power’ he means political power. The question of economic and social power is resolutely ignored in the central part of his discussion.
145. G. Swain, op. cit., p. 57; L. Lande, op. cit., pp. 64 onwards.
146. Quoted T. Cliff, Trotsky: The Sword of the Revolution, 1917–1923 (Bookmarks 1990), p. 25.
147. V.D. Nabokov, op. cit.
148. Quoted J.P. Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg (Oxford University Press 1969), pp. 423, 425.
 



‘Tell me what you think about Hungary and I will tell you who
you are,’ said a Polish writer in late November 1956. So in this
spirit let us make a declaration. The Hungarian Revolution of 1956
was an authentic working class revolution. Other factors were
involved; revolutions are complex things. But the driving forces of
the Hungarian Revolution were the efforts of the workers. First they
established organs of popular power. Then they fought to extend them
to defend Hungary against the invading Soviet forces that eventually
allowed the puppet government of János Kádár to crush the revolt:
Most of the provincial councils and workers’ councils
in the capital became, to an ever increasing degree, representative
of an attitude unknown in Hungary: the belief in self-government, or
to put it in other words, government by soviets, in the original
sense of the term – people’s councils, organs of local power. [1]
Neither then nor now did the revolt fit into a conflict between
Washington and Moscow, between West and East. On 7 November, as
Russian forces fought Hungarian workers in Budapest, a group of
fighters in Tüzoltó Street ran up a red flag in honour of the
October Revolution, the fortieth anniversary of which fell that day.
The fluttering flag, like others in those desperate days, signalled a
different version of socialism not only in Hungary but the world
over. The flag was a rebuke to a Soviet imperialism that had grown
upon the ashes of the real October Revolution. For this reason such
flags also found little favour in the West. ‘We wish for neither
capitalism nor Stalinism,’ said the Revolutionary Council of
Budapest University. And this is the problem. With Stalinism and the
USSR gone, the pressure everywhere is to reinterpret the past as a
march to Western capitalism. So the role of the workers in the
Hungarian Revolution remains an embarrassment. [2]



Table 1: Hungary in the 1950s [3]




 


Population
(in millions)


Urban


In Budapest


In provincial
towns




1930


8.69


36.2%


16.6%


19.6%




1941


9.31


38.3%


18.4%


19.9%




1949


9.29


36.5%


17.3%


19.2%




1957


9.80


40.2%


18.9%


21.4%




1960


9.98


39.8%


18.2%


21.6%







Figure 1: The Main Centres of Action in 1956











Table 2: Dead and Wounded in 1956 [4]




 


  


Hungarians


  


Russians




Wounded


Dead


Wounded


Dead


Missing




Fighting


19,226


2,502


1,540


669


51



The Hungarian Revolution
Hungary in 1956 was a small European country of some 10 million
people. Once a central part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it was
now reduced in size and status by two world wars and the unhappy
period between them of authoritarian rule, repression and failed
development. It was occupied by the Soviet army at the end of the
Second World War and incorporated into the Soviet bloc as the Cold
War developed. For Moscow, Hungary was in the front line against NATO
to the West. For Washington, the Hungarians were another of Moscow’s
‘captive peoples’, a bargaining chip in the jousting for position
that characterised the whole Cold War era.
The events of 1956, however, did not derive directly from
geopolitical competition. They were a product of the way in which
Cold War pressures manifested themselves internally as economic,
social and political contradictions. The Eastern European regimes
claimed to be socialist but they were driven forward by a competitive
industrialisation in which the resources for accumulation were
squeezed from the mass of the population using whatever repression
was necessary. [5] But on the mass of people pressure was so intense
as to become counter-productive, and after Stalin’s death in 1953
his successors signalled a degree of relaxation. However,
contradictory messages, policy changes, and admissions of the
monstrous levels of repression in the past – culminating in the
denunciation of Stalin’s behaviour by the new Russian leader Nikita
Khrushchev in his ‘secret speech’ of February 1956 – opened up
a space for the open, if still cautious, articulation of discontent.
In Hungary Mátyás Rákosi, ‘Stalin’s best Hungarian
disciple’, was sidelined from Moscow in favour of Imre Nagy, a
loyal but reform minded ‘Stalinist’, in 1953. But Nagy could not
consolidate his grip and a change in the balance of power in Moscow
enabled Rákosi to come back in 1955 and expel Nagy from the
Communist Party. [6] Blind to the pressure for change, Rákosi’s
triumph was short-lived. After Khrushchev’s secret speech Rákosi
again found support draining in Moscow – Khrushchev later talked of
‘that idiot Rákosi’. At home the growing ferment in the
Hungarian Communist Party was reflected in huge popular debates held
by the Petöfi Circle – initially a forum for party youth.
Critics of the regime were emboldened by events in Poland where
June 1956 saw a near-rising of workers against the regime in Poznan.
[7] Moscow removed Rákosi (he now thought of himself as ‘the last
Mohican of the Stalinist era in Eastern Europe’) on 18 July, and
replaced him, not with a reformer like Nagy, but another man
identified with the old Stalinist era – Ernö Gerö. [8] Meanwhile
growing revelations about the many victims of Stalinism in Hungary,
most notably László Rajk, a leading Communist minister executed as
a traitor and spy in the paranoia of 1949–50, stimulated further
defiance. The new prime minister, Hegedüs, said that ‘by now a big
part of the media is not controlled by the party any more’. [9] The
Hungarian leadership was forced to allow the ceremonial reburial of
the body of Rajk on 6 October and this led to a spontaneous
demonstration of support for change. ‘The reburial of Rajk’s
remains dealt a massive blow to the party leadership, whose authority
was not all that high to begin with,’ Gerö told the Soviet
ambassador, Yuri Andropov. [10]
The real explosion came just over a fortnight later on 23 October.
Students had called a demonstration in support of Poland, where a
reformist government seemed to be standing up to severe political and
military pressure from Moscow. But the demonstration immediately
brought tens of thousands on to the streets . The regime felt the
full force of popular anger when the hated state security secret
police – the 50,000-strong AVH – fired upon crowds.
The revolt went through three stages.
From 23 to 28 October there was disorder as protests spread and
the old order began to disintegrate. ‘The democratic storm ... is
... raging in full force,’ said one Hungarian newspaper at this
time. [11] In this storm the initiative passed to the streets and the
factories. ‘It was the (inner party) opposition who ‘prepared’
the revolution and yet no one was so dumbfounded by the outbreak as
they’, wrote Sándor Fekete in an early participant account. [12]
Russian forces initially attempted to come to the aid of the
Hungarian leadership but were then withdrawn as the revolt gathered
force. Nagy was made prime minister but immediately found himself
overtaken by the popular mood.
From 29 October to 3 November a degree of order driven from below
was established. Nagy, at last, responded to popular demands with
announcements of policy changes aimed at democratisation and the
weakening of Moscow’s grip. But neither he nor anyone in the
Hungarian leadership could offer Moscow the prospect of containing
the ferment from below. For the Russian leadership fear of the
strategic implications of the loss of Hungary and the way revolt was
erupting from the bottom up was too much.
On 4 November the revolution entered its third and longest stage.
Moscow had already decided that it had been a mistake to withdraw
Russian troops and new units had begun to enter Hungary on 1
November. But it was on 4 November that they attacked Budapest and
other centres. There were several days of armed resistance, but the
odds were in favour of the well armed Russian forces. Nagy fled to
the Yugoslav embassy and was later betrayed and executed. Other
leaders were rounded up and arrested; still others fled across the
border to the West along with some 200,000 others (2 percent of the
population). Those who had died fighting the Russians and the old
Hungarian regime were buried in unmarked graves. Since 1989 there has
been a huge effort in Hungary to uncover their fate, but putting a
name on a headstone is a poor memorial if in the process what a
person died for remains hidden from history.
Workers’ councils, formed from 23 October, now continued to
oppose the occupation until December when widespread arrests and
repression finally overcame resistance. It is here, in the role of
these councils, that we see the real nature of 1956 as a social
revolution, and it is exactly this that current accounts are anxious
to bury. [13] But before we examine the workers’ councils in some
detail it is worth pausing a little to say something about the street
fighting in 1956.
 
Street fighting people: round one
On 23 October and in the days following the most visible aspect of
the Hungarian Revolution was the street fighting. For a revolution to
occur state authority must weaken sufficiently to disorient the
forces of repression. This had happened in Hungary. On 23–24
October the panic in the Budapest leadership was such that some fled
‘into underground bunkers that were unsuitable for any work’,
according to Soviet politburo members who were there. [14] The
regular police proved powerless, and in Budapest a significant number
of the 1,200 officers, led by Sándor Kopásci, the Budapest police
chief, defected to the demonstrators. [15] The army too was
disorientated. The only major unit to initially obey orders to
repress protests was the Third Army Corps whose commander forced his
men into action and even bombed demonstrators in Tiszakeske and
Kecskemet from the air before he thought better of it and fled to
Russian protection. Most army units took a position of benign
neutrality. Sometimes they intervened to enforce ceasefires on the
state security forces. Occasionally units, as well as individual
soldiers, went directly over to the protesters. The main group
defending the state was therefore the hated state security AVH. It
was because they appeared so isolated that Gerö called on Soviet
forces for support late on 23 October. With some 31,000 troops
immediately at hand, and some 1,100 tanks and air power, this was a
formidable force.
In most of the provinces, where there was also a limited presence
of Russian forces, the Hungarian security forces were soon
overwhelmed, despite the shooting of protesters. Conflict in Budapest
was more costly. At the peak perhaps 15,000 demonstrators, armed with
weapons seized or donated from the civil defence, police and army,
faced the disintegrating AVH and the Russian army. The fighting was
serious at a small number of key points, but both the AVH and
Russians were uncertain of what to do. The Russians had confused
orders. Ordinary troops were quickly disconcerted when they found
that they were facing ordinary Hungarians. There was some
fraternisation. Tensions rose high on 25 October when indiscriminate
shooting led to many deaths outside the Hungarian parliament. On
26–28 October the radicalisation and polarisation continued, as did
the brutal Russian response – ‘To solitary shots we replied with
salvos,’ said one Soviet commander. [16] It was at this point that
Nagy managed to establish a ceasefire and announce that Soviet troops
would withdraw from Budapest – the start, many hoped, of a
negotiated withdrawal from the whole of Hungary.
The evidence from Budapest is that much of the street fighting was
done by young people, including even schoolchildren. The fighters
tended to form self-organised groups, often around key individuals,
some of whom may have had a murky past, though it is difficult to
separate claim and counter-claim. But it would be wrong to make too
much of this. ‘It is touching that it was the hooligans of
Ferencváros who created ethics out of nothing during the
revolution,’ said a student at the time. [17] It is clear that a
broad process of radicalisation was occurring. Not the least example
of this was the role of Colonel Pál Maléter who became ‘the most
popular hero of the revolution’, for which he would pay with his
life, executed by the Kádár regime. Maléter had had an erratic
career which ran from being a bodyguard of the pre-war dictator
Horthy, to a Russian trained partisan fighting the Nazis and then a
senior figure in the new army. He at first tried to play a neutral
role when he was sent to try to relieve the Kilián Barracks but then
appealed to the ministry of defence to have Soviet forces withdrawn
to reduce the tension and loss of life. When this was refused he
famously cast his lot with the revolutionaries: ‘I must inform you
that I will fire on the first Soviet tank to approach the Kilián
barracks.’ [18]
 
The rise of the workers’ councils
Most of Budapest had stopped work, supported by growing strikes in
the rest of the country, while these struggles were taking place. A
new network of committees and councils began to emerge. The echoes of
1917 are obvious. Some of these new forms were factory committees.
These would then link into revolutionary (sometimes called national)
councils or committees. But in smaller places local area-based
councils were formed straight away. The pattern and the names are
often confusing because, unlike in Russia in 1917, there was not time
for more sophisticated forms of organisation to be worked out. But
this does not diminish the central role of these councils or what
they achieved in a short time. ‘Without their political pressure,’
say the authors of the standard Hungarian account edited by György
Litván, ‘the Nagy government would probably have stopped halfway.’
[19] But the significance goes beyond this immediate political
dynamic, which is why they remain so controversial and why they are
so difficult for more conservative accounts to digest.
Budapest was the centre of the workers’ council movement. Once
the second city of a great empire, it was now the overblown head of a
small country and contained nearly a fifth of Hungary’s population.
Over half of the country’s industrial output was produced there by
46 percent of its industrial workers. They were concentrated in
engineering works, chemical plants, consumer and food industries.
Here too were a significant part of Hungary’s building and
transport workers. Industry was not evenly spread within the city.
Two of the most concentrated areas were the Újpest district to the
north and the Csepel island in the Danube to the south, long an
industrial area based around iron, engineering, paper and oil. The
city, split by the Danube, tended to be more industrial on the Pest
side than the Buda, the area developed for the imperial middle class
and now the site of the residences of many of the people who had done
well under Rákosi.
The first Budapest workers’ council was established on 23
October in the Újpest district at the huge Egyesült Izzó (United
Lamp) Factory which employed around 10,000 people. [20] A day later
factory committees and workers’ councils were spreading to most of
the city’s plants and districts. On 29 and 30 October district
workers’ councils began to be created in the areas where the bigger
plants were concentrated – Újpest, Obuda, Angyalföld, Csepel.
Then on 31 October a parliament of workers’ councils for Budapest
was convened with delegates from 24 factories and looked to establish
a new order within them. Many elements of this order remained unclear
but most commentators have been struck by the sophistication of the
demands. The delegates declared:
The supreme controlling body of the factory is the
workers’ council democratically elected by the workers ... The
director is employed by the factory. The director and highest
employees are to be elected by the workers’ council ... the
director is responsible to the workers’ council in every matter
which concerns the factory. [21]
The councils also looked to the political situation, demanding a
whole range of measures of democratisation and, above all, the
withdrawal of Russian troops. In this process the old instruments of
Stalinist rule were simply pushed aside. The Communist Party and the
official trade unions, two of the means of repressing the working
class and driving forward accumulation, were marginalised. As Lomax
writes, ‘When a few days later the government, the Communist Party
and the Central Council of Trade Unions called in turn for the
creation of workers’ councils [in a failed attempt to direct them –
MH] they were merely giving official recognition to an already
accomplished fact.’ [22]
Inevitably the geography of workers’ councils outside of
Budapest reflected the industrial geography of Hungary, with the
strongest ones in the north and the weaker ones in the towns of the
southern agricultural plains. But, as Peter Fryer, the shocked but
honest reporter for the British Communist Party’s Daily Worker,
put it:
these committees, a network of which now extended across
the whole of Hungary, were remarkably uniform. They were at the same
time organs of insurrection – the coming together of delegates
elected by factories and universities, mines and army units – and
organs of popular self-government which the armed people trusted. As
such they enjoyed tremendous authority, and it is no exaggeration to
say that until the Soviet attack of 4 November the real power in the
country lay in their hands. [23]
Listeners to a radio broadcast from Miskolc heard the following
declaration on 25 October: ‘We have had enough! Enough of the
autonomy of certain leaders! We too want socialism, but according to
our special Hungarian conditions, reflecting the interests of the
Hungarian working class and the Hungarian nation’. [24] Miskolc was
the second largest town in Hungary. It had a population of some
140,000 in 1956 and was situated to the north east of Budapest in
Borsod county, ‘the largest unbroken industrial area in Hungary’.
[25] The whole area had been a centre of rapid expansion in the
post-1948 industrialisation drive, based on concentrated investment
in heavy industry, cement and brickworks, as well as a textile mill.
As Miskolc expanded so it merged with Diósgyör, the site of
Hungary’s first iron foundry and now the main iron and steel centre
as well as the location of a large machine works making rolling stock
and turbines.
It is here that we find the second great centre of the workers’
councils of 1956. While local students formed a student parliament,
committees were formed in the factories and then workers’ councils.
Things began to move on 22 October with the formation of various
committees and then, on 24 October, a ‘labour council’.
Organisation spread within and between plants in the neighbouring
towns. Government authority collapsed locally in the face of a mass
demonstration in Miskolc on 26 October when 38 people are thought to
have died as state security forces opened fire and the crowd took its
revenge. The workers and students and existing forces which defected
to them quickly restored order and Radio Miskolc could announce on 27
October that ‘for two days the town of Miskolc has been under the
leadership of the workers’ council and student parliament.’ The
new councils of the industrial belt linked up to form a countywide
Borsod Workers’ Council. When the claim was later made in Budapest
that what was at stake was a counter-revolution, the Borsod County
Workers’ Council simply said, ‘You have only to pick up the
telephone, and in three hours we will be there, the workers of Ozd,
Diósgyör, Miskolc, all 20,000 and armed.’ [26]
To the north of Budapest was the smaller town of Salgotarjan. Here
industry was based on coal, iron and steel and there was no
university. Anyone stopping there in late October would have found a
town in which the radicalisation appeared to have involved one of the
most peaceful power shifts. On 25 October a strike became general and
on 27 October there was a march to the town centre. The local
Communist Party attempted to lead the workers’ council movement but
it was pushed aside. But the relative calm of this period would be
deceptive, for in the next phase Salgotarjan would become a major
centre of resistance to Russian invasion and the Kádár government.
Györ had a population of around 70,000 in 1956. Situated on the
Danube, 80 miles north west of Budapest and on the main Budapest to
Vienna route, the town had grown on the basis of the expansion of its
pre-war wagon building works, textiles and consumer goods industries.
Nearby were the coal mining town of Tatabánya and smaller towns
based on opencast coal and bauxite mining. Some discontent appeared
before 23 October but news of the events in Budapest led to a small
demonstration on 24 October, which quickly snowballed. In the evening
state security forces again opened fire. The next day thousands came
out. Strikes were generalised and local authority collapsed. On 26
October a town-wide National Revolutionary Committee was formed and
the next day Radio Free Györ announced that ‘national committees
and workers’ councils were being formed everywhere between Györ
and Tatabánya’. The Györ council became the core of the
Transdanubian National Council formed to represent the western half
of Hungary.
While this was happening the state security forces had acted out
another massacre at nearby Mosonmagyaróvár in which 52 had died.
Order was only restored when the state security police were disarmed
by local troops under the control of the Györ council. [27] The
strength of the workers’ councils here was based on the Györ
factories and nearby mines at Tatabánya and Balinka. The Györ
National Council not only issued a programme, but also ran the town
and even negotiated for a time with local Soviet military leaders.
But its most demanding task was trying to cope with the political
cross currents in Györ. The mood in the town was heated and,
especially early on, there was frustration with the timidity of Nagy
in Budapest. Some right wing forces tried to take advantage of this,
as did adventurers, some from within Hungary, others from across the
border. There were several tense episodes before the leaders of the
local council were able to encourage a focus on building a base
through the development of the workers’ council movement in the
wider Transdanubian area.
Further south on the Danube, some 40 miles from Budapest, was
Sztálinváros (now Dunaújváros). This was intended as the
centrepiece of Hungary’s new industrial development. In the late
1940s it had only been an overgrown village but in the spring of 1950
the building of the Stalin iron and steel works began under the
supervision of Soviet engineers with ostensibly a model ‘socialist’
community – the biggest investment project of Hungary’s first
five year plan. By 1956 Sztálinváros had a population of 30,000
and, as in Russia, welfare there very much took second place to
demands of steel output. [28]
Agriculture still dominated much of the south of the country. Here
the major towns had been trading, administrative and educational
centres, with their social structure less intensively affected by
Stalinist industrialisation. Debrecen is Hungary’s third largest
town with a population of some 130,000 in 1956. It had been the scene
of Kossuth’s short-lived declaration of independence from the
Austrian Empire in 1849 and the base for the Soviet-backed liberation
government in 1944. On 23 October demonstrating students were joined
by workers. Local party leaders ordered forces to open fire, killing
three people. Over the next days talks between representatives of the
local soldiers, students and workers led to the formation of the
Debrecen Socialist Revolutionary Committee which soon became the
effective power in the town until the second Soviet onslaught on 4
November. A second southern town, Szeged, with a population of just
under 100,000, was the place where the first independent student
organisations had been created before 23 October. After the 23
October events in Budapest, students in Szeged were involved in local
protests and occasional clashes until 26 October when security forces
withdrew. Workers’ councils in the local factories were set up
which then linked with student groups to form a People’s
Revolutionary Council on 30 October. This then began to organise a
local national guard.
Pecs had been the site of Hungary’s first university and was
also a major trading and agricultural processing centre. In 1956 it
had a population of 110,000. Its post-1948 growth had been affected
by the development of coal mining nearby and uranium mining. Here,
however, the old order held together better in the first days. Local
bosses encouraged factory committees in the belief that they could
put their own people at the head of them but they were pushed aside.
Then, as news spread of events elsewhere, the local state security
police began to crumble. On 28 and 29 October councils were elected
and a national guard created. The Pecs councils were less impressive
in depth than those in the north, but the town would be a major
centre of resistance to Russian forces in the next phase.
It was, however, not just the towns that were affected by the
revolution. As Table 1 shows, Hungary was still a predominantly
agricultural country. Authority began to collapse in the rural areas
on the Saturday and Sunday of 27–28 October. The process had echoes
of traditional peasant revolt. News arrived of the urban protests,
sometimes brought directly by migrant workers returning from the
factories. Discussions took place in village centres and pubs, and on
the Sunday around and in churches. Fearful of a state which they saw
as both oppressive and exploitative, the peasants, reflecting an
older moral economy, sought to legitimise their revolt symbolically.
Village national committees were elected in many places. While some
of the old, imposed rural leaders fled and others were offered some
kind of protective security, less hated figures might symbolically
hand over village centre keys to the new committees. The state
campaign against religion had been especially resented and therefore
dressing in one’s Sunday best to go to church had a special
resonance that weekend. Sometimes local Stalinist party secretaries
were made to carry the crosses. Tax records were seen as an
instrument of the power of the state and burned in some places. [29]
Some villagers also loaded carts with food to take to towns both as a
gesture of solidarity and as an assertion of the superior morality of
the gift over the past history of forced deliveries to the state.
The level of politicisation in the countryside was much lower than
in the towns. But, with the power of the state gone, many peasants
took the opportunity to leave what they saw as state organised
agriculture. By early 1957 only around 6 percent of peasants were
left in state cooperatives which now had some 10 to 12 percent of
arable land. [30]
The question arose of how far the workers’ councils should
sustain the strike and cooperate with the Nagy government as it began
to broaden the agenda of change under the pressure of the councils.
Almost from the outset delegations had gone to Nagy to influence him.
Then on 1 November, with the Russian forces seemingly withdrawn and
Nagy radicalising his position, delegates from the councils argued
that the strike should be called off while maintaining the general
role of the councils. This produced some sharp local debates but when
the district councils in Csepel and Újpest agreed to support a
return to work the position was endorsed and the date set for Monday
5 November. But the agreement would be rendered redundant by the
second Soviet military assault.
 
The significance of the workers’ councils
What was the significance of the workers’ councils? The fact
that they were set up against a so-called ‘socialist state’ and
then destroyed by it should show that neither before nor after 1956
was Hungary in any sense socialist. The fact that the councils
involved workers seizing control of the means of production should
also show that what was wrong with Hungary was not some ‘political
degeneration’ at the top but a system which exploited and oppressed
workers both politically and economically. ‘The communists
nationalised all the factories and similar enterprises, proclaiming
the slogan, “The factory is yours – you work for yourself.”
Exactly the opposite of this was true. They promised us everything,
at the same time subjugating us and pulling us down to the greatest
misery conceivable,’ said one Csepel worker. [31]
But these are only the first questions posed by the workers’
councils in 1956. Clearly the councils were tools of destruction
through which the old regime was being brought down. But were they,
and can they again be, tools of creation through which a new
democratic economic and political order can be built?
There is a horrible irony in the fact that many historians today,
and not least those in Hungary, are as anxious to dismiss this
possibility as was the Kádár regime that destroyed the workers’
councils in 1956. Those for whom the only alternative to dictatorship
is a Western style bourgeois democracy solve the problem of 1956 by
concentrating on the political demands. The re-emergence of some 20
political parties, with the potential to compete for parliamentary
power, was bound, they suggest, to lead to a market transition and,
sooner or later, a degree of privatisation. Nineteen fifty six is
made to anticipate 1989. It was a ‘bourgeois revolution’, said
the Hungarian politician Viktor Orban in 2001. For Peter Kende, one
of a number of participants who now doubt their own past, ‘by
history’s inscrutable logic the Hungarian people seem to have
achieved in 1989 what they fought for in 1956’. [32] Litván,
another participant historian, is less direct, redefining 1956 (in a
phrase of István Bibó) as a ‘revolution in human dignity’. But
all revolutions involve the oppressed asserting their dignity against
the oppressor. Moreover dignity comes in different forms – not all
of them compatible. If people in 1956 did not believe it could be
found in the old system, they equally did not seem to believe it
could be found in the restoration of other discredited forms. Istvan
Bibó, who attempted to theorise what was happening at the time,
called it ‘the beginning of one of the most exciting socialist
experiments of the century’. [33] ‘The intended economic order’,
writes Litván’s group of historians, ‘would place decision
making in industry, mining and transport in the hands of the
producers.’ But sooner or later, they also imply, workers would
have been forced away from this ‘possibly utopian’ road. ‘The
healing of a ruined economy was impossible without a more or less
free market.’ [34]
But if the workers’ councils were incompatible with a Stalinist
state capitalism masquerading as ‘socialism’, how could they have
been compatible with more free market capitalism either? It is true
that what was called ‘workers’ participation’ existed in some
social democracies and in Yugoslavia in the 1950s, but participation
is not control. These were top down initiatives in which real
influence from below was severely constrained. The importance and
challenge of the Hungarian councils lie in their contradiction to
these lesser visions of change. [35]
The Hungarian workers’ councils grew from the bottom up and were
marked by the breadth and depth of participation. They combined
national demands with a fundamental social agenda which looked to a
new system moulded from the workers’ councils, independent free
trade unions and competing socialist parties. This idea is less
distinctive than some have suggested. It recaptured elements of an
earlier socialist tradition (even, we would suggest, a Bolshevik one)
that had been squeezed out by the statism of social democracy and the
one-party developmental dictatorship of Stalinism. Its base would lie
in the claim that ‘the factories must become truly collective, and
not capitalist property’ and the argument, expressed in different
forms, that ‘the working class itself wants a guarantee that it
will be armed so that it can stop any force from negating the basic
aim of the revolution and its achievements so far’. [36]
Here at least we must grant the Kádár regime the virtue of
consistency. For it the workers’ councils were a fantasy in theory
and mob rule in practice. They had no creative element; they were
simply destructive. The regime was quick to identify every incident
and build it up as one of the crimes of 1956. The most notorious,
perhaps, was on 30 October when state security police opened fire
from inside the Budapest Communist Party headquarters. Protesters
returned the fire, killing, among others, Imre Mezö, the local party
secretary and Nagy supporter, and then lynched a number of the people
in the building, some of whom may not have been involved in the
shooting. But the regime’s own data puts any popular violence into
perspective. There were, it claimed, 215 ‘victims of
counter-revolution’ of whom were 169 were military; 14 of these
were claimed to have died from summary execution. Forty six deaths
were civilians, of whom eight were Communist officials killed or
lynched by crowds. ‘Believe me, we are not sadists, but we cannot
bring ourselves to regret those kind of people,’ said one
contemporary who was asked. [37] The majority of deaths, even if they
were all regime deaths, clearly came in the fighting. All the
occasional indiscriminate ‘crimes’ of the real revolution cost no
more lives than a single massacre by the forces of the Hungarian
state or the Russian army. Far from the revolution involving
widespread mob rule, the Litván group writes, ‘there is abundant
evidence that the freedom fighters themselves penalised any
lawlessness resolutely’. [38]
Most present day accounts want to claim that the councils had
limited capacity. But the creative energy and self-discipline of the
councils create a problem for them. The historical undermining of the
legacy of the workers’ councils today does not derive from a grand
theory of bourgeois democracy or the majesty of its reality. Where is
such a reality today? Rather it derives from an accommodation to
current practice. Historical accounts inevitably reflect the time in
which they are written. The best can partly rise above this and
connect past, present and a range of new futures; the worst bludgeon
the present into the past to deny any future other than what is. The
political vision that emerged out of the transition in Hungary was a
narrow one, and leading Hungarian intellectuals accommodated to it.
It does past, present and future a grave disservice.
 
Street fighting people: round two
‘Today at dawn’, Imre Nagy broadcast on Sunday 4 November,
‘Soviet troops attacked our capital with the obvious intention of
overthrowing the legitimate government.’ The second Soviet
intervention, ‘Whirlwind’, was more massive and better organised
than the first. The Hungarian army was immediately demobilised by
Russian troops. The new National Guard had had no time to organise
for such a contest. Potential leaders like Maléter were arrested.
Kopásci was soon rounded up. Resistance again had to come from
below. The Soviet general Zhukov later claimed that his forces had to
disarm 35,000 Hungarians. This may be true but they could never have
matched a major army.
Nevertheless, the stand taken in key areas was heroic in the face
of often overwhelming force. Fierce fighting took place in several
provincial centres including Pecs in the south. But generally the
stiffness of resistance reflected the distribution of sections of the
working class. ‘The greatest armed resistance to the Soviet forces
occurred in the large iron and steel centres of Dunapentele, Ozd and
Miskolc, and in the mining regions of Borsod, Tantabánya and Pecs,’
writes Lomax. At Dunapentele, the former Sztálinváros, the workers’
council faced with the Soviet army declared:
Dunapentele is the foremost socialist town in Hungary.
Its inhabitants are workers, and power is in their hands. The houses
have all been built by workers themselves. The workers will defend
the town from ‘fascist excesses’ but also from Soviet troops. [39]
Within Budapest the same pattern emerged. In the centre street
fighting was hard at the Kilián Barracks, Corvin Passage and Tüzoltó
Street – all these places became legendary. But it was also
considerable in Újpest and Kobanya. It was no less fierce on the
Cespel Island where workers held out until 10–11 November.
In 1957 the Kádár government was quick to issue its own data to
claim that the cost of violence was greater during the first wave of
fighting, when the Soviet army withdrew, than in the second wave
after its re-entry. Its ‘order’ was supposedly preferable to the
‘disorder’ of the revolution. ‘Two thirds of the injured were
wounded before 3 November and one third after 4 November.’ But the
figures, based on hospital admissions, can hardly be a guide since
arrest was more likely after 4 November. The deaths seem to have been
40 percent in the first round and 60 percent in the second round of
fighting. Property destruction was largely a product of the second
phase. The regime claimed only 4 percent of housing in Greater
Budapest as a whole was damaged but this somewhat foolish statistic
could not hide that fact that 23 percent of housing had been damaged
in the 9th Ferencváros district and 18 percent in the Jozsefváros
district. Fifty percent of the Budapest dead were recorded in these
two districts and the 7th. [40] As Peter Fryer wrote:
I have just come out of Budapest, where for six days I
have watched Hungary’s new born freedom tragically destroyed by
Soviet troops ... Vast areas of the city – the working class areas
above all – are virtually in ruins. For four days and nights
Budapest was under continuous bombardment. I saw a once lovely city
battered, bludgeoned, smashed and bled into submission. [41]
The data on the Budapest dead tell an even clearer social story of
a predominance of working class youth. Twenty percent of the dead
were under 20 years old, and 28 percent aged between 20 and 29.
Seventy five percent of the injured were reported to be under 30;
1,330 of the dead were recorded as workers, only 44 as students.
Another Kádár source suggested that ‘according to the figures
supplied by the hospitals, 80 to 90 percent of the wounded were young
workers, while students represented no more than 3 to 5 percent’.
[42]
 
Resistance and the struggle for power
With the armed resistance crushed by 10–11 November a month and a
half of passive resistance to occupation and counter-revolution
began. The Hungarian army had disintegrated, the political leaders
had been arrested or had fled, and writers and intellectuals, however
prominent, lacked an organisational base of their own. It was the
workers’ councils which were the basis of opposition and they stood
at the head of a general strike. ‘We are and shall remain the
leaders in Hungary,’ said Sándor Racz when he was elected
president of the new Central Workers’ Council in Budapest. Despite
the continued emphasis in some accounts on the role of intellectuals,
the Writers Association passed a motion on 12 November which read,
‘We throw in our lot with the Hungarian working class, the
peasantry and the revolutionary youth, and in the course of further
developments we shall work together with their democratically elected
organisations.’ [43]
It is not difficult to see why. If we take industrial production
in September as 100 then in October it was 71.1 percent of that level
and in November a mere 17.6 percent. Even with the actions of the
authorities in December it only rose to a monthly figure of 30.5
percent of the September level. To close down over 80 percent of
industrial production effectively for over a month must register as
one of the most complete and sustained general strikes in history.
And in particular sectors for which data was collected by the
statisticians the strike was even more effective. [44]
A journalist writing for the Observer in Britain reported the
situation in mid-November:
A fantastic aspect of the situation is that although the
general strike is in being ... the workers are nevertheless taking it
upon themselves to keep essential services going, for the purposes
which they themselves determine and support. Workers’ councils in
industrial districts have undertaken the distribution of essential
goods and food to the population in order to keep them alive. The
coal miners are making daily allocations of just sufficient coal to
keep the power stations going and supply the hospitals in Budapest
and other large towns. Railwaymen organise trains to go to approved
destinations for approved purposes ... [45]
The impact of the invasion on the workers’ and revolutionary
councils was uneven. In some areas they quickly collapsed but those
based on factory committees in urban, working class environments
proved more resilient and their organisation deepened. So strong was
it that the Kádár government was forced to temporarily recognise
the workers’ councils while trying to gain time to contain and
undermine them and pick off their leaders. In some areas arrests
began immediately. On 5 November, for example, 12 members of the
Borsod workers’ councils attempted to negotiate and were arrested
and taken out of Hungary. [46] Occasionally, however, such arrests
had to be rescinded and negotiations were held with Soviet commanders
to this effect.
The biggest developments were in Budapest. On 12 November the
Revolutionary Workers’ Council of Újpest proposed the creation of
a Central Workers’ Council for Greater Budapest. In spite of
attempts by the authorities to disrupt it, on 14 November the new
Central Council met at the Egyesült Izzö plant. The meeting, which
was chaotic, elected a provisional committee made up from delegates
from the district workers’ councils. [47] As in any revolution,
individuals were thrown up who quickly proved unequal to the task and
were replaced by others who found a strength, courage and vision that
perhaps they had not appreciated they had. Two of these were workers
from the Beloiannis electrical factory. Sándor Racz was a young tool
fitter who was soon elected president of the council. Sándor Bali,
another tool fitter, was older and more experienced, having been a
past member of the Social Democratic Party and Communist Party but
also having conspicuously refused to take advantage of the
possibilities of social mobility that the regime offered before 1956.
It was Bali who was the leading influence on the perspectives of
the Central Workers’ Council. These involved seeing it as the
organising centre for the Budapest workers’ councils. It became,
said Balász Nagy, ‘a hive of activity’. New elections were held
in the factory committees and workers’ councils to ensure the
legitimacy of these organisations and hence the Central Council
itself. ‘The factories are in our hands, the hands of the workers’
councils,’ said one leaflet from late November. But the key
political issue was whether to negotiate with the Kádár regime. The
brute face of military power was everywhere. Bali therefore proposed
that the Central Council negotiate but refuse any formal recognition
of the government. But negotiate to what effect? The Central Council
and the councils on which it drew were determined to deepen their
role. The big immediate weapon they had was the general strike. But
general strikes cannot last indefinitely, especially one so complete.
The most conservative voices argued for the strike to be called off
to give Kádár time to show his intentions. The most radical argued
for it to be maintained to the bitter end, come what may.
In the midst of military occupation, with perhaps 2,000 dead
already and many more wounded and under arrest, the difficulty of
these choices should not be underestimated. In the event the position
that won was to agree to return to work in return for concessions.
But what concessions, and could the government be trusted? This
produced sharp arguments in some of the Budapest districts and
committees. In Csepel, for example, leaders who saw this position as
too radical were removed in favour of delegates who thought it too
moderate. [48] Racz argued that the workers’ councils were in a
position of growing strength: ‘The government is now beginning to
make certain concessions, and it will make still more. We just have
to force it to do so. We must wait until work has been resumed
everywhere, because otherwise the Russians will occupy the industrial
centres and replace the workers. The question now is whether we will
be the masters or the Soviet command.’ [49] Outside of Budapest too
there were divisions. Some miners took the view, ‘You can work if
you want, but we shall provide neither coal nor electricity; we shall
flood the mines.’ [50] But negotiations went ahead with the Kádár
regime for the removal of Soviet troops, the generalisation of
workers’ councils, and the defence of the right to strike. The
return to work was set for 17 November.
But the government’s position was well described by a British
reporter. Its aim was ‘to divert workers’ councils into innocuous
channels by “legalising” them as organs of economic
self-government, somewhat on the Yugoslav model, but denying them the
right to put forward political demands or issue a newspaper’. The
perspectives were far apart and ‘merely led to continued deadlock
in Budapest’. [51]
To maintain its position the Central Council could not stand
still. The organisation had to be widened. Accordingly on 19 November
it accepted a plan to create a new Parliament of Workers’ Councils
and made an appeal for delegates to meet in Budapest on 21 November.
But when delegates arrived at the sports stadium where the meeting
was due to be held they found it surrounded by Soviet tanks (some
called them ‘Kádár taxis’). A smaller meeting was held at the
headquarters of the Central Council which, again after debate,
accepted its positions. But while the talk was going on, workers,
fearing that delegates had been more widely arrested, were coming out
on strike again and on 22–23 November Budapest was hit by a general
strike which also served to commemorate the outbreak of the
revolution a month earlier. The Central Council had no choice but to
put itself at the head of this.
The Kádár regime and Soviet forces were far from idle during
this time. It is clear now that János Kádár swung to become the
figurehead of the Russian invasion quite late on. When he arrived in
Budapest on 7 November in a Russian armoured car he had no plan or
authority other than that given to him by the Russian army. [52] The
secret police had gone, the army had disintegrated, and government
was in disarray. His new ‘party’ – the Hungarian Socialist
Workers Party – barely existed (in December it only had 37,000
members, a few percent of the old Communist Party). In the next weeks
Kádár talked but refused to yield, supported as he was by the
Soviet occupation. Imre Nagy and his supporters were tricked out of
the Yugoslav embassy with the complicity of the Yugoslav government
on 23 November, arrested and taken out of Hungary. But Kádár also
tried to build a new base for himself through the formation of the
Hungarian Revolutionary [sic] Home Guard Militia, which was
supplemented in early 1957 by a ‘Workers’ [sic] Guard’.
It was the militia, with the Russian army, that would eventually
crush the revolution in December. Another strand of Kádár’s
policy was to send out the signal that there would be no return to
the past, whatever repression followed, Attempts were made to buy off
working class discontent with backdated pay rises, peasant discontent
with concessions on forced deliveries and agricultural process, and
the discontent of small craftsmen through tax and property changes.
Rákosi and Gerö remained in exile and gestures were made on
religious freedom and towards an even more obvious co-option of
national symbols. But the regime, like all established orders, had an
additional weapon and a very powerful one – time. It could sit it
out and try to stretch out negotiations to a point when it felt able
to move. By early December Kádár and others seem to have begun to
feel that their time was coming.
The Central Workers’ Council (CWC) did not want the provocation
of a major demonstration on 4 December, a month on from the second
Soviet invasion. Fearing the consequences if the authorities used
force against a mass demonstration, an evocative procession was
organised of some 30,000 women dressed in black. They walked through
Budapest until they encountered Soviet troops. The demonstration was
deeply symbolic and moving. But in terms for the balance of power
between the councils and the government it was too little. The
authorities now began to move quickly.
The Kádár regime began to widen arrests and then news came
through that on 8 December a massacre had occurred at Salgótarján,
with the arrest the leaders of miners’ workers’ councils and the
shooting of 39 demonstrating miners. The Central Council meeting in
Budapest called a 48-hour general strike for 11–12 December, ‘the
like of which has never before been seen in the history of the
workers’ movement’, an official Hungarian paper was forced to
report. [53] The government responded by declaring that the CWC and
local councils were illegal (but not yet the factory committees) and
declaring a state of emergency. Some 200 working class leaders were
rounded up and arrested. Racz and Bali were major targets but they
were protected for a time by the workers in their factory. They were
only induced out by a duplicitous personal offer from Kádár to
negotiate. They were then arrested. When other strikes and
demonstrations against the arrests were called the response was just
as ruthless as it had been in Salgótarján. Workers were shot down
in the streets in several places including Miskolc, Eger and Zalaegerszeg.
Workers’ opposition was now forced underground and on 5 January
1957 the government announced the death penalty for a refusal to work
and strike agitation. Several workers’ councils ceremoniously
dissolved themselves rather than just fade away under the weight of
this repression. The Csepel council said that to continue ‘would be
to deceive our comrades. We therefore return our mandate to the
workers.’ [54] When, on 8 January, workers on the Csepel Island
demonstrated their support they too were met with Soviet tanks and
more were killed. Five days later the Kádár government further
widened the death penalty. The regime was able to move on and suspend
the Writers Association on 18 January and close the Journalists Club
on the 20th. After nearly three months the Hungarian Revolution had
finally been crushed.
 
The pattern of repression
The story of a revolution can also be told through the nature of
the victims when it is repressed. The weight of repression has
obviously to serve as a warning to the main social forces involved
never to attempt the same again. Here too then we find evidence of
the absolute centrality of the workers’ councils. Arrests began to
mount between November 1956 and the end of 1959. Some 100,000 were
arrested, 26,000 tried and 22,000 sentenced; 229 formal death
sentences were passed but accounts suggest that as many as 350
executions may have occurred. Those of Imre Nagy, Maléter and others
were the most prominent. Leading intellectuals were jailed. But the
target of repression was much more the working class. The majority of
the arrested and sentenced ‘were workers 20 to 30 years of age’.
Death sentences fell especially on workers accused, rightly or
wrongly, of street fighting. Among the arrested ‘the group that
contributed the greatest number of those sentenced consisted of the
members of the workers’ councils and revolutionary committees from
factories and local institutions’. Death sentences were rarer but
long prison sentences the norm, including life (for Bali and Rácz,
for example). Despite later amnesties ‘quantitatively ... this
group was hardest hit, by both judicial sentences and by extra-legal
measures of repression’. As the Litván history notes, the
targeting of this group was hardly an ‘accident’ but ‘a major
goal of the repression’. [55]
 
Fifty years on
Once the threat of the revolution had been overcome Kádár began
to build bridges to the Hungarian people. From the early 1960s he
became the most successful Eastern bloc leader. But the memory of
1956 still had to be contained through suppression and distortion.
The same process is at work today but the politics are different.
When the Soviet bloc collapsed in 1989, ‘the transformation in
Hungary was perhaps the most tranquil of all’. [56] This was a
negotiated transition, negotiated in no small part by those who had
made their careers under Kádár and who saw the chance not only to
survive but also to prosper in a new Hungary. Manipulating 1956 as a
‘national’ myth served the interests of these people as well as a
new generation of leaders committed to the market and private
property. Today Hungary is a member of the European Union. It is an
ally of the United States, and the share of multinationals in its
manufacturing turnover is over 70 percent – second only to Ireland.
Ordinary Hungarians, however, like most ordinary people in the
transition regimes, have seen fewer of the benefits of change. This
has been especially the case in the industrial areas that were the
core of 1956.
In this new situation the radical interpretation of 1956 is
unwelcome. So too is a recognition of the hollowness of Western
policy in 1956 which was strong on rhetoric but involved standing by
to allow Russia to crush the revolution and maintain its sphere of
interest and the overall balance of power. ‘Alas, the logic of
great power policy made accomplices of many otherwise honourable
Western politicians’, writes the Litván group. [57] This is
self-deceit of the worst kind, for 1956 was the year of both Hungary
and Suez. It simply writes into history the cynical idea that it is
better for a small country to prostrate itself voluntarily before
Washington and Brussels than be enslaved by Moscow.
Did Hungarian workers want to control their own lives? The
self-deceit works again. Of course, but now it must be understood
that freedom can never be anything more than the freedom to apply to
work for this or that multinational and their freedom to reject you.
But the story of 1956 is bigger than this. Different regimes in
France struggled to contain the legacy of its great revolution for
200 years. But it has not always been easy. One of the songs heard on
the streets of Budapest in 1956 was in fact the Marseillaise.
What Kende now calls ‘history’s inscrutable logic’ is often
more inscrutable than those who invoke it suggest. Connecting to the
real history of 1956 shows that its legacy is much more open than
many would like us to believe.

Notes
1. M. Molnar, Budapest 1956: A History of the Hungarian
Revolution (Allen & Unwin, 1971), p. 174.
2. It is ironic that accounts of the post-1956 Kádár regime
often paid more attention to the ‘counter-revolutionary’ role of
workers in 1956 than some post-1989 Hungarian accounts. The main
translated general history of the post-1989 era, Ignac Romsic’s
Hungary in the Twentieth Century (Corvina, 1999), (which
incidentally concludes with a near racist celebration of Hungary’s
thousand year struggle to resist ‘Asian and Eurasian tyranny’ in
favour of membership of the Christian West) does not mention the
workers’ councils in its discussion of the first stages of the
revolution. It then gives them scant attention in the resistance
except when they became victims of repression. ‘The spirit of the
revolution,’ Romsic argues, ‘lived on most conspicuously among
groups of intellectuals’ (p. 316).
3. Data from M. Pécsi and B. Sárfalvi, The Geography of Hungary (Collets, 1964).
4. There is an element of spurious precision in this data.
Although the order of magnitude is correct it is probably an
undercount. Some of the losses on the Soviet side may have been
hidden. The undercount is probably greater on the revolutionary side.
Some urban dead were simply buried by relatives; there was a less
accurate count in the countryside and some others died trying to flee
the country – G. Litván (ed.), The Hungarian Revolution
of 1956: Reform, Revolt and Repression 1953–1963 (Longman,
1996), p. 103. For the Russian data see J. Granville, In the
Line of Fire: the Soviet Crackdown on Hungary, 1956–57, in T.
Cox (ed.), Hungary 1956: Forty Years On (Cass, 1996), p. 82.
5. See M. Haynes, Accumulation and Working Class Exploitation,
Some Origins of 1956 in Hungary, London Socialist Historians
Conference on 1956, February 2006 (forthcoming).
6. Quoted in M. Kramer, The Soviet Union and the 1956 Crises in
Hungary and Poland: Reassessments and New Findings, Journal of
Contemporary History, vol. 33, no. 2 (1998), p. 175.
7. J. Granville, Reactions to the Events of 1956: New Findings
from the Budapest and Warsaw Archives, Journal of Contemporary
History, vol. 38, no. 2 (2003), pp. 264–265.
8. Rákosi’s comment to Voroshilov quoted in J. Granville,
Reactions ..., as above, p. 268.
9. Quoted in J. Granville, Reactions ..., as above, p. 277.
10. Quoted in M. Kramer, as above, p. 181.
11. Quoted in M. Molnar, as above, p. 178.
12. Quoted in C. Harman, Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe (Pluto, 1974), p. 150. Fekete was the imprisoned
author of a famous underground pamphlet by ‘Hungaricus’.
13. The analysis of Hungary in 1956 as a social revolution forms
the centrepiece of Bill Lomax’s The Hungarian Revolution
(Allison & Busby, 1976). Since 1989 a mass of material has become
available but new Western accounts focus primarily on the
international dimensions. Hence Lomax’s classic account remains a
significant point of reference. Lomax also edited a major documentary
collection: B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers’ Councils
in 1956 (Social Science Monographs, 1990).
14. Quoted in M. Kramer, as above, p. 185.
15. Kopásci later wrote his own account. See S. Kopásci, In the Name of the Working Class: The Inside Story of the Hungarian
Revolution (Fontana, 1987).
16. Quoted in J. Granville, In the Line ..., as above,
p. 101.
17. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 111.
18. As above. For a sizeable extract from a first hand account of
Maléter’s actions see C. Harman, as above, pp. 136–37.
19. G. Litván (ed.), The Hungarian Revolution of 1956: Reform, Revolt and Repression, 1953–1963 (Longman, 1996),
p. 68. This is the quasi-official post-1989 history of 1956. Its
editor, György Litván, was then a brave history teacher who
denounced Rákosi to his face. He was later imprisoned. Now he is one
of the most senior historians in Hungary. The 1956 Institute in
Hungary has a large website with a mass of materials that I have
drawn freely on: www.rev.hu.
20. Despite its name this plant was involved in engineering,
including military production.
21. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 141.
22. B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 140.
23. P. Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy (New Park, 1986), pp. 44–45.
24. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above.
25. Hungary (Corvina Press, 1964), p. 280.
26. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 97.
27. This was the first place Peter Fryer, the Daily Worker correspondent, saw. He arrived the day after the massacre and was
immediately broken of his Stalinism by what he saw. See P. Fryer, as
above, pp. 17–24.
28. S. Horváth, Everyday life in the first Hungarian socialist city, International Labor and Working Class History,
no. 68 (Fall 2005), pp. 24–46. Whether Sztálinváros was
ever rational is an interesting question but whatever logic it had
was further undermined as it was being planned by Stalin’s dispute
with Tito in Yugoslavia, which denied the iron and steel works
expected supplies from that country. Horváth’s study of
Sztálinváros shows that many of the new workers and especially the
skilled ones came from other towns including Budapest. This confirms
the pattern evident in the work of Mark Pittaway which stresses the
role of skilled workers in 1956. See, for example, M. Pittaway, The
Reproduction of Hierarchy: Skill, Working Class Culture, and the
State in Early Socialist Hungary, Journal of Modern History,
vol. 74, no. 4 (December 2002).
29. Peter Fryer describes a peasant council at the Bábolna state farm where he spent two days – P. Fryer, as above, pp. 49–54.
30. Calculated from I. Romsic, as above, p. 330.
31. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 37.
32. P. Kende, Afterword, in G. Litván (ed.), as above, p. 180. Kende had been an oppositionist journalist in the 1950s.
33. Quoted in B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers
Councils, as above, p. xix.
34. G. Litván, as above, p. 126.
35. On the debate on 1956 in Hungary see H. Nyyssönen, The Presence of the Past in Politics: ‘1956’ after 1956 in Hungary
(Sophi, 1999).
36. Quoted in B. Nagy, Budapest 1956: The Central Workers’ Council. This is reprinted in B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers’ Councils, as above. It is also more easily available online in the Marxist Internet Archive.
37. Quoted in B. Lomax, Eyewitness in Hungary (Spokesman, 1980), p. 125.
38. G. Litván, as above, p. 77.
39. See B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers’ Councils, as above, p. 85.
40. Fontosabb adatok az 1956. Október–Decemberi idöszakról, Statisztikai Szemle, vol. xxxiv, no. 11–12
(November–December 1956), p. 928.
41. P. Fryer, as above, p. 69.
42. G. Litván, as above, p. 103; B. Nagy, as above.
43. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Working Class in the Hungarian
Revolution, Critique, no. 12 (Autumn–Winter
1979–1980), p. 46.
44. Fontosabb adatok az 1956. Október–Decemberi idöszakról, Statisztikai Szemle, as above, pp. 17–918.
45. Observer, 25 November 1956, as quoted in A. Anderson, Hungary ’56, available at http://libcom.org/library/hungary-56-andy-anderson.
46. G. Litván, as above, p. 135.
47. For the role of the Council see B. Nagy’s account, as above, and the documents in B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers
Councils, as above, pp. 91–180.
48. See E. Nagy, Conflicts Between the CWC of Greater Budapest
and the CWC of the Csepel Iron and Steel Workers, in B. Lomax
(ed.), Hungarian Workers Councils, as above,
pp. 467–499. Elek Nagy was president of the Csepel Central
Workers’ Council.
49. This comes from evidence presented in the trial of Rasz and
the other CWC leaders after the defeat of the revolution. See B.
Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers’ Councils, as above, p. 562.
50. Quoted in B. Lomax, The Hungarian Revolution, as above, p. 159.
51. Observer, 2 December 1956, quoted in A. Anderson, as above.
52. The Russians needed a figurehead. Kádár’s shame is that he became it. We now know that he did so after hesitation. See M.
Kramer, as above, pp. 200–201.
53. Quoted in P. Fryer, Hungary and the Communist Party (London 1957), p. 27.
54. See Elek Nagy’s account in B. Lomax (ed.), Hungarian Workers Councils, as above, pp. 497–498.
55. See G. Litván, as above, pp. 139–148.
56. As above, p. xiii.
57. As above, p. 155.
 



David Harvey
A Brief History of Neo-Liberalism
Oxford University Press, 2005, £14.99
David Harvey, the leading Marxist geographer, manages to cram a
lot into this brief history of the renaissance of free market
capitalism in the guise of neoliberalism. He wants to explain how,
from New York, to Europe, to China, key figures like ‘Volcker,
Reagan, Thatcher, and Den Xiaoping all took minority [neo-liberal]
arguments that had long been in circulation and made them ... the
central guiding principle of economic thought and management’.
This shift did not happen automatically. Neo-liberalism triumphed
in the 1990s after ‘a series of gyrations and experiments’. Its
success, Harvey argues, reflected two main things. One was pressure
on profits in global capitalism. The other was the determination of
the ruling class to find a solution that would remould the world in
their favour.
The bluntness, even crudeness, of this second argument will shock
some, especially as Harvey has not been afraid in the past to argue
for more complexity rather than less. Now he argues that the paradox
of the last two decades has been that while the left has been
agonising about the disappearance of class, our rulers have been
pursuing a project which has aimed to consolidate their political
power and to secure an astonishing redistribution of wealth in their
favour. ‘If it looks like class struggle and acts like class war,’
writes Harvey, ‘then we have to name it for what it is’ (p. 202).
Seemingly more sophisticated accounts cannot grasp this central
element of neoliberalism. The philosopher John Grey, for example,
presents neo-liberalism as an intellectual conceit, a genuinely
utopian project, which is bound to fail, as 19th century free market
liberalism did before it, when it encounters the real world. Joseph
Stiglitz, on the other hand, treats neo-liberalism as an intellectual
error. While the best economic theorists have been showing the limits
of the market, market populists have mistakenly stripped away any
qualifications from public debate and policy.
For Harvey, accounts like this fail to focus on the way in which
self-interest has been at the heart of the neo-liberal project. The
wider political system has been deliberately manipulated through the
strategic intervention of think tanks, pressure groups, lobbying and
the like, and behind all this have stood ruling classes intent on
strengthening their power. The left too, in not wanting to appear
unsophisticated, has missed the obvious. Neo-liberalism as a project
for raising the rate of global growth, reducing inequality, widening
freedom has consistently failed. But this was never its real object.
At first more or less intuitively and semi-consciously, but then more
openly, neo-liberalism has secured its main object: ‘to
redistribute, rather than generate, wealth and income’. This was
not, as writers like Grey or Stiglitz might argue, an unfortunate
by-product of theoretical failings – it was the main agenda all
along.
I have much sympathy with this view. The audacity of the changes
of the last two decades is so great that it is intimidating. However,
as the contours of the changes become clearer so does the centrality
of the concentration of global power and wealth. Although Harvey adds
many nuances – discussing how the ruling class itself has been
remoulded, the uneven spread of neo-liberalism, its Chinese
manifestation and so on – the central demand that one should judge
neo-liberalism by what it has done and see this as the object all
along makes considerable sense. Indeed it might be possible to go
even further and to supplement Harvey’s class account with a more
particular corruption theory of privatisation – seeing its real
object as providing legal ways through which the state could be
milked for the individual benefit of members of the ruling class. At
the turn of the 19th century the state was a huge redistributive
mechanism which took from the poor to give to the rich – they it
called ‘old corruption’ at the time. In many countries a similar
mechanism of ‘new corruption’ has been created for the turn of
the 21st century.
Harvey suggests that we can find an alternative to this through
struggle ‘to regain popular control of the state apparatus’. But
this is a problem. Any self-respecting political activist will
support struggles which help to limit the control our rulers have
over us. But is this enough? Note the strange sound of the word
‘regain’. Does Harvey really mean to suggest that there was once
a point where the state apparatus was under popular control?
The issue here runs deeper than a difference over political
tactics. Harvey follows the valuable work of Duménil and Levy (< a href="https://www.marxists.org/archive/harman/2005/xx/crisis.htm" target="new">reviewed in IS 2 : 108) in tracing how the crisis of global profitability emerged in the late 1960s, the extent of its
resolution and the way that the redistribution of wealth and income
has changed. But despite his effective summary of these trends he
offers no real examination of where the crisis of profitability came
from in the first place. Instead he characterises the period after
1945 as an era of ‘embedded liberalism’, meaning by this some
form of welfare capitalism. Corporate power was constrained by state
ownership, planning and regulation, and inequality held in check by
the welfare state.
There are two obvious difficulties with this that bear directly on
Harvey’s argument. The first is that if the democratic deficit was
less after 1945 than it is now, it was still substantial. Socialists,
including Harvey, have argued that state action never confronted the
fundamentals of the capitalist system, but aimed to perpetuate them.
Even then the redistributive impact of the state was less than is
often imagined, as any critique of earlier welfare states would show.
The second obvious problem is that this system broke down. When
the crisis of profitability began to emerge, attempts to use more of
the same failed. State action was undermined by global flows of
capital and goods; the state’s own fiscal crisis; and political
polarisation. Harvey describes all of this but he does not want to
discuss its implications for the future, and the possibility and
direction of change.
History certainly shows that neoliberalism is but one of the forms
capitalism can take. The analysis Harvey makes also shows that the
system is more neo-liberal in rhetoric than practice and that its
stability is far from assured. This means that the state is an area
of struggle. But Harvey, like Joel Bakan in his The Corporation,
risks the charge of nostalgia by presenting a return to the past as a
solution for the future.
There is little in Harvey’s account here to tease out exactly
how he would resolve this. But it is not hard to see that the central
hole in his analysis is the nature of state power. He repeats the
failing of Karl Polanyi, who he draws on at a number of points. In
The Great Transformation, published at the end of the Second
World War, Polanyi wrote a devastating indictment of laissez-faire
liberalism as an attempt to impose a utopian doctrine on the world.
Out of its failure came depression, poverty and war but out of it
also came a determination of society through the state and community
to assert itself against the liberals. This analysis remains much in
the minds of all critics of neo-liberalism. But what I have elsewhere
called the Polanyi problem (See Journal of European Economic
History, 1998, 27 (3)) here becomes the Harvey problem. Just
what are these things called ‘society’, ‘the community’ and
the ‘state’? And in whose interest do they work and with what limits?
This is not only a problem for Harvey’s political analysis. It
also affects his economic discussion. He sees a key part of the
neo-liberal agenda as involving what he calls ‘accumulation by
dispossession’ – effectively a primitive accumulation of capital.
Accumulation by dispossession is a nice concept but it needs careful
application. Here, for example, he defines it as having four main
features: ‘privatisation and commodification’;
‘financialisation’; ‘the management and manipulation of
crises’; and ‘state redistribution’. The elements are clear but
they form a ragbag category and seem to confuse a number of different things.
When Marx wrote of the original primitive accumulation of capital
in the 16th and 17th centuries he saw it as a process involving two
related aspects. One was plunder from outside of the system – gold
from the Americas for example. The other was the separation of labour
from the means of production – for example, forcing peasants off
their land through the enclosure acts. Today it is puzzling to
imagine a process which involves either a significant accumulation
from outside of the system or by the separation of workers from
control of the means of production – for where in the last century
has that control been evident? This is most clear when Harvey tries
to apply it to the heartlands of capitalism.
Harvey might want to make the argument that this can be seen in
the incorporation of previously state controlled economies like
Russia and China into global capitalism. But this presumes that these
societies were non-capitalist in the first place – a point that
would be rejected here but is not explicitly confronted. But Harvey
appears to want to go further than this and suggest that similar
processes can be seen within advanced capitalism. The idea of
‘accumulation by dispossession’ seems to suggest that what might
appear as a normal part of crisis restructuring, where there is a
movement from control being held in one capitalist ‘pocket’ to
another, is, in reality, a movement from a ‘non-capitalist pocket’
to a capitalist one.
So he writes, for example, of whole state sectors being opened up
as ‘new fields for capital accumulation’ from public utilities to
welfare provision to warfare. We can agree that with privatisation
these have become more ruthlessly subject to the ‘calculus of
profitability’ but it does not make sense to argue that they were
outside of this before. This suggests a strange view of the nature of
the capitalist state, whether in its welfare or warfare forms.
Financialisation seems more to refer to a redistribution within the
system, as does the management of crises and state redistribution.
Most of what Harvey discusses here seems familiar in terms of crisis
theory, and given his argument that things should be called by their
proper names it is perhaps unhelpful to try to give these the
additional gloss of ‘dispossession’.
There are then serious arguments to be had. But these should not
alter the fact that this is also a good account of neoliberalism and
one that we can draw on to sharpen our attacks on the malign and
cynical self-interest that Harvey suggests motivates it.
 



Andrew Simms
Ecological Debt: The Health of the Planet and the Wealth of Nations
Pluto Press, 2005, £12.99
Steven P. McGiffen
Biotechnology: Corporate Power Versus Public Interest
Pluto Press, 2005, £15.99
What is to be done about global warming? The greenhouse effect is
caused by our pumping carbon dioxide into the atmosphere when we burn
carbon-based fuels like coal, gas and oil. The atmosphere acts like
greenhouse glass, trapping the heat we need to survive. But when the
greenhouse becomes too hot, disaster beckons.
It is the advanced world that causes most of the problems and it
is the poor world that suffers most as the number of ‘ecological
refugees’ rises. Andrew Simms’ Ecological Debt offers a
vivid description of how this happens. The advanced capitalist states
have plundered the world and continue to trap poor countries in a
network of economic debt. But in any ecological accounting the debt
would be the other way. The few owe the many because of their
disproportionate use of resources and the disproportionate pollution
that they cause. This is getting worse as competition for resources
and energy grows. Two thirds of the anticipated increasing demand for
oil in the next two decades will have to come from the Middle East,
for example. This may not be the only reason for the US presence in
Iraq but it is a powerful contributing factor.
Simms rejects the idea that capitalism has a self-correcting
economic mechanism. Some claim that when prices rise the system will
adjust and reduce the burden on the environment. For Simms, any such
price signals would be too slow and distorted by dirty subsidies.
They would also require unrealistic increases in technological
efficiency. Inevitably the costs would again fall more on the poor.
So far so good. Simms’ account echoes what some on the left have
argued. In two articles in the Journal of Economic (Issues
34 (3), September 2000 and 37 (3), September 2003), for
example, Rumy Husan and I have argued that even if the market
argument worked (we don’t think it does), then it could only
equalise global incomes over huge time periods and with unsustainable
environmental costs.
Is there an alternative? Simms suggests that if nothing changes
the result will be chaos. Only a reduction and redistribution of
resources makes any sense. This is what, following Aubrey Meyer,
Simms calls ‘contraction and convergence’. I would prefer to talk
of restructuring, redistribution and convergence. But the key issue
is, can we get either inside the system?
Simms’ answer is by far the weakest part of this book. He veers
towards the apocalyptic at one point, suggesting that ‘global
warming probably means the death of capitalism as the dominant
organising framework for the global economy’. Yet much of the
second half of the book is taken up with the idea that the
international legal system can be used to control and moderate
capitalism. Simms never seriously considers the limits to the law at
the national level, let alone the international level. Nor does he
ask who will enforce it.
To have an illusion in the law is also to have an illusion in the
state and the ability of states to work together. In Between Equal
Rights (reviewed in International Socialism 2 : 107),
China Miéville has shown in terms of legal theory why international
law cannot work in the way that its supporters hope. But even without
this we might have hoped for a more sceptical position from an
environmentalist like Simms. He uses the idea that the law needs to
control the ‘global commons’ – the common land, atmosphere,
etc., that we all share. But in England it was the rich who took the
original common land from the people using the law and state
together. Legal challenges have a place, but by themselves they are
not enough and to the extent that they are effective they owe as much
to the sound of noisy opposition beyond the courtroom walls as to
‘legalistic thinking’ inside.
Such arguments underpin Steven P. McGiffen’s Biotechnology:
Corporate Power Versus Public Interest. McGiffen reviews the
legal basis of the control of Genetically Modified Organisms across
the developed world, in the developing world and through
international treaties. Whereas Simms’ writing is light, McGiffen’s
is dense. But he is the more realistic about what law and regulation
can do. Corporate power, he argues, likes legal protection for some
things – patents, for example, or forcing farmers to keep buying
seeds from the company store. Corporate power dislikes regulations
which conflict with its basic drive for profit and attempts to
commodify increasing areas of life across the globe.
This undermines the possibility of the ‘precautionary approach’
whether it be to climate change or GM farming. The ‘precautionary
approach’ is the argument that, since we cannot know exactly what
climate change or genetic modification will bring but we suspect that
any negative changes might be irreversible or only reversible over
generations, we should err on the side of caution. In contrast,
McGiffen argues that corporate power has no interest in a ‘measured
and considered’ debate or measured regulation. Both are subject to
‘the ferocious, self-interested lobbying of multinational
corporations with a stake in biotechnology’.
This is justified by a GM science that makes vastly inflated
claims. Companies prevent or denigrate independent tests.
One of the most interesting facets of global capitalism at the
moment is the huge power of agribusiness. Hundreds of millions of
people produce the food that feeds billions, but if it enters into
the global economy then this food is funnelled through a tiny number
of multinational companies. Ten pesticide companies, for example,
control 84 percent of the global pesticide market and five of these
(Du Pont, Syngenta, Bayer, Monsanto and Dow) control 25 percent of
the commercial seed market as well. These same five companies control
71 percent of patents of agricultural biotechnology.
The problem is how to go beyond this situation. McGiffen argues
that ‘under pressure from a public increasingly aware of problems
associated with biotech’ in some places the law and elected
representatives have gone some way to creating some controls. But
elsewhere those who try to regulate the system ‘have become nothing
more than builders of the road along which the juggernaut of
corporate-controlled biotechnology is moving, and crushing all that
stands in its way’.
 



Karl Marx was born on the 5th of May 1818 in the small German town of Trier. 65 years later he died on 14 March 1883 in London – the hub of nineteenth century capitalism. In those intervening six and a half decades the face of much of the world had been more radically changed than at any previous time in history. The measures we have of this transformation are all inadequate to the task of capturing its full extent. Nevertheless we must make of them what we can. One such crude indicator is that of the growth of total output. If we look at Europe as a whole between 1818–1883 we find that total output grew by 2.5 times. Of course the population of Europe also increased in these years but even so output per head rose some 1.7 times. If we focus particularly on the early industrialising countries where Marx spent much of his life (our statistics define these as the United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Switzerland) then the increases are even more significant. Total output in these countries rose some 3.3 times during Marx’s lifetime and output per head 2.3 times. [1]
Such figures only have real meaning if we can compare them with what went before. Unfortunately this is not possible with any precision – the basis of our statistics is already weak enough for Marx’s lifetime without pushing them back into earlier centuries. But by a simple trick we can gain an idea of just how revolutionary these rates of grow were. Suppose we extrapolate backwards the rates of increase between 1818–1883 to the years before Marx’s birth? Within a matter of decades we quickly arrive at such low levels of output per head that life would have been difficult to sustain. The system then could never have sustained growth as fast as this. In fact our trick enables us to go one step further and say that the increase in output per head in the early industrialised countries during Marx’s lifetime was probably greater than the increase in output per head in the previous 2,000 years and possibly even the whole of recorded human history. [2]
No-one was more aware of this than Marx himself though of course he could not put any precise figures to the growth of capitalism. From the beginning of his attempt to understand its development he stressed that capitalism was the most dynamic mode of production that had yet been seen. This dynamism took a number of forms. At one level capitalism piled up huge concentrations of wealth in a way that had never before been possible. At another level it spread itself ever more widely across the face of the globe tying in the world’s population to its motive force. But the dynamic of capitalism for Marx was not simply quantitative. Capitalism could only develop by constant transformation. At first it was the old relations that were dissolved as the restrictive barriers that had limited human potential were destroyed. But the transformation did not stop there for then capitalism proceeded to constantly revolutionise itself as it pushed production forward and constantly broke down the earlier forms that it had created.
The sense of this dynamism comes out clearly in the famous first part of the Communist Manifesto:
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together ...
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole relations of society. Conservation of old modes of production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind.
Capitalism, continued Marx and Engels was, ‘like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells’.
Everyone who reads this and other passages in the Communist Manifesto is impressed both by the outrage in the condemnation of capitalism and the analysis that accompanies it. But it is difficult also not to be impressed by the awe that Marx and Engels obviously have the stupendous nature of capitalism’s achievements. It was an awe that was the product of living in a society in which for the first time growth and change had become the normal condition. And it was a sense of achievement that Marx and Engels fully shared with the bourgeoisie itself.
Discussed at this level, however, it is too easy to see the development of capitalism in Marx’s time as a simple success story. And unfortunately this is just how much historical work including that of some leading Marxist historians portrays it. The old crumbles and gives way before the new save only for the heroic resistance of various groups of peasants and workers. Real interest then comes to centre on the original rise of capitalism and its later ‘take-off’ in the era of the industrial revolution. The ‘drive to capitalist maturity’ that occupied Marx’s lifetime and beyond for the advanced capitalist countries appears largely as an afterthought in which immanent tendencies of development naturally work themselves out until we finally arrive at the relative complexity of the present day. In its turn Marx’s own analysis of capitalism can then be pictured as a magnificent distillation of these immanent tendencies, a splendid theoretical edifice in which the structure of the capitalist mode of production is laid out before us. It is not, of course, a complete distillation – there is room for theoretical debate on this and that issue – but the logical structure is there and all that is necessary for historians is to apply it to history.
This approach, we shall argue, rests upon a serious misunderstanding both of the actual history of capitalism and the nature of Marx’s method in the Grundrisse and Capital. The pattern of capitalist development has never been a simple realisation of immanent tendencies and it was certainly not so in Marx’s day. On the contrary, capitalism always presents us with a series of highly complex, concrete, but changing forms. The analysis of capitalism therefore must consist of much more than simply identifying the pattern of development in what appears at any one time to be the most modern or the most typical forms and then constructing an analysis around them. Equally we cannot simply apply a pre-ordained theoretical structure to the real complexity of capitalism as it exists rather than as it is supposed to exist. Instead what we need is a method by which we can understand the relationship between the general nature of the capitalist mode of production and the various concrete forms that it has historically given rise to.
To see why this is so and how such an approach differs from what often passes as the Marxist analysis of capitalism we need to begin by looking more carefully at capitalism in Marx’s time and the very complex forms its expansion took. To do this we will concentrate on the capitalist forms that Marx knew best – those of Britain. From this basis we will then be able to see more clearly the problem that Marx had to deal with and it will then be possible to look anew at his method in the Grundrisse and Capital and to show why a proper understanding of that method is equally essential to an understanding of capitalism in our time.
 
Factory industry in Marx’s time
The first thing that needs to be said is that even in those areas where capitalism most resembled the forms that we take for granted today (particularly, cotton, iron and steel and engineering) these forms were still relatively undeveloped. This point is now more widely commented upon by historians but the extent of the transformation that took place at the end of the nineteenth century i.e. in the three decades after Marx’s death is still not appreciated. In fact, as W.H.B. Court noted some years ago, ‘mid-Victorian England [the background against which Marx wrote Capital – MH] was nearer to Matthew Boulton and his partner James Watt than to the men and methods of 1914’. [3]
The significance of this can be seen across a whole series of areas. The size of capital, for example, was still very small. No easily comparable figures exist on the size of either firms or factories. Nevertheless the scattered data that we do have show that capital in Marx’s time in England was small scale. We know from factory inspectorate returns that the average size of manufacturing establishments was less than 20 employees in 1871. Such averages across the whole of manufacturing can, of course, be misleading weigh down as they are by the numerous small plants. Ideally we would like to know median sizes rather than simple averages but no-one has yet attempted such calculations. Nevertheless there is a degree of consistency between the average size revealed by the statistics for the advanced sectors and what we know of company size from the study of individual firms. Big units did exist but the degree of variation around the mean was limited. [4] The biggest plants were to be found in shipbuilding (as they had always been in history until then). The average number employed in these yards varied between 600–800 depending upon the area. In South Wales the largest iron works averaged some 650 workers but the national average was down to 200. In engineering the average number of workers was less than 100 and in cotton it was about 170. By the time of Marx’s death little had changed. ‘There is no reason to think that there that there was any important change in the scale of industrial operations’, commented J.H. Clapham, of the period between 1871 and the early 1880’s. Anything resembling the large modern factory unit was therefore a relative rarity in Britain during Marx’s lifetime. [5]
Similarly the concentration and centralisation of capital had hardly begun. Examples of vertical integration backwards and forwards to take over different stages in the productive process can be found, as can examples of horizontal integration outwards to take over rival units at the same stage of production. But these examples too are relatively rare and hardly typical of mid-Victorian industry. Conglomeration – the drawing together of different lines of production under the umbrella of one unit of capital was virtually non-existent. Factory size was therefore a good guide to the actual size of capital itself. Indeed in some industries like weaving it actually overstated it since factory buildings might well be shared by different firms.
This embryonic development of the centralisation and concentration of capital was closely related to the equally embryonic development of the organisational form of capital. It was only in the 1850s and 60s in western Europe that legislation permitting joint stock organisation was passed. In Britain the necessary legislation came between 1856–62. However the opportunities created by this legislation were comparatively slowly taken up. In 1885, two years after Marx’s death, it is estimated that only between 5–10% of companies were limited and these were concentrated in shipping, iron and steel and cotton. The family business remained the norm and most joint-stock companies were simply family firms taking advantage of the legislation rather than modern management controlled units with a mass of ‘impotent’ shareholders. Marx, therefore, developed much of his analysis against the background of the ‘heroic age of the private owner of risk capital’. [6] In these terms it is not surprising that although he stresses the danger of confusing capitalist relations with the control of individual capitalists he should nevertheless write as if in practice these relations were personified or embodied in the individual owner capitalist. Charles Dickens may have exaggerated when he developed his portrayal of Mr. Gradgrind in Hard Times as the quintessential capitalist but the Victorians and Marx would have recognised in him the capitalists they saw around them.
Equally the years between the 1850s and the late 1870s were also the time when changes in price had their sharpest impact on the restructuring of capital. The relatively small scale of business combined with falling transport costs gave price competition a competitive edge that it had not had before and would not have again. This was not, of course, a competition that even then bore any resemblance to the ‘perfect competition models’ of modern economic textbooks. But it did mean that Marx’s experience of ‘monopoly capital’ was highly restricted and unrepresentative of what was to come. (One of the few more blatant examples of monopoly that Marx might well have encountered as a member of the mid-Victorian middle class was when he did his weekly shopping! The Victorian middle classes were much concerned that the existing stores overcharged them and sold them adulterated food. Moreover since they offered long credit their customers could find themselves tied by debt and so unable to shop around. In the late 1860s and 1870s this dissatisfaction led to the creation of middle class ‘co-ops’ like the Civil Service and Army and Navy Stores!)
Much of this picture of the structure of capital in the more advanced sectors began to change from the late 1880s. Capital began to take advantage of the joint-stock form as a convenient shell for its expansion. In the 1890s and early 1900s there was much more rapid development of the company form and a related burst of amalgamation that fundamentally altered the structure of capital and the nature of capitalist competition. It is probably true that by 1914 this had developed less far in Britain than in the United States but even so the picture in 1914 is strikingly different from at the time of Marx’s death. For the economy as a whole the number of registered limited companies increased seven times from 9,334 in 1885 to 62,762 in 1914. [7] During the same period paid up capital increased some five times to about £2,500 million. Of these companies in 1914 only some 14,000 were public companies but this 27% of all companies clearly covered the biggest capitals and the largest employers of labour which had not been the case in 1885. Unfortunately it is not possible to say with precision how big the public companies were relatively because the statistics did not distinguish private companies from public in any adequate way until 1926. In that year, though, the much smaller number of public companies had twice the capitalisation of private companies. It also seems likely, if the post war data is not too distorted a guide, that this type of capital was much more profitable. In the immediate aftermath of the war public companies were estimated to be making 57% of all company profit. [8]
One industry where we can trace the transformation relatively clearly is the Lancashire textile industry to which Marx had originally devoted so much attention. Table 1 shows the lack of development of joint stock organisation in 1884. Joint stock companies were few and by no means larger on average than unincorporated and private companies that were under clear family control. By 1911, albeit at different rates in different parts of the industry, the picture had changed quite dramatically. Now joint-stock companies dominated the industry in a much more recognisably modern form and they were also the forms with the largest number of spindles and looms. It is also clear from the data that there had been a significant increase in the size of firms (measured by the changing averages for the numbers of spindles and looms).



Table 1




Changes in the Structure of Capital in the Lancashire Textile Industry 1884–1911 [9]




 


1884


1911




Character
of Firm


% Firms
(a)


Average no. (000s)


% Firms


Average no. (000s)




Spindles


Looms


Spindles


Looms




Spinning only




Private


77


34.3


 


16


26.8


 




Family J/S


  4


84.7


22


61.8




Joint Stock


19


41.6


62


80.7




Doubling only (b)




Private


89


11.8


 


59


14.2


 




Family J/S


–


 


32


18.0




Joint Stock


11


13.8


  9


18.0




Weaving only




Private


93


 


0.4


48


 


0.5




Family J/S


  2


0.5


30


0.6




Joint Stock


  5


0.6


22


0.7




Firms Weaving and Spinning




Private


82


35.0


0.7


25


37.9


0.8




Family J/S


  8


52.0


1.0


57


51.2


1.0




Joint Stock


  9


40.0


0.6


18


50.1


0.9




All Firms




Private


84


 


33


 




Family J/S


  4


31




Joint Stock


12


36




a. because of round not all percentages sum to 100.
b. doubling is the twisting of the yarn together.



Looked at across the whole economy the transformation was more varied. Some sectors like services lagged far behind but in others both the take-up of joint-stock forms and the concentration and centralisation of capital had proceeded much farther. This was particularly clear in the crucial banking sector. In 1880 there had been some 240 private banks and only half that number of joint-stock banks, each with few branches. By 1913 there were only a dozen or so private banks left. The number of joint-stock banks had also declined by two thirds to 40. And within this latter total the emergence of a small number of giant banks was already obvious, in the next four years of war these were to build their power even more fading to the creation of the ‘big five’ that were to dominate financial capital in the British economy for the next half century. Beyond this it is also possible to clearly identify a significant trend towards the internationalisation of manufacturing capital. At the time of Marx’s death the multi-national company had been barely noticeable but by 1914 60 firms had significant overseas manufacturing subsidiaries and of the leading manufacturing firms in 1970 at least 14 had gone multinational before the first world war. [10]
The significance of all this is that although Marx was able to identify the tendency within capitalism for capital to centralise and concentrate it was not a reality around him except in the most attenuated forms. He was, therefore, ignorant – except in the most general terms – of the forms that these tendencies would take after his death. The development of the modern forms of capital was a relatively slow process and it is dangerously misleading to read them back into mid-Victorian Britain. The legislation of Marx’s day may have made big business possible but ‘it was thirty years before the combination movement made it a reality’. [11] This was at least a decade after Marx’s death and some three decades after he had done his investigatory work for Capital. Even Engels who outlived Marx by a dozen years could only begin to catch a sense of the changes that were to come and of their significance.
 
Non-factory capital
But the development of capitalism in Marx’s time was complex in other ways too. It was not simply that modern factory based capital emerged slowly but that the overall pattern of development had nuances of its own. In recent years historians have begun to investigate the nature of the transformation of the labour process more closely and this has made them more aware of the great variation in the forms taken by the expansion of capital. Even in industries like textiles, iron and steel and engineering mechanisation did not follow any simple pattern. The Victorian factory still depended heavily on the brute force of manual labour as an essential ancillary force to the machine. But even by the time of Marx’s death these factories still did not dominate employment and at the time that he was writing Capital they employed less than a fifth of the labour force.
What forms then existed in the rest of the economy? Raphael Samuel has recently catalogued at some length the large number of industries in mid-Victorian Britain that depended upon traditional processes based on hand labour that had been relatively untransformed by industrialisation. [12] These industries were in no sense marginal for they still accounted in the 1850s for much the larger part of industrial output. Moreover, as we shall see, they were just much at the centre of the expansion of capitalism as the better known cotton industry.
Perhaps the single most important industry that expanded without transformation of the labour process by mechanisation was the industry. Mechanisation on the surface did have some impact in the nineteenth century but underground work was much the same at the end of the century as it had been at the beginning. Yet by 1914 the coal industry produced 7% of GNP and exported some 73 million tons. This was only possible because the industry had expanded on ‘extensive’ lines by employing more labour rather than by undergoing a technological transformation. In fact labour productivity in mining began to decline in the 1880s but thanks to the continued increase in the labour force (940,000 in 1907) coal owners were able to push up output. In 1913 only 8.5% of coal was cut mechanically and a significantly smaller proportion conveyed mechanically. But this was an average of all the fields. In fact mechanisation had proceeded unevenly and gone furthest in Scotland and Yorkshire. In other areas its advance was significantly less. [13] In south Wales, for example, more than a quarter of a million miners worked with picks to hew out what Gwyn Williams has called ‘the gigantic world Empire of south Wales coal ... a heartland of British imperial capitalism’. The expansion of the industry there was dependent on the continued movement of workers into south Wales which developed to such an extent that ‘in the early years of the twentieth century south Wales saw immigration of an intensity second only to U.S.A.’ [14]
The sheer scale of the coal industry made it untypical in a number of respects of the type of industries we are interested in here. [15] More typical were the so-called ‘Midland trades’ which dominated the Birmingham area – hand made nails, chains, nuts and bolts, ironmongery, small arms, jewellery, and the brass and copper trades to name only the most important. Here, to quote Court, one of their leading historians, one found ‘great employers of men, women and children at forges attached to the cottages in which they lived. At most, the industry might rise to the dignity of a small shop with assistants run by a garret-master.’ [16] Control of the industries could, however, be more complex with many of these cottages workers tied together under the thumb of wealthy and powerful merchant capitalists. The ‘rise of the Midland Industries’ can be raced back to the sixteenth century from when they began to develop a dominance in the area that lasted three centuries. Moreover it was a dominance which, like coal elsewhere, was tied intimately to the growing world role of British capital. It was only in the late 1870s and 1880s that the modern industrial structure of the area began to develop centred on light engineering, food processing (Cadbury’s), the bicycle industry, rubber and cars – ‘turning out new products, making more use of power and machinery and complicated techniques, organized on a joint stock basis and sometimes upon a very large scale’. [17]
But this type of production dominated more widely and hung on more tenaciously in still other industries. It can be found in food processing, pottery, glass, leather, woodworking, metallurgy and some engineering production. Similarly it dominated much of the building industry as to an extent it continues to do so today. It was even an important part of the history of East Lancashire – ‘the home of the greatest concentration of manufacturing industry that the world had ever known’. There cotton never employed more than a third of the population in the towns and many of the related and ancillary trades continued to be traditionally organised throughout the nineteenth century. Even in textiles ‘domestic industry expanded side by side with the factory until the 1830s and experienced a renaissance with the spread of the sewing machine in the 1860s and of the knitting machine in the 1880’s. [18]
To understand this form of development and why it was so; important a part of the general expansion of capital in nineteenth century Britain (and for some industries beyond this) it is important to use the distinction that Marx drew between the formal subordination of labour and the real subordination of labour under capitalism. (Strangely Raphael Samuel ignores both this distinction and Marx’s own substantive discussion of it.)
Marx used the term capitalist mode of production in two quite distinct senses. The first and most significant referred to the domination of production and society at large by the self-expansive power of capital. The second sense referred specifically and more narrowly to the labour process itself. Here Marx writes of modern large-scale factory industry dominated by machinery as ‘the specifically capitalist mode of production in its developed form’. A failure to distinguish between these two senses has led to much confusion amongst Marxists.
Capitalism in the wider sense of a mode of production distinct from feudalism began to emerge in the sixteenth century. But it did so by subordinating the existing labour process to the imperatives of the expansion of capital without actually transforming the internal nature of that labour process. Classically, domestic or cottage industry was tied into a network of merchant control and the real independence of workers was lost as production as a whole was subordinated to the laws of motion of capitalism. This was what Marx called ‘the formal subsumption of labour under capital’. It was only in the nineteenth century with the development of machinery that capitalist domination could develop through the internal transformation of the labour process. It was this process that Marx analysed as the ‘real subordination of labour’. [19]
From our discussion of the characteristics of British capital it can now be seen that not only did the formal subordination precede the development of the real but during Marx’s lifetime forms of capital embodying the formal subordination continued not only to exist but to grow and develop apace. In other words in examining the actual development of capitalist forms we have to drop the notion that the shift to new forms embodying the real subordination of labour was automatic. Even if we leave aside the now well documented resistance of workers themselves to this shift it is clear that capital itself found it more profitable to expand by developing the old methods than adopting the new across a wide range of industry. Indeed during Marx’s lifetime these forms not only developed alongside modern industry but in an intimate relationship to it. Thus one historian of sweated labour in outwork notes ‘the amazing persistence – even vitality – of this antique “system” in the nineteenth century’. Even by the time of Marx’s death this vitality was still very real:
Although by then [the last quarter of the century – MH] it had virtually disappeared from some areas where it had traditionally been important, it had taken a firmer root in others; and although no major industry now existed exclusively on the basis of outwork organisation, many were carried on by some complicated combination of factory production and outwork, with the two effectively complementing each other. [20]
There exists therefore a complex process of interaction in operation here that needs to be understood if we are to analyse the nature of capitalist development.
Precisely because production based upon the formal subordination of labour continued to grow alongside the modern factory and in direct connection with it we cannot analyse its development in terms of a crude dichotomy between pre-modern/modem forms or pre-industrial/industrial forms. Both forms of development were modern and industrial in the sense that their particular dynamics both derived from and were tied together by the same general logic of capitalist development. As a consequence there arose a specific and differentiated pattern of development where for many industries and localities the consequence of the industrial revolution was ‘to accentuate pre-industrial characteristics’ and create ‘industrialisation without industrialisation’.
This accentuation of the pre-industrial character took two related forms. One was a major expansion of employment in these traditional industries. This can easily be traced in the occupational census where alongside the expected increase in employment in factory based industry one finds a significant growth too in non-factory industry. [21] It can also be traced in the history of many manufacturing towns where these industries continued to dominate late into the century. [22] But perhaps its best known consequence can be traced in London where, as Gareth Stedman-Jones has so graphically described it, a massive pool of casual labour flowed in and out of trades like furniture and clothing as well as service industries like transport and the docks. [23] But this accentuation of pre-industrial employment patterns did not leave the labour process itself untouched. On the contrary, it produced a massive degradation of labour within the traditional labour process of which ‘sweating’ was the most obvious form. In this way in spite of formally owning certain of the means of production and in spite of a formal control over their means off subsistence workers found that ‘these conditions of labour (were being) mobilised against them’. The more effectively, continued Marx, ‘the formal relationship between capital and wage labour is established (then) the more effectively the formal subsumption of labour under capital is accomplished ...’
 
The ‘logic of capitalist expansion’
What then underlay this pattern? The forces sustaining each specific instance of expansion on the basis of the formal subordination of labour must be examined separately. But it is possible to offer some wider generalisations. Some commentators have suggested that these forms developed alongside the factory because of an under-accumulation of capital associated with the early stages of capitalist development. But the theory behind this is only a variation on the pre-modern/modern dichotomy and the basic suggestion is that as capital is accumulated these will die away. As such it fails to explain the very vitality of these forms over the long period. Moreover there is no evidence to show that capital was actually a limiting factor causing capitalists to adopt and perpetuate these forms. [24] Indeed large amounts of capital could be and were invested in these industries though not necessarily in the labour process and there was certainly no shortage of capital accumulated there out of the efforts of the workers.
Another similarly inadequate attempt at explanation is that which stresses the limitation of technique – these industries developed in this way because an adequate factory technology was not yet available. But this only begs the question of why in these industries an adequate factory technology was slow in coming. It also fails to explain why when that technology did become available the take-up of the factory form was so slow and expansion through the formal subordination of labour so resilient. What tends to lie behind this argument is a technological determinism which both assumes the superiority of factory technology in terms of efficiency and that such superiority is a sufficient explanation. But, as Stephen Marglin has powerfully argued, the factory is a social institution and not just a technological form. Therefore one cannot discuss the shift to the factory in terms of an abstract technological efficiency. In fact, as he suggests for the very first factories in the eighteenth century:
the key to the success of the factory, as well as its inspiration, was the substitution of capitalists’ for workers’ control of the productive process; discipline and supervision could and did reduce costs without being technologically superior.
Only later, once the factory form was in place, did an appropriate technology develop. [25]
In other words two related issues are crucial in analysing the shift to the factory. First is the size of the surplus that could be generated by a particular labour process, then, secondly there is the problem of controlling the worker in that process and the costs this involved. That the shift was not more universal therefore depended not only on technology but the ability of these traditional forms to generate sufficient surpluses to survive and because the problems of controlling the labour force did not increase to a level where the close supervision of factory labour became necessary.
What lay behind both of these features was the availability of a mass of malleable cheap labour. This meant that capital could expand not by increasing relative surplus value but by driving down labour costs to increase the amount of absolute surplus value produced. In this way these forms could not only cling tenaciously to life but expand. The fact that this involved a degree of self-exploitation only added to its attraction for capital so long as the resistance of workers (slower work, poor quality production, etc.) did not threaten the size of the surplus. But with a huge pool of labour available and wretched earnings, those who controlled the industries had the upper hand. Moreover, the system also meant that many of the ‘costs’ that would have accrued to capital could now be passed on to the shoulders of the workers themselves or, less directly, on society in general through charity and poor relief. This is especially useful wherever trade had a seasonal character. In this sense capitalism created a dynamic where the increasing spread this type of industry as well as agricultural development led to Population growth which in its turn then perpetuated and gave life this particular form of capitalist expansion rather than factory based technology. [26]
We do have available one valuable indicator that goes a long way towards crystallising what we have been saying about both the protracted development of modern capitalist forms and the way in which the actual pattern of capitalist expansion assumed complex forms. This is the extent of steam power utilisation in industry. It is not a perfect indicator of the extent and modernity of modem capitalist forms since water power was the major source of factory power for much of the first half of the century. But certainly for the latter half of the nineteenth century the index of steam power use goes a long way towards capturing both the extent and character of capitalist development. This is shown in the table below:



Table 2




Steam Power in U.K. Industry
(horse-power) [27]




1800


 


     20,000




1824


   100,000




1850


   500,000




1870


   980,000




1880


2,200,000




1907


9,650,000



It is clear from the table that in 1870 less than one million horse power existed in industry (at this time water power supplied a further 55,000 h.p.). Moreover, of this figure some 300,000 h.p. was accounted for by the cotton industry alone and just over 500,000 h.p. by the whole of the textile industry. Since blast furnaces and iron mills accounted for a further 220,000 h.p. the major part of the remaining industries must have been without significant steam power utilisation. In these terms Marx’s early aphorism that the hand mill gives you feudalism while the steam mill gives you capitalism should obviously not be taken too seriously. [28]
By 1880 the amount of steam power had more than doubled but the really big surge in the use of steam power (and by implication power driven machinery) came between 1880 and 1907 – in the decades after Marx’s death. Moreover, by the latter date electrical power had begun to be important (in 1912 it supplied a quarter of motive power) so that the actual increase in the use of power driven machinery was actually greater. Thus we can see that at the time that Marx was preparing Capital power driven machinery had hardly begun to touch large sections of British industry and even when he died two decades later the technological transformation for the larger part of the economy was still to come.
 
Crisis, state and world economy
So far we have concentrated our attention on the structure of individual capital but the distinctiveness of the system in Marx’s time can also be explored in other ways. Two in particular need comment here. The first is that the process of the expansion of capital at large was then, as it is now, through crisis. But the form of periodic crisis in Marx’s time was significantly different both from today and what it was beginning to become after his death. As Court comments in his general history:
The classical period of the trade cycle, so far as Great Britain was concerned ... undoubtedly fell within the century between the crisis of 1763 and the country bankers crisis of 1866. [29]
In other words it formed the background to Marx’s own discussion of the mechanism of capitalist crisis.
In his reference to the ‘classical trade cycle’ Court has in mind three features of the crisis mechanism at this time. Firstly, as we have already noted, the size of capital was small and this made it more vulnerable. Secondly, the banking system was weakly developed and insecure and dependent to an extent on a Bank of England that had yet to fully take on the functions of a modern central bank. Thirdly, the state itself did not intervene in the crisis. Taken together these features meant that from the point of view of the system as a whole the restructuring of capital through crisis was a relatively automatic process. Crisis was precipitated by a banking panic which would lead to the destruction of weaker capitals and a redistribution of capital to areas of higher profits. Manufacturers in certain trades and localities might try to organise themselves to resist the full impact of the crisis but their efforts were generally limited and unsuccessful.
By the end of the nineteenth century, however, the crisis mechanism was beginning to be the subject of more conscious manipulation. Under the ‘Gold Standard’ there remained no significant role for the government in a crisis and serious state attempts at the mediation of crisis in Britain had to await the final retreat from gold in 1931. But even the gold standard had to be administered and this placed the Bank of England at the centre of the process – a responsibility which from the 1860’s it was much more prepared to accept. Equally the rise of larger business units also began to introduce modifications into the working of crisis. The consequence was that the apparently automatic restructuring of capital began to be the subject of more conscious attempts at interference and manipulation. Prior to 1914 the impact of these attempts at mediating the crisis for British capital as a whole and world capital was hardly perceptible. But a process had been set in motion whereby it would become more significant and so the crisis mechanism of capitalism would come to incorporate a whole series of crucial features not apparent in Marx’s time.
These later developments cannot, of course, be understood without reference to the state which is the final characteristic of British capital in Marx’s time that we need to raise here. During Marx’s lifetime the British state played an essential role in creating the general political and economic conditions for the reproduction of capital. But its direct role in the process of accumulation and production was limited though not to the extent that some of the more naive ‘laissez-faire’ histories suggest. The state was, for example, and always has been the single largest capital in any advanced country. Nevertheless in Britain in Marx’s time this aspect of its activity did not stand to the fore. From the 1820’s to the 1870’s state expenditure in money terms was constant and as a percentage of GNP it actually fell to a low of about 8%. To give some idea of the comparative significance of this – the value of all state expenditure during this time was roughly on a par with the value of the output of the cotton industry.
Consequently one of the major and most distinctive features of modern capitalism was missing from Marx’s experience. It is not surprising, therefore, that while the state figures prominently in Marx’s general political analysis it only appears intermittently as an economic force in the Grundrisse and Capital. Yet by the 1880’s we can already, with only a limited need for hindsight, begin to see the significance of this omission. It was then that the liberal Sir William Harcourt coined the phrase ‘we are all socialists now’ to capture the way in which a more general rise in the level of state activity had begun. The Economist put it more picturesquely in 1895 when it wrote that ‘little by little and year by year, the fabric of state expenditure is built up like a coral island, cell on cell’. By 1914 state expenditure had increased from the time of Marx’s death by a third to take 12.5% of GNP. The growth of defence and welfare spending had contributed to this but so had a ‘spectacular’ growth of municipal trading which was to lay the basis for much later nationalisation. Then during the first world war it shot temporarily to 50% of GNP as by 1918 the state had brought thousands of factories and workshops and millions of workers under its control. When the economy demobilised after 1918 it was to a plateau of state activity significantly higher than in 1914. [30]
We have deliberately stressed the peculiarities of British capital in Marx’s lifetime. Of course, had we cast our net more widely on a world scale those peculiarities would have been even more evident. In the United States, for example, we find in the North a labour process which was if anything more intensely based upon the real subordination of labour than that in Britain. Yet in the American South slavery, which had been a declining institution in the eighteenth century, had been given a new lease of life, indeed one might say recreated anew, from the 1790’s to feed the burgeoning demand for cotton from the textile factories of Lancashire. Not only was slavery used to work the plantations but it was even found to be an efficient form of labour organisation and control in the factories in the South. [31]
If we then turn to Europe the forms in the countries following Britain’s industrialisation here are no less varied. In Germany in the 1870’s we find the huge Krupp works at Essen with some 12,000 employees. [32] But alongside it in the German economy a mass of small workshop and artisan production that was to survive even longer than in Britain and so lay some of the social basis for fascism in the inter-war years. This pattern of uneven and combined development and forms was repeated more generally elsewhere in Europe. Here too we find also a different process of development in which the ‘weightings’ of institutions are different. In some countries it is the banks that play a leading role in organising production. In other countries that role falls to the state itself – most notably in Russia itself where the initiative for much industrialisation derived directly from the activities of the minister of finance, Count Witte, in the 1890’s. [33]
All these many forms were clearly tied to the general development of capitalism as a world economy but there has been a tendency to treat them apart. Somehow Marxists have seen them as simply less developed forms, peculiar and of restricted significance – necessary perhaps to understand the ‘development of underdevelopment’ but not to understand the ‘purer’ and uncomplicated ‘development of development’. Sometimes these peculiarities have seemed so great that the temptation has been to cut some of them out completely and treat them as being products of different modes of production. In this argument their development is related to and derives from capitalism but it is said not to be a part of any capitalist mode of production.
The advantages of our concentration on Britain is that we can now see more clearly the difficulties of any such argument, for these peculiarities were by no means restricted to ‘backward’ areas. Certainly they appear in a more intense form there but they reflect the type of peculiarities that we need to get to grips with if we are to understand capitalism in Britain – by general consent the most developed form in Marx’s time. From this basis therefore we will hopefully now be able to better understand the problem that Marx faced in trying to analyse both capitalism as a mode of production and the particular and restricted forms of it that he knew and had studied.
 
The problem of capitalism
Marx’s well known intention was to lay bare the ‘economic law of motion of capitalism’. But we have seen that the material he had available to him was limited by the particular stage of development that capitalism had reached in his time. Here our argument has been that, even at its most developed, capitalism was still relatively undeveloped and alongside its relatively ‘modern’ forms we find a whole series of other highly complex forms. At the same time we have argued that none of these forms were static, they were all subject to a process of change and they were, at the time of Marx’s death, about to give way to a variety of new and different forms under the impact of the expansive dynamic of capitalism.
Marx himself was completely aware of what he called the ‘permanently revolutionary’ character of capitalism. In the preface to Capital he wrote that ‘the present society is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of change, and constantly engaged in a process of change’. But if this is so how is it possible to grasp the true nature of capitalism as a dynamic mode of production? How are we to understand what ties together the many different forms that capitalism gives rise to as it develops? [34]
We can best begin to solve his problem by asking just what is meant by ‘the economic law of motion of capitalism’? Unfortunately this phrase has been repeated so many times that it has become like a religious incantation whose meaning has become obscure to even the priests themselves. Yet it actually takes us directly to the heart of the matter at issue. Marx’s starting point was his recognition that all social forms are constantly in motion and change. Writing later in Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy Engels described this as the ‘great basic thought’ of both Marx and himself, ‘the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a complex of processes’. If this is true in general then it must obviously be true in particular for capitalism since this is the most dynamic mode of production yet known to us. When therefore we try to unravel ‘the law of motion of capitalism’ we are concerned not with identifying static structures – not with a solid crystal – but with seeing the process which creates and operates through the different historical structures that arise as capitalism develops as a mode of production.
But this process cannot be immediately grasped from a superficial survey of the complex reality we find around us. Necessarily we need theory to understand it and our theory will have to be built upon abstractions which enable us to recreate the world in our heads. All readers will be familiar with the nature of these abstractions in Marx’s analysis – the commodity, exchange value, wage labour and so on. But in the real world these general or simple abstractions do not exist except as aspects of specific, concrete forms. These particular forms are what Marx called ‘determinations’ and the nearer we get to the real world the richer and more complex do these determinations become.
But this immediately produces a problem for us. It is clearly insufficient to just produce a list of these categories and imagine that we can build an analysis out of them. What we need to know is how the different categories all relate to one another. Are our abstractions all of equal weight or are some more important than others and, just as important, how do we decide upon our answer? We need some guide to tell us just what it is that sets the order of determination of our abstractions – what determines the determinants, what is the basis of the order of determination itself?
Marx himself did not set out this problem formally in his writings on method. In the introductory section of the Grundrisse, for example, he sets out the need to understand the world through abstraction in its successive determinations but then stops short of any more detailed discussion. But the nature of the solution is not difficult and it is immediately apparent in his actual writings on capitalism.
The crucial thing for us to understand is what keeps the system in continual movement. Here the traditional abstractions of Marxist economics are of no immediate help. The commodity, exchange value, profit, wage labour etc. do not themselves move anything, they all need to be moved by something that is itself in continual movement, that is itself a process. In capitalism it is capital in its mutual competition and self-expansion that is that process. As capital works through its circuit of self-expansion so it moves and gives life to and works through the other abstractions that we need. Without this notion of capital as a process we are at a loss even to know why the other abstract determinants should be the appropriate ones for capitalist society let alone how they relate to one another, in this sense the whole process has an irreducible element – it can only be grasped in its total movement and not in its parts. As Marx wrote in the Grundrisse:
If, then, the specific form of capital is abstracted away, and only the content is emphasised ... Capital is conceived as a thing, not as a relation ... (but) capital is not a simple relation, but a process, in whose various moments it is always capital. [35]
It is this focus on capital as a process ordering social relations which gives us the method by which we can understand the succession of ordered determinations in capitalism and thus through this we have the possibility of coming to terms with the great variety of forms that capitalism produces. Earlier in the Grundrisse Marx puts this even more clearly:
In all forms of society there is one specific kind of production which predominates over the rest, whose relations thus assign rank and influence to the others. It is a general illumination which bathes all the other colours and modifies their particularity ... Capital is the all-dominating economic power of bourgeois society. [36]
If it is capital that ‘is a general illumination which bathes all the colours and modifies their particularity’ then it now follows that we cannot understand how the actual forms of capitalism relate to’ capital by working backwards from simple categories like those of wage labour and the commodity. Rather we must move forward to understand how these categories themselves function and are determined in the world by capital. But unfortunately much of what passes for Marxist economics does the former rather than the latter. Thus one writer will conceive of capitalism as ‘generalised commodity production’, another will take it as a ‘system of wage labour’, yet others will focus on even higher and more specific forms of determination and define it as a system of private property, markets or profit or whatever.
All of this runs directly counter to Marx’s own analysis where simple abstractions were meant to be filled out and not simply matched against reality. Thus, for example, Marx talks not of the commodity under capitalism but the ‘capitalist-modified commodity’. Similarly when he spoke of wage labour he did not mean by that any one concrete form – in particular the worker presenting himself at the factory gate for wages every week – but those forms of labour which create capital. Wage labour, he says, is in essence, ‘capital positing labour’. [37]
In this sense we cannot tie capitalism down and we should not expect to. It is not possible to offer simple definitions of what the system is or will be:
A definition fixes the superficial attributes of a thing at any given moment or period, and thus transforms these attributes into something permanent and unchanging. To understand things it is necessary to grasp them genetically, in their successive transformations and thus to discover their essence, their notion. It is only a pseudo-science that is satisfied with definitions and the phenomenal aspects of things. [38]
Instead we must gear ourselves to following the successive transformations that capital produces as it is driven to preserve itself through its competitive self-expansion.
We cannot then, analyse the world through a set of pre-ordained theoretical categories. Rather these categories must themselves be continually reconstructed in their different determinations as we analyse actual forms of development such as those we have attempted to identify in the first part of this article. If by contrast we now turn to see how other Marxists have dealt with the problem we will be able to see the distance that both separates them from us and, we have argued, Marx himself. It would not be appropriate here to enter into a detailed critique of these other views, instead we will rest content with a more general focus on what they have in common and in particular their tendency to reduce capitalism to a given structure or model which is then held up to reality.
Just what this model or structure consists of varies. For some it is like the ‘ideal type’ of the German sociologist Max Weber: we select a number of characteristics which form our ‘ideal type’ and then hold it up to existing capitalism for comparison. But now we should be able to see how inadequate this approach is. Weber’s method was, in fact quite distinct from Marx’s. Despite a huge Weberian scholarship no-one seems at all clear about the method which Weber used to construct his ideal types. They are essentially static constructions in which parts are deliberately exaggerated for supposed illumination. The different levels at which they are supposed to operate and the different levels within them are equally unclear in Weber’s writings. By contrast the steps in Marx’s argument appear a model of clarity. Firstly its focus is dynamic – on process. Secondly its abstractions are real in the sense that they are not abstract definitions against which to judge the world but categories which enable us to understand real relationships. (This incidentally in why Marx spends so much time showing us the relevance of each abstraction!) And, thirdly, as we argued above, the order of determination in Marx’s argument is clear.
To raise the spectre of Max Weber in this context might seem a red herring since while ‘orthodox social science’ accounts frequently relate Marx and Weber few Marxists consciously do. Yet unconsciously the refusal of Marxist economists to focus on capitalism as a process of determinations inevitably produces a vision of capitalism whose method is closely related to that of Weber and bourgeois social science in general. This can be seen, for example, the huge literature generated in what has been called ‘the modes of production’ debate which has sought to deal precisely with the variety of forms which we discussed earlier. Here modes of production appear as structures which are ticked off against the world. There is, of course, debate about the character of these structures. In respect of capitalism it has recently focussed on a clash between those who see capitalism’s essence as commodity production and those who see it as wage labour. But the method that underlies both approaches is the same. Instead of recognising the kaleidoscope of forms that capitalism operates through, the simple categories themselves determine what is and is not capitalism. Thus for some American slavery is not capitalist because it is not based upon some simple conception of wage labour, for others it is because it produced commodities; for some the Soviet Union has commodities and that is sufficient in itself to make it capitalist, for others they must find wage labour in a form that they can assimilate to their own abstract conception. The terms vary but the method of treating the world through appearances and simple abstractions remains the same. At its crudest we seem almost to have 49% wage labour equals ‘non-capitalist’; while 51% wage labour equals ‘capitalist’!
Recently in this debate a powerful case has been put with great force by what we can call the ‘wage labour school’. Thus writers like Dobb, Laclau, Brenner and Callinicos all concur. [39] But what they all take to be wage labour is nothing other than a phenomenal form – namely a freely negotiated wage contract. In other words instead of seeing the essence of wage labour in Marx’s sense of labour producing capital in its specific determinations they remain content with one appearance that is produced out of the hat as a determining form. Nowhere in Marx so we find this attenuated view. [40] If wage labour is that labour that produces capital then its form can vary enormously from the freely negotiated wage contract to the forced labour of British and other imperialisms in the colonial world to the labour of concentration camp prisoners in Nazi Germany to the labour of the worker tied to his job for life by his pension fund to the worker in the ‘planned’ economy of the Soviet Union.
In other words the point is not to erect another and allegedly superior defining category for capitalism in place of the commodity. It is to show that capitalism cannot be analysed in this way at all. In fact, although we do find a particular historical order in the development of capitalism, there is no a priori reason to see either particular commodity forms or wage labour forms or indeed any other forms as being specifically capitalist or non-capitalist. The determining question when these forms make their appearance is whether and how they are subordinated to the circuit of expansion of capital. But this is a question that can only be answered historically through careful investigation. It cannot be dealt with by the imposition of a priori theoretical constructions. To do so is to reduce the analysis of social processes to mere classification. [41]
This same tendency, however, appears in other guises too. A particularly influential example is the argument by Ernest Mandel that in his analysis Marx presents us with capitalism in its ‘chemically pure form’. In this sense Mandel argues that capitalism has become purer over time and therefore overcome the variety of forms that existed in Marx’s time. Thus, in his introduction to the Penguin edition of Capital, he writes that:
Today’s Western world is much nearer to the ‘pure’ model of Capital than was the world in which it was composed ... Without courting paradox one could even contend that from a structural point of view, the ‘concrete’ capitalism of the final quarter of the twentieth century is much closer to the ‘abstract’ model of Capital than was the ‘concrete’ capitalism of 1867, when Marx finished correcting the proofs of Volume One. [42]
But the difficulty here is now a fairly obvious one. If capitalism has made itself purer in some instances (in the sense that the degree of mediation between the simple abstraction and reality is less) it has equally in other instances made itself ‘impurer’. Capitalism never presents itself to us in a ‘pure’ form in Mandel’s sense – it is always impure in that its forms are concrete and specific. As such the impurities of its youth give rise to the impurities of its middle age which in turn are overtaken by the impurities of its old age and decay. Since discussion of Marx’s analysis as a ‘pure model’ usually abounds in inadequate chemical analogies let us add one more which is hopefully no less inadequate. Capitalism is like a radioactive isotype forever changing (and hopefully decaying!) through its various lives and only ever reaching a final stable form when it is dead. As analogies go it is not perfect but it is perhaps sufficient to suggest that a focus on any one part of the process in abstraction necessarily will do violence to the whole notion of the process itself. This leads us to our final point about how we analyse capitalism. Our argument has been that capitalism can only be grasped historically but in a much more substantial sense than is usually recognised. It is a relative commonplace to recognise that in his critique of Ricardo and the other classical economists Marx attacked the way in which their analysis was vitiated historically by their lack of a concept of the ‘mode of production’. The result was that they were led to see capitalism as an eternal form and so failed to see how it was differentiated from other modes of production. But for many the relevance of history stops at this point. Once the supposed features of capitalism as a mode of production have been identified a model is then set up in which the falling rate of profit is measured or values are transformed into prices or whatever. [43] Our argument is that capitalism also has an internal history as a mode of production that cannot be abstracted from or reduced to crude stages if we are to understand it. We can only capture capitalism’s concrete forms historically because this is how they exist and develop. Thus the method of our understanding of capitalism must be neither historical nor theoretical but both theoretical and historical. To counter-pose history and theory is to negate the very essence of understanding society as a process. [44] It is explicitly not a question of bringing theory to history nor bringing history to bear on theory – Marx’s method is necessarily both theoretical and historical because capitalism develops its forms and their determinations through history by seizing on the material available to it. [45]
We can see this if we now turn to examine some of the various forms that the self-expansion of capital has taken in our time in contrast to the forms that dominated during Marx’s lifetime.
 
Capital in Britain today
In Britain the various forms of capitalist expansion based upon the formal subordination of labour that characterised so much of nineteenth century production have been pushed to the very margins of the economy. There they still cling to life preying particularly on the cheap and docile labour of married women trapped in the home. On a world scale, of course, it remains true that capitalism can only be understood if we recognise the continuing variety of ‘backward’ forms through which capital continues to expand. But in an economy like that of Britain or any other section of advanced capitalism capital is now based firmly on the real subordination of labour and from this base it has become centralised and concentrated on a massive scale.
Throughout the twentieth century we have seen a steady rise in the size of this capital. The pattern in Britain has varied from year to year as has the changing relative contribution of internal growth and takeover. What seems to have occurred here has been a steady internal growth supplemented by two massive merger booms in the 1920’s and the 1960’s which both shifted the degree of concentration and centralisation to new, higher levels. The result has been that whereas before 1914 Britain may have lagged behind the United States and Germany comparing modern sector for modern sector, today capital in Britain is some of the most concentrated in the world. [46]
It is difficult to find a single measure that conveys the extent of this development. Table 3 is based on the most recent data from the 1978 census of production.



Table 3




Distribution of Manufacturing Plants and Firms 1978 [47]




 


Plants (a)


Firms (b)




No. of
workers


% total
employment


% total
net output


% total
employment


% total
net output




1–99


20.2


17.7


17.3


14.4




100–499


25.3


24.6


12.8


11.7




500–1499


20.9


21.8


10.6


10.5




1500 and over


33.6


35.9


59.3


63.3




a. Manufacturing and construction only
b. Manufacturing only



It shows firstly the change in the size of factories and plants. Today the majority of workers in manufacturing work in large units that dwarf the Victorian factory. More than half are employed in plants with more than 500 workers and these plants produce an even higher proportion of output. These plants themselves number less than 2500 and at the top concentration is even higher. A third of the labour force is employed in less than six hundred plants or 0.6% of the total number of factories and plants – each with a workforce of more than 1500. But the expansion of capital has, of course, gone far beyond a simple increase in factory size. The table also shows the degree of concentration of capital in firms. Approximately 60% of the labour force produce a slightly higher percentage of output in firms employing more than 1,500 workers.
While these census categories enable us to get a sense of the distance capitalism has travelled since Marx’s time they are hardly adequate to do full justice to the extent of its development. To see this we have to dig behind them and rely on various recalculations and estimates from the available data. These show the increasing domination of a small number of capitals at the very top. The largest one hundred firms, for example, seem to have increased their share of net output to 24% in 1935, 32% in 1958 and some 46% in 1970 when the data stop. Assets are certainly more concentrated – the estimates suggest that the top 80 firms control something like 70%. These top capitals operate on a huge scale. One calculation suggests that on average they have more than 70 plants each and employ more than 30,000 workers each. But again these figures can obscure. Within the top 100 firms the 50 largest control one third of net output, i.e. they produce three times as much as the bottom 50. [48]
The concentration of capital has largely exhausted the possibilities of horizontal and vertical integration. This is why in the last two decades conglomerate mergers which diversify the activities of individual capitals have become relatively more important. At the same time this process of concentration and centralisation has also operated on a world scale bringing the multinational face of capital to the fore. Some 70% of multinational companies are of US and British origin with those of West Germany, Japan and France next in importance. [49] Together these multinationals produce something like a fifth of world output outside the Eastern bloc. Their assets are huge, their liquid assets, for example, have been estimated to be twice the world’s gold and foreign currency reserves. Some estimates suggest that they alone do as much as three quarters of the world’s manufacturing trade. Moreover since they themselves straddle national boundaries much of what is recorded as international trade is in fact intra-company trade – for example, perhaps one third of British manufacturing exports.
Although economists have tried to justify these huge capitals as ‘rational’ in terms of various managerial, marketing and above all financial economies of scale it seems unlikely that either singly or together such explanations provide an adequate account. The drive of capital to expand cannot be reduced to the textbook criteria of economists. The dynamic of capitalism has driven capital far beyond that, itself dictating the need for ever grater accumulations of capital which are to a significant degree independent of ‘efficiency’. For what they are worth studies of the results of mergers seem to show that they do not bring significant increases in productivity, big firms do not necessarily perform better than smaller ones and monopoly does produce massive waste. [50] But capital is no respecter of economists and their conclusions and so it has still driven itself forward under a dynamic that it cannot escape.
The reason is simple – size protects. Even in the current depression the problem for big capitals is not so much bankruptcy as the threat of takeover. To protect against this it is necessary to be big enough to do the digesting and too big to be digested. A failure to sustain growth therefore can be fatal. Of course other factors feed into and supplement this drive but to find its roots we have to dig through the post hoc rationalisations of scale and pull out the expansive dynamic of capital itself.
The result of this drive, moreover, is a competition which is more ruthless than ever before. It is not a competition which operates through prices. Indeed the larger part of price competition has been eliminated amongst big capital. Prices are set on crude cost-plus mark-ups which reflect the power of big business over the market. But this does not eliminate competition itself – it displaces its expression and introduces new mediations. Here in these different forms it operates more ruthlessly through competition in product design, quality, reliability, delivery and so on. A failure in any or all of these can be just as catastrophic, if not more catastrophic than a failure to compete in conventional price terms. Between 1963 and 1978, for example, the price competitiveness of British manufacturing exports on balanced improved (in 1979–82 because of the high pound it dramatically declined). But during that same period the failure of British capitals to match their world competitors in areas other than price led the British share of world manufacturing exports to be cut in half! [51]
This drive of capital forwards has been increased rather than lessened by the changing patterns of control. Modern capitals are anonymous capitals. Behind the joint-stock form that they now all adopt a significant minority of family controlled firms can still be found. But they are a clear minority and a diminishing one. The norm in Britain is one of institutional ownership – banks, pension funds, insurance companies and so on. These financial institutions now control over half of all shares and more than 60% of all quoted shares. Day to day control of such shares, however, often rests more narrowly since many of these institutions have their funds externally managed by a small number of leading banks. Richard Minns has calculated that some 20 city institutions (the 4 clearing banks, 7 insurance companies and 9 leading merchant banks) together control between one fifth and a third of the shares of all British capitals with a stock market valuation of £40 million. [52] This does not mean that their share control is translated into detailed supervision of day to day management decisions but it does provide a major sanction against any weakening of the competitive drive. This is because far from bringing more stability these institutional funds seem to be switched around at the first signs of weakening or even to gain windfall profits from speculation. The Wilson committee investigating the city found that between 1973/1977 pension funds held their shares for an ‘imputed’ period of 6 years compared to 24 years in the 1963/67 years.
These trends will perhaps, be familiar in outline to readers and it is tempting to seize upon them alone as representing the essence of modern capitalism. It is this idea that lies behind the cruder analyses which characterise capitalism in our time as ‘monopoly capitalism’, ‘finance capitalism’ or even ‘multi-national capitalism’. Equipped then with these uncomplicated conceptions it is then possible to extrapolate any or all of these tendencies of concentration and centralisation into the future and arrive at a world dominated by a few capitals. Thus one calculation suggests on the basis of the trends of the late 1950’s and the 1960’s that by the 1990’s the 100 largest firms in Britain will control 80% of net manufacturing output. Another extrapolation based upon a similar trend period arrives at the conclusion that by the year 2000 on a world scale the top 100 multinational companies will control half of the world’s output.
 
State, capital and crisis
The problem with these calculations, however, is only in part the naive use of extrapolation. Concentration and centralisation can be expected to increase though perhaps not to this degree but the real problem is to understand how these tendencies relate to and to an extent are subordinated to other tendencies in capitalism in our time. It is these other tendencies that give modern capitalism its specific characteristics and so serve to separate it both from capitalism in Marx’s time and from what he could expect it to become from his vantage point.
At the centre of these other tendencies has been the vast expansion of the role of the capitalist state. Indeed masked in our general statistics of concentration are a number of state owned enterprises. State owned manufacturing enterprises like BL and Renault in cars are now responsible for 21 % of world sales of the 500 largest business corporations outside the United States. Some of these state owned capitals have become major multinational capitals. [53] But this is only the tip of the iceberg of the actual role of the capitalist state and its centrality to an understanding of modern capitalism. Its consequence has been that far from being less differentiated than capitalism in Marx’s time, modern capitalism is just as differentiated but this time in other directions.
Some idea of this can be gained from table 4:



Table 4




State and World Economy [54]




 


 


(1)
No. of
states


 


(2)
Mean value trade
as % of nat. inc.


(3)
World Trade Index
(constant 1947/9 $)


(4)
No. Treaties per
decade (1866/75 etc.)




1870


  47


n.a.


  25


  1,300




1910


  56


54


  79


  3,600




1920


  66


56


  73


  4,000




1938


  67


45


  73


–




1950


  82


48


114


  1,500




1970


142


54


373


18,700




1980


156


 



Columns 2, 3 and 4 illustrate some of the basic ways in which world capitalism has been tied together. Column 2 gives the mean value of trade as a percentage of national income. As can be seen this fell from a high of 56% in the sample to a low of 45% under the impact of the 1930’s depression. Then, contrary to the prognostications of some economists it rose to recover significantly in the post war years. Column 3 shows the world trade index which rose significantly in the nineteenth century, remained relatively stable in the inter-war years and then rose dramatically after 1945. Column 4 reflects the way in which at a political level capitalism has increasingly bound itself by networks of various ties. All of this might suggest a simple and undifferentiated picture of a world capitalism were it not for column one which records the way in which just as these ties were binding the world economy together so the number of states tripled!
But not only has this occurred. These states themselves now have a great role and more extensive powers than ever before. They no longer stand apart, if they ever did, from the reproduction of capital just guaranteeing the system and its framework. States are now part and parcel of the reproduction of capital itself. Capital is developed and expanded by the state and through the state. The degree varies from country to country but the tendency is an ever present one as capitalism ages.
When we look at modern capitalism then we see that the self-expansion of capital today takes two conflicting forms. At one level capital moves to expand by breaking down barriers – by internationalisation. At another level it expands through the national form itself. These tendencies are both a part of its general expansion but they are conflicting moments. [55]
In one sense it might be said that to acknowledge this is hardly original but in fact it represents a major problem for the approaches that we criticised earlier. The drive of capitalism to expand is now being reproduced through new forms and therefore we have to confront the new mediations that have arisen. Most notably the competitive drive of capital which forced the state to the fore has now made the struggle to compete a vital act of physical self-preservation. In this century capitalism has given us two world wars and a host of other ‘minor’ military conflicts. We are no longer faced with wars of limited liability. Capitalism’s wars in the twentieth century have been total wars. Between 1914–18 an estimated 60 million were mobilised. Between 1939–1945 the figure is a staggering 107 million. In the main belligerent countries between 35 and 65 per cent of the pre-war labour force was enlisted each time. The casualties were equally enormous. One estimate suggests 37 million European dead in these two wars and perhaps 55 million dead on a world scale. It is a testament to the extent and scale of the barbarity that we can only provide estimates. No-one actually knows the precise numbers mobilised, killed, maimed and injured, the margins of error are measured not in thousands but millions. [56] And if we were to try to count the toll of war since 1945 our estimates would be just as horrific and the margin of error just as wide.
But those drafted into military service or killed and injured by military action represent only one aspect of total war in twentieth century capitalism. To fight these wars it was and is necessary to mobilise the whole of economy and society. Production and labour are planned and regimented to provide for the war effort. Markets are replaced, private property ‘displaced’ in order that victory should be won.
And since 1945 this military competition has been an ever present factor at the very centre of all advanced capitalist states. Capitalist competition has led to statisation and statisation in its turn to militarisation. The result is that capitalism’s crises are now both economic and military crises. Here we are not threatened with some abstract ‘exterminism’, a threat disembodied from the society that gives rise to it. It is a threat whereby new and concrete forms of capitalist expansion, capitalist exterminism menace us all with destruction.
But the forms this mutual antagonism and drive for expansion and self-preservation take today cannot be understood by recourse to the traditional simple formulae any more than we can understand the complexities of Marx’s time by them. To take but one example, since 1945 the Pentagon has out-produced every economy in the world save the American of which it is a part and the Russian economy. But it does not operate through markets and commodities, even the simple category of wage labour makes little sense when applied to much of its labour force. It is in fact the world’s second largest planned economy in terms of its output. [57] But this does not mean that we cannot understand it or any other military-industrial complex. It simply means that we have to work through new determinations, new mediations to trace the way in which the self-expansion of capital works out in our time. Nor does this requirement stop here, for the forms of development that we have just drawn attention to have affected the whole rhythm of the development of capitalism. Table 5 is based upon some calculations by Angus Maddison which deserve much wider notice.



Table 5




% Average Growth Rates Leading OECD Countries [58]




 


Output


Output
per Head


Tangible Reproducable Non-
Residential Capital Stock


Volume of
Exports




1870–1913


2.5


1.5


2.8


3.7




1913–1950


1.9


1.1


1.6


1.1




1950–1970


4.9


3.8


5.6


8.6




1970–1976


3.0


2.4


6.3


6.0






% Average Cycle Characteristics Leading OECD Countries




 


Variation in
Annual GDP
Peak to Trough


Variation in
Export Volume
(P to T)


Average
Unemployment
Rate


Average Rise
in Consumer
Prices




1870–1913


−   6.7


− 14.9


5.7


+ 0.4




1913–1938


− 13.1


− 34.2


7.3


− 0.7




1950–1970


+   0.3


−   6.0


3.1


+ 3.8




1970–1976


−   1.7


−   7.9


3.3


+ 9.2



Although this periodisation leaves something to be desired it shows clearly that something peculiar happened to capitalism after the Second World War. In the period 1870 to 1950, in spite of a growth in absolute capacity, rates of growth were falling and symptoms of crisis increasing. But then, after 1945, the whole system, as measured by Maddison’s sample, expanded at least twice as fast as it had ever done before at its peak prior to the First World War. The accumulation of capital as crudely measured by the data on non-residential capital stock was two and a half times as fast. The table also shows that alongside this the crisis mechanism was also fundamentally modified in these years. Crises in which output actually declined gave way to recessions in which the rate of expansion but the system itself did not contract. The amount of variation in Gross Domestic Product and export volume, and the amount of unemployment were all significantly less than ever before with perhaps the difference in unemployment being understated if we make allowance for the particular inadequacy of these statistics before the First World War. Paul Bairoch has recently calculated the ‘the accumulated world industrial output between 1953 and 1973 was comparable in volume to that of the entire century and a half which separated 1953 from 1800’. [59]
But Maddison’s data also show something else. After 1970 the system began to recapture some of its old instability. If the statistics were continued to the present this would be even more obvious. Even here, however, this has been no simple return to the past. Production has not simply crashed as it did between 1929 and 1933 and the crisis that has occurred has seen new forms rise to the fore, most notably the intensity of inflation which is apparent in the last column of Maddison’s data.
What we have to explain, therefore, is how it came to be that previous trends were suddenly reversed? Why when they were reversed the scale of the upturn was so great? Why that upturn could be sustained for some three decades but no more and why, when it failed, it did so in the form that it did? It is not difficult to immediately think of a list of possible factors that might explain these or any of the other problems we have discussed in this article.
but this is not the point. It is the manner of our explanation that is the problem. For unless our explanation relates to the dynamic of capitalism as a process of continual change it will merely be ad hoc. The list of factors may explain but what explains them and why do they come into being when they do with the force that they do?
Problems like this again present a fundamental challenge to the received version of Marxism and Marxist economics. Once our conception of capitalism becomes fixed, once we mistake its forms for its essence we have no choice but to either deny reality itself or to continually chase after it to patch up our conceptions by ad hoc additions. [60] It is then hardly surprising that it all appears to be based upon a sleight of hand. But Marxists are not conjurers, they are people who should through their understanding of capitalism be in a better position to change it. We have argued here that the basis of that position must be in the recognition of capitalism as a dynamic process of changing forms that must be unlocked in their successive determinations.
Our contention would be that it is just that approach that is to be found in Marx and in the great Marxists that came after him. It can be seen, for example, in Lenin’s analysis of agrarian development in Russia, in his more general discussion of imperialism, it can be found in Bukharin’s dissection of imperialism and the world economy and, occasionally, too it can be found in parts of Trotsky’s analysis of capitalism. It is there too in the great Marxist works of history that we still read today and we would argue further that is this tradition that we have tried to develop in this journal. [61]
It is, of course a well-established and not very convincing device of writers on the left to invoke the greater and lesser gods in their support at some stage in their argument. Readers must judge for themselves whether this is one instance where it is justified. In our terms the choice is clear – either Marxism is a means of unravelling the world as it exists or it becomes a limited set of theoretical tools with which we bludgeon a recalcitrant world into submission. Unfortunately, if the past tells us anything it is that the world will not submit, no matter how hard we try to hammer it into place and in that part of the dustbin of history reserved for Marxists there is already considerable pressure on space. It would be a pity to increase it. Theory, said Lenin, is grey but the tree of life is green – but that was well over fifty years, the tree has grown since then and the foliage is even thicker now.

Notes
1. These output data are, of course, subject to wide margins of error. They were obtained by interpolation from P. Bairoch, Europe’s Gross National Product 1800–1975, Journal of European Economic History, vol. 5, 1976.
2. In so far as the data is not entirely fictional it suggests that ‘population rose about 0.04 per cent a year over the two millennia preceding 1700, and world income no faster’. A. Maddison, Phases of Capitalist Development, Banco Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, no. 121, June 1977, p. 103.
3. W.H.B. Court, A Concise Economic History of Britain, 1954, p. 175. Court’s is one of the few general textbooks on British economic history to capture the uneven development we stress here.
4. It should also be noted that the factory inspectorate’s statistics also have a tendency to overstate average size since they are known not to have visited some of the smallest units
5. J.H. Clapham, An Economic History of Modern Britain: Free Trade and Steel 1850–1886, 1932, chapter IV.
6. Court, op. cit., p.87.
7. The major study is still an unpublished thesis, J.B. Teffrey’s Trends in Business Organisation in Great Britain since 1856 (Univ. London 1938), pp. 104, 130.
8. This estimate is reported in G.P. Jones & A.G. Pool, A Hundred Years of Economic Development in Great Britain (1840–1940), 1940, p. 169.
9. Calculated from S.J. Chapman and T.S. Ashton, The sizes of businesses mainly in the textile industries, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, April 1914, vol. LXXVII part v, p. 538, table xiv.
10. J.M. Stopford, The origins of British based multinational manufacturing enterprises, Business History Review, vol. XLVII no. 3, Autumn 1974, p. 304.
11. P.L. Payne, The emergence of the large scale company in Great Britain 1870–1914, Economic History Review, vol. XX no. 3, 1967, p. 520.
12. R. Samuel, Workshop of the world: steampower and hand technology in mid-Victorian Britain, History Workshop, no. 3, Spring 1977.
13. A.J. Taylor, Labour productivity and technical innovation in the British coal industry, 1850–1914, Economic History Review, vol. XIV, 1961; R. Walters, Labour productivity in the South Wales steam coal industry, 1870–1914, Economic History Review, vol. XXVIII no. 2, May 1975. This situation survived for much longer. In 1924 19% of coal was cut mechanically in Britain compared to 70% in the USA. A smaller proportion was conveyed mechanically. In 1931 31% was cut by machine and 17% conveyed by machine.
14. G. Williams, Mother Wales, get off me back?, Marxism Today, Dec. 1981, pp. 14–16.
15. For the size of colliery businesses by numbers employed see Chapman & Ashton, op. cit., p. 548, table xxvii, for the situation on the eve of 1914.
16. Court, op. cit., p. 56.
17. ibid., p. 218; W.H.B. Court, The Rise of the Midland Industries, 1938.
18. D.A. Farnie, The English Cotton Industry and the World Market, 1815–1896, 1979, pp. 70, 76–77.
19. K. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, Penguin edition, 1976, pp. 1019–1025.
20. D. Bythell, The Sweated Trades: Outwork in Nineteenth Century Britain, 1978, pp. 143–156.
21. These occupational statistics are most easily studied as they were grouped together by Charles Booth in the late nineteenth century. They are reprinted in W.A. Armstrong, The use of information about occupation, in E.A. Wrigley (ed.), Nineteenth Century Society, 1972.
22. I have examined one case in the first half of the nineteenth century – Northampton – in the course of a discussion of the significance of this for an understanding of class consciousness. M. Haynes, Class and class consciousness in the early nineteenth century: Northampton shoemakers and the GNCTU, Literature and History, no. 5, 1977.
23. G. Stedman-Jones, Outcast London, 1971
24. Bythell, op. cit., p. 186.
25. S. Marglin, What do bosses do?: the origins and functions of hierarchy in capitalist production, in A. Gorz (ed.), The Division of Labour, 1976. Marglin’s documentation of his case is weak but his argument is persuasive and accords with much historical work of which he appears unaware.
26. This process has been analysed in terms of ‘proto-industrialisation’ see F. Mendels, Proto-industrialisation: the first phase of the industrialisation process, Journal of Economic History, vol. 32, 1972, and P. Kriedte, H. Medick & J. Schlumbohm, Industrialisation before industrialisation: rural industry in the genesis of capitalism, 1981.
27. All figures except that for 1880 from A.E. Musson, Industrial motive power in the United Kingdom, 1800–1870, Economic History Review, vol. XXIX no. 3, 1976. The figures for 1800, 1824, and 1850 are estimates, that for 1870 is derived from the factory inspectorate’s report, that for 1907 from the census of production of that year. The figure for 1880 is from M. Mulhall, Mulhall’s Dictionary of Statistics, 1884, p. 424.
28. Musson, op. cit., gives the industrial breakdown.
29. Court, op. cit., p. 105.
30. M.E. Faulkus, Modern British economic development: the industrial revolution in perspective, Australian Economic History Review, vol. XIX part 1, 1979, p. 56.
31. R.S. Starobin, Industrial Slavery in the Old South, 1970 dispels some of the myths about the alleged ‘inefficiency’ of industrial slavery.
32. Schneider in France had 12,500 at the same time. There was nothing in British industry to compare with works of this size at this date. The largest single employers were the big railway companies of the time. E.J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Capital, 1975, pp. 250–252.
33. This variation is still best approached through the classic works of A. Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, 1966 and Continuity in History and other Essays, 1968.
34. At this point it is, perhaps, worth pausing to stress that this problem is not one of prediction or prophecy about the future although one sometimes finds it posed in this way. Marx was concerned to show how capitalism as it was developing was also producing the internal contradictions that were threatening its continued survival. But this whole discussion must be separated from what Karl Popper called ‘unconditional historical prophecy’. Marx, of course, did speculate about the future of capitalism though not as much as might be expected. But he was not in the business of being a futurologist – Capital is not Old Moor’s Almanack. Capitalism itself precludes detailed prediction as the real futurologists and science fiction writers know to their cost. The problem is not only that the capitalist system is dynamic but that its dynamism is dialectical – you cannot simply extrapolate the present into the future. And, at base, in any case the survival of the system depends upon political conditions, not economic ones. We know, for example, that Marx did not expect capitalism to politically have the life it has had and he would certainly be surprised to find that it was still around on the hundredth anniversary of his death! He would perhaps be even more surprised to see the forms it has taken in the absence of the revolution he expected. Socialists should not need reminding that 1983 is not only the anniversary of Marx’s death – it is also the anniversary of Hitler being handed power in 1933. No-one in Marx’s time including Marx had any conception of the barbarous forms that would arise as the system began to atrophy.
35. K. Marx, Grundrisse, Penguin edition, 1973, p. 258.
36. Ibid., pp. 106–107.
37. Ibid., p. 463.
38. H. Grossman, The evolutionist revolt against classical economics – part II, Journal of Political Economy, vol. LI no. 6, Dec. 1943, p. 517.
39. M. Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism, 1946; E. Laclau, Feudalism and capitalism in Latin America, New Left Review, no. 67, 1971; R. Brenner, The origins of capitalist development, New Left Review, no. 104, 1977; A. Callinicos, Wage labour and state capital, International Socialism, second series, no. 12, spring 1981.
40. Interestingly we do find it in Weber! ‘Rational capitalistic calculation is possible only on the basis of free labour; only where in consequence of the existence of workers who in the formal sense voluntarily, but actually under the compulsion of the whip of hunger, offer themselves, the costs of products may be unambiguously determined by agreement in advance.’ This is the fifth of six characteristics that for Weber constitute ‘meaning and presuppositions of modern capitalism’. M. Weber, General Economic History, 1981, pp. 275–278.
41. This tendency to classification can be clearly seen, as well, wherever this approach has influenced historical work – for example, Perry Anderson’s discussion of pre-capitalist modes of production.
42. Capital, Penguin edition, op. cit., introduction, pp. 12, 82–83.
43. This approach is apparent, for example, in Bob Rowthorn’s highly regarded discussion of Neo-classicism, neo-Ricardianism and Marxism. There history is only needed to establish capitalism and separate it from feudalism. See his Capitalism, Conflict and Inflation, 1980.
44. This is what is done in much of the debate started by Richard Johnson on history and Marxist theory in the successive issues of History Workshop, nos. 6, 7, 8, 1978/9. An exception is Simon Clarke’s contribution in No. 8, 1979 which puts a position which seems close to my own.
45. In discussing the ideas above with various people distaste has occasionally been expressed about their ‘Hegelian’ character. I should state bluntly that I see this neither as a sin or a cause for concern. But a more substantive comment may also be in order. The emphasis on process and the way in which the essence or notion of categories must be understood clearly derives at a general level from Hegel. However, in preparing the final draft of this article I came across an apparently little known article by Henryk Grossman published in two issues of the Journal of Political Economy, 1943, vol. LI nos. 5 & 6. [Note by ETOL: Extracts can be found here.] Since little is known of Grossman outside the German speaking world it is difficult to know where this fits into his Marxism as a whole but the piece seems worthy of note in two respects. In the first place it advances a view of Marx’s analysis that seems close to my own and I have taken the liberty of quoting from it above (footnote 38). Secondly while recognising Marx’s general debt to Hegel Grossman attributes the specific way in which Marx develops his notion of process in his political economy to an appreciation of and critique of the limitations of what he calls the evolutionist revolt against classical political economy. Not being an historian of Marx’s thought I cannot comment with any authority on the validity of this claim but I found much of the argument illuminating and certainly worthy of wider notice.
46. From A.R. Prest & D.J. Coppock (eds.), The United Kingdom Economy: a manual of Applied Economics, 9th ed., 1982, p. 242.
47. S.J. Prais, The Evolution of Giant Firms in Britain, 1976; L. Hannach, The Rise of the Corporate Economy, 1976.
48. Much useful information is collected in M. Campbell, Capitalism in Britain, 1981, although its framework is one we implicitly criticise here.
49. The reader should be warned that the definition of a multi-national company varies and so therefore do the statistics. Here we simply quote the most repeated data in the huge literature on the subject.
50. Much of this work has been done by Keith Cowling and his collaborators, see K. Cowling & D.C. Mueller, The social costs of monopoly power, Economic Journal, vol. 88, 1978 and K. Cowling et al., Mergers and Economic Performance, 1980.
51. See, for example, J. Eatwell, Whatever happened to Britain, 1982, chap. 3.
52. R. Minns, Pension Funds and British Capitalism, 1980; Challenging the bankers, New Statesman, 21 August, 1981.
53. D.F. Lamont, Foreign State Enterprise, 1979.
54. J. Boli-Bennett, Global integration and the universal increase of state dominance, 1910–1970, in A. Bergensen (ed.), Studies of the Modern World System, 1980, pp. 97–98.
55. The classic discussion remains N. Bukharin, Imperialism and the World Economy, 1972.
56. For an introduction to the problems of the statistics see J. Terraine, The Smoke and the Fire: myths and anti-myths of war 1861–1945, 1980, chaps. 3–5.
57. The comparison is not mine but the American radical economist Howard Sherman’s. Readers who want to take it further might like to note that the Pentagon owns a land area larger than a number of the Eastern European economies.
58. Maddison, op. cit., pp. 114, 115?
59. P. Bairoch, International industrialization levels from 1750 to 1980, Journal of European Economic History, vol. 11 no. 2, 1982, p. 276.
60. For example, ‘The survival of capitalism ... has certainly had a life-span far beyond what Marx expected. But this is not because the system has developed in essentially other directions than those predicted by Capital’ (my emphasis – MH) writes Ernest Mandel in his introduction to Capital, op. cit., p. 85. Here we seem to have Marx as Nostradamus!
61. See for example, C. Harman, State capitalism, armaments and the general form of the crisis, International Socialism, second series, no. 16, spring 1982. I am immodest enough to hope that it can also be found in P. Binns and M. Haynes, New theories of Eastern European class societies, International Socialism, second series, no. 7, winter 1980, which discusses another area of the world where the variety of forms subject to the domination of capital is even greater.
 



Andreja Zivkovic and Dragan Plavsic (eds.)
The Balkan Socialist Tradition: Balkan Socialism and the Balkan Federation, 1871–1915
(Revolutionary History, vol. 8, no. 3, 2003), £12.95
How many failed interventions can the world tolerate? Since the
end of the Cold War we have seen a succession of attempts, led by the
US and its supporters, to use military power ostensibly to solve
local problems. But whatever the immediate effect of the
intervention, the long term result has been to leave the underlying
problems unresolved and even more difficult to resolve. Somalia,
Bosnia, Kosovo-Serbia, Afghanistan and now Iraq – the list grows.
But as one intervention has succeeded another, interest seems to fade
in the consequences of earlier actions. But these consequences remain
to be dealt with by the local populations and they can contain the
seeds of future conflicts. It is important therefore for socialists
not only to expose the immediate hypocrisies behind the interventions
but also to look beyond them to the nature of the wider imperial
system. This requires an analysis of the present, but also a more
adequate understanding of the past.
The Balkan Socialist Tradition: Balkan Socialism and the Balkan
Federation, edited by Andreja Zivkovic and Dragan Plavsic, is a
major documentary collection of articles from the pre-1914
international and Balkan socialist movement that have never appeared
in English before. [1] It will enormously advance our understanding
both of development in the Balkans and the way in which the Balkan
left responded. Published as a book length issue of the journal
Revolutionary History, it is edited to the highest standards
with a strong commentary, detailed footnotes, a glossary and clear
maps, all of which explain the context of the writings and provide a
wealth of historical information. My only regret is that an index has
not been added to help those who wish to track the way issues of
detail were used as the debates of the time developed.
To get most benefit from the debates translated here it is
necessary to have a general understanding of Balkan developments but
readers who followed the arguments at the time of the last NATO
attack should have what is necessary and there are now a number of
short background accounts that can also be recommended to those who
want more. [2] But all those who wrote in English on this topic would
have benefited from having this collection to hand, for even the most
cursory skimming of the text reveals how partial and impoverished our
understanding of the Balkan past and the role of the left within it
has often been.
Before 1914 Balkan socialists struggled with issues that are still
with us today. Capitalism came late to this region as it did to most
of the world. But it showed little capacity to deliver harmonious
development. Instead it encouraged the development of a region of
suspicious statelets with competing claims to the loyalty of the
local population. (Today, of course, with the fragmentation of the
former Yugoslavia the division is even greater.) Moreover it did this
in an area which had become the focus of great power rivalries and in
which local conflicts inevitably became mixed up with outside interests.
The Balkans could not remain as it was. Small states with narrow
local markets and competing interests were no basis for stability.
One solution might have been unity through the expansion of a single
state – the way that Prussia unified Germany or Piedmont
effectively unified Italy. But no single Balkan state had the means
to do this, nor were the Great Powers interested in allowing it to
happen. Another solution was some kind of federation or alliance from
above. This briefly and partially came about in 1912 as Bulgaria,
Greece, Montenegro and Serbia ganged up on their fellow Balkan state
Turkey. But this partial alliance immediately fell apart in the
Second Balkan War in 1913 where Greece and Serbia, now joined by
Romania, went to war with Bulgaria over the spoils of the first war.
The alternative that emerged on the radical left was to fight for
a Balkan federation from below by challenging both the local states
and the imperial interests that helped to guide them. This idea of
federation from below was not simply a slogan to be painted on a
banner. It emerged from the fight against the nationalist policies of
the individual states and a growing understanding of the nature of
the new age of imperialism.
Crucial here was a changed appreciation of the role of Russia. In
the mid-19th century Marx and Engels had seen a backward but
politically and militarily strong Russia as the major obstacle to the
advance of capitalism, democracy and eventually socialism. In 1914
some socialists still saw things this way and Russophobia was an
important tradition in both Germany and Austro-Hungarian socialism.
But in the late 19th century not only did the power of Russia visibly
weaken but after 1900 it now became part of a wider imperialist
system in which the dominant powers would sometimes co-operate and
sometimes compete with one another to redivide the world and manage
their interests. As this happened the issue became more and more one
of opposition to the imperialist system as a whole. This is the
context for the detailed discussions in the contemporary documents
discussed in this book. And they will reveal to the interested reader
jewels hitherto hidden as well as a tradition of socialist activism
in the most difficult circumstances that still stands out today.
Let’s take some examples.
The crisis that led to the First World War began with the
assassination of Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo by
Gavrilo Princip, a Serbian nationalist. Austria took this as a
pretext to crush Serbia and the Great Powers lined up on two sides to
fight. Faced with the threat of European war most socialists in
Europe, organised in the Second International, threw aside their
internationalism to support their own countries’ war efforts. Lenin
and the Bolsheviks in Russia did not. But how many people know that
neither did many Balkan socialists? And how many know that in Serbia,
as the Austrian armies advanced and socialists came under the most
enormous pressure imaginable, some still held up the banner of
internationalism? Here we have, for example, the speech of Dragisa
Lapcevic, who with enormous courage opposed the war in the Serbian
parliament even as the Serbian armies were being hammered by the
first blows of the Austrian military. Here we have the bitter lament
of Dusan Popovic as he records the problems of editing an anti-war
paper in Serbia while he tries to come to terms with the war-death of
one of the great Balkan socialists of the day, Dmitrije Tucovic. The
stand of people like this and others in neighbouring states was only
possible because of the clarity with which leading members of the
left in the Balkans saw the decisive issue as one of an imperialist
war which relegated local issues to the background. The memory of
their stand reinforces all the opprobrium that history has
subsequently heaped on western socialists who in far less difficult
conditions took weaker positions.
The arguments of these Balkan socialists developed under the
umbrella of the Second International. But the book also makes clear
how our understanding of these debates often underplays their
sophistication and complexity. This is partly a product of the
failure of 1914 and the inevitable tendency to concentrate on the bad
elements that led to it. But this is to neglect the good, which also
existed, and the way in which socialist theorists tried to confront
the ways the world was changing. Part of the reason figures like
Lenin and Luxemburg were so shocked by the betrayals of August 1914
was their recognition of the positive contributions that had been
made before. Kautsky suffered particularly here and if he is seen
only in terms of his positions after 1914 and 1917 and through his
widely translated popular tracts it is difficult to understand why he
was so important. But a reading of his sharp analysis of the problems
of the Ottoman Empire translated here should persuade even the most
sceptical that, whatever his failings, here was also a man of great insight.
But our misunderstandings are also a consequence of the prism
created by Stalinism and anti-Stalinism. The former we can now
discount, but in doing so there has been a tendency to rely on
Trotsky and his friend and fellow left oppositionist Christian
Rakovsky for guidance on the issues at stake in the Balkans.
Trotsky’s writings as war correspondent in the Balkans in 1912 to
1913 are an invaluable source and a classic of their kind, but his
appreciation of the debates of the time was sometimes wanting. [3]
The collection does not translate, for example, a robust rebuttal of
Trotsky by Dimutur Blagoev, a great Bulgarian Marxist practically
unheard of outside the Balkans. It does, however translate Blagoev’s
blunt dismissal of Christian Rakovsky who at this point was both
trying to help paper over critical differences and also too naively
viewing the potential of development from above for resolving the
problems in the Balkans. This is not to say the positions adopted at
the time were and are unquestionable. In one section, for example,
Dragan Plavsic raises uncomfortable questions about the response of
Balkan socialists to the First Balkan War. Rather the issue is that
there was both a serious debate and no sense of the need to defer to
authority in a way that represents the best tradition of socialist
discussion. Here were people who were self-confident in their
arguments and who had a political credibility to match it, but who
subsequently became lost to history until this book helped to
resurrect them for a new century.
But the collection also helps us understand the deficiencies in
some other positions. Perhaps the most important here are the
problems that the Austro-Marxists had in dealing with the national
and imperial questions of the time. Those on the left today who are
inclined to be sympathetic to the abstract attractions of their
arguments about solving the national problem through fighting for
cultural autonomy within big states will learn much here from the way
in which this position crumbled towards a de facto support of
big powers when confronted with real issues like Bosnia before 1914.
As the collection proceeds the editors note striking parallels
between issues raised before 1914 and recent events. But they also
recognise that the problem is not one of using the past as a stick
with which to beat people in the present. Rather through a better
understanding of the past we can gain a better understanding of the
present and therefore also have a better chance of going beyond it.
Those of us who opposed Western intervention in the former Yugoslavia
in the 1990s were hostilely received by many on the liberal left –
including those who had previously stood with us. But our sense that
a dangerous pattern was being created has been vindicated by events
and the tradition we helped to precipitate has become part of a wider
movement of opposition that can be seen in the protests against the
war on Iraq. This book (and with it Misha Glenny’s The Balkans
1804–1999: Nationalism, War and the Great Powers, London 2000)
has given birth to a serious attempt to lay the basis for a deeper
understanding of the Balkans that puts at our service the best
traditions of historical research and co-operative translation. As
the problems of Western intervention extend we will need to combine
more a general education in the history of imperialism and resistance
to it with detailed and genuinely ‘scientific’ accounts in the
best sense. It is good to have this kind of book therefore not only
for what it tells us about its subject but as a model for others to
emulate for other places at other times.

Notes
1. A. Zivkovic and D. Plavsic (eds.), The Balkan Socialist Tradition: Balkan Socialism and the Balkan Federation,
1871–1915 (Revolutionary History, vol. 8 no. 3, 2003).
2. For a general context see M. Haynes, Theses on the Balkan War, International Socialism 2 : 83 (Summer 1999). L. German (ed.), The Balkans Nationalism and
Imperialism (London 1999) gives more detail. M. Mazower, The
Balkans (London 2000) is an excellent short attack on the idea
that people are born into the Balkans with some special quality that
makes them want to kill one another. Two longer accounts that can be
recommended are M. Glenny, The Balkans 1804–1999: Nationalism,
War and the Great Powers (London 2000) and a reprinted classic by
L. Stavrianos, The Balkans Since 1453 (London 2000).
3. L. Trotsky, The Balkan Wars, 1912–13: The War
Correspondence of Leon Trotsky (New York 1981).
 



Is the Cold War returning? Relations between Russia and the West
now are at their lowest point since the mid-1980s, and some in the
West are happy to interpret this as an impending return to the days
of the Cold War. Under Vladimir Putin Russia has begun to recover
from the low point of its “transition” in August 1998 when it
defaulted on its $40 billion debt and the rouble lost 60 percent of
its value in two months. Now, a decade on, some economic recovery has
helped to give a foundation to some political recovery. The fact that
Russia is a nuclear power with a permanent seat on the UN Security
Council means that Moscow’s concerns are magnified in the world
system and this creates difficulties and embarrassments for the
United States in particular. When in May 2006 Dick Cheney, the US
vice-president, denounced Russia’s use of oil and gas as “tools
of intimidation and blackmail”, Putin responded by denouncing the
US as “Comrade Wolf [who] knows whom to eat. He eats without
listening and he is clearly not going to listen to anyone.” [1]
Those who believe that the Cold War was a clash between
“capitalism” and “socialism” have little ability to explain
this new tension since on any account Russia and the US are now part
of the same system. Those who took a more sceptical view of the
argument that the Cold War was some clash between systems are in less
difficulty. Conflict is inherent in capitalism. The Cold War was not
so much a clash between “capitalism” and “socialism” as
between the globalising capitalism of the West and the more closed
“state capitalisms” of the East – a clash whose real nature was
disguised by the ideological claims of each side. The collapse of the
USSR therefore removed conflicts at some levels, but left those at
others untouched, and now, as before, Russia’s role in the global
system balances cooperation and tension.
 
The Russian challenge?
Three aspects of Russian policy today have aroused concern in the
West. The first is Russia’s reassertion of a degree of foreign
policy independence. The US has stumbled in Iraq and this has
provided a space for differences to be more openly expressed. A
Russian government document put it bluntly in April 2007: “The myth
about the unipolar world fell apart once and for all in Iraq ... A
strong, more self-confident Russia has become an integral part of
positive changes in the world.” [2] The
argument was expressed more fully by President Putin at the Munich
Conference on Security Policy in February 2007. Here he was
sufficiently ill-mannered to state some fairly self-evident truths –
from referring to the “hundreds and thousands of civilians” being
killed in war today (in Iraq) to talking about the unequal trading
relationships the West continues to impose on the poor countries of
the world. But the centre of his attack was on the idea of a unipolar
world, dominated by the US, with:
one centre of authority, one centre of force, one centre
of decision making ... one master ... one sovereign ... today we are
witnessing an almost unconstrained use of force – military force
... one state and, of course, first and foremost the United States,
has overstepped the national borders in every way. [3]
The second aspect of Russian policy to cause concern has been the
apparent deployment of its gas and oil power for economic and
political advantage – ”geostrategic blackmail”. Notoriously in
January 2006 Russia temporarily cut off gas supplies to Ukraine; then
Belarus appeared to be threatened and later Lithuania. These local
actions threatened potential knock-on effects since 20 percent of
Russian gas to Central and Western Europe goes through Belarus and 80
percent through Ukraine. Central and Western Europe are now directly
dependent on Russian gas for 25 percent of their supplies, a figure
that is expected to rise to around a third in 2010 and, according to
some accounts, 70 percent by 2020. The idea that gas (and oil)
controlled by state-based companies such as Gazprom might be used in
a politically motivated way obviously raises concerns in Europe. [4]
The third element of concern about Russian policy has been the
reconsolidation of Russian state power and its deployment against
regime critics. Within Russia the Kremlin took on and jailed Russia’s
biggest oligarch, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, and broke up his oil company,
Yukos. The main TV media are clearly under Kremlin control, as is
much of the formal political system. Beyond this, the finger of
suspicion has been raised as various critics of state policy,
corruption and criminalisation have died. Since 1993 over 150
journalists have been killed, for example. The most notorious
killing, in October 2006, was that of Anna Politkovskaya, the best
known journalist critic of Russia’s wars in Chechnya. Then in
November 2006 came the spectacular killing in London of the otherwise
minor figure of Alexander Litvinenko. How direct a role the Kremlin
had in this remains speculative but it has not stopped people
pointing the finger at the Putin regime.
But clashes of interest between states go beyond immediate
triggers. Putin’s sharp words against the US are designed to get
Russia a more prominent place at the high table, not to overturn it.
And we obviously also need to tackle Western complaints about Russia
with a pinch of salt, given the tendency of Western states also to
turn a blind eye to repression wherever it is in their interests. In
fact to understand what is happening we have to recognise the extent
to which international tensions are structured by the basic state
inequalities that exist in the global economy. The dominant player
here since 1945 has been the US. Even during the Cold War the USSR
struggled to challenge it, and once the USSR collapsed US power was
massively increased relative to other states. In the words of
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the US was now:
A power of unprecedented worldwide reach and grasp ...
America stands supreme in four distinctive domains of global power:
militarily, it has unmatched global reach; economically, it remains
the locomotive of global growth ... technologically, it retains the
overall lead in the cutting areas of innovation; and culturally,
despite some crassness, it enjoys an appeal that is unrivalled. [5]
Today Russia’s policies reflect the interaction of internal and
external elements, but to make sense of it we need to start with the
external dimension and Russia’s changing reaction to the West’s
policies of the last decade and a half.
 
American policy – pinning Russia back
In the midst of another diplomatic spat in spring 2007 an
editorial in the Guardian claimed, “The West won the Cold
War and advanced eastwards in time honoured fashion”. [6]
Seen from Moscow this is the truth of what has happened since 1991.
The USSR broke up and Russia retreated, while the West in general and
the US in particular advanced to fill the vacuum. In his 2007 Munich
speech Putin quoted the words of a former Nato general secretary,
Manfred Werner, from 1990: “The fact that we are ready not to place
a Nato army outside of German territory gives the Soviet Union a firm
security guarantee.” Today it looks very different, claimed Putin:
“Nato has frontline forces on our borders.”
How should we explain the approach of the US and the West under
its leadership? As the debacle in Iraq grows, few are prepared to
defend the regime of George Bush, but blaming US policy on a
Washington leadership supported by neoconservatives is too
simplistic. Since the 1990s the US ruling class has held a shared
view that this has been the US’s moment, but it is a moment that
will not last and which must be maximised for its longer-term
advantage. In the more liberal version of this vision this requires
deployment of US soft power, a degree of self-sacrifice of immediate
US interests for longer-term goals and a sensitive leadership. For
the neocons the vision requires the deployment of hard power,
self-interest and tough leadership. But both approaches are rooted in
the same drive for global domination, and actual policy has involved
elements of both. For example, from the standpoint of Russia’s
leaders the recent Bush regime’s unilateralism only confirms
tendencies that go back to the Clinton era and beyond that to the
reign of George Bush Snr. The end of the Cold War was an opportunity
to really contain Russia, at best as a “normal country” – i.e.
a compliant and junior US client – at worst as a peripheral force.
In 1992 the US Defence Planning Guidance paper said that the US
should “account sufficiently for the interests of the advanced
nations to discourage them from challenging our leadership or seeking
to overturn the established economic and political order”. [7]
So far as Russia was concerned this produced a delicate balancing
act. Some of the hard logic of this was spelled out at the time by
Brzezinski. The focus of US power had to be on Europe and Asia, what
he called, “the grand chessboard” and “the chief geopolitical
prize”. Here Russia’s size and position make it “a major
geo-strategic player, in spite of its weakened state and prolonged
malaise”. It was therefore necessary to undermine it, externally by
keeping the former Soviet bloc states beyond Moscow’s control, and
internally, by balancing a concern with Russia’s economic recovery
with the need to avoid strengthening Russia “politically and militarily”:
America thus faces a difficult dilemma regarding tactical
balance and strategic purpose. Internal Russian recovery is essential
to Russia’s democratisation and eventual Europeanisation. But any
recovery of its imperial potential would be inimical to both these objectives.
Today, like many others, Brzezinski suggests that the tactics of
Bush’s regime have weakened the US’s capacity to achieve its
strategic objectives. [8] But we should
not let this argument detract from recognising the wider assumptions
of an imperial strategic purpose. [9]
Equally the fact that the decisions made by the US sometimes reflect
problems and opportunities not of its making (for example, the
alacrity with which the former Central European states have turned to
the West) should not distract us from also recognising that US policy
has sought to use events for its own narrower ends.
US policy has produced many areas of friction with Russia but here
we will mention four issues. The first has been US determination to
push its global military dominance. This has partly been done by its
support of the “son of Star Wars” project which has led it to
unilaterally abrogate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty (one of
the prizes of Cold War diplomacy) and to now threaten to locate
(albeit encouraged by compliant local governments) radar bases in
Poland and the Czech Republic. This system is supposed to be directed
against rogue states but it only makes sense (if it makes sense!) if
the threat is Russia. But American military dominance has also been
reflected, from Moscow’s point of view, by US actions in Bosnia and
Kosovo, Afghanistan and now Iraq.
The second tension arises from the way that the US has encouraged
first the former Soviet bloc states of Central Europe and then the
successor states of the USSR to link into the West, while seemingly
excluding Russia. While Russian leaders expected states in its former
sphere of influence to be integrated economically with the West, at
one stage they naively believed this would not be accompanied by
military and geo-political integration. In fact it was led by this,
with Nato membership preceding the expansion of the European Union.
In July 2006 Putin pointed out, “There is no more Warsaw Pact, no
more Soviet Union, but Nato continues to exist and develop”. [10]
This is not simply an issue to the west and south of Moscow. To the
east the US continues to help Japan modernise its military with half
an eye on China and half on Russia. Western officials portray this in
the most benign light, but a more cynical view might suggest that the
wildest encirclement ideas of the Cold War hawks in Washington are
being realised while many of the darkest nightmares of Russian Cold
War warriors in Moscow are coming true.
A third tension is competition over oil and energy. While any
deployment of energy power by Russia is seen as illegitimate, the US
is determined to maintain its supplies of cheap oil by whatever
economic, political and military actions are necessary. As George
Bush Snr infamously put it in 1992, “The American way of life is
not negotiable.” Oil and energy pipeline issues have therefore
become mixed up with US policies around the globe, and not least in
Iraq. The result is not merely distrust of Russian energy power but
its sidelining in areas where Moscow feels it might have legitimate interests.
Finally, we should also note the aggravation of a fourth element –
the imperial arrogance of US policy. Beggars cannot be choosers. The
US does not have therefore even to make minor accommodations. Trivial
in itself but telling symbolically has been the US tardiness in
dealing with relics of the Cold War such as the 1974 Jackson-Vanek
amendment which treated the USSR/Russia as an economic pariah state.
During the Cold War US policymakers had to disguise their real
designs to some degree in order to win hearts and minds. The real
dynamics of US policy were therefore often set out in
semi-confidential and confidential documents, hinted at and alluded
to. Today they are discussed openly. Not everybody is prepared to
grit their teeth and accept this. Russia’s leaders believe they
should also be accorded a degree of respect. As one Western diplomat
said at the time of the St Petersburg G8 summit in 2006, they have
all “the right suits, watches and the right cars”. [11]
In making these points we are not trying to justify the Putin
regime or defend “a lesser imperial power” against a “major
imperial power”. This is not the issue. Rather our point is that
Western commentators and politicians who claim that Western policy is
benign and Russia’s response paranoid need to be more realistic. Of
course there is self-interest and arrogance in Russia’s own
position (not least in its failure to understand the grievances of
the states that it formerly ruled). There is also an element of play
acting and a degree of paranoia too. But, as the saying goes, just
because you are paranoid it doesn’t mean that they are not out to
get you.
 
The fall of Russia
Russia hit rock bottom both internally and externally in the
crisis of the summer of 1998. It had lost its Eastern European empire
in 1989. Then in 1991 the Soviet Union was broken up, leaving Russia
the largest fragment with 148 million out of its population of 288
million. Economic output fell by 45 percent during the transition to
market capitalism – a virtually unique peacetime collapse. And in
1998, as the rouble crashed, it all seemed for nothing. The mass of
the population suffered enormously in a social catastrophe. Male life
expectancy fell from 64.2 years in 1989 to 57.6 in 1994 (female life
expectancy fell by 3.3 years in the same period). The birth rate fell
from 13.4 (per thousand individuals per year) in 1990 to a low of 8.3
in 1999; the death rate rose from 11.2 in 1990 to a peak of 16.4 in
2003. Russia’s total population would have fallen more had it not
been for migration from the “near abroad” of the former states of
the USSR of 2.5 million people pushed out by equal penury and fear of
anti-Russian moods. [12]
But in the process there were winners as well as losers. The
Russian ruling class was restructured in no small part through
grabbing the state property that it once managed. This involved three
stages. The first was the spontaneous “nomenklatura privatisation”
of 1989–92 when, as one Russian put it, many of those managing
resources pursued the smell of property like a beast after prey.
Formal privatisation took place in the 1992–5 period in what was,
in effect, a further managerial buy out. The third stage was when
Boris Yeltsin exchanged key state holdings for financial support –
a set of deals that consolidated and increased the holdings of the
so-called oligarchs. The aim of those at the top was to convert their
de facto control of state property into de jure (legal) control of it
as private property and in the process to plunder it as much as
possible. Investment all but collapsed, falling to about 20 percent
of the levels of a decade earlier. Inequality grew dramatically. On
the basis of the 2004 Forbes Rich List it
has been calculated that, while the wealth of US billionaires was
equivalent to some 7 percent of output, the wealth controlled by the
then 26 Russian billionaires was 19 percent of Russian output. [13]
Some of the new wealth was spent ostentatiously in Russia but much of
it was carried abroad. Often money was laundered through the
financial system in what economists call “capital flight” but
some of it taken out in cruder forms: “I saw people with suitcases
stuffed with money,” said one of the people who helped some of this
cash re-emerge in London. “It was a fallout from what was sweeping
Russia at the time; it was the Wild West. Much of the money had been
made in state sell-offs and it seemed with every new convulsion
there, a new wave of exiles arrived.” [14]
The paradox of the transition and the Yeltsin era was its
combination of continuity and instability. Key state institutions
survived – the bureaucracy, the military, the secret police, etc.
Many of the new players turned out to be the old ones, or their
children or acolytes. But the structures of power were weakened as
insiders and opportunists seized their chance. What in Russia are
called the “verticals” of power – the links between the top and
bottom of society, and the links between the centre and the regions,
were thrown into disarray. Some thought this would last forever.
Boris Berezovsky suggested that 50 percent of the economy was
controlled by seven oligarchs and Mikhail Khodorkovsky said,
“Politics is the most lucrative field of business in Russia. And it
will be this way forever.” [15]
This plunder weakened Russia within and without to such a degree
that even members of the ruling class began to see that some greater
degree of order was necessary lest Russia become a “failed state”.
The problem was whether things could begin to be put back together.
When power formally passed to Putin at the turn of 2000 it was not
obvious that they could. How has he managed to be more successful
than many anticipated?
 
The recovery of Russian economic and state power?
In March 1999 the Economist magazine made a spectacularly
bad prediction: “The world is awash with oil and likely to remain
so”, oil was selling at $10 a barrel and might fall to $5, but
“basket cases” such as Russia and Nigeria would have to sell it
whatever the price, and so endure “huge budget and current account
deficits”. [16] Today, of course, oil
economies are awash with cash. By 2002 oil prices were in the range
of $22 to $28 a barrel, and by mid-2006 they had hit $75 a barrel.
This windfall came courtesy of George Bush and the war in Iraq.
Since 1998 Russia has grown at around 6 to 7 percent a year on
average. Today it is near to exceeding its 1991 levels of per capita
output, albeit with a very different income distribution. The decade
and a half of lost growth appears to have come to an end. Inevitably
economists debate the explanation for this turnaround. One factor is
that the 1998 collapse made imports much more expensive, providing
some space for Russian production to expand. The question is the
balance between any internal recovery and the oil windfall. For
Russia’s leaders, as well as those who supported the market
transition, it is important that the state that they head be
something more than an “energy superpower”, that something more
has been achieved than simply turning the country from what cynics
used to call “Upper Volta with rockets” to “Upper Volta with
oil wells (and a few rockets)”. And it is true that as growth
continues its base must widen. But taking all this into account (and
allowing for a whole series of technical issues about how to deal
with the continuing distortions in the measurement of output) it is
difficult to escape the conclusion that energy exports have been and
remain at the core of Russia’s recovery.
One OECD economist talks of “the staggering extent to which
recent growth has been driven by the expansion of output and exports
of the national resource sector, and especially by ... Russian oil
companies”. This resource sector also includes steel, aluminium,
nickel and fertiliser. But beyond it, however, “Russian industry is
still unable to compete with imports of many sought after consumer
goods”. [17] Indeed this dependence
produces the fear that Russian industry will remain weakly
competitive because energy sales help to keep the value of the rouble
high and therefore weaken competitiveness (what economists refer to
as the “Dutch disease” said to particularly characterise oil economies).
The data in tables 4 and 5 in the appendix to this article show
the unbalanced distribution of gas and oil reserves and production in
relation to global demand. Currently Russia is the world’s second
largest oil exporter. In 2004, for example, energy exports made up 55
percent of total exports with metals a further 14 percent. Machinery
and equipment were only 7 percent. Table 1, however, shows that the
actual production of gas and oil is not as impressive as it has been
in the past, despite their central role in the internal and external
economy. Resource-rich regions, as well as Moscow and St Petersburg,
have benefited disproportionately from Russia’s extractive
recovery. [18]




Figure 1: Recovery of the Russian Economy
1989/1990 = 100









Source: derived from data in UN Economic
Commission for Europe Database



The continued outflow of capital is now compensated by significant
inflows of foreign investment. But this too is heavily concentrated
in energy and extraction. Beyond these sectors foreign direct
investment is focused in property, commerce and the food industries.




Table 1: Russian energy production




Year


Oil
production
(million tonnes)


Exports of oil
and oil products
(million tonnes)


Average
oil price
($ per tonne)


Gas production
(billion
cubic metres)


Gas exports
(billion
cubic metres)




1980


547


 


 


254


 




1985


542


 


 


462


 




1990


516


 


 


641


 




1995


307


162.1


103


595


180.3




2000


324


207.6


180


584


194.0




2005


470


  339.1*


  232*


  641*


    200.1*




Data drawn from Simchera, 2007, and Goskomstat, 2005
(* data for 2004)



The Putin regime has been able to use this energy driven recovery
to create a degree of order within Russia, imposing what is
euphemistically called “a managed democracy”. In doing this Putin
has often moved cautiously. Even if his ultimate destination has been
a strong Russian state, Putin’s policies seem designed to build on,
rather than call into question, the post-Soviet settlement. Several
elements of this are important.
The first is the relation of the Putin regime to Russia’s
business class. This is the subject of some controversy. Is the
regime the friend or foe of Russian business? To what extent is
business colonising the state or is the state colonising business?
While some commentators see the Putin regime as a threat to business
and, through this, to a continued market transition, others see it as
their guarantor. Similarly, while some are struck by the role of
political appointees and members of the former security forces at the
top of Russian companies, others are struck by the direct access that
business has to the state. It is important not to overestimate the
strength of the Russian state and the political regime. If much
business is dependent on the state, so is the state dependent on business.
There is no contradiction between a degree of state recovery and
the broader interests of those who control the Russian economy. As
Thompson, another OECD economist, has put it, “For Russia’s new
rich, state-building and structural reform were intended to
consolidate the victories they had won in the 1990s”. [19]
One aspect of this is the deal Putin supposedly struck with 21
representatives of big business in July 2000. What happened is not
known precisely, but the popular account is that Putin agreed to
leave the changes of the 1990s untouched provided business leaders in
turn supported the state and his regime and did not make political
capital against him. This seems to be more or less what has happened.
The evidence against this is the fate of some of the biggest
oligarchs of the Yeltsin era. Boris Berezovsky has been given
political asylum in the UK, Vladimir Gusinsky lives in the US and
Israel, and Mikhail Khodorkovsky – Russia’s biggest new
capitalist – is in jail for tax fraud and his company, Yukos,
effectively renationalised. These are spectacular cases but in each
instance these oligarchs appeared as potential centres of open
opposition to Putin. Beyond them, however, the pillaging of the 1990s
produced a super-rich elite with over 50 dollar billionaires and some
100,000 dollar millionaires. While many ordinary Russians would like
to see these join Khodorkovsky, Putin has shown no sign of wanting
this. The security origins of some of the power brokers today – the
so-called silovki – reflects the clannish nature of the Putin
regime and the continuity of the KGB-FSB (the federal security
service) nexus. [20] But, compared to
Yeltsin’s clique, known as “the family”, Putin’s seems to
have a broader base. Certainly there is a concern with “our
people”. Andrei Illarionov, an adviser who fell out with Putin,
talks of “an ideology of ‘nash-ism’ (our people) offering
privileges, subsidies, credits, power and authority to those who are
nashy (ours)”. But significantly some now refer to those at the top
who are “our people” not as a “family” but as a
“corporation”. [21]
As one Russian commentator puts it, today Russia is a country
where “interests reign supreme” and especially financial interests:
Private and corporate interests are behind most of
Moscow’s major policy decisions as Russia is ruled by people who
largely own it ... Under President Vladimir Putin’s watch the
Russian state has turned into something like Russia Inc with top
Kremlin staffers and senior ministers sitting on the boards of
various state-owned corporations and taking an active interest in
their progress and profits. [22]
A second crucial aspect of the Putin regime has been the
successful attempt to regain control over Russia’s resources (and
some production) through the development of state and semi-state
companies. The natural gas monopoly Gazprom and Rosneft, which now
controls some 55 percent of Russian crude oil output, are the leading
examples. Khodorkovsky’s Yukos was, by a circuitous route, taken
over by Rosneft. BP has been forced to retreat in its Anglo-Russian
joint ventures and Shell has been squeezed in the giant Sakhaklin-2
gas project in the Far East. The giant Russian companies that control
decisive sectors of the Russian economy are certainly examples of
“state capitals” but they are no longer insular as their
acquisitions abroad and their appearance in the world financial
markets (not least London) shows. [23]
As Dmitri Trenin has put it, those in control want geo-economic power
as much as geo-political – ”they plan to build Russia as a great
power with a global reach, organised as a super-corporation”. [24]
The third element of Putin’s emerging policy has been to try to
restore some coherence to the Russian state, to restore some of the
“verticals”. This has involved trying to smash separatism, most
notably in the bloody war in Chechnya. It has also involved trying to
re-establish clear links between the centre and Russia’s 89
regions. In particular Putin used his powers in 2004 to impose the
appointment rather than election of regional governors. It has also
involved trying to re-establish a degree of state bureaucratic
competence and not least to restore the tax base. Again, however,
there has also been caution. Rich Russians are expected to pay their
taxes but they are rewarded with a flat rate income tax of 13
percent. The regional governors are expected to give Putin his due
but in turn the overwhelming No.  of old ones were reappointed.
The fourth direction of state policy has been to try to capture
some of the gains from the economic recovery and the oil windfall. A
state stabilisation fund was created – effectively a financial
insurance fund to sustain the state budget for three years if oil
prices fall by a half and tax revenues drop. Beyond this, as average
real wages have risen sharply from the dangerously depressed levels
of the 1990s, a more modest attempt has been made to deal with the
extreme poverty of pensioners and lower level state employees, who
experienced some of the hardest conditions in the transition. Again
there is caution. The stabilisation fund has so far had a financial
focus neglecting what the OECD calls “income generating”
components. Poverty has fallen but it is still widespread and the
class and regional gaps are huge. By value, for example, four
provinces – Moscow, Moscow Region, St Petersburg and the oil rich
Siberian province of Tyumen – are responsible for more than half of
all output. [25]
Finally the Putin regime has tightened control of the political
system. The elections of December 2007 are already stitched up. No
one doubts that, barring something completely unforeseen, they will
produce a compliant Duma. This is because in 2004 Putin changed the
electoral system to weaken potential opposition. Formal politics has
taken on a virtual character as pseudo parties have been created and
manipulated and the TV media in particular controlled. [26]
The big question now is over the March 2008 presidential elections.
Under the constitution Putin cannot serve a third term but he now has
the power to alter the constitution if he wants and enough control of
public support to do it. He insists he will not. If he maintains this
position power will pass to his anointed successor. Putin could then
return in 2012 while retaining a key position or he could even (it
seems unlikely) risk retirement. In one sense, however, his decision
is a lesser issue. Whether Putin stays, goes, or steps back, Putinism
– the emerging logic of a strengthened internal and external
system, based on a “managed democracy” – will continue so long
as the conditions which allow it continue.
It is this recovery that has also allowed Russia to be less
compliant externally. Putin can now appear as the defender of the
“Russian nation”, the leader of a power which, whatever its
immediate difficulties, might have a brighter future. This means that
Russia’s leaders can now try to get back some at least of the power
that was humiliatingly lost in the 1990s, and that they can do so on
the basis of a new realism about the “benign” intentions of the
West. This, from their point of view, does not mean a return to an
old style Cold War. Russian capital, however ill-gained, has begun to
flow abroad and with it many Russians, including its ruling class who
fly backwards and forwards to the best resorts, hotels, second homes,
luxury shops and so on. They do not want the old days. But it does
mean that they look forward to Russian capital having some leverage
in the global economy and to the Russian state being a player in a
“multipolar” world. The idea of a straightforward US-Russian
alliance, which briefly flickered in the 1990s, has been abandoned.
So too has Gorbachev’s idea that Russia would be allowed to fit
easily into “a common European home”. [27]
But there is an enormous amount of pragmatism in Russia’s
position. There has to be. Its leaders need to maximise their
advantages from a position that is still weak. This means putting
pressure on the near abroad and countries such as Georgia and Ukraine
to warn them of the costs of moving too close to the US. It also
means trying to divide its bigger competitors to weaken their
resolve. This is one reason for the bilateral energy deals with
different European countries. It also lies behind the cultivation of
closer relations with some countries than others. The contradictions
of Russia’s relationship with Britain show the problems for Moscow.
Politically the London-Washington link is so strong that Britain
appears as a political problem for Moscow. But the UK also operates
as an open door to the global economy. Lax City regulations allow
Russian companies to float in London. Money is laundered there,
football clubs are bought and the Russian rich find a welcome in
“little Moscow on the Thames”. There has, therefore, to be a
carefully modulated rhetoric globally – trying to turn the West’s
own rhetoric against itself, pushing but pushing not too far in order
to balance integration into and a degree of independence within the
global economy.
 
Still a weak hand?
The US wants a unipolar world. Moscow wants a multipolar one. But
neither can have what they want. Tables 2 and 3 show the key elements
of the balance of power. The US is the dominant player but Iraq has
exposed that its reach has limits. Russia on the other hand, thanks
to its geography which still stretches across 11 time zones, remains
a player but still a weak one compared to both the old USSR and other
states today. The Russian defence budget is due to rise, but even so
it is still only running at around 5 percent of the US budget, as
Putin has acknowledged. Thus when Putin responded to US pressure
first by threatening to retarget Russian missiles and then, in July
2007, suspending Russia’s obligations under the conventional forces
in Europe treaty these gestures had a big element of posture
politics.




Table 2: A tale of two powers – the USSR/Russia 1985–2007




 


1985


2007




Population (millions)


277


142




Population as percent of US


116


47




Output as a percent US


35–45


8




Output per head as percent of US (PPP)


33


28




Defence expenditure as percent of GDP


13.1


6.4




Defence expenditure as percent of US


104


4–5




Drawn from data in Arin, 2001, Simchera, 2007, and other sources



If Russia continues to grow this gap will diminish somewhat
(though it should be remembered that Russia is still not at the
relative position it was in 1989). But even if the rebound is strong
and sustained the gap will remain enormous. Economically Russia now
appears a second division economy. The difficulty for the Russian
regime is that growth will not continue indefinitely at the high
rates of the past years. Some of the causes of the current high price
of oil are structural. Others reflect the situation in Iraq. Oil
prices always fluctuate and when they go down they will test how
diversified the Russian economy has become. From the time of Brezhnev
to Gorbachev the USSR was condemned for underpinning living standards
through exports of raw materials, especially oil, and failing to
build a competitive industrial (or service) base. Today the situation
of Russia is, it seems, little different. Russia’s oil and gas
wealth is produced by around a mere 3 percent of the work force. No
economy with a population the size of Russia has been able to
generalise wealth on the basis of energy and raw material exports
(Saudi Arabia’s population, for example, is one seventh that of
Russia).




Table 3: Economic and military dimensions of power c.2005




 


US


Russia


China


UK




Population (millions)


302


142


1,321


61




Percent of global population


4.6


2.5


21.2


1.0




Percent of global GDP


20.8


1.6


12.0


3.3




Percent of global exports of goods and services


13.8


1.3


6.0


5.6




Military budget (billions of current value dollars)


582


24.9


40


29.9




Military budget as percent of GDP


3.97


4.29


2.3


2.5




Size of army


1,506,757


1,027,000


2,255,000


191,030




Intercontinental ballistic missiles


550


506


46


48




Drawn from data in Simchera, 2007, Goskomstat, 2005, and other sources



One reason for scepticism regarding Russia’s economic prospects
is that investment, while rising too, still remains too low,
especially in agriculture and manufacturing. If average consumption
is now greater than in 1989 (but distributed differently) investment
is still well under half the 1989 level. Even in the oil and gas
sectors there are huge problems because of the backwardness of the
technology. In gas production Rudiger Ahrend, an OECD economist,
calls the situation “dire”. The basis for continued improvement
is what the 2006 OECD report on Russia calls “a pattern of
self-sustaining investment driven growth that can be maintained over
the long-run”. [28] Yet key sections
of the ruling class still see their future in terms of organised
plunder. The former chess champion and now Putin opponent Garry
Kasparov, despite his own political weaknesses, makes a valid point
when he says, “It’s not like America in the 19th century.
Carnegie, Morgan, Rockefeller, they built something new. These
people, they were just in the right place when the national wealth
was being distributed”. [29]
Building, therefore, is hardly central to their nature.
The continuing tendency to withdraw profits is both cause and
consequence of the fact that although some order has been restored
there still remains massive inefficiency, corruption and
criminalisation. Indeed some claim that the level of state corruption
is significantly higher than under Yeltsin. In 2006 Transparency
International, the pro-market and anti-corruption NGO, put Russia
126th out of 159 states in its corruption index. In June 2006 Putin
seemed to admit to continued problems when he sacked the Russian
procurator general, in part for failing to deal with corruption. In
November 2006 the deputy prosecutor general estimated that bribes to
state officials might amount to an extraordinary £125 billion. [30]
Nor is it just a question of low physical investment. Although the
OECD still talks of the value of Russia’s educational base, its
social infrastructure in general has suffered enormously in the last
two decades. Even in oil and gas Putin was driven to ask in 2003,
“What is the good of having oil and metal if we do not have the
know-how to extract them? ... We keep importing workers from Europe,
as if we did not have our own system for training them in this
country”. [31] The idea that Russia
can sustain an innovation boom to growth looks highly questionable.
The Putin regime combines a far from unique authoritarianism and
centralisation of state power in some areas with neoliberalism in
others. If the main ownership structures are now established, this
does not mean that there is not a space and need for further
restructuring, and this will be painful if subsidies and protection
are withdrawn. In the Soviet era certain forms of state provision
were subsidised to buy social peace. Now internal customers are also
being asked to pay more. The state continues to have neoliberal
welfare reform on the agenda, which means effectively solving the
education and health care crisis by increasing prices. Thus even as
the standard of living rises for some, the state is risking a
confrontation. Moreover, even if expression of it is being squeezed
out of the formal political system, there is still much public
bitterness alongside support for the general goals of the Putin
regime. One independent MP (who will probably not survive the
December 2007 elections) told Western reporters that “Putin’s
system is a petro-state where a small group have monopolised
resources and divided them between the political class, state
bureaucrats and managers. A couple of million live well, while the
majority are poor”. [32] This sense
of division regularly comes through in opinion polls.
But sustained opposition is hard. This is only in part because of
the authoritarian and oppressive nature of the regime. The
manipulation of formal parties to create psuedo movements certainly
sows confusion. To derail the nationalist Communist Party the Kremlin
sponsored the creation of the nationalist Rodina party. To prevent a
youth revolt it sponsored the right wing Nashi youth movement.
Similarly repression, though mild in comparison to some countries, is
periodically turned against embryonic movements from below. But a
bigger problem is continuing disorientation, demoralisation and
depoliticisation in Russia.
The heyday of a popular movement for change in Russia was probably
the brief flowering of 1989–90. Thereafter people’s lives were
ripped apart to a degree that is hard for us to imagine. While a few
made good, others became more nihilistic and the majority turned in
on themselves. Defensive struggles were sometimes sharp but many
ordinary Russians simply struggled to survive. The most glaring sign
of this is the problem of what two demographers have called “the
Russian cross” – the cross on the demographic graph between the
rising death rate and the falling birth rate. [33]
The gap between them is still huge. Demographic projections are
notoriously unreliable but non-current trends see Russia’s
population falling from over 140 million today to 100 million in
2050. One major reason for this is the huge rise in alcohol
consumption, as a generation of Russian men drown their sorrows and
death ends their lives prematurely. Russia now has 2.3 million
official alcoholics.
Nonetheless, resentment periodically breaks out. Whatever support
Putin commands as an individual there is still widespread concern at
the situation he has ruled over. People feel the injustices of their
situation – the inequalities and flaunted wealth, the corruption
and crime – despite the uneven improvement. [34]
And economic recovery occasionally allows for some demands to be made
in a slightly more positive frame of mind – employers can also
grant wage increases to avert trouble. In 2003, for example, there
were only 67 strikes officially recorded in Russia. These figures
underestimate small day-to-day acts of resistance, which have been
commonplace. But in 2004-5 there was a mini strike wave, though the
strikes were almost all small. In 2006 officially recorded strikes
all but disappeared, but wages continued to rise. [35]
There have also been continuing demonstrations, especially against
reforms that affect jobs and welfare. From the point of view of the
Putin regime these are little more than minor irritants, but just as
we have suggested that at the top there has been less consolidation
than some suggest, so the same is true at the bottom.

Appendix




Table 4: Global oil consumption, production and reserves




 


Percentage of
consumption


Percentage of
production


Percentage of
estimated reserves




USA


24.1


  8.0


  2.5




EU 25


18.2


  2.8


  0.6




Saudi Arabia


  2.3


13.1


21.9




Russia


  3.3


12.4


  6.6




Iran


  2.0


  5.4


11.4




Venezuela


  0.7


  3.7


  6.6




Iraq


 na


  2.3


  9.5




Nigeria


 na


  3.0


  3.0




Libya


 na


  2.2


  3.4




Kazakhstan


  0.3


  1.7


  3.3




Calculated from BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2007








Table 5: Global gas consumption, production and reserves




 


Percentage of
consumption


Percentage of
production


Percentage of
estimated reserves




USA


21.7


18.3


  1.3




EU 25


16.4


  6.6


3.3




Russia


15.1


21.3


24.3




Iran


  3.7


  3.7


15.5




Qatar


  0.7


  1.7


14.0




Saudi Arabia


  2.6


  2.6


  3.9




UAE


  1.5


  1.6


  3.3




Iraq


 na


 na


  1.7




Calculated from BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2007




Notes
1. Quoted in the Guardian, 11
May 2006.
2. Quoted in the Guardian, 11
April 2007.
3. Quoted from the official
translation on the Russian president’s website.
4. Gazprom, under majority state
ownership and formally headed by first deputy prime minister Dimitry
Medvedev, sits on the largest reserves of natural gas in the world
and -controls the third largest oil and gas energy base after Saudi
Arabia and Iran.
5. Brzezinski, 1997, pp. 3, 24.
6. The Guardian, 12 April 2007.
7. Quoted in the Guardian, 16
February 2007.
8. Brzezinski, 2005.
9. A different US leadership might
have handled things with more sophistication than the George Bush
regime but a so-called realist analysis rather than a neoconservative
one still recognises the inevitability of clashes of interest.
10. Quoted in the Guardian, 5
June 2007.
11. Quoted in the Guardian,
11 April 2007.
12. Khalturina and Korotaev, 2006, p. 66.
13. Guriev and Rachinsky, 2005, p. 140.
14. Quoted in the Guardian,
13 April 2007.
15. Quoted in Treisman, 2007.
16. See Drowning in Oil in
the Economist, 6 March 1999, and later articles in same issue.
17. Ahrend, 2006, p2. See also OECD, 2004.
18. For the latest data (albeit with
a positive spin) on regional inequality see World Bank, 2007.
19. Thompson, quoted in Wood, 2007, p. 63.
20. For popular accounts see
Triesman, 2007, and Penketh, 2006.
21. Illarionov, 2006.
22. Trenin, 2006, pp95-96. In this,
of course, Russia is less different from the US and UK than many make
out. Here, however, the corporate state hides behind a faÃ§ade,
albeit weakening, that does not exist in Russia.
23. Trenin, 2006, p96. Discussing
the squeeze on Western companies, Daniel Yergin writes that “this
is an era in which power has shifted toward state companies and the
questions -international oil companies are facing in Russia are
similar to the access questions they are facing elsewhere” – The
Financial Times, 20 April 2007.
24. Gazprom’s self-declared
mission is “the strategic objective of becoming a global energy
leader”, quoted in the Guardian, 12 April 2007.
25. Wood, 2007.
26. There are now four main
parties/groups in the Duma – United Russia, A Just Russia, the
Communists, and the Nationalists. As a result of the 2004 changes
parties must have a minimum of 50,000 members spread over at least
half of Russia’s provinces; a list system is used, so reducing the
role of independents. The minimum vote needed for Duma representation
was increased from 5 to 7 percent and the minimum 25 percent turnout
was removed.
27. See Lavrov, 2007, for an
official statement of the Russian leadership’s view of Russia’s
global role. This is the text of the Russian foreign minister’s
article for the US journal Foreign Affairs which was withdrawn in
disputed circumstances.
28. Ahrend, 2006, p. 21; OECD,
2006; see also World Bank, 2007.
29. The Times Magazine, 24
March 2007.
30. The Guardian, 8 November 2006.
31. Quoted in Volosatov, 2006, pp. 13, 16.
32. Vladimir Ryzhkov in the
Financial Times, 20 April 2007.
33. Khalturina and Korotaev, 2006.
34. See the discussions of the
social situation in Popov, 2007, and Wood, 2007.
35. Goskomstat, 2005.

References
Ahrend, Rudiger, 2006, Russia’s Post Crisis Growth: Its
Sources and Prospects for Continuation, Europe-Asia Studies,
Vol. 58, No.  1 (January 2006).
Arin, Oleg, 2001, Dvadtsat pervuii vek: mir bez Rossii (Moscow).
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 1997, The Grand Chessboard: American
Primacy and its Geo-strategic Importance (Basic).
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 2005, The Choice: Global Dominance or
Global Leadership (Basic).
Goskomstat, 2005, Rossiia v tsifrakh 2005 (Moscow).
Guriev, Sergei, and Rachinsky, Andrei, 2005, The Role of
Oligarchs in Russian Capitalism, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 19, No.  1 (Winter 2005).
Illarionov, Andrei, 2006, When the State means Business, International Herald Tribune,
25 January 2006.
Khalturina, Daria Andreevna, and Korotaev, Andrei Vitalevich,
2006, Russkii krest: faktory, mekhanizmy i puti preodoleniia
demograficheskogo krizisa v Rossii (Moscow).
Lavrov, Sergey, 2007, Containing Russia: Back to the Future, available on Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs website, 19 July 2007.
OECD, 2004, OECD Economic Survey of the Russian Federation 2004.
OECD, 2006, OECD Economic Survey of the Russian Federation 2006.
Penketh, Anne, 2006, The KGB’s Great Power Grab, The
Independent, 11 December 2006.
Popov, Vladimir, 2007, Russia Redux?, New Left Review 44 (March–April 2007).
Simchera, Vasilii Mikhailovich, 2007, Razvitie ekonomiki Rossii
za 100 let 1900–2000 (Moscow).
Treisman, Daniel, 2007, Putin’s Silovarchs, Orbis,
Vol. 51, No.  1 (Winter 2007).
Trenin, Dmitri, 2007, Russia Redefines itself and its Relations with the West, The Washington Quarterly, Vol. 30, No.  2 (Spring 2007).
Volosatov, V.D., 2006, The Demographic Situation and Problems
of Employment in Russia’s Entry into the World Trade Organisation,
Sociological Research, Vol. 45, No.  3, (May-June 2006).
Wood, Tony, 2007, Putin’s New Order, New Left Review 44 (March–April 2007).
World Bank, 2007, Russian Economic Report (June 2007).
 



Gareth Dale
Between State Capitalism and Globalisation: the Collapse of the East German Economy
Peter Lang, 2004, £30
Gareth Dale
Popular Protest in East Germany, 1945–1989
Routledge, 2005, £65
Gareth Dale
The East German Revolution of 1989
Manchester University Press, 2006, £15.99
Three books in as many years are an achievement by anybody’s
standards. What Gareth Dale has done here is more – through his
discussion of the rise and fall of East Germany (the GDR) he has
staked out a claim as a major influence on our interpretation of
events in the second half of the 20th century in Europe. Whether it
will be seen that way by the left is, however, another matter.
Discussions of the Eastern bloc societies tend to suffer from
three problems. First, slight and poorly documented essays by left
academics seem to be valued more than substantive pieces of
theoretically and empirically engaged work. In an earlier generation
both Tony Cliff’s State Capitalism in Russia and Chris
Harman’s Class Struggles in Eastern Europe suffered from
this condescension from people who had neither produced a similarly
sustained analysis nor, it seemed, aspired to. Second, the focus of
discussion has too often been on the USSR/Russia as if Eastern Europe
were a world apart. For some the Russian ‘social formation/mode of
production’ was so specific it had to be analysed separately from
those in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria and so on. Third, the so‑called
Socialist countries were also seen as a world apart from ‘Western
capitalism’ and therefore also required a different kind of
analysis, though there was little agreement as to what that was.
Gareth Dale’s three books on East Germany challenge each of
these problems. He draws on a detailed knowledge of the GDR based on
personal experience of its last days, interviews, archival work and
an impressive grasp of the published literature. Second, he sees his
work as contributing to a general analysis whose implications go
beyond a society of 17 million people which in the years 1945–89
became one of the frontlines of the Cold War but which has now
disappeared. Third, he is continually engaged in a discussion which,
while it does not neglect the specific characteristics of the GDR,
nevertheless rejects the idea that this was a non-capitalist society
with a non-capitalist logic. In these terms he adds to the more
recent work of Jane Hardy and Al Rainnie on Poland [1],
my own work and that written with Rumy Husan on Russia and Hungary
[2], and the discussion on the Balkans
[3] – all of which tries to show the
importance of the analysis of this journal through a detailed
confrontation with the reality of the former Eastern bloc societies.
And it is hopefully no slight to any of us to say that in many
respects he outdoes us all.
But do we need a trilogy on the rise and fall of the GDR? The
answer is yes. Each of these books takes up a different theme and the
degree of overlap is limited. Between State Capitalism and
Globalisation is a major economic history. It has already
received a positive, if critical, reception, from one commentator
bemused by its combination of detailed knowledge of economic change
in the GDR and an explicit theorisation from the perspective that the
Eastern Bloc countries were state capitalist. [4]
And if you are hoping that this review contains all you might ever
need to know about the GDR then pause for a moment – Between
State Capitalism and Globalisation offers more. It opens with a
long discussion of capitalism and the global economy which has value
for all of us and is the strongest published attempt to engage with
debates on state and capital from a state capitalist perspective. [5]
The GDR aside, it should be compulsory reading for anyone interested
in these issues.
State control represented what one vice-president of the GDR state
planning commission called ‘an attempt to transpose the economic
rationality of the capitalist enterprise onto the national economy as
a whole’ (p. 19). And it seemed to work. The 1960s saw the
high point of confidence for the ruling class in the Soviet bloc. In
the GDR Walter Ulbricht fondly imagined that it (the most advanced
Soviet bloc society) would overtake the West. But from the late 1960s
globalising forces which affected all economies began to expose the
weaknesses of the GDR approach (and that in the rest of the Soviet
bloc). Its leaders rejected isolated development in favour of greater
links to the global economy but this brought debts and dependence and
then weakened their room for manoeuvre by the end of the 1980s, and
especially in 1989.
Popular Protest in East Germany, 1945–1989 takes up the
question of the resistance. It opens with the June 1953 uprising when
workers, who had been repressed and brutally exploited, exploded in
anger in the confusion of the period immediately after Stalin’s
death. Dale argues the size of these protests in the GDR has been
consistently underestimated. They were shortlived but they ‘developed
at a breathtaking pace’ and were only crushed ‘by the deployment
of ruthless military force’ (p. 10). ‘The situation is extremely
serious,’ said the then head of the secret police. ‘It’s a
question of them or us’ (p. 31). Though the rising was
defeated the memory lingered on. ‘We sure showed them that they
can’t just do whatever they like with us,’ said one worker
(p. 33). Indeed the fear of a repeat of 1953 weighed more
heavily on the minds of the GDR ruling class even though Erich
Honecker boasted of the value of summary execution in deterring
‘counter-revolution’.
Thereafter Dale traces the more submerged forms of resistance that
survived in the next decades, and the way that the regime used a
combination of relative prosperity, ideology, surveillance and
repression to sustain itself. He compares the arts of resistance with
those of domination, emigration and youth rebellion and the emergence
of small-scale dissident movements in the 1980s.
The final part of Popular Protest focuses on the 1989
revolution. For many people this is symbolised by the day that the
Berlin Wall came down, but Dale stresses it was a much longer process
with real worker involvement both on the streets and in the
factories. ‘Between August 1989 and April 1990, 2,600 public
demonstrations and over 300 rallies took place, as well as over 200
strikes and a dozen factory occupations. The largest three of the
2,600 demonstrations attracted well over 1 million people. No
accurate figures exist for the total number of participants in
demonstrations and public protests. That it was several million is
indisputable. One researcher has estimated the figure over 5 million’
(p. 181). At the top the regime’s leaders were desperate for a
way out. ‘Erich, we can’t beat up hundreds of thousands of
people,’ said secret police chief Erich Mielke to Erich Honecker.
This made a gamble on a technocratic deal with the West and
unification look increasingly attractive even if some leaders had to
be sacrificed.
The interesting question is why the mass movement also came to see
this a solution. Dale quotes a placard at a Christian Democrat rally:
‘Helmut [Kohl], take us by the hand, show us the way to the
economic miracle land’ (p. 167). But he then rejects the idea
that such a simple material analysis is adequate, and especially so
in terms of the level of mobilisation. Here he suggests two things
were crucial. One was that the high levels of protest did not
necessarily reflect a strong belief in the people’s own capacity to
change the world. In some respects, 1953 was more radical than 1989.
The submerged character of conflict in the next decades meant that,
when things exploded, East German workers lacked the self-confidence
to strike out in a different direction. This was then compounded by
the peculiar character of the leadership that emerged.
The suddenness of the collapse brought to prominence a collection
of intellectuals, artists, Greens and religious figures – some of
whom played courageous roles that individually put most readers of
this journal to shame. However, collectively they found it hard to
connect. ‘It was always difficult to make worldly problems
intelligible to the intellectuals and artists of the opposition,’
said one worker. Indeed from the other side Dale honestly records the
problems of his own fleeting attempts to intervene. Leaders and ‘led’
therefore moved in different ways. In the first phase workers looked
to these ‘leaders’ almost in spite of themselves. Then, when the
movement began to radicalise even more, its erstwhile leaders who had
been temporarily catapulted into prominence were looking to negotiate
and even join the government. Thus a gap was opened up which could
not only be capitalised on by the West German leader Helmut Kohl, but
which also provided the basis for a negotiated shift of power as a
top‑down process. Dale quotes an American commentator
suggesting that unification ‘left little room for citizen input. It
was the hour of the policymaker and the bureaucrat. [It] relegated
people to being subjects, rather than agents of change’ and of
course, there were no mass mobilisations in West Germany either.
The East German Revolution of 1989 treats these themes in
much greater detail. But Dale again stresses that it makes more sense
to investigate events in a country like the GDR in the context of a
wider understanding of ‘German, European and world history’. He
rejects the continuing influence of Cold War thinking on the history
of the GDR in favour of recognition of what he calls ‘shades of
grey’ between Eastern and Western Europe. He also develops his
critical engagement with social movement theory to analyse the
interaction of the ‘streets’ and ‘civic protest’ groups. ‘Had
we related to workers’ demands we could have become a lively, trade
union-linked left wing movement. Instead we became a sect,’ said
one of the few workers in the New Forum civic group (p. 228).
But he adds to this a more structured discussion of ‘history from
above’ by looking at why the regime acted as it did. Here he
stresses the negotiated nature of the transition and the way in which
East Germany’s leaders were able, with the assistance of their
counterparts in West Germany, to undertake ‘a very orderly
retreat’. The rhetoric of ‘Communism’ was used so long as state
driven competition seemed to work. When it came to the crunch and a
more market based regime seemed to offer a solution to the problems
of running the GDR ‘their commitments could be – and were –
abandoned without a fuss’ (p. xi).
In this sense the GDR initially followed the pattern of ruling
class continuity visible elsewhere in Eastern Europe. But the GDR’s
leaders were less successful as a group because, when the transition
depression hit, they found themselves part of wider German structures
through unification. This meant that they had fewer ways of bending
the system to protect themselves so that eventually ‘only a
relatively thin layer of East Germany’s ruling class was able to survive’.
This whole analysis – its depth, detail and theorisation – is
important. This is not to say that readers will necessarily agree
with everything Dale writes. I would have liked to see more
comparative growth data used to inform the discussion in Between
State Capitalism and Globalisation. When discussing East German
workers in both Popular Protest and The East German
Revolution I think Dale might have moderated his comments about
‘their substantial shop floor strength’ had there been more
discussion of the similarities of the labour process east and west.
But these are matters for detailed discussion. What should stand out
for all of us is the overall achievement and challenge which Gareth
Dale has laid down.

Notes
1. Jane Hardy and Al Rainnie,
Restructuring Krakow: Desperately Seeking Capitalism (London
1996). Readers should also note the many articles on Poland by Colin
Barker in this journal as well as his collaborative work with Gareth
Dale and also Colin Mooers on revolutions and 1989. See Colin Barker
and Colin Mooers, Theories of Revolution in the Light of 1989 in
Eastern Europe, in Cultural Dynamics, volume 9, number 1
(1997), pp. 17–43.
2. Mike Haynes, Russia: Class and
Power in the Twentieth Century (London 2002); Mike Haynes and
Rumy Husan, A Century of State Murder? Death and Public Policy in
Russia (London 2003); Mike Haynes and Rumy Husan, Health and
Safety at Work in Russia and Hungary: Illusion and Reality in the
Transition Crisis, in Vernon Mogensen (ed.), Worker
Safety under Siege: Labor, Capital and the Politics of Workplace
Safety in a Deregulated World (New York 2006).
3. Mike Haynes, Analysing Balkan
Development 1945–1989. The Rhetoric of the Economist, in Andrew
Hammond (ed.), The Balkans and the West: Constructing the
European Other (London 2004), pp. 36–49.
4. See, for example, the review by
Nigel Swain in The Economic History Review, volume 58, issue 2
(February 2006).
5. But before they are lost to history
we should also note Emma Bircham, The International Political
Economy of Actually Existing Capitalism: Rethinking Globalisation and
the Retreat of the State, London School of Economics, PhD (2005);
Mike Haynes, Economic Backwardness and State Led Development: The
Origin, Character and Fate of the Soviet Model, University of
Wolverhampton, PhD (2005).
 



Eternal Russia: Yeltsin, Gorbachev and the Mirage of Democracy
Jonathan Steele
Faber and Faber £17.50
A Fourth Way? Privatisation and the Emergence of New Market Economies
Eds: Gregory Alexander and Grazyna Skapska
Routledge £14.99
Russia is an important placing for Western journalists and they
usually produce a saleable book when they finish their stint. The
work of these correspondents has played an important role in
establishing the Western view of Russia. Before glasnost, because
they had no access to the top, they could only report policy changes
and official press briefings. But by weaving together pointed
anecdotes, information gleaned from the press and the occasional
nugget handed out at the top they were able to build up valuable
pictures of Russian society below.
After 1985 more access to the top was available but, as in the
writings of Martin Walker, it was the explosion of information from
below that took centre stage.
Now all is different. Jonathan Steele went out to Russia to report
the collapse of the USSR for the Guardian. He has had
unrivalled access to the top, including getting to Gorbachev straight
after the defeat of the 1991 coup. His book reflects this, drawing on
indiscreet interviews with past and current players in the battles at
the top of the USSR. The result is a book that anyone interested in
Russia will have to read and can learn a lot from.
But there is also a sense in which Steele’s book is a less
satisfactory one than those of his predecessors. They had no choice
but to write from the bottom up. Steele has chosen to write from the
top down.
But while the top is fascinating, what we really need is an
analysis of the disintegration of the middle and bottom of Russian
society. This is not only because the top does not operate in a
vacuum but also because it is here that the future of Russia will be
decided. Steele senses this but cannot deliver the analysis. Instead,
as the title Eternal Russia suggests, he resorts to the old
argument that Russia’s future is written in its past – centuries
of authoritarianism mean there is no civil society, no democratic tradition.
It is not an argument Steele feels comfortable with, but it is all
he offers. It contains an element of truth. Democratic traditions are
important, but they do not hang in the air. What is needed to
understand Russia in 1994 is an analysis of 1994 and not of 1894 or 1794.
Steele, like many, thought that Russia was different from the West
and he is still to an extent paralysed in his thinking by a
recognition that it was not.
This comes out clearly in his discussion of October 1993. Steele
provides a valuable discussion of Yeltsin’s manipulation of the
crisis but he is caught in a trap of his own making. He seems to
sympathise with the old parliament who in a legalistic sense
certainly had right on their side. But he cannot abandon Yeltsin as
democracy’s hope. Because he looks from the top down it is the
fissures in the ruling class that dominate the whole issue for him
and suddenly Zhirinovsky rises like a rabbit out of a hat in the
final pages.
If Steele cannot deliver, academia have no less difficulties. The
Fourth Way illustrates this. As Eastern Europe collapsed there
was much abstract talk about a third way between Stalinism and the
unregulated market, but this was rhetorically swept aside by many new
leaders with the demand for ‘markets without adjectives’. Steele
points out that this was based on a fantasy view of ‘really
existing capitalism’ but for a crucial period not only was the
revolutionary left squeezed out of the discussion but so was social democracy.
The Fourth Way – the phrase is clutched out of the air to
get an Eastern Europe audience – is an attempt to put a weak social
democracy back into the discussion. The essays question the nature of
privatisation west and east and provide some (occasionally) useful
information, though more about Eastern Europe than Russia.
What is ironic is that a part of the left that generally believed
this area to be different should now be trying to teach Eastern
European reformers how to be real capitalists rather than fantasy ones.
When those at the bottom need a real alternative to the worst
ravages of crisis, the disillusioned Western liberal and social
democrat stands on the sidelines shouting – capitalism shouldn’t
be quite like this.
 



Sexual liberation is central to the idea of socialist
revolution. Mike Haynes looks at how the Russian Revolution in
1917 challenged the morality of the old regime, but how the growth of
Stalinism smashed the gains of 1917 and left a legacy of repressed
and distorted sexuality that endures even today
Attitudes to sex can tell us much about a society. In the case of
Russia the changing attitude to sex throws considerable light on the
nature of the different regimes that have controlled that society in
the 20th century.
Today Russia is a society drowning in sexual imagery. Pornography
is rife. On the bookstalls, in the markets and subways, it is
possible to find everything from Trotsky’s History of the
Russian Revolution to Mein Kampf and Lord of the Rings
sitting alongside ‘erotica’. Even if you don’t have enough
money to buy them, if you offer enough, the stallholder might let you
look for a few seconds at the ‘Playmate of the Month’.
Yesterday none of this existed. But Russia was just as hung up on
sex in the negative sense. Under Stalin it became, in the words of
one sociologist, a society with a ‘pathological animosity to sex’.
And yet in the period after 1917 socialists had seen Russia as the
most free society on earth, eliminating not only exploitation and
oppression but also sexual repression.
Conservatives have always accused revolutionaries of ‘immorality
and free love’. And it is true that socialists do repudiate the
hypocrisy of conventional society. But the socialist argument
involves more than this. Marx and Engels argued that human
relationships are distorted by class society. The relationships of
men and women are moulded not least by the oppression of women.
By removing the material base of class, Marx and Engels argued,
socialism can create the possibility of new human relationships
developing. In particular by liberating women a real equality will be
possible in which men and women face each other as real equals with
the right to choose and say yes and no. A free choice of heterosexual
or homosexual love would develop without the interference of society.
Russia at the start of the 20th century was like any other
capitalist state. The subjection of women was reinforced by the law.
The wife was required ‘to follow her husband as head of the family,
to love and respect him, to submit to him in every respect’.
Although a small but growing feminist and socialist movement
challenged these ideas, most people lived lives set by the
conventional world of male domination. The aristocracy and middle
classes proclaimed the virtue of stable marriage but this was belied
by the tens of thousands of prostitutes and the VD wards where
servant women made up the biggest group. Among the peasants it was
still common for a whip to be passed to the man in the marriage
ceremony and sometimes this was hung above the couple’s bed. In the
lower classes generally wife beating was endemic, and everywhere
material poverty sapped the pleasure of human relationships.
Yet pressures for change developed both from the socialist
movement and from the beginnings of a new self confidence from women
as they moved into the workplace and found a collective strength.
Revolution in 1917 boosted this. One soldier interrupted a women’s
street meeting to ask, ‘Does this mean I can’t hit my wife?’
The crowd shouted, ‘None of that. You just try it. Nothing doing.
Let ourselves be beaten any more? Not on your life. Nobody has the
right now.’ In the factories too, women took revenge on the boss
and foremen who had humiliated them. Of course, revolution was no
magic wand that transformed everything but here was a process
beginning from below where women especially asserted the right to
their free development.
The Bolsheviks tried to reinforce this in the first days of
revolutionary power by their decrees on women. The rights to free
marriage and free divorce were established, distinctions in law
between legitimacy and illegitimacy removed. Homosexuality was
decriminalised. To help pregnant women a special department of the
Commissariat of Health was established and in 1919 women in the
Bolshevik Party created the Zhenotdel – a special women’s department.
The new spirit was expressed by one Zhenotdel worker in 1920:
‘Communism emancipates women, communism emancipates children,
communism transforms the relations between the sexes into simply
private relations, communism transforms the woman from “the wife of
a person” into a person.’ In this sense a woman, said another
member of the Zhenotdel, would ‘not be inferior to a man in
anything’. The Bolshevik leader Alexandra Kollontai identified what
this meant for personal relationships, ‘a union of affection and
comradeship, a union of two equal members of the communist society,
both of them free, both of them independent, both of them workers.’
But these fine aspirations were undercut by the horrors of the
Civil War which stretched the revolution almost to breaking point. As
the cities starved and froze and resources were drained away to the
military front it was impossible to turn the aspirations into
reality. Human relationships were formed in the worst of times. At
best they were brief encounters. ‘Love meant: I’m going to die,
to die’, wrote Ilya Ehrenburg in a poem of the time. ‘Love meant:
Go, leaping, fire, along the wind. Love meant: Where are you? Where?’
Some confused this rough enforced equality with a new morality but,
as one socialist critic has put it, they were ‘simply glamourising
the helpless situation of people fighting a war’. It was in this
fearful context that an immense step forward was made in 1920 to
decriminalise abortion as a way of relieving the pressures on women – 
the first time that this had happened anywhere in the advanced world.
But at worst in these years something else occurred. As the social
facilities crumbled, children were abandoned and orphaned on a
massive scale – half a million by 1922. In the undergrowth
prostitution flourished and black market publishers still found paper
to print pornography. The end of the Civil War in 1921 brought new
opportunities but also new dangers. Bolshevik rule had just survived
but much of the working class had been destroyed and with it the
spirit of 1917.
The 1920s were therefore full of ambiguities. At one level it was
a time of experiment and ferment, in sex as much as anything else.
‘What fun we had mocking the cult of virginity’, one woman
remembered. A small gay culture developed. Nudists marched on the
streets of Petrograd to celebrate the human body. Alexandra Kollontai
wrote stories of the dilemmas of those freed from convention. But
just beneath the surface was a different picture.
Even among the free spirits of the party freedom became twisted.
‘Any Komsomol woman or female student has to do the bidding of any
man to whom she seems pleasing, otherwise she is “petty bourgeois”
and does not deserve the name of proletarian student’, complained
the head of the Zhenotdel.
Resisting the degeneration in this area of life, as elsewhere, was
not easy. Some thought personal life unimportant. Others saw their
chance to use their power. Bukharin attacked the case of a party
official who was procuring girls in the resort of Sochi for other
officials as a symbol of the revolution’s degeneration. Still
others – notoriously Stalin – moved towards an acceptance of
family values as the basis of the retreat from the high ideals of 1917.
As early as 1923 he can be found arguing that, ‘The female
workers and peasants are mothers, the educators of our youth – the
future of our country.’
So long as the uneasy balance of the New Economic Policy (NEP)
remained, so did some of the earlier gains. One peasant woman said in
1927, ‘Yes, I think it is a little better. Men are ashamed to beat
their wives so often ... I think they are also afraid. A woman in the
next village got a divorce.’ But what remained of the earlier
liberation was swept away by the victory of Stalin and the final
overturn of the remains of the revolution.
The objective was rapid industrialisation and competition with the
West. This needed women in the labour force on a massive scale but it
also needed the family as the basic cell of society. Stalin pushed
the Soviet Union towards one of the most sexually repressed societies
in the advanced world in the 20th century.
Homosexuality was made a crime again in 1933 and abortion
effectively banned from 1936. The family and ‘mother heroine’
were celebrated. Women had to be both workers and mothers. ‘I am
ready to give birth every year’, wrote one woman joyously in
response to the banning of abortion to stimulate population growth.
Discussions of sex simply disappeared. Naked bodies were not
allowed in paintings. Sex could not be reflected in books and films.
The first screen kiss was not seen until 1956. Unmarried couples
could not stay in hotels. In the streets police whistles stopped
courting couples and in private the Communist Party played the role
of moral policeman.
People did struggle to find love and comfort in one another. ‘They
think just because we have had Stalin we have never lived and loved
like people’, said one woman. But it was difficult to keep the
world out of your bed – not least if you lived in a communal room
and feared that fleeting passion would bring another pregnancy.
After the death of Stalin there was a gradual relaxation in the
discussion of sexuality. Women’s lives did improve – especially
after 1955 when abortion was again allowed. But contraception
remained uncertain. By the 1980s only 20 percent of need was being
covered and Soviet women had as many as 10 million abortions a year.
Sex education continued to be taboo until it was gingerly broached
in the 1980s. Overall attitudes remained trapped as the sexual
revolution passed by the Soviet Union.
Ignorance and repression combined to produce bigotry. Sex was
smut. Real men did it their way. Real men and women were not
‘queers’. In the early 1970s the film director Sergei Paradzhanov
was sentenced to five years hard labour for homosexuality and many
lesser known men suffered with less publicity.
People were told that this repressive society was one that had
achieved socialism and women’s freedom. But if this was so then it
is not surprising that people turned away from the ideas of both
socialism and women’s emancipation in disgust. From the 1960s,
generations developed which began to see unrestrained sex as a
gesture of apolitical opposition to the regime. It was opposition
because ‘they don’t want us to do it’. It was apolitical
because it took place in an ideological vacuum and it pointed to a
liberation no less false than the one that had been claimed to exist before.
When the system began to collapse at the end of the 1980s it
opened up an explosion of repressed interest in sex and sexuality,
and women in particular were cynically encouraged to celebrate their
ability to serve man’s sexual needs as a form of liberation in the
same way that they had earlier been encouraged to see the double
burden of worker and homemaker as freedom.
In one sense this is not unusual. Russia today echoes the
contradictions in Portugal and Spain in the 1970s when politically
and sexually repressive dictatorships fell. Sexual images,
pornography and politics jostle one another. But there is a vital
difference. In these cases movements developed in which men and women
could argue for a real emancipation.
In Russia the vacuum is continuing. It is reinforced by talk of
putting women back into the home as beautiful wives. Small gay and
women’s movements have developed but it is difficult for them to
stand against the flood. The fascist Zhirinovsky has seen political
potential in building on this pseudo liberation. He shocked many by
deliberately suffusing his election speeches with sexual imagery.
Some responded with disdain. It was a bad misjudgement. Zhirinovsky
in this as so much else represents an outcome which derives from the
legacy of exploitation and oppression which masqueraded as socialist
freedom and so denied people the chance to explore a real path to
freedom in both their politics and personal life.
 



On 13 March 1938 at 4 p.m. the Soviet Court trying Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin returned to pronounce him and his co-conspirators guilty as charged. Less than twenty-four hours later Bukharin, the man who Lenin had described as ‘a most valuable and major theorist … rightly considered the favourite of the whole Party’ was dead, executed by firing squad. With him died 17 of his fellow defendants in the third and greatest of the Soviet Purge Trials.
Who could doubt his guilt? Had it not been proven before the world that he was in the words of Prosecutor Vyshinsky a ‘damnable son of a fox and a swine’, a ‘counter-revolutionary bandit’? Had he himself not admitted leading the conspiratorial ‘Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites’? Had not volume upon volume of evidence been marshalled against him – evidence which proved how in 1918, he had plotted to assassinate Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov; evidence which proved that the criminal Bloc had been formed on the instruction of foreign intelligence services; evidence which proved that they were planning to dismember the USSR; evidence which proved that they were wrecking the economy; evidence which proved that they were a terrorist centre responsible for the assassination of Kirov? Who but a fascist or a dupe of the fascists could doubt his guilt? [1]
Certainly there were few in the world communist movement who did. There, Bukharin’s supporters had been dealt with long ago. Pliant tool of Moscow that it was, it rose with one voice to echo the demands of Vyshinsky, ‘crush the accursed reptile’, ‘shoot them like dirty dogs’! What was the trial of Bukharin but in Harry Pollitt’s words ‘A triumph in the history of progress’? Nor was he alone in this estimate. If the Gods demanded a sacrifice then so be it. And so they came, the intellectual cream of the left ‘down on its knees before the Soviet bureaucracy’. [2]
Was there then, no reason for doubt? Of course there was! Logic cried out against the whole charade. The trials themselves, based as they were on confessions, demanded repudiation. Much of the evidence was patently false. There was no excuse for believing the Stalinist propaganda machine, no excuse for suspending judgement and many did not. Not of course that they came out in open political opposition, in support of those who like Trotsky tried to expose the trials for what they were. No, seeing through the tissue of lies laid before them, the larger part of the working class concluded in a simple gut reaction that if Stalinism was socialism then they wanted nothing of either. Against the background of despair and disillusionment created by the failure to fight poverty and unemployment, against the spectre of the rise of Hitler, the purge trials and the doublethink associated with them confirmed for the majority of workers that there was no real alternative. [3]
Today the repression in the Soviet Union is less intense but the trials go on, the popular association of Russia with socialism has yet to be broken. And yet the context is much different. Not only has the small Marxist tradition which opposed the trials in the 1930’s grown in strength but now, with the emergence of Eurocommunism, the orthodox communist parties have moved to distance themselves from the Soviet state. But, more than this, Eurocommunism has not only made it necessary to be critical now, it also-forces a revaluation of the past. Was Stalin really necessary? Can we not find a politically less painful alternative? Are there not other lessons to be learnt on the transition to socialism? And so, gingerly, the questions are posed and each time, it seems, figuring at the centre of the answer, is none other than the former ‘reptile’ Bukharin. Those who once crucified him before the world now demand his resurrection. The cause of Bukharin is in the ascendant.
In the West his major works have been republished and there is also now an outstanding biography by Stephen Cohen. [4] But more than this, his thinking has been and is at the centre of the reassessment of the Soviet past and present. Even in Eastern Europe he talks anew. For years he has been the ‘eminence grise’ behind reform discussions and now it is even possible to openly praise him in some countries. [5] In the Soviet Union, of course, he is still officially ‘non-person’. In the West it is difficult to appreciate how complete this is. It is perhaps understandable that Soviet writers should still be cautious about discussing the contentious debates of the 1920s, that they should follow the official line of the time in describing Bukharin and the Right Opposition as
an expression of a straightforward repudiation of the Leninist policy of the party and as an expression of a frank opportunist surrender of the Leninist position under the pressure of the class enemy.
But, his banishment goes further than this. Even his role in the Revolution and Civil War is still taboo. Thus one recent work on Moscow in 1917 finds space to mention him only once and then in a list of names. One wonders if this is the same N.I. Bukharin who was the most prominent member of the Moscow Bolsheviks at this time? In another work however, he gets a better deal – all of three mentions! Each time, though, it is to condemn him as the leader of the ‘left Communists’. Indeed, this work goes even further and we are told that ‘Certain local party organisations including Moscow, Petrograd, the Urals came under the influence of the “left Communists” ...’ – a masterly understatement considering that the first two were the biggest local organisations and that Bukharin’s position on the war with Germany apart from having an early majority on the Central Committee, was initially at least, probably supported by a majority in the Party. [6] But, if this is the open situation, behind closed doors, even in the Soviet Union, the ghost of Bukharin still walks. In the discussions on economic reform, for instance, one observer has commented that
it was astonishing to discover how many ideas of Bukharin’s anti-Stalinist programme of 1928-1929 were adopted by current reformers as their own and how much of their critique of past practices followed his strictures and prophecies even in their expression … [7]
There is now even an international campaign, supported by western communist parties for his rehabilitation. [8] There is no doubt that such a campaign should have the support of everyone on the left. Limited though it might seem, in the context of Soviet society any move to open a free discussion on the legacy of Bukharin would be a major political advance. But, equally a genuine resurrection of Bukharin demands more than a campaign, more than uncritical adulation, it demands a thorough re-examination of the Soviet experience and his role in it.
 
Why Bukharin?
It is easy to see Bukharin’s attraction. At the most basic level, for instance, there is Bukharin the human being. Whereas the rest of the old Bolsheviks appear to us as austere, detached figures, isolated by their hagiographers, Bukharin is at once open and accessible – warts and all. Thus we have Bukharin the animal lover, who from his earliest years never ceased to delight in butterflies; Bukharin the theoretician, begging Lenin not to provoke a split by immoderate criticism; Bukharin Lenin’s friend, alone among the old Bolsheviks, trying to ease his last years by constant visits; Bukharin the protector, using his influence to defend the intellectual victims of repression; Bukharin the reluctant henchman, breaking down at Trotsky’s expulsion, and so on, right to the end, when Bukharin managed to extract a degree of human dignity from his last appearance in that Moscow hall in March 1938.
Then there is Bukharin the theoretician. Fluent in languages, he was immersed in Western thought. Here, at last, is a Bolshevik who cannot be explained away by ‘Russian conditions’. Bourgeois social science was something he took seriously and kept up with throughout his life, something he refused to dismiss out of hand, something he saw must be challenged and undermined. Then there is Bukharin the innovator in his own right, producing a pathbreaking analysis of imperialism, drawing penetrating pictures of the growing might of the State.
Then we have Bukharin, the Bolshevik leader. In 1917 both Trotsky and Lenin saw him as their natural successor if they were killed and throughout the 1920s and early 1930s he managed to retain this prestige. He was the one major leader who had managed to remain untainted by a bureaucratic posting. That appeal remains today, distinguishing him from those like Kirov who seem eventually to have moved against Stalin but who were always part of the machine.
Then there is Bukharin the oppositionist. The man who finally realised and realised more completely than the left the threat of Stalin. And it is here that we find the key element in his resurrection, for Bukharin’s opposition was of a particular kind. Not for him the ‘theory of permanent revolution’, not for him an appeal to the working class against the party, nor even an appeal to the party against the leadership – no, firmly committed to the theory of ‘socialism in one country’, firmly within the confines of the emasculated democracy of the time Bukharin developed an alternative. [9]
He developed a set of theories that amounted to a full-fledged counter-programme for Russia’s road to socialism as opposed to the one the majority leaders were embarking upon. [10]
It is this counter-programme which not only now seems so attractive in the West but which has also served as a source of inspiration for the reform movement in Eastern Europe in the post-Stalin years. To appreciate its true significance it has to be set alongside the traditional view of what happened in the twenties and thirties.
The old picture of the economic debates of the 1920’s has been one of a stalemate between the views of the left and the right. The left, wanted to tax more and more resources from the peasantry in order to increase the pace of industrial development. This would have resulted, however, in, among other things, peasant opposition and a falling demand from the countryside for industrial goods. The right on the other hand, wanted prosperity in the countryside to pacify the peasant and to develop a buoyant source of demand. This, however, would have led to a very low ceiling being placed on the level of accumulation – in Bukharin’s fatal phrase, they would develop at a ‘snails pace’. The consequence was, to quote Lewin:
… the left had an industrialisation programme but lacked a clear answer concerning the peasants, whereas Bukharin had no adequate blueprint for industrialisation but offered a plan to the peasantry. [11]
This deadlock became more and more dangerous as external forces gathered against the Soviet Union and internally stability was threatened, economically, by high urban unemployment and the ‘grain crisis’ in the countryside and, politically, by the machinations
of the left and right oppositions and the Kulaks. It was left to Stalin to brilliantly solve the problem, albeit at a high (and, of course, regrettable cost). His solution entailed, firstly, the collectivisation of the countryside. At a stroke, therefore, he both eliminated peasant opposition and created a situation where resources could be pumped out of agriculture for industry. Secondly, it involved rapid industrialisation across a broad front. In this way he created a ‘development bloc’ which fed off its own demand. Stalin was, therefore, seen to have expropriated the policies of the left and taken them to degree that they could never have imagined. [12]
This story is not entirely fictional but much of it needs substantial revision. So far as Bukharin is concerned the essence of the revision lies in a recognition of the fact that during 1926–1928 his thinking underwent a transformation in which he moved closer to the left and began to develop a programme which allowed for a harder line in the countryside and a faster pace of industrialisation. [13] At the same time, he stressed the need for an optimum path of growth in the long run rather than the fastest short run path – the position adopted at the fifteenth Party Congress in 1927.
... we must take as our point of departure not the minimum tempo of accumulation for next year or the next few years, but such a proportion as will guarantee the greatest speed of development permanently and over the long run. [14]
Such a path entailed an emphasis on balance and coordination within the economy, on what he constantly termed ‘equilibrium’. In this way it would be possible to minimise disruption. Thinking along these lines he developed a devastating critique of the chaotic policies pursued by Stalin and his supporters and of their rationale. Let us examine it more closely, looking at his critique of what was happening and then at his alternative.
 
The ‘Agrarian Crisis’
The keynote of Bukharin’s approach still remained a much more favourable estimate of the situation in the countryside than either the left or Stalin after 1927–28 was prepared to allow. Throughout the 1920’s the main danger to the revolution was seen to be the peasantry. The ‘grain crisis’ of 1927–28 was seen as a confirmation of this. It was widely believed that the cause lay in a discontented peasantry, dominated by the hostile Kulaks, refusing to sell grain to the towns. In this way Stalin’s brutal response was made against economic and political threats.
For Bukharin, on the other hand, this whole account consisted of little more than ‘fairy tales’. From 1921 onwards he moved away from his early radicalism to take up the cause of the peasantry. This shift had a political as well as an economic dimension. He was led to argue that the peasantry was not a hostile capitalist class but a neutral force which could both be won over to socialism and ‘grow into it’ without the need for any ‘third revolution’. At the centre of the Communist International, Bukharin’s line combined with his support of the notion of ‘Socialism in One Country’ led to a general dismantling of the revolutionary perspective and a number of major debacles typified by the Chinese fiasco. [15]
In his economic arguments, however, Bukharin was on much stronger ground. The idea of a Kulak threat supposes three things. Firstly, that social differentiation had gone sufficiently for the creation of a group of wealthy peasants capable of dominating the peasantry as a whole. Secondly, that this group was capable of organising itself and the peasantry, to act in a unified way against the state. Thirdly, that if such a group did exist and did act in this way that it would constitute a real danger. For Bukharin none of these points could be demonstrated and whatever the weaknesses of particular parts of his argument there is little doubt that with hindsight he was right.
In the first place, try as they might the economists of the time could not prove, even with the aid of a few distortions, that a Kulak class existed. Subsequently historians have had the same problem Kulaks it seems, are like God, a matter of faith. ‘It was no longer true that class analysis determined policy. Policy determined what form of class analysis was appropriate to the given situation’. [16] Similarly the notion that peasants were withholding vast stores of grain was false as Bukharin tried to demonstrate. [17]
Today every child knows that the oppositional fairy tales on the ‘frightfully tremendous’ grain reserves held back by the village, the legends of the 900 million puds of grain that have been supposed to be hidden away have burst once and for all like soap bubbles. Nobody believes these fairy tales any longer. [18]
But of course, in a situation where the pressure was on, they did. Not only did Stalin move to adopt the ‘fairy tales’ as his own but they dominated the thinking of the left opposition. It is one of the great tragedies that the left seemed almost to will itself to believe in the Kulak threat to the exclusion of all else. Chasing phantoms they lost sight of the real threat – the growing power of Stalin rising on the backs of the bureaucracy. ‘With Stalin against Bukharin? – Yes’ exclaimed Trotsky. ‘With Bukharin against Stalin? – Never’. Only too late did he realise what a blunder he had made. When Stalin moved against the ‘accursed Kulak’ the left opposition collapsed around him. ‘This was it,’ they argued, ‘at last the left turn has come’! [19]
Bukharin was equally scathing about the potential of collectivisation for improving the rural situation.
Certain comrades among us consider that the main path to socialism is the Kolkhoz. I consider this claim is wrong. The chief path will be through ordinary co-operation; sales, purchases, credit – in other words through agricultural cooperatives. [20]
Again there is little doubt that Bukharin was right. [21] No-one today outside the Soviet Union disputes that collectivisation was a catastrophe. Rather, the argument is that it was a ‘necessary evil’. It was necessary (as was Stalin) to (1) release labour for industry, (2) feed the towns, (3) eliminate peasant opposition, and more important. (4) release the bulk of the capital needed for the investment drive.
The first claim that collectivisation was needed to release labour is particularly strange. In the towns alone in 1928 there were some 1–2 million unemployed, according to official statistics. The countryside was like a sponge holding underemployed labour. Some 8–10 million people could probably have been released even at existing productivity levels without any serious loss of output. Who is to say, therefore, what relatively small improvements might have produced? The claim that collectivisation fed the towns is equally curious. The coercive measures used led to a massive fall in output, mass slaughter of livestock and a major famine in 1933. Grain procurements did indeed increase but at what a cost! In the towns rationing was introduced and inflation ran riot on the black market. Severe hardship occurred to a much greater depth than existed in the so-called crisis that prompted the whole experience. Agricultural production did not consistently reach its 1926–28 levels until the mid 1950’s. Neither did collectivisation eliminate peasant opposition.
But most significant of all is the attack that can be made on the fourth claim – that collectivisation enabled a ‘tribute’ to be secured for ‘primitive socialist accumulation’ to occur in industry. The work of a Soviet historian, Barsov, has made clear what really happened. Such was the destruction and chaos caused by collectivisation that in order to keep production up, even at much reduced levels, it was necessary to push back from the rest of the economy much of the funds that were being taken out of agriculture. [22] In fact there does not appear to have been any substantial net transfer of surplus out of agriculture. In this sense millions of peasants suffered and died in vain. But, if the peasants did not pay for industrialisation, who did? The answer is, of course, that it was the workers in the towns. Just as the substantial component of accumulation in every other country has come from surplus value exploited from the working class, so it was in Soviet Russia too:
From a Marxist point of view, the origin of the huge increase in accumulation during the First Five Year Plan was (a) an increase in absolute surplus value resulting from the increase in the urban labour force (30 percent), and (b) an increase in relative surplus value resulting from the fall in real wages (101 percent), less (c) a decrease in unequal exchange with agriculture (−31 percent). The four key mechanisms for obtaining additional accumulation were: the transition of the unions from trade unionism to production mindedness, the rapid growth of forced labour, the replacement of a market relationship between agriculture and the industrial sphere by a coercive relationship, and an increased differentiation between the elite and the masses. [23]
But if this was so, and few now dispute it, is this ‘socialism’ perhaps little more than capitalism in disguise? Even without the hindsight given by history this was a question which, as we shall see was not far from Bukharin’s mind. [24]
 
Industry and the five year plan
The New Economic Policy combined market forms with intensive state ownership of large scale industry to create a system where the centre was ‘primarily an administrative coordinator of the socialist sector and a centre of macroeconomic policy for the whole.’ Within this system enterprises had a ‘far-reaching autonomy’ although after 1925 much of this began to be cut back. Given the fact that the economy was recovering for much of the NEP it is difficult to say how effective it was. [25] Bukharin nevertheless came to see it as a practical if not ideal mechanism and in this he was supported by the left opposition. Thus debates largely revolved around issues within NEP rather than the question of overthrowing it.
The real challenge to NEP began to develop in 1925–27. ‘Until 1921 it was not the Politburo that was pressing for higher targets; it was the group of party members in Gosplan, allied first with several radical non-party specialists ...’ [26] In a situation where it was possible to use administrative measures to silence critics and where state manipulation of the economy was already producing disequilibrium these views gathered support. To the leadership in the Politburo the increasingly optimistic forecasts must have seemed like a godsend. Attempting to grapple with internal economic difficulties at the same time as they were subject to both external economic and political pressure from the world economy and the push from the bureaucrat for increased rewards the possibility of speeding up tempos seemed to solve all problems. At first affecting Stalin’s associates this attitude spread as the difficulties increased until the majority in the Politburo saw no solution but to initiate measures which would lead to the elimination of NEP in favour of the Five Year Plan.
Rarely can a more misleading name have been chosen. As politico and economic pressure intensified the original plan became transformed. The atmosphere has been well described in recent works. A technical achievement in itself, the original plan was subject to major revisions in which rationality disappeared as competing groups strove to outdo one another. Riazanov summed up the situation at the Party Conference in April 1929.
every speech ends … Give us a factory in the Urals and to hell with the RIGHTS! Give us a power station and to hell with the RIGHTS! [27]
The voice of moderation was the voice of the opposition, the voice of defeatism. ‘There are no fortresses the Bolsheviks cannot storm!’ became the slogan of the day. This was not planning, it was the unleashing of a totally chaotic form of development ordered only by the dictates of circumstances. [28]
Bukharin viewed this transformation with growing horror. By 1927 he had seen the need for an increased rate of growth. But the 15th Congress also reaffirmed a commitment to NEP – not this monstrosity. Now he strove to defend the Congress line, to attack with the rest of the Right opposition this policy of ‘madmen’. Planning was no simple panacea, ‘With an incorrect policy the cost of the process might be no less than the cost of capitalist anarchy … ‘ [29]
His attack was spelt out in a number of articles published in 1928 and 1929. Foremost amongst these was Notes of an Economist published in October 1928. [30] This article, written as an attack on ‘Trotskyism’, was in fact a very obvious, if veiled attack on the majority line. Bukharin’s argument was that industry was already growing at a fast pace. But even at this level problems – deficits and imbalances – in the economy were growing. In this situation it was absurd to demand more.
If there are not enough bricks and if, for technical reasons, no more than a certain quantity can be produced during the current season, then we must not draw up a building programme which exceeds this limit ... you cannot build factories out of air!
But this was not all. The situation was bound to deteriorate. As shortfalls developed, extraordinary administrative measures would be needed creating more inbalances, more bureaucratism. But already ‘We have too much overcentralised everything. We must ask ourselves ought we not now to take some steps in the direction of the Leninist commune state?’ Above all what was needed was flexibility and balance – that flexibility and balance embodied in the directives of the Fifteenth Party Congress. ‘Isn’t it possible here to demand a Precise carrying out of the decisions of the Fifteenth Congress’.
Of course it was not. Just as over the question of agriculture Bukharin and the Right were overwhelmed. At this point Bukharin proceeded to publish his most memorable article in the form of a book review entitled ‘The Theory of Organised Chaos’. [31] This purported to describe the emerging chaos in the West as a result of increased state intervention. State capitalism was becoming part of the normal functioning of the system, the contradictions of capitalism were now played out on the world market. But far from bringing internal order the resort to administrative measures, to ‘organised capitalism’ created a whole new range of problems as ‘means became ends’. [32] The chaotic method of economic coordination led to huge economic waste; human relations were increasingly distorted – ‘private’ and ‘public’ spheres became inseparable; creeping economic lethargy developed as bureaucratism led to the routinisation of social processes. [33] Developing his arguments at some length Bukharin concluded ‘Soviet readers will be startled by the formal resemblance of certain organisational problems ...’!
What on earth was Bukharin trying to say? That he was attacking the existing situation in the Soviet Union was clear but was it more than this? Could he really be implying that in essence the ‘organised chaos of capitalism’ and the ‘more pressing analogous problems’ of socialist construction reflected the fact that they were variants of one and the same system? This we shall probably never know for this was the last really significant piece he was able to publish. As it is, what is left is a prophetic critique of what happened during industrialisation.
The fact is that the Five Year Plan was simply unfeasible, even in its original form. Two highly optimistic variants had been developed, a base line version and an optional version with goals some 20 percent higher. The latter could only be obtained if a number of highly unlikely circumstances were met – for example, no harvest failure, a significant increase in international trade. There was thus an element of flexibility. In fact a recent reworking of the plan has shown that it was not even internally consistent in its gross magnitudes, let alone its petty details. Even if its optimistic assumptions had been met it could not have worked. [34] But of course the plan was not even applied. It was destroyed by the drive to push up targets. Priority sectors became autarchic empires at the cost of fantastic waste and duplication. Collectivisation destroyed one set of assumptions as agricultural output fell and chaos reigned in the countryside. Another set of assumptions were hit by the world crisis as Soviet exports fell and the economy was pushed towards isolation. The consequence was as Bukharin predicted. Each problem, each imbalance was met by administrative measures.
It was the unplanned character of the whole process which forced upon the state ever more ‘planning’ meaning simply the need to enlarge upon the scope of administrative controls, and the takeover of the whole of the national economy by state apparatuses. [35]
The plan was dead. What was left was a bureaucratically controlled economy whose institutional framework was an ad hoc response to chance. This is the reality of the world’s first ‘planned economy’. [36]
’Organised chaos’ was reflected also in the economic results of industrialisation. In 1932 the plan was declared fulfilled, in reality the whole economy was in crisis as even the distorted Soviet statistics show. When one takes into account the destruction of the time, the decline in quality it seems plausible to argue that the economy actually grew faster overall between 1928 and 1932 than it did in the last year of NEP. Particular sectors were, of course, transformed and the period 1934–1937 was one of general recovery but the years 1938–40 were again a period of crisis as the economy was subject to a major disruption from the purges. [37]
It would seem obvious that a lower rate of economic growth would have achieved the same or even better results. In fact, even Soviet economists are prepared to admit this possibility. [38] A simple extrapolation of the results of the last years of NEP also suggest as much. Bukharin’s critique would seem to be vindicated. But a critique, however perceptive, does not automatically become an historically viable alternative. Even less is it necessarily a socialist alternative. The problem with Bukharin was that his alternative never raised itself above the level of a critique, for it was neither viable nor socialist, as we shall see.
 
Bukharin’s Alternative
The question of an historical alternative cannot be reduced to a technical decision or a personality issue. It involves taking a position on the nature of the transformation that occurred in the Soviet Union and placing Bukharin’s analysis within the context of this. Viewed in these terms it seems clear that Bukharin provided no real alternative. Almost certainly, had he remained in power, the absurdities of the industrialisation drive, the purges, the repression would all have been moderated and this is important. But it does not mean that the essential nature of the transformation would have been much changed. The fact is that Bukharin’s critique and his so-called ‘counterprogramme’ embodied much the same set of assumptions as the majority line. The essence of the industrialisation drive lay in the final political expropriation of the vestiges of working class power and. consequent upon this, a massive upsurge in the level of exploitation. Yet all of this was implicit in Bukharin too, basing himself, as he did on the thesis of ‘socialism in one country’ and a development of the perspectives of the Fifteenth Congress in 1927.
During the early 1920’s he had agreed with the left opposition that the funds for accumulation should not, indeed could not, come from the working class. [39] The left argued that a solution could only come if the revolution was spread abroad, although it was possible in the short run to extract more from the peasantry. Bukharin, however, quickly shifted to become the theoretical protagonist of socialism in one country. [40] Given that the investment funds had to come from somewhere, his analysis led him directly to see Russia ‘riding into socialism on a peasant nag’. His new perspectives did nothing to bring him nearer to solving this contradiction. It was all very well to espouse the cause of a faster tempo of growth but the resources still had to be obtained. A harder line in the countryside might have helped but he himself continued to show the limits to this. The only alternative was the working class. [41]
The fact is that by 1928, although there had been a recovery in living standards, the level of surplus drawn from the working class was already excessive. This was reflected in the adoption of capitalist organisational forms, and a general pressure for increased output. [42] On top of this, it has now been shown that to have succeeded, the five year plan, even in its original form, would still have necessitated a major cut in personal consumption – a cut that was bound to be opposed if the limited rights of workers were left unchallenged. [43]
Moreover, because Bukharin had no revolutionary international perspective, he too would have been imprisoned by outside developments. The Soviet Union would still have been hit by the world crisis and he offered no perspective for dealing with it. Similarly, he offered no new perspective for the defence of the Soviet Union. Stalin’s solution of an arms drive and a rapid military build-up, while it might have been more extensive than Bukharin envisaged, was essentially his solution too. Indeed, the whole military logic of ‘socialism in one country’ had been worked and affirmed with Bukharin’s support in 1927 both in the party and in the Communist International, then under his leadership. [44] Faced with a deteriorating international situation only a real revolutionary perspective offered any alternative to the assimilation of capitalist defence measures with all their momentous consequences. Bukharin might try to reject the ‘social fascist line’ in favour of his own version of the popular front but he was still imprisoned by the thesis he had done so much create. [45]
Behind this failure to see the contradiction between the revolution and ‘socialism in one country’ lay a deeper fault. Bukharin simply had no concept of the way in which the revolution was degenerating politically. This not only coloured his theoretical perspective but led directly to his political impotence. The man who had once seen the state as ‘the fundamental and principal question of the entire; practice of the revolutionary class’ entirely lost sight of this issue in the twenties and thirties. Whereas the left continued to see NEP as a ‘retreat’, ‘fraught with danger’, he saw it as a long term framework for transition. In this he has been followed by his modern admirers.
True NEP does appear as a period of apparent ‘peace and tranquility’, ‘pluralism and diversity’ but this, of course, was relative to what had gone before and what was to come later. Moreover juxtaposing NEP to other possible ‘models’ obscures the fact that it was a society in motion – and not just any society. [46] It was the peculiar product of the degeneration of a ‘workers and peasants state’ in a backward country. As such it combined a number of conflicting dynamics, different interests and powers, each fighting for supremacy. The apparent ‘pluralism and diversity’ reflects not something intrinsic to NEP, rather NEP reflected a temporary equilibrium of forces in a changing situation. Bukharin, for all his intellectual brilliance, was blind to this. So has been much of the left. [47]
Whereas the cornerstone of the revolution had been the fantastic upsurge in popular democracy, NEP continued the widespread retreat forced by the Civil War. But in the Civil War authoritarian control was what held society together in the face of general collapse. NEP should have changed this, yet the astounding fact is that there was not one serious attempt to transfer any real power below. Each step went progressively in the opposite direction.
A persistent anxiety took hold of us communists... now the cities we ruled over assumed a foreign aspect; we felt ourselves sinking into the mire – paralyzed, corrupted .... a million and a half unemployed ... gambling, drunkenness, and all the old filth of former times ... classes were reborn under our very eyes.... there was a growing chasm between the prosperity of the few and the misery of the many ...
Even the great debates of the time reflected a ‘high level claustrophobia ... rarely pierced by opinion intruding from the Bolshevik rank and file ...’ [48]
At the centre of this general degeneration was the party itself, ‘we could no longer recognize the old party of the revolution’. Already in 1921, a quarter of its membership had been purged for ‘bureaucratic deformations’ but, of course, many of those doing the purging were themselves ensconced bureaucrats. Then, whereas Lenin had wanted another purge to remove more degenerate elements, the party leadership mockingly celebrated his death with ‘the Lenin Enrolment’, opening the doors of the party again and inevitably strengthening the power of the apparatus. [52] The result was that:
A new line of demarcation began to appear between a highly articulated, politically conscious and increasingly authoritarian party central organisation and a passive, dispersed and often bewildered party membership, less and less clearly distinguishable in its political attitudes and in the role which it was called on to play, from other ‘loyal’ elements of the population. The vanguard as a whole was no longer a vanguard or elite leading the masses of workers and peasants: the vanguard was formed of party officials leading and directing both the party and non-party masses. [53]
Against this Bukharin seems to have lived in a cocoon. Even the sympathetic Cohen is forced to talk of his ‘chronic public optimism’. At the beginning of NEP he had been willing to consider the possibility of the political degeneration of the revolution but this line quickly disappeared. [54] By the mid 1920’s any such suggestion was ‘treason’ for him:
For the three or four years when Stalin was building up his impregnable hold over the party and state and beating down the opposition, Bukharin was his zealous henchman. [55]
All that was left off his once vigorous analysis of the state was ‘a distrust of state power’, ‘a liberalising element in his Bolshevism’. The class nature of the state became little more than an abstraction – it was something which had been established for all time by the revolution. It might become frayed at the edges by bureaucratic degeneration but it could not be fundamentally changed. The role of the party and the role of the leadership within it had to be maintained at all cost. [56]
Moreover, whatever radicalism one choses to read into such pieces as his ‘Economics of Organised Chaos’, even when he came to see Stalin for what he was, his opposition was to Stalin as an individual. He had no real conception of attacking the power on which Stalin’s position rested. His opposition was private, ‘he never came out publicly against Stalin’. [57] If Cohen is right to suggest that the Right Opposition had a real popular base in 1928 then how much greater is the condemnation of Bukharin for not having mobilised it? Here was the man who had divided the party at its most crucial hour in 1918! Again, if Cohen is correct in seeing him ‘even in defeat as the symbol of Bolshevik resistance to the rise of Stalinism in the 1930’s’ why did he not do more? To the end his role was pathetic. Why did he remain silent? Why did he not add his authority, even as ‘a symbol of resistance’ to the Ryutin revolt in 1932? Why did he never openly speak out? Whatever gloss one might try to put on his actions, the fact is that his ‘conspiracy of silence’, his veiled attacks counted for little against the consolidation of Stalinism. What did count was the way in which he and the other old Bolsheviks were used to adorn the regime, to give Stalin his legitimacy. And when it came to the crunch Bukharin was even more prepared than some of the others to do this. At the Fourteenth Congress in 1934, for instance, so well did he abase himself that he ‘was one of the few former oppositionist speakers to receive the plaudits of the assembly’. [58] And then, in 1936, came the final irony. Bukharin, it seems, had a major hand in the production of the Stalin Constitution. But, more than this, he initially seems to have seriously thought that a constitution, a ‘scrap of paper’ could influence a regime whose brutality compares only to that of Nazi Germany. In such a way could a once great Marxist degenerate. [59]
Certainly there is a personal failing here. But it is more than this. The fact is that Bukharin was once again imprisoned by the system he had done so much to create. He was constrained both by its institutions and by its assumptions and he would not, could not give them up. Surely anything – anything, was preferable to his role? Opposition, protest, emigration, even suicide – the choices were there and many lesser men took them, but not Bukharin. To step outside the bounds, to dare, to fight – this was unthinkable. And so in the end his opposition became no more than a stream of endless letters to Stalin, " ‘Dear Koba! Dear Koba! Dear Koba!’. And he got not one reply.’’[60]
 
The other Bukharin
If this were all that remained of Bukharin – a contemptible, crude hounding of the opposition in the 1920’s; a critique of industrialisation which nevertheless accepted its basic assumptions; a half-hearted campaign against Stalin which degenerated into little more than a squalid concern to save his own life and those of his family, while millions perished; and ignominious end, rescued only by his ambiguous attempt to reject the basis of his trial, an attempt which few recognised for what it was – if this were really all, it would, indeed, be little. Yet, if we are to believe the liberal and Eurocommunist version this is all there is. One can understand how in the closed societies of Eastern Europe even this Bukharin could still pose such a threat, but that he should be taken up this way in the East – how, one asks, can this be? Is this really all there is left of his legacy?
Fortunately, it is not. There is another Bukharin – one whose whole being seems to contradict the thoughts and deeds of the later one. This is Bukharin in his early years – Bukharin the revolutionary. However, whereas it was this the younger Bukharin to whom Lenin gave his famous accolade, now, his new found admirers seems to want to keep him hidden, to explain him away in terms of his ‘immaturity’, ‘his Utopian leanings’ and so on. But if there is a real core to the ‘legend of Bukharin’, if there is a real legacy to celebrate then it is here that we will find it. Here, as a magnificant Marxist theorist of the state is a man whose work is of lasting value, for, in this early period we can find works which provide the key to unlocking the explanation of both the way in which modern capitalism has developed and the way in which it must be overcome. Culminating in his remarkable book The Economics of the Transformation Period, published in 1920, he set out to develop an understanding of imperialism and the role of the nation state within it. Then, summarising the experience of the Russian Revolution, he posed some of the key problems of the transition period. [61] No-one has yet satisfactorily explained how this early, radical Bukharin could become transformed into the later version that we have been discussing. But it is one of the merits of Cohen’s biography that« emphasises that there is this Bukharin to consider too. [62] Even Cohen though, has not set him in his true light for his ultimate concern seems to be to suggest that he was a forerunner of those who see the possibility of a third kind of society, neither capitalist nor socialist.
For socialists at the beginning of the twentieth century the fundamental political issue was the question of the nature of state power. Since Marx’s death there had been a major increase in the role of the state under the pressure of economic crisis, monopoly and increased militarisation. While the degree of state intervention was still relatively small compared to today, it still posed a major problem for the left. One reaction was to identify state power with ‘socialisation’ and, thus, to support reformism. Another, more complex reaction, which ultimately led in the same direction, was Kautsky’s vision of ‘ultra-imperialism’. In this the organisation of capitalism was seen to transcend national boundaries, leading to the eventual formation of one massive, global cartel which would subordinate the world economy to itself. It was left to a smaller group of Marxists in Germany and Russia to develop revolutionary alternatives to these views. At the centre of this group was Nikolai Bukharin.
Bukharin’s point of departure was a recognition that capitalism was not a national mode of production but an international one. An understanding of it must, therefore, start from an understanding of the world economy – not this or that national one. Were it the case that capital could be centralised on a world scale, as Kautsky suggested, then certainly capitalism would cease to exist. But, Bukharin argued, reality was different since the trend was towards multiplicity of competing state capitals within the world economy. This reflected the way in which capitalism was always pulled two ways – towards internationalisation and towards nationalisation. As a consequence the contradictions of capitalism were now reproduced on a world scale. This was the argument that he developed at length in his Imperialism and the World Economy and later summarised as an essential part of his argument in the introductory chapters of The Economics of the Transformation Period.
… ‘national economic organisms’ ... have long ceased being a secluded whole, an ‘isolated economy’ ... On the contrary, they are only parts o a much larger sphere, namely, world economy. Just as every individual enterprise is part of the ‘national economy’, so every one of these ‘national economies’ is included in the system of world economy. This is why the struggle between modern ‘national economic bodies’ must be regarded first of all as the struggle of various competing parts of the world economy ...
‘Modern capitalism’, he went on to summarise, ‘is world capitalism’. [63]
But what is this ‘world economy’? Bukharin was at pains to suggest that it was more than just the sum of its component parts. Rather it was characterised by an ‘unorganised unity’ of its own:
The system of world economy is just as blindly irrational and ‘subjectless’ as the earlier system of national economy. [64]
It was precisely this which explains the way in which the role of the nation state had developed. Under the impact of competition on the world economy the state was coming to the defence of its own national capitalists and subjugating its independent units to create a form of what Bukharin termed ‘state capitalism’. [65] It remained capitalism because no unit could exist independently of the competitive world economy. In his particular formulation this state capitalism expressed the basic links between finance capital and the state, but he was not concerned to shrink from the logic of his argument. So long as the state remained constrained by the world economy there was, in principle, no difference between capitalism based upon its monopoly of the means of production and a ‘private’ organisation of that monopoly. [66]
This is the essence of Bukharin’s argument but it is worth emphasising a number of points in it.

He saw the state as intervening both to support the conditions of exploitation and to act as an exploiter and producer of surplus value itself:

State power thus sucks in almost all branches of production; it not only maintains the general conditions of the exploitation process, the state more and more becomes a direct exploiter, organising and directing production as a collective capitalist.

It is because the state can and does produce surplus value that a state capital is theoretically possible internally. [67]


Given that the state regiments the internal economy in relation to the world economy this leads to an increased emphasis on extra-market forms of competition. [68] The most extreme form of these is war itself, a perspective that the First World War confirmed, ‘war in capitalist society is only one of the methods of capitalist competition, when the latter extends to the sphere of world economy’. These extra-market forms did not negate capitalism but represented the development of its contradictions on a higher scale.
 
He saw the growing role of the state not in terms of the capture of some autonomous force by finance and monopoly capital but as one more developed expression of its basic role. ‘The state is nothing but the most general organisation of the ruling classes, the basic function of which is the maintenance and extension of the exploitation of the supressed classes’. It was not, therefore, possible to rescue the state for the working class.

This last point had tremendous political consequences which led directly to Bukharin’s first major dispute with Lenin. In this, of course, Lenin finally admitted his error and developed Bukharin’s analysis in his own State and Revolution. Bukharin drew two conclusions from his analysis. Firstly, that the Russian Revolution when it came, was not just a revolution against capitalism in general but against its specific contemporary form – an emerging state capitalism. Secondly, because of this, to go forward the revolution had to smash completely the old state apparatus which was fundamentally incompatible with the socialist revolution. It was this that led to the peculiar nature of the transition period. Given that it was necessary to destroy so thoroughly the old system, the transition period inevitably became one of chaos and economic decay as the working class began to organise itself. This was not something specific to Russian conditions but a general characteristic of all future transition periods.
There were, of course, real problems in Bukharin’s analysis. He seems to have moved, for example, to regard war as the cause of crisis in the world economy rather than a cause. He then moved to overestimate the depth of the crisis caused by the First World War, foreseeing imminent, general collapse. His analysis frequently ran ahead of itself. In this way he neglected, for, instance, the very real political contradictions which, in normal circumstances, limited the consolidation of total state control. This failure to deal adequately with politics also led him to ignore the fact that the Russian Revolution occurred in a state which combined a degree of state capitalism with the most backward economic forms.
This last point brought another conflict with Lenin. Lenin’s recognition of the backwardness of Russia led him to argue that even the adoption and generalisation of state capitalism would be a great advance. This was totally abhorrent to Bukharin. This was what the revolution had been against! With hindsight one can see that neither was right. Bukharin was certainly unrealistic in his assumptions about Russia but equally the measures adopted by Lenin did imply and furthered the degeneration of the revolution. The spreading of revolution abroad might well have solved this problem but in its absence, this debate typifies the central contradiction of a revolution in a backward country. [69]
But, these points aside. Bukharin’s analysis retains most of its power and validity. In the sixty years since he wrote, the role of the state has immeasurably increased without eliminating any of the basic contradictions of the system. The need to smash the state is even greater and in this sense his arguments are even more relevant. His analysis of the real problems of the transition in a revolutionary state have still to be taken up by a left which has studiously ignored this issue.
Beyond this we can also see the applicability of his argument to Soviet Russia itself. Reading his analysis of state capitalism the example of the Soviet Union constantly cries out for attention. Here we have a state controlled economy, an economy in which the working class has no power, an economy whose dynamic cannot be explained in any other way but in relation to the world economy. This is not a form of socialism – surely this is Bukharin’s state capitalism? And this is really where Bukharin’s analysis leads, not as Cohen suggests to speculation about a third kind of society. It is not surprising that his current admirers draw back from this Bukharin; it is not surprising either that Bukharin himself, surrounded by the failure of a once great revolution should be unable to follow his earlier password ‘Think through to the end, without shrinking from any consequences’. Concluding his preface to The Economics of the Transformation Period, Bukharin wrote:
The author would consider his work fulfilled if those who have begun an analogous train of thought would put it into a final form, and if those who are holding fast to naive illusions of a reformist nature would at least consider that the thing is more complicated than it looks in the vulgar pamphlets of the renegades.
Real justice to Bukharin will finally come when those who ‘have begun an analogous train of thought’ put it into a final form and make sure that Nikolai Bukharin is not allowed to decorate the ‘naive illusions of a reformist nature’ that he once so much despised.

Notes
1. The most accessible source on the trial is G. Katkov, The Trial of Bukharin (London 1969); K. Coates, The Case of Nikolai Bukharin (Nottingham 1978), provides an annotated transcript of the indictment.
2. Trotsky, quoted in D. Caute, The Fellow Travellers (London 1973), p. 133. This is a useful summary of the attitudes of those supporting Moscow. Pollitt is quoted from Moscow Trials Anthology (London, New Park 1967).
3. The limited evidence on the Soviet Union suggests much the same kind of situation. Nadezhda Mandelstam records the opinion of a steelworker in her memoirs: ‘See what they are doing in our name. They’re just making fools of us with that stuff about the working class. They say power belongs to us, but just you try and interfere and they’d soon show us our place’. But alongside this she also notes that ‘our hosts had no patience with any kind of political struggle’. Hope Against Hope (London 1975), pp. 403–405.
4. S. Cohen, Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution (London 1973). This was the subject of a number of useful reviews. Readers of this journal should particularly note Peter Sedgwick’s valuable The Return of Bukharin, International Socialism (First Series), 75, February 1975. Much of his analysis is complementary to my own and I would urge readers to search out his piece.
5. See for example the Hungarian economist L. Szamuely, First Models of the Socialist Economic System (Budapest 1974), and the Polish economists quoted by M. Lewin in his Political Undercurrents in Soviet Economic Debates (London 1975), p. 61.
6. The works referred to are respectively, A.M. Belyanova, O Tempakh Ekonomicheskogo Razviiiya SSSR (Moscow 1974), p. 38; A. Ya. Grunfel, Moskva 1917-i Revolutsiya i Kontrrevolutsiya (Moscow 1976), G.S. Ignat’ev, Moskva v Pervuii God Proletarskoi Diktaturui (Moscow 1975), p. 100.
7. Lewin, op. cit., p. xi.
8. For details see Coates, op. cit. In spite of its role in the 1930s the British Communist party was one of the first to join the campaign. See for example Marxism Today, March 1978, which accords Bukharin their greatest accolade: ‘Many of his ideas bore similarity with those of Gramsci’.
9. These points are developed in Cohen, op.cit., as well as in the fairly abundant more specialised material available in the west.
10. Lewin, op.cit., p. 21.
11. Lewin, op. cit., p. 16.
12. This traditional view which underlies both Soviet and western accounts can be found in its most sophisticated form in A. Nove, An Economic History of the USSR (London 1969). Nove has since made some concessions to some of the revisions discussed below, see his debate with J. Miller, Was Stalin Really Necessary?: A Debate on Collectivisation, Problems of Communism, 1976, July–August, Vol. XXV. Two intellectuals linked to the British Communist Party have produced useful summaries of the recent work which challenges this interpretation: J. Cooper, To Catch Up and Overtake: Soviet Industrialisation, 1929–41, Socialist Europe, 1977, No. 2; M. Harrison, The Soviet Economy in the Inter-war Years: A Survey, Capital and Class, 1978, No. 5. Both pieces, however, totally fail to come to terms with the material they are discussing and exhibit a schizophrenic division between ‘theory’ and ‘history’.
13. This is discussed in detail both by Lewin and Cohen in their works referred to above.
14. Quoted from Bukharin’s Notes of an Economist, his emphasis. This article, published in Pravda in October 1928, is the most important statement of his new line. An English translation of large parts of the article together with summaries of the rest can be found in B.D. Wolfe, Khrushchev and Stalin’s Ghost (London 1957).
15. For a more detailed discussion of this see Sedgwick, op.cit.
16. E.H. Carr, A History of Soviet Russia: Socialism in One Country, Part 1 (London 1970), p. 112. The various volumes of Carr’s history discuss the distortions of the time as they developed. See also M. Lewin, Russian Peasants and Soviet Power (London 1968), Chap. 2 and 3.
17. For a brief but more detailed discussion of these points plus a full bibliography see Harrison, op. cit. It is interesting to note that in the first edition of Let History Judge Roy Medvedev attempts to justify what is basically the traditional view. In the second edition, which incorporates extensive revisions (and is still untranslated) this discussion is omitted (Let History Judge, London 1972), p. 73; K Sudu Istorii (New York 1971), p. 165. Medvedev, however also incorporates the strictures on Bukharin to be found on pp. 64–65 of the English edition.
18. Wolfe, op. cit., pp. 303–304. Unfortunately this only summarises a detailed critique of contemporary statistics and their use.
19. In his review of Cohen’s biography The Legend of Bukharin, Times Literary Supplement, 20/9/1974), E.H. Carr-writes that ‘From the moment of Stalin’s rise to power till the moment of Trotsky’s assassination in Mexico fifteen years later, one theme, one obsession, pervaded and coloured everything that he (Trotsky) did and wrote. He was the supreme adversary of Stalin and everything Stalin stood for’, Carr is then quoted with approval by Tamara Deutscher in her review of Cohen (Monthly Review, April 1975). A moments reflection show the absurdity of this statement. The idea of ‘a degenerate workers state’ contains a basic ambivalence towards Stalinism. In the 1930s Trotsky’s attitude became less ambiguous and this led him to more and more see holes in his old arguments although he could not abandon them. In the 1920s he initially ignored this and some of his actions then contributed to Stalin’s rise to power. The Left Opposition as a whole was even more ambiguous, see A. Nove, A Note on Trotsky and the Left Opposition, 1929–31, Soviet Studies, Vol. XXIX, No. 4, 1977. What really separates Trotsky from Bukharin in this respect, and what made him so dangerous, was his recognition that Stalinism was a social question reflecting the degeneration of the revolution and not a personal issue.
20. Quoted in Medvedev, K Sudu Istorii, op. cit., p. 151.
21. Wolfe, op. cit.
22. On these problems generally see P. Wiles, The Importance of Being Djugashvili, Problems of Communism, 1963 and A. Nove An Economic History ..., op. cit. Work currently being undertaken on Soviet agriculture in the 1930s at the University of Birmingham suggests that part of the responsibility for the poor performance of agriculture lies in bad weather conditions but this in no way alters these basic conclusions about collectivisation as can be seen from its continued problems into the 1970s.
23. M. Ellman, Did the Agricultural Surplus provide the Resources for the Increase in Investment in The USSR during the First Five Year Plan, Economic Journal, 1975, Vol. 85, p. 860. It seems possible that Ellman’s exact figures may be open to criticism but the general conclusion is not.
24. Both Cooper, op.cit., and Harrison, op. cit., follow this analysis but do not draw any conclusions or even suggest that it raises any problems!
25. V.N. Bandera, Market Orientation of State Enterprises during NEP, Soviet Studies, 1971, Vol. 22, No. 1, and his NEP as an Economic System, Journal of Political Economy, June 1963. In both articles Bandera gives a very optimistic assessment of NEP. Bukharin’s support of NEP is often used to suggest, with greater or lesser degrees of caution, that he was a supporter of ‘market socialism’ and continued commodity relations of production under socialism. Here Nove’s comment is pertinent, ‘He was for building socialism using the market. But socialism for him would not be any species of market economy and none of his writings can be cited to support a contrary view’, Some Observations on Bukharin and his Ideas, in C. Abramsky (ed.), Essays in Honour of E.H. Carr (London 1974), p. 199.
26. R.W. Davies & S.G. Wheatcroft, Further Thoughts on the First Soviet Five Year Plan, Slavic Review, Vol. 35, No. 4, 1975.
27. Quoted in Cohen, op. cit., p. 326.
28. A point well made by Cooper, op. cit., but again no conclusions are drawn.
29. Quoted in Lewin, op. cit., p. 57.
30. See note 14
31. Teoria Organizovannoi Bezkhoziaistvennosti, Pravda, 30/6/1929. So far as I know there is no English translation available.
32. This formulation is repeated (unconsciously?) by Cooper in his description of the Plan: ‘One could say that a means was seen as an end in itself’, op. cit., p. 4. In his article Bukharin was at pains to distinguish any such society from socialism.
33. This latter point did not preclude growth but was to be reflected in its retarded character. That technological retardation did occur in key sectors of the Soviet economy is attested to by Cooper on the basis of his research. It was also characteristic of the state dominated Nazi economy in Germany see A.R.L. Gurland, Technological Trends and Economic Structure under National Socialism, Studies in Philosophy and Science, Vol. IX, 1941.
34. See the discussion and bibliography in Harrison op. cit.
35. Harrison op. cit. notes much of this, e.g., ‘a tendency towards disintegration’ [in] the planning system itself but still manages to talk in terms of what one contributor to the Marxism Today debate on Socialist Democracy referred to as ‘mindless platitudes’ e.g., ‘This was the world’s first planned economy’, ‘regularities of Soviet industrialisation’ and so on.
36. Note missing in original – ch
37. See Wiles, op.cit., and B.Katz, Purges and Production in the Soviet Union, Journal of Economic History, September 1975.
38. See Harrison, op. cit., Roy Medvedev is even more forthright ‘... without Stalin we would, probably, have been able to obtain significantly greater results’. K Sudu Istorii, op. cit., p. 232.
39. In 1919 Bukharin had written, ‘The Proletarian state cannot exploit the proletariat, for the simple reason that it is itself an organisation of the proletariat. A man cannot climb upon his own back. The proletariat cannot exploit its own self.’ ABC of Communism (London 1968), p. 312.
40. E.H. Carr, History of Socialist Russia: Socialism in One Country, Vol. 1 (London 1958), p. 185.
41. As we have seen Bukharin’s programme moved closer to the left. Lewin interprets this positively. What it really illustrates is not Bukharin’s ‘realism’ but the way in which the left had politically degenerated. Trotsky was later to write, in 1933, that ‘the correct policy of the workers state cannot be reduced only to national economic construction’ but it is clear that in the late 1920s this was what some of the left, such as Preobrazhensky increasingly did. In this way it became possible for them to capitulate to Stalin, regretting the passing of working class power but arguing that by his policies he was ‘defending the revolution’.
42. ‘Even in 1928, before the progressive redirection of resources from consumer needs into investments, the share of GNP devoted to private consumption was low compared to other major economies at similar levels of per capita GNP’. S. Cohn, Economic Development in the Soviet Union (London 1970), p. 70.
43. See Harrison, op.cit., for a brief discussion and bibliography.
44. E.H. Carr, History of Socialist Russia, Foundations of a Planned Economy, Vol. 2 (London 1971), pp. 329–332.
45. Cooper, op.cit., summarises his own research which shows, amongst other things, that the role of defence was even greater than had formally been supposed. Needless to say he makes no comment!
46. See Cohen, op.cit., and Lewin, op.cit., for the model approach.
47. The historian Roger Pethybridge has emphasised that ‘Most accounts of the Russian Revolution tend to shy away from the problem of reconciling the elegantly and rationally conceived humanitarian ideals of the Bolshevik party with the ugly details of actual Soviet history as it developed into what has come to be known, for better or for worse, as Stalinism’ – The Social Prelude to Stalinism (London 1974), p. 7. Victor Serge’s comment that the revolution began to degenerate the day after it occurred may be extreme but there is more than a little truth in it.
48. V. Serge From Lenin to Stalin (New York 1973), pp. 39–40; Pethybridge, op.cit., p. 6.
49. Note missing in original – ch
50. Note missing in original – ch
51. Note missing in original – ch
52. Serge, op. cit. For details of the change in membership see T. Righby, Communist Party Membership in the USSR, 1917–1967 (Princeton, N.J. 1968).
53. Carr, op. cit., p. 137.
54. See Nove, Some Observations on Bukharin ..., op.cit., for details.
55. Carr, The Legend of Bukharin, op.cit.
56. The best discussion of this crucial failing is J.L. Dallemagne. Justice for Bukharin, Critique, No. 4, 1975. Although I cannot accept all his formulations this article does have considerable merits. It also contains useful references to French translations of Bukharin’s works, otherwise obtainable only in the original Russian.
57. Carr, Legend ..., op. cit.
58. Katkov, op. cit., p. 83
59. For Bukharin’s role see Coates, op. cit., and Cohen, op. cit.
60. There are three major secondary sources on Bukharin’s last years. Cohen, op. cit., is by far the most sympathetic. A. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (London 1973), is the most hostile but in many respects nearer the truth. Roy Medvedev, Bukharin’s Last Years, New Left Review, May–June 1978, No. 109, adds little to Solzhenitsyn and his earlier account in Let History Judge, op. cit. He seems, if anything, to be nearer to Solzhenitsyn in his assessment.
61. There are four key works from this period on which this discussion is based: (1) Imperialism and the World Economy (London 1972). (hereafter Imperialism ...). This was written in 1915 but not published until 1925; (2) Towards a Theory of the Imperialist State, written in 1916 but not published in full until 1925. There is no English translation of this but it is summarised in Cohen, op.cit., and also in R.V. Daniels’ very useful The “Withering Away of the State” in Theory and Practice in A. Inkeles and K. Geiger (eds.) Soviet Society (London 1961); (3) The Economics of the Transformation Period (New York 1971), (hereafter Economics ...), written and published during the Civil War; (4) ABC of Communism, op. cit., from the same period.
62. Bukharin. while identifying this period as one of ‘illusions’, never came to terms with it. Nove, Some Observations ..., op. cit., succinctly draws attention to the problem, without solving it. Cohen, op.cit., does so at greater length with no more success.
63. Imperialism ..., op. cit., p. 17. Economics ..., op. cit., p. 12.
64. Economics ..., op. cit., p. 19. A typical example of the way in which Bukharin has been studiously ignored can be found in the recent ‘State Debate’ see J. Holloway & S. Picciotto, State and Capital: a Marxist Debate (London, 1978). This debate has attempted to understand the nation state in terms of itself. The world economy is then seen as the sum of its parts–exactly the error Bukharin castigated. See C. von Braunmuhl, On the analysis of the bourgeois nation state within the world market, Holloway & Piciotto, op.cit. and C. Barker, A Note on the Theory of Capitalist States, Capital and Class, No. 4, 1978, and C. Barker, The State as Capital, International Socialism (Second Series), No. 1, July 1978, for critiques which support Bukharin’s analysis.
65. ‘Here “economics” is organisationally fused with “politics”; the economic power of the bourgeoisie unites itself directly with its political power …’, Economics ..., op. cit., p. 37.
66. Imperialism ..., op. cit., p. 137. In Economics ..., op. cit., he puts his position more clearly: ‘The mathematical limit of the tendency is given by the transformation of the entire “national economy” into an absolutely closed combined trust ... where the entire economy has become an absolutely unified enterprise of corresponding groups of the world bourgeoisie’, p. 36. (Bukharin’s emphasis)
67. Quoted in Cohen, op.cit. (my emphasis.) Again the ‘State Debate’ has failed to understand this, arguing that the state cannot produce surplus value. On this error which flies in the face of reality see Barker, op. cit.
68. It is often suggested that this led Bukharin to argue that ‘Internal crises’(which no-one defines) would be eliminated. In Economics ..., op. cit., he does say (p. 15) that the anarchy of production within large capitalist countries has been abrogated by finance capital. Against this Lenin wrote ‘has not been abrogated’. What Bukharin actually meant is debatable. The world economy has made a crisis of the national market an anachronism, if it ever occurred. In this sense the transfer of the crisis mechanism to the world scale is only a change of degree. In his later work Bukharin made it clear that within the state capitalist economies market crises were replaced by the constant crisis of rationality. Mandel in his Late Capitalism (London 1975) suggests that Bukharin failed to understand the contradiction between exchange value and use value and therefore the inability of capitalism to organise itself (p. 537). But this was precisely what his piece on the Economics of Organised Chaos was about!
69. For an interesting, but unsympathetic, account of one aspect of this controversy see H. Ray Buchanan, Lenin and Bukharin on the Transition from Capitalism to Socialism: The Meshchersky Controversy, 1918, Soviet Studies, Vol. XVIII, No. I, 1976.
 



Kevin Murphy
Revolution and Counterrevolution: Class Struggle in a Moscow Metal Factory
Berghahn Books, 2005, £45
Alexander Rabinowitch
The Bolsheviks Come to Power: the Revolution of 1917 in Petrograd
Pluto Press, 2004, £12.99
A book on the history of Russia which begins by asserting that
‘the Marxists got it right. Leon Trotsky and Tony Cliff provided
the theoretical groundwork for much of my understanding of the
Russian Revolution while Victor Serge acted as the “conscience”
of the revolution by giving it such an inspirational and principled
voice’ is bound to be of interest to readers of this journal. And
this is a book to beg, steal or borrow, for it is in a sense the
missing volume in the analysis of how state capitalism developed out
of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution.
Revolution and Counterrevolution explores the lives of
workers in Moscow’s largest metalworking factory – the Guzhon
factory, which became the Hammer and Sickle works – in the years
between 1900 and 1932. It marks a double first in writing on the
Russian Revolution. It breaks the implicit taboo that has seemed to
prevent historians tracing the experience of these workers across
both the rise and fall of the revolution, and it is based on the most
intensive research in the Moscow archives.
Chapter one describes the emergence of an organised working class
in the Guzhon works, the heady days of 1905, the repression after the
defeat, and the pre-war radicalism that followed the massacre of
workers on the Lena Goldfields in 1912. This marked the start of an
upturn bringing large-scale industrial conflict back to Russian
factories on the eve of the First World War. Chapter two tells the
story of the 4,000 Guzhon workers involved in the revolution,
complementing the city-wide accounts of Petrograd and Moscow that
were written by Western historians in the 1980s. In 1917 factory
committees were created in the works, workers won the eight-hour day,
management was forced back and the level of class consciousness rose
to new heights.
‘In the Marxist sense of a working class conscious of its
collective strength, 1917 marked the zenith of proletarian power in
the 20th century,’ writes Murphy. It is at this point that his
analysis strikes out on its own to establish ‘how ... a movement
based on egalitarianism and freedom transformed into a system based
on exploitation and repression’.
The argument that the Russian Revolution degenerated from the high
point of 1917 under the blows of foreign intervention and civil war
will be familiar to readers. But what kind of country was Russia
between this point and Stalin’s consolidation of power? Although
Trotsky discredited the concept by stretching it to cover the era
after 1928, the idea of a degenerating workers’ state captures an
important part of the reality. Lenin used a slightly different
formulation describing Russia as a workers’ state with bureaucratic
deformations in a peasant country. Those of us who have written about
this have often been so fixated on the degeneration aspect that we
have neglected to analyse enough the extent to which, despite the
poverty and penury, there were positive gains and evidence of a still
vibrant, if more attenuated, culture below.
Here Murphy makes three important contributions. Firstly, he
rejects the legend of the Civil War – that Bolshevik labour policy
at this time anticipated Stalinism through ‘its iron discipline and
brutal terror’. The extreme collapse during the Civil War affected
the Hammer and Sickle works just as badly as other factories, but he
finds no evidence in the archives to support ‘grossly inflated
estimates about early state repression, concentration camps and
coercion’. The Civil War unravelled the working class and so
undercut class consciousness in favour of ‘a desperate and
apolitical individualism in the factory’. In 1921 the factory
nominally had 1,412 workers with conditions so bad that they were
producing only 4 percent of the pre-war output. Yet these remaining
workers ‘were almost completely unfazed by a state that had
virtually ceased to exist’. This was very different then from what
came later.
Secondly, whatever the deficiencies of Russia in the NEP period,
and they were many, Murphy argues that early on there was a positive
attempt to narrow the gap between the revolution and its base that
had resulted from the Civil War. In the early 1920s workers had real
material grievances in a situation of great difficulties, but they
articulated them within the context of a regime with which they had
an ‘uneasy compromise’ and felt some identity. Certainly they
went on strike, they held boisterous mass meetings, but they also
joined the party for positive reasons and saw factory committees and
trade unions as vehicles for the expression of their grievances. This
led to the creation of a system of arbitration for disputes that came
to involve 6 million workers and which gave real weight to workers’
interests:
‘The early Soviet participatory institutions differed
markedly from those of both the Tsarist and Stalinist eras. It was
workers’ trust and involvement in workplace institutions that gave
the factory regime an essential degree of legitimacy.’
Thirdly, Murphy shows how this was undercut in the second half of
the 1920s and how Stalin was able to rise to power on this increasing
separation of the state from the workers. This partly reflected the
pressures forcing the state towards industrialisation, but it also
reflected the changing position of workers, traced by Murphy in the
case of the Hammer and Sickle works.
Although the power of the workers to resist the bureaucratic
degeneration towards counterrevolution was weakening, Murphy supports
the argument of Michael Reiman in his The Birth of Stalinism
that there was something of a crisis in the factories in late 1927.
It appeared briefly that there might be a surge in support for the
opposition to the leadership. But this was overcome and after 1928
any independent working class expression was increasingly suppressed.
In the Hammer and Sickle works a minority of workers were co-opted
but most were forcibly squeezed by the state to help provide the
resources for industrialisation. ‘Management coercion rested on
social pressures by a milieu of hardened state loyalists to bully
other workers and utilised control over food as its most effective
weapon to discipline the workforce.’ So far from Stalinism having
popular mandate, it was based on repression beneath which there was
‘simmering but fractured discontent’ among the workers of the
Hammer and Sickle factory.
Murphy’s book will not be popular in academic circles. Each of
the arguments he presents involves a challenge to the orthodoxy which
stresses the continuity between 1917 and Stalinism. It will be less
popular still because it is based on such serious research: ‘Fifteen
years after the doors of the archives swung open, not a single
source-driven study has supported either of the contending arguments
– that the workers were either terrorised by the early Soviet state
or impressed with Stalinism.’
But if his book is disliked because it stands out against the
mixture of eclecticism and confusion that passes for wisdom in the
study of Russian history these days then so much the better. The
pettiness of the academic world sometimes seems to know no bounds and
the pressures to conform are great. We should be grateful that Kevin
Murphy has had the courage to write a book which ends so confidently
with the argument that ‘Karl Marx and Frederick Engels were correct
... The history of the Russian Revolution is the history of class struggle.’

Megan Trudell
Leadership battles
During the 1970s and 1980s a ‘social history school’ of
writers challenged both official Soviet histories of the Russian
Revolution which regarded the Bolsheviks as the architects of the
revolution, and the US Cold War historians who were hostile to the
revolution and the Bolsheviks. The social historians’ work
concentrated on showing that 1917 was not a coup, nor the action of a
blind mob, but was based on a genuine mass movement led by workers
who were increasingly politically conscious of their own actions.
First published in 1976, The Bolsheviks Come to Power is
one of the best of these histories. Now republished, it offers a new
readership an involving and convincing account of the revolution
which has at its heart the self-activity of workers and soldiers, led
by a responsive and flexible Bolshevik Party that bears no
resemblance to the rigid, disciplined faction of right wing myth.
Rabinowitch’s history traces the ‘development of the
revolution from below’. He uses minutes of meetings of local and
city-wide soviets, the Provisional Government and the Bolsheviks,
resolutions and newspapers, to carefully assemble a compelling
account of the complex and fluid relationship between the Bolsheviks
and Petrograd’s workers and soldiers throughout the course of 1917.
In the process he decisively demolishes the idea of the revolution as
a highly organised coup forcibly imposed on the population.
Rabinowitch begins with the July Days in Petrograd, with the
Bolshevik retreat from a premature challenge for power and the
ensuing repression against the left. He examines the attempted right
wing coup in August, the steady draining away of support for the
Provisional Government that followed, and the rise of Bolshevik
support in the Petrograd Soviet which preceded the October revolution.
Rabinowitch emphasises the impact of the First World War on
driving the revolution forward in February, and in continuing to push
soldiers to the left as the government’s continuation of the war
alienated the army. He reveals the extent of this radicalisation –
despite the July accusation that Lenin was a German agent most
soldiers sided with the Bolsheviks because they were opposed to the
death penalty at the front which Kerensky, the head of the
Provisional Government, had reinstituted. By the time of the October
insurrection, Kerensky was unable to mobilise any troops from the
rear or the front in defence of his government against the forces of
the Bolshevik-led soviet.
The increasing polarisation between the right wing forces of the
Provisional Government and the revolutionary forces of the soviets
from February to October is rigorously drawn out. The government
installed by the February revolution had given in to right wing
forces that threatened the revolution, and increasingly the strong
impulse to unity that held the masses of workers and soldiers to the
government became focused instead on the creation of a revolutionary soviet.
Rabinowitch traces how these tensions within dual power in
Petrograd were played out, and demonstrates the necessity of the
October insurrection to prevent another counter-revolutionary attempt.
Many social history accounts, in stressing the independent action
of workers and soldiers, dilute the important role that the Bolshevik
Party and the individuals in it played. Rabinowitch shows that, while
October was clearly no coup or conspiracy, the Bolshevik role was
central, and was intimately related to the independent action of the
masses. The relationship between the party and the workers and
soldiers in the soviets, trade unions and, indeed, the other
socialist parties, was a dynamic and sensitive one. The Bolsheviks
were not imposing their desires onto the ‘masses’, but were part
of the collective shaping of a concrete strategy for the realisation
of collective desires. The February demand for ‘bread, peace and
land’ became more radical as workers and soldiers found their hopes
for reform from the Provisional Government frustrated. They found
their desires expressed in the Bolshevik slogan of ‘All Power to
the Soviets’.
Rabinowitch attributes the Bolsheviks’ success to the intense
debate within the party and to the strength of democratic centralism
– the leadership was often corrected by the membership in the
workplaces and local soviets, and indeed was often itself divided. In
explaining the Bolsheviks’ growth and influence, Rabinowitch
emphasises ‘the party’s internally relatively democratic,
tolerant, and decentralised structure and method of operation, as
well as its essentially open and mass character’.
He also points to the growth of the party as contributing to its
flexible and accessible nature – the thousands of new members who
joined the party in 1917 were ‘by no means without influence, so
that to a significant degree the party was now responsive and open to
the masses’.
There are weaknesses with The Bolsheviks Come to Power:
Rabinowitch’s narrow focus means he spends little time on wider
events and processes, which makes some prior knowledge of the
revolution and its context essential. He constrains his account to
events and social changes in Petrograd with no reference to the rest
of Russia or the international context, which can be frustrating. His
approach ‘from below’ provides much less sense of the view of
bourgeois forces at the time. However, within these limitations, the
cumulative power of the evidence Rabinowitch uses is thorough and
convincing without being dry – the atmosphere in Petrograd is
vividly transmitted and the sense of dynamism and development in
people’s actions and ideas comes through very well. There is even a
map with all the key buildings marked enabling the reader to follow
the revolution through the streets.
At a time when histories of the revolution are dominated by a new
‘revisionism’ – like Orlando Figes’ A People’s Tragedy
and Anne Applebaum’s Gulag, both of which cloak their return
to traditional, hostile accounts of the revolution in more liberal
and populist language – this book is a reminder of the strengths of
social history writing at its best.
The collapse of Stalinism disoriented many on the left, in some
cases leading to dramatic political reversals. Consequently today
there is little resistance to the revisionist picture of the
revolution. This, and the renewed importance of debates over the
nature of leadership within the movement against capitalism and war,
in which interpretations of the Russian Revolution are crucial, make
the re-publication of this classic book timely and very welcome.
 



China Mieville
Between Equal Rights: A Marxist Theory of International Law
Brill, Historical Materialism book series, 2005, Euro 69
Did Tony Blair break international law in his support for the
American invasion of Iraq? Could he be successfully prosecuted in an
international court? As evidence accumulates of the murky dealings
that led to war more and more people are coming to the conclusion
that there is a legal case to answer. China Mieville would disagree,
not because Blair’s actions weren’t ‘criminal’, but because
international law does not work in this way. Moreover it is an
illusion, he argues, to think that it could ever be made to function
in a fundamentally different way.
Mieville will be well known to readers of this journal as a
leading writer of science fiction in the UK. Here he pioneers
something quite different – the Marxist critique of international
law. The result is a significant book which, if parts are not for the
fainthearted, nevertheless establishes some very important ideas that
will influence not only the debate about Iraq and other Western
interventions but the whole approach to international law.
An obvious question to those who want to see Blair in court is,
who would arrest him and try him? But even if this could be answered
it by no means follows that there is a strong legal case against him.
This is not simply because of the ambiguities of the evidence but
also the ambiguities of the law itself. This does not mean that Blair
was right. It means that trying to condemn him in terms of
international law is not the right way to attack him. Mieville points
out for example that if there is ambiguity in the law about Iraq
there might well be other wars which were less ambiguous in law but
no less objectionable politically. But if the argument is left simply
at the level of law then we might be forced to support them. The same
applies to Iraq. No one has put the legal doubts about Iraq more
eloquently than Robin Cook, but suppose for a moment (a fantasy!)
that these were tested in some international court and there was
found to be no case to answer. Would Cook then hold his hands up and
say, ‘I was wrong and you were right Tony, it was legal, I should
have supported you ... ’? As Mieville puts it, ‘A lawful war is
not necessarily a just, prudent or humanitarian war.’
A supporter of international law would argue that Blair and Bush
would have to be found guilty because the evidence and law to
interpret it is so clearly against them. But Mieville suggests that
this is not the case at all. Any state could find a basis in law for
almost any action, because ‘for every claim there is a
counter-claim, and legalist opposition to war is therefore ultimately toothless’.
Why should this be so? Three main positions commonly influence the
discussion of this problem. Realists see the basis of global
relations in the clash of state power. They are sceptical of ideas
like globalisation and sceptical of the idea of international
society. For them international law is no more than ‘a moralistic
gloss on power politics’. It plays a useful role in obscuring the
extent to which power is still the central determinant of how the
world works. If a conflict emerges between the ‘gloss’ and state
needs then realpolitik dictates the impotence of international law
before power.
Against this supporters of international law argue that it exists
above states and can therefore constrain their actions. It must
represent some natural conception of what is right or it must develop
into a rational set of rules that states can be persuaded to agree
to. In either form it can be a force of stability and progress. If
this is not yet fully the case then this is because the law needs to
be further strengthened and then enforced.
The third and most critical view is associated with the left. This
is less idealistic. It largely accepts the role of power and it looks
at the way in which all law is conditioned by social interests and
not least capitalist interests. But it still aspires to use law for
progressive ends. Law, writes Susan Marks, is ‘a strategic tool,
which can be used for both good ends and bad ones, to constrain
violence and to legitimise it’. The task for the left is to
struggle to use and expand this space.
Mieville recognises the importance of this critical approach to
the understanding of law but he argues that it does not go far
enough. It especially fails for international law. This is not
because international law is not real law (as a realist might
suggest) and can therefore be dismissed. International law is
essential to the way global capitalism works. When, for example,
Robin Cook writes that ‘for the neo-conservatives around George
Bush it was a guiding principle that the US should undertake no
policy that conferred validity on the concept of international law’
(Guardian, 25 March 2005) he is simply wrong. The US wants and
needs international law – consider the issue of patent protection
or intellectual property rights, and so on. Yet it also needs its own
freedom of manoeuvre. Because the US is the world’s most powerful
state it has a greater capacity to manage and twist things to its own
advantage, but all states reflect this ambiguity and thus so does
international law. Mieville notes, for example, that all states have
a right to exist and war is only justified in terms of self-defence,
but he also notes that there is an equally long history in
international law where (and this must give Blair comfort) ‘great
powers have always asserted a right of intervention in the affairs of
small countries’.
To understand why this is we have to appreciate how international
law emerges at the intersection of two processes. One was the
development of the nation-state system, the other was the rise of
capitalism. Mieville argues that these are not separate or autonomous
processes but developments that fed off and supported one another. He
thus has much to say of historical interest on the way in which law
developed in the context of the shift from feudalism to capitalism
and the nature of that shift. But his central theoretical point is
that capitalism is a system of both commodity competition and
inter-state competition and this must be reflected in both the
existence and the ambiguity of the international order and its legal expressions.
One thread here is the contribution of the great Soviet legal
theorist Evgeny Pashukanis before he became a victim of Stalin.
Mieville builds on his analysis to show the role of commodity
production in the development of law. The rise of law, Mieville
suggests, has to be understood in the context of ‘market relations
generalising globally, in the transition to capitalism’.
Because capitalism is a global system of commodity production
organised through competing states, international law can only
partially contain states. Inter-state competition is also the
instrument through which international law develops. Demonstrating
this involves Mieville in a valuable historical analysis of the way
international law evolved in the context of colonialism, imperialism,
unequal treaties and the like. International law was not only a means
by which global capitalism incorporated non-capitalist parts of the
world; it was also an expression of the dominance of the powerful
imperialist nations. Thus those supporters of international law who
try to counterpose it to imperialism misunderstand its historical
roots – imperialism made international law, and international law
helped make imperialism and it continues to do so today. ‘Coercive
political violence – imperialism – is the very means by which
international law is made actual.’
International law cannot therefore transcend the system which
gives rise to it. The legalistic argument is not only wrong because
it cannot work. It is also wrong because those who support it fail to
reflect on why international law is so ambiguous and limited. As
capitalism changes so will international law, but it cannot be the
means to overcome the major contradictions of the system from within.
In this sense, says Mieville, international law is ‘fundamentally
unreformable ... I see no prospect of a systematic progressive
political project or an emancipatory dynamic coming out of
international law.’ This is an important conclusion based on a deep
and impressive analysis of the law, its origin and history and
current state and it makes a major contribution to the way we think
about the world. It is well worth ordering through your library.
 

