

THE 42nd Anniversary of Leon Trotsky’s assassination by an agent of Stalin is an occasion to remind ourselves again of the historical importance of his last great struggle in defence of dialectical materialism.
Before he died Trotsky insisted that the need to re-educate the Socialist Workers Party (USA) in dialectical materialism was central to the issues in dispute in relation to the class nature of the Soviet bureaucracy. The objection of the revisionists of those days to the introduction of dialectics as an issue in dispute was dismissed with the remark:
‘Dialectical Logic expresses the laws of motion in contemporary scientific thought. The struggle against materialist dialectics on the contrary expresses a distant past, conservatism of the petty bourgeoisie, the self-conceit of university routinists and ... a spark of hope for an after-life.’ (In Defence of Marxism, p. 67, New Park Publications edition)
Fifteen years earlier (1924), Trotsky was involved in a life-and-death struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy. Stalin had raised the demagogic demand of the need to ‘Bolshevise the party’ at a time when he was going all-out to consolidate bureaucracy and prepare the physical destruction of Trotsky’s Left Opposition.
The demand for ‘Bolshevisation’ was nothing but a cynical cover behind which Stalin was plotting not only to physically eliminate his opponents, but to terminate the democratic rights won by the Soviet working class and impose his own personal dictatorship over the Soviet masses. Trotsky, in a carefully-worded statement, commented as follows: ‘Much has been spoken and written lately on the necessity for Bolshevising’ the Comintern. This is a task that cannot be disputed or delayed: it is made particularly urgent after the cruel lessons of Bulgaria and Germany a year ago. Bolshevism is not a doctrine (i.e. not merely a doctrine) but a system of revolutionary training for the proletarian upheaval.
‘What is the Bolshevisation of the Communist Parties? It is giving them such a training and effecting such a selection of the leading staff as would prevent them from “drifting” when the hour for their October strikes. “That is the whole of Hegel and the wisdom of books, and the meaning of all philosophy ...”’ (Lessons of October, p. 64, New Park Publications edition)
Now, with only months to go before his assassination, he was insisting once again on the necessity for a serious attitude towards the training of revolutionary cadres in the spirit of Hegel, Marx, Engels and Lenin.
‘Dialectical thinking,’ he wrote, ‘is related to vulgar thinking in the same way that a motion picture is related to a still photograph. The motion picture does not outlaw the still photograph but combines a series of them according to the laws of motion ...
‘Hegel wrote before Darwin and before Marx. Thanks to the powerful impulse given to thought by the French Revolution, Hegel anticipated the general movement of science. But because it has only been an anticipation, although by a genius, it received from Hegel an idealistic character. Hegel operated with ideological shadows as the ultimate reality. Marx demonstrated that the movement of these ideological shadows reflected nothing but the movement of material bodies.’ (In Defence of Marxism, p. 66, New Park Publications edition)
When it came to the dialectical materialist method and reading ‘Hegel materialistically’, Trotsky was a staunch Leninist. He walked in the footsteps not only of Lenin but of Marx and Engels as well. The International Committee of the Fourth International, to which the Workers Revolutionary Party is affiliated, consciously trains and educates its members and leaders in this tradition.
We are pleased, therefore, to present to readers of the News Line an outline of some of the material covered in the courses on Dialectical Materialism at our College of Marxist Education during the months of June and July 1982.
 
Nature – The source of dialectics
THE source of dialectics is in dialectical nature, of which human beings are a dialectical part. ‘... for every materialist,’ wrote Lenin, ‘sensation is indeed the direct connection between consciousness and the external world; it is the transformation of the energy of external excitation into the fact of consciousness.’ (Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 14, p. 51)
The ‘energy of external excitation’ is provided by the external world of nature which is primary with ‘consciousness, thought, sensation as secondary ...’ (Volume 14, p. 46)
‘Natural science leaves no room for doubt,’ he stressed, ‘that its assertion that the earth existed prior to man is a truth. This is entirely compatible with the materialist theory of knowledge; the existence of the thing reflected independent of the reflector ...’ (Volume 14, p. 123)
There can be no dialectical training unless these basic materialist principles are thoroughly understood. As long as we are paralysed by the dangerous effects of ‘bourgeois ideology’ then there can be no successful socialist revolution. So long as the ideology which maintains the ruling class in power predominates over the consciousness of parties and groups calling themselves Marxist, so-called revolutionary leaderships will remain floundering in fatal confusion.
Whilst this does not of course mean that every worker member of the Party will become a conscious dialectician, we do insist that the revolutionary Trotskyist leaderships in all countries must be trained in the dialectical materialist method.
When we speak of the predominance of the world of Nature over consciousness we refer of course to Social Being. Regardless of the individualistic approach of the idealists, it is not they who really decide what they think and do but the capitalist production relations which objectively predominate over them. Whether they like it or not, they are all images of the effects of these production relations. It is the class nature of these production relations that determines the consciousness of all individuals as well as their lifestyle.
Individuals cannot be understood outside the conditions of Social Being. The behaviour of men is determined by their materialist and thinking life, which in turn is reflected in their ‘thoughts and feelings’. (See Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 1, p. 405)
Lenin explained the materiality of this process a little further on in the same article when he wrote:
‘The theory of the class struggle, however, represents a tremendous acquisition for social science for the very reason that it lays down the methods by which the individual can be reduced to the social with the utmost precision and definiteness. Firstly, this theory worked out the concept of the social-economic formation.
‘Taking as its starring-point a fact that is fundamental to all human society, namely the mode of procuring the means of subsistence, it connected up with this the relations between people formed under the influence of the given modes of procuring the means of subsistence, and showed that this system of relations (”relations of production”, to use Marx’s terminology) is the basis of society, which clothes itself in political and legal forms and in definite trends of social thought.’ (Volume 1, p. 410)
These remarks by Lenin are very important for dialectical training. The development of consciousness in the past by Hegel and the founders of our movement must be understood as an infinite process. Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky outlined and fought for revolutionary policies and interpretations of history. They believed that by overthrowing the capitalist system through a social revolution and fundamentally changing the social circumstances under which men lived, this would in turn change men themselves.
Men, they insisted, were not the source of the negative features of human nature. The capitalist mode of production which maintained a veritable handful of rich idlers at the expense of the working class through the exploitation of profit, was, in fact, the real source of human nature.
The founders of our movement have bequeathed to us a scientifically derived revolutionary theory of knowledge which is presently the core of our dialectical training. Not only is the development of consciousness an infinite process, but the cognition of the external world is an infinite process as well. The process of cognition today enables us to stand on their shoulders as it were, and complete the historical tasks they set out to accomplish.
Their efforts and ours have been greatly strengthened by the considerable achievements in the natural sciences over the past six decades. These would not have been understood if it were not for the materialist interpretation of the external world which they fought for. In this way they have contributed to the invaluable legacy of Hegelian concepts and categories (stood on their feet) without which the richness of these advances would not have been understood. For this reason Marxism is a world scientific outlook since it incorporates all the gains of the sciences as well as being itself a science of Historical Materialism.
In the ‘process of cognition’ we have a ‘theory of knowledge’ which enables us through its constant dialectical development, to speedily guide our objective dialectical practice. While the idealists are still juggling around with the self-created images of their own pessimisms, we can have the richness of the revolutionary reality of the external world at our disposal thereby providing us with an enormous speed of movement through the initiation within the working class of advanced and more and more revolutionary practices.
 
The dialectics of the external world
TO STUDENTS of dialectics, the external material world is initially and mistakenly taken for granted. In their efforts to become conscious of its existence their idealist training invariably takes over. They start by creating images of what they think it is, which are then wrongly imposed upon its ever-changing reality.
In periods like the present when great changes are constantly emerging in the world crisis of imperialism, the idealist is constantly living in an atmosphere of frustration, pessimism and fear, within the self-created images of what, in fact, is their ‘own’ reality.
They become dominated more and more by bourgeois ideology. This emanates from the needs of a ruling class in the throes of a mortal economic and political crisis. They are drawn further and further away from the objectively potential reality of the historical revolutionary role of the working class. Without a dialectical materialist outlook the ruling class have the present-day idealist in a trap of his own creation.
The principle of OBJECTIVITY in the approach to the external world constitutes the basic difference between materialism and abstract idealism. We therefore begin with Lenin’s invaluable analysis On the Question of Dialectics. (Volume 38, p. 359)
‘The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts,’ according to Lenin, ‘... is the essence (one of the “essentials”, one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) of dialectics.’ (Volume 38, p. 359)
We use the philosophical concept ‘Being’ to denote the materiality of the objective world as a single ‘whole’ existing independently of consciousness. ‘Being’ is nature including human beings. Whilst we recognise ‘Being’ as primary and consciousness as secondary, the process of Cognition interprets consciousness as not merely a passive reflection of ‘Being’, but as an active force which influences ‘Being’ in a dialectical way. ‘Being’ is matter which exists independently of consciousness and is the source of all sensation. Under these conditions ‘Being’ is primary, consciousness is secondary.
‘Being’ as matter in motion, when negated immediately, has an empirical existence. When it has entered into a unity with its opposite Not Being it constitutes three dialectical moments. Being, Becoming and Not Being. It is ‘something’ sublated only in so far as it has entered into a ‘unity’, into its opposite ‘Not Being’ within the relation of Becoming; denoting movement and change.
Thus we have perceived the division of ‘unity’ into its mutually exclusive opposites which are ‘Being’ and ‘Not Being’, whilst remaining united in the form of their Becoming in the infinite movement and changes of nature itself. The Positive infinite concept of ‘Being’ through ‘Becoming’ has now entered into a self-relation with its opposite Not Being.
The infinite source of sensation (Being) is in the external world existing independently of consciousness, which has now been registered as sensation in consciousness in the form of its ‘Other’, the abstraction ‘Not Being’. In this self-relation the outer forms are the Positive (Being) and its abstract also a positive (Other) ‘Not Being’ – the latter is now implicitly CAUSE which is finite. At one point cause will become Effect and at another effect becomes cause when the first negation in general is completed.
The ‘thing’ whatever it is, is now considered mediated, as the ‘Other’ of Being. ‘Being’ and ‘Not Being’ are forms which contain as their content the first infinite negation as negation in general.
The external world of reality is the quantitative outer source (world for itself) of the first qualitative inner movement of negation, in general (world in itself). It has for its content the infinite internal qualitative source of the negation itself. The infinite positive form (Being) which has been negated simultaneously into its own finite abstraction is now dissolved into its own infinite Negative which completes the first Negation in general.
The duration of the first Negation is here limited to the measurement in time of that micro portion of the external world which is initially negated, whilst it registers within the negation for its content the absolute conflict between infinite and finite.
Because of the time limit of the negation they become reciprocally transformed into one another, tending more and more to exceed the limitation of the negation in general which contains them. Here is the inner source of the emergence of absolute essence initially negated from its outer source in the external world. This absolute nature of essence itself is negative Semblance.
Hegel, with the approval of Lenin, explains that that part of the objective world (Being) embodied in ‘Not Being’ preserves itself in the negative of its determinate Being. It is essentially ‘one with it’ and ‘not one with it’. It stands in a relation to its ‘otherness’ and is not simply its ‘otherness’. ‘Otherness’ as infinite is at once contained within it preserving itself as a finite ‘part’ or ‘being’ of another.
Whilst working on Capital Marx, for the purposes of a closer study of economic phenomena, analytically isolated important features of the Hegelian concept, negation in general.
‘Being’ represented basic raw materials at their quantitative source in the external world. These constituted Value within infinite negation or Negation in general. The Finite ‘Not Being’ then became qualitative USE VALUE which is a form containing value as its infinite content.
Cloth is an example of Use Value. Since many finite product forms, such as suits etc., can be made from cloth for people to wear, the infinite value is constantly being transformed into finite Use Value. These finite use values have now acquired a new value form which is exchange value. As suits of clothes, for example, they have acquired an Exchange Value.
Abstract human labour is the infinite element of all commodities. It is the value content of Negation in general. The basic contradiction within a commodity for exchange is that it both ‘is’ and ‘is not’ a use value. For the owner ‘it is not’ – for the consumer ‘it is’. During negation in general value has become use value.
The negative of the form use value which incorporates value tends to go beyond negation in general and drives towards the negation of the negation, of entry into the Universal world of Exchange where it will circulate as a commodity. Thus what was infinite (Value) has become finite (Use Value) and what was finite (Use Value) is pushing for Negation as a commodity into Exchange. There is here a double positing – Value into Use Value – Use Value into Exchange Value.
 
The importance of antithesis
THE negative side of semblance now contains ‘Essence as reflection in itself (absolute essence). (Volume 38, p. 129) This is the beginning of the important moment of antithesis which is the ground in which the Laws of Identity, Difference and Contradiction are manifested. Absolute essence (Negative Semblance) confronts our ‘theory of knowledge’ which becomes Positive Semblance as they face each other in antithesis.
We have ended the sensuous stage of the Cognitive process. ‘Being’ has been mediated by ‘Not Being’ and at the same time they are joined together through ‘Becoming’ which is now Existence, or mediated Being. ‘Essence is what it is by virtue of its own infinite movement of Being.’ (Volume 38, pl30.)
As concepts, Being, Not Being, Becoming, have become more and more distinctive. ‘... In human concepts,’ wrote Lenin, ‘nature is reflected in a distinctive way (this NB: in a distinctive and dialectical way).’ (Volume 38, p. 285) ‘... Not only is the transition from matter to consciousness dialectical, but also that from sensation to thought, etc.’ (Volume 38, p. 283)
Concepts emerge during subjective cognition, in the dialectical transition from sensuous representation to thought. Sensuousness cannot apprehend movement as a whole. ‘Thought taken from sensuous representation ... reflects reality.’ (Volume 38, p. 228) The properties of sensuous representation build up into thought forms. They are an initial part of the same process of apprehending the external world., but they should be understood in the transition from sensuousness to thought. Living Perception and Cognition begins with thought at the stage of antithesis, because ‘in a certain sense, sensuous representation is, of course, lower.’ (Volume 38, p. 228)
‘The difference between sense-perception (sensation) and Cognition,’ said Lenin in a quotation from Hegel, ‘is: that which causes the sensation is external. The cause of this is that perceptive activity is directed on the particular, while knowledge has as its object the universal.’ (Volume 38, p. 286 – my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in scan])
Semblance then consists of Positive and Negative parts with antithesis as common ground to both. The Negative as Absolute essence faces Positive essence which contains the method of dialectical logic coinciding with a theory of knowledge. Presently, this method will be used extensively for purposes of analysis.
‘The dialectical, (my emphasis), wrote Lenin in a quotation from Hegel, ‘is comprehending the antithesis in its unity.’ (Volume 38, p. 98)
Antithesis is resolved through the interpenetration of absolute essence as the Negative side of Semblance into essence as the Positive side of Semblance. In the moments of antithesis as their self relation, the Positive Semblance, which previously was negatively inactive now assumes an active role as it confronts Negative Semblance. Whilst as Lenin explains: ‘There is a difference between the subjective and the objective ... it too has its limits.’ (Volume 38, p. 98)
The Subjective side of Semblance is the ground which in its antithesis towards its Positive side contains the limits of contradiction which arose from negation between them. This can only be resolved through the interpenetration of the negative Semblance into what is now the Positive or (Universal). This takes place through the negation of the negation in general (Negation of the Negation – Quality into Quantity).
 
Cognition and practice
THE use of concepts in particular, applies to sensuous knowledge. We go from distinction to contradiction, and from concepts to categories. ‘Categories are,’ as Lenin wrote, ‘stages of distinguishing i.e. of cognising the world, focal points in the web, which assist in cognising and mastering it.’ (Volume 38, p. 93)
Categories cognise and assess the operation of the objective laws governing nature and society, they are ‘an expression of laws both of nature and of man,’ (Volume 38, p. 91) and of the objective world which help him. They are moments of man’s knowledge in the formulation of general laws of nature.
Categories enable us to understand the more general features of the objective world as they are reflected in our consciousness. They assist us to extend and develop our theory of knowledge, thus creating conditions for the elaboration of further scientific concepts about our reflections of external reality. Dialectics of sensations, perceptions, notions and concepts, enable man to go from ignorance to knowledge, from ‘essence of the first order to essence of the second order’.
Lenin referred to the sensuous development of the concept when he wrote:
‘First of all impressions flash by, then Something emerges – afterwards the concepts of quality (the determination of the thing or the phenomenon) and quantity are developed. After that study and reflection direct thought to cognition of identity – of difference – of Ground – of the Essence versus the Phenomenon – of Causality etc.’
‘... Quality and sensation are one and the same, says Feuerbach. The very first and most familiar to us is sensation, and in it there is inevitably also quality.’ (Volume 38, p. 319)
The data of ‘sensual knowledge’ which is equivalent to the concept is cognised in the form of words, at first stimulated by theoretical thinking in relation to Concepts.
The more we become trained in the use of theoretical thinking derived from previous dialectical practices, the earlier our ordinary consciousness will become the object of conceptual analysis for dialectical study. Such an analysis in Subjective Cognition will provide guidance in the examination of empirical data at the stages of sensuousness and negation in general, when forms of words will still lack a dialectical thought content.
Through the use of categories we shall of course become ever more trained both in the development and use of new concepts. As Lenin explained:
‘The use of knowledge and practice is the essence of dialectical cognition ... Thought proceeding from concrete to the abstract, provided it is correct, gets closer to it ...’
And further:
‘Man by his practice proves the objective correctness of his ideas, concepts, knowledge, science.’
‘The unity of the theoretical idea (of knowledge) and of practice – this NB – and this unity precisely in the theory of knowledge, for the resulting sum is the “absolute, idea” and the idea = “the objectively true”.’ (Volume 38, p. 219)
These are an historically concrete approach to the process of Cognition and practice which reveal the connection between both. We must evaluate the practices of human beings in ‘the process of becoming’ rather than allowing them to remain something that has already become.
 
Against idealism and scepticism
THE source of Idealism and Scepticism invariably starts at Semblance. As Lenin explained in a quotation from Hegel:
‘Semblance then is the Phenomena of Scepticism ... Modern idealism did not dare to regard cognition as a knowledge of the Thing-in-Itself; with the former. Semblance was supposed to have no basis at all in any Being; with the latter, the thing in itself was supposed incapable of entering into cognition. But at the same time scepticism admitted manifold determinations of its Semblance; or rather its Semblance had for content all the manifold riches of the world. In the same manner the appearance of idealism comprehends the whole range of these manifold determinatenesses.’ (Volume 38, pp. 130–131)
The Idealists and Sceptics subjectively impose or manipulate their ideas of what they think Semblance means, which is what Lenin referred to when he commented:
‘You include in Semblance all the wealth of the world and you deny the objectivity of Semblance.’ (Volume 38, p. 131)
Or as Hegel put it when he explained the difference between his ‘materialism’ and the idealism of Leibnitz, Kant and Fichte: ‘They did not reach beyond being,’ that is the Positive or one side of the image. Lenin comments: ‘They did not go deeper.’ The idealists stopped at the Positive Form whereas the sceptics saw this form as content . . . ‘that which is immediately given’ ... ‘of its Semblance to be given to it; for it, it is immediate, whatever content it is to have.’ (Volume 38, pp. 131–132)
‘The monad of Leibnitz develops its presentations out of itself; but it is no creative and connecting force – the presentations arise in it like bubbles; they are indifferent and immediate relative to one another, and therefore to the monad itself.’ (Volume 38, p. 132)
‘Monad’ is a Greek word denoting ‘Being’ as a ‘structural unit’. It was one of the main concepts of Leibnitz’s philosophy. For him it was the sole source of Being endowed with a ‘soul’ which according to Leibnitz was a spirit. He claimed that the whole world is reflected in the Monad and that its individuality contains infinity. ‘Here’ wrote Lenin, ‘is dialectics of a kind, and very profound despite idealism and clericalism.’ (Volume 38, p. 383)
‘Kant’s phenomenon,’ wrote Hegel, ‘is a given content of perception; it presupposes affections, determinations of the subject which are immediate to one another and to the subject.’ (Volume 38, p. 132 – my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in scan])
‘The infinite limitation or check of Fichte’s idealism,’ said Hegel, ‘refuses, perhaps, to be based on any Thing-in-Itself, so that it becomes purely a determinateness in the Ego. But this determinateness is immediate and a limit to the Ego.’ (Volume 38, p. 132)
In a word, if you create your own ‘images’ of what is going on in the external world, then they remain your own, being a limited self creation of your ego, or one’s image of oneself.
The Idealists always cling to the rigid Identity that is ‘simple Essence’, ignoring that Essence reveals Semblance through Negation. For them the law of identity has its opposite in the law of Variety and NOT in the law of Difference, which is one-sided determinatedness containing only formal truth which is abstract and incomplete. All things are different. One cannot IDENTIFY something unless we can show its Difference with something else. Or as Trotsky explained it simply and clearly:
‘Every worker knows that it is impossible to make two completely equal objects. In the elaboration of bearing-brass into cone bearings, a certain deviation is allowed for the cones which should not, however, go beyond certain limits (this is called tolerance). By observing the norms of tolerance, the cones are considered as being equal. (“A” is equal to “A”.) When the tolerance is exceeded the quantity goes over into quality; in other words, the cone bearings become inferior or completely worthless.
‘Our scientific thinking is only a part of our general practice including techniques. For concepts there also exists “tolerance” which is established not by formal logic issuing from the axiom “A” is equal to “A”, but by the dialectical logic issuing from the axiom that everything is always changing. “Common sense”, is characterised by the fact that it systematically exceeds dialectical “tolerance”.
‘Vulgar thought operates with such concepts as capitalism, morals, freedom, workers’ state, etc. as fixed abstractions, presuming that capitalism is equal to capitalism, morals are equal to morals etc. Dialectical thinking analyses all things and phenomena in their continuous change, while determining in the material conditions of those changes that critical limit beyond which “A” ceases to be “A”, a workers’ state ceases to be a workers’ state.’ (In Defence of Marxism, New Park Publications edition, p. 65)
 
Synthesis – Law and contradiction
‘THE coincidence of concepts with “synthesis”,’ wrote Lenin, ‘with the sum, summing up of empiricism, sensations, the senses, is indubitable for the philosophers of all trends. Whence this coincidence? From God (I, the idea, thought etc., etc.) or from (out of) nature? Engels was right in his formulation of the question.’ (Volume 38, p. 285)
And Engels:
‘In world schematism pure mathematics arose out of pure thought – in the philosophy of nature it is something completely empirical, taken from the external world and derived from it.’ (Anti-Dühring, p. 54)
The law of the identity of Not Being is confirmed through its difference between the time of its development and the Negative into which it has dissolved. This difference is already in sensation posited contradiction, within the Negative side of Semblance. Within the antithesis absolute contradiction arises as the contradiction inherent in Negative Semblance starts to interpenetrate and activate the latent contradiction already posited in the essence of Positive Semblance.
Synthesis is a leap which according to Lenin distinguishes the dialectical transition from the undialectical transition. The interruption of gradualness. The Unity (Identity) of Being and Not Being. (Volume 38, p. 284) Synthesis at first appears in Sensation where Not Being becomes the mediator of its opposite ‘Being’.
It next appears, when again, via external reflection through Negation of the Negation, interpenetration of Negative into Positive Semblance takes place, making it possible for different structures of thought to emerge. Absolute essence, containing Being as Mediated by Not Being, interpenetrates Positive Essence, leading to Essence in Existence.
The law of Identity is now based upon contradiction whose ground is Essence in Existence. This is a unity of Positive into Negative and Negative into Positive Semblance or Finite into Infinite as Essence in Existence and Infinite into Finite. The truth of contradiction is contained in the relation of Positive and Negative to each other. Each contains the other in its own concept – Negative Semblance maintains a Positive direction in its movement.
The Negation of the Negation through the interpenetration of Negative Semblance into Positive Semblance now determines itself into Variety and Opposition. These include the posited contradiction of Negative Semblance which is more profound than the Contradiction which was latent in Positive Semblance before its activisation in its Antithesis with Negative Semblance. It is only insofar as it contains Contradiction that anything which moves has impulse and activity. Since infinity is contradiction as it appears in the sphere of Being, there must be a determination of absolute essence after each synthesis.
‘But the fact,’ wrote Lenin, ‘that Positive itself is negativity causes it to pass outside itself and to change.’ (Volume 38, p. 140) And he adds:
‘If an existent something cannot in its positive determination also encroach on its negative, cannot hold fast the one in the other and contain Contradiction within itself, then it is not living unity or Ground, but perishes in Contradiction.’ (Volume 38, p. 141)
Idealist thinking is always speculative because it excludes Contradiction. Lenin provides an example of this in a quotation from Hegel: ‘Thus although Imagination everywhere has Contradiction for content, it never becomes aware of it, it remains an external reflection, which passes from Likeness to Unlikeness.’ (Volume 38, p. 142)
Hegel comments: ‘The simplicity of these determinations conceals the contradiction from imagination; but this contradiction immediately stands revealed in the determinations of relation.’ (Volume 38, p. 141) And he continues: ‘The most trivial examples – above and below, right and left, father and son, and so on without end – all contain contradiction in one term.’ (Volume 38, pp. 141–142 – my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in scan])
That which is below at one point can be above at another, and vice versa. That which is a turning on the left-hand side of the road when travelling in one direction can be on the right-hand side of the road when returning from the opposite direction. A father today is at the same time himself a son of a father and so on.
But, says Hegel, correctly:
‘Father is the Other of son, and son of father, and each exists only as this Other of the other; and also the one determination exists only in relation to the other; their Being is one subsistence.’ (Volume 38, p. 142)
What is important to understand here is that antithesis is not some separate stage proceeding Semblance. It must be understood as moments of vital connection between the transition through interpenetration of Negative into Positive Semblance. The antithesis of Yes-No-No-Yes continues during this transition within the interpenetration leading to Appearance.
‘Ordinary imagination,’ writes Lenin, ‘grasps difference and contradiction, but not the transition from one to the other; this however is the most important. (Volume 38, p. 143)
By ‘ordinary imagination’ Lenin is referring to the one-sidedness of ‘external reflection’ which he insists that by its ‘simplicity conceals’ the transition of ‘Being’ into the ‘other of being’, when they both are the same and not the same. That must be demonstrated if absolute essence is to be revealed in a way in which ‘Being’ is both itself and its ‘other’ and ‘Other’ is both ‘itself and ‘Being’. As Hegel explains: ‘Infinity ... is Contradiction as it appears in the sphere of Being.’ (Volume 38, p. 140 – my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in scan])
The idealist keeps two determinations like ‘Other’ and ‘Being’ external to each other. They are denied transition into one another. For the concept of things and their relations the Idealist has only ‘determinations of imagination for material and content’. He allows their concept to show through the contradiction, but he does ‘not express the concept of things and their relations.’ (Volume 38, p. 142)
 
Essence must appear
LENIN turns again to Hegel, who writes:
‘Thinking Reason, on the other hand, sharpens (so to speak) the blunt difference of Variety, the mere manifold of imagination, into essential difference, that is, Opposition. The manifold entities acquire activity and vitality in relation to one another only when driven on to the sharp point of Contradiction; thence they draw negativity, which is the inherent pulsation of self-movement and vitality ...’ (Volume 38, p. 142 – my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in scan])
The idealist ignores ‘determinant content’ which allows the thing-in-itself to come into existence, which is the ‘law of ground’. He allows only the relation of external reflection to judge the differences between Negative and Positive Semblance when they must interpenetrate into one another through antithesis, synthesis and absolute contradiction.
Only when this is done can ‘things-in-themselves’ emerge as parts each of which is a posited ‘entity’ whose source is in the external world of ‘Being’. The form of appearance of the parts is Essence in Existence and as their properties build up to that of the material world on the outside their ground changes from existence grounded on Appearance to Appearance grounded on existence.
Mediations now take place at all stages of cognition, and it is here that the method of “dialectical logic’ is used for analysis.
‘Logic is the science of cognition,’ writes Lenin. ‘It is the theory of knowledge. Knowledge is the reflection of nature by man. But this is not a simple, not an immediate, not a complete reflection, but the process of a series of abstractions, the formation and development of concepts, laws etc., and these concepts, laws, etc., (thought, science = “the logical idea”) embrace conditionally, approximately the universal law-governed character of eternally moving and developing nature ...’ (Volume 38, p. 182)
Dialectical Materialism utilises the principle of the coincidence of dialectics, logic and the theory of knowledge. This coincidence is of great importance in the present situation of the impending collapse of some of the world’s leading banking groups. Lenin in his Materialism and Empirio-Criticism referred to the development of such a crisis.
‘Every individual producer in the world economic system realises that he is introducing this or that change into the technique of production; every owner realises that he exchanges certain products for others; but these producers and these owners do not realise that in doing so they are thereby changing Social Being.
‘The sum-total of these changes in all their ramifications in the capitalist world economy could not even be grasped by 70 Marxes. The most important thing is that the laws of these changes have been discovered, that the objective logic of these changes and of their historical development has in its chief and basic features been disclosed.’ (Volume 14, p. 325)
This process is objective ‘in the sense that social being is independent of the social consciousness of people’. ‘The highest task,’ wrote Lenin, 75 years ago, ‘... is to comprehend this objective logic.’ (Volume 14, p. 325)
The principle of coincidence enables us to define the objective content of a given category by revealing its relations as a stage of knowledge in relation to other categories such as necessity, probability, possibility.
The Category of Appearance is a moving form in the first instance within thought itself. As essence builds up from its source in the external world it expands in its form the course of analysis, this form is the ‘showing of Essence in itself of ground and grounded. ‘Matter is the passive, form is the active.’ ‘Matter must be formed and form must materialise itself ...’ ‘Now this,’ writes Hegel, ‘which appears as the activity of Form, is equally the proper movement of Matter itself ...’ ‘Both – the activity of Form and the movement of Matter – are the same.’ (Volume 38, p. 145) ‘Form is essential. Essence is formed.’ (Volume 38, p. 144)
This ‘activity of Form’ is the proper unity of matter. ‘Content equals Form’ and ‘they must coincide’. (Volume 38, p. 145) Understanding a part presupposes understanding a whole. A knowledge of the ‘whole’ presupposes a knowledge of its constituent ‘parts’. This is what is meant by the law of Appearance.
‘Law’, Lenin said in a quotation from Hegel, ‘is the reflection of Appearance into identity with itself.’ Appearance is about to emerge in Actuality in which Law is identical with it.’

THE category of ‘Appearance’ exists initially in the theory of knowledge as negative self-mediation. It is the movement of antithesis apprehended in its unity before Negative semblance interpenetrates Positive semblance, thus activating the theory of knowledge and Appearance as a category. Law as a category is reflection of Appearance into identity with itself.
From the law of the unity of contradictions within the process of interpenetration, Essence enters into Existence. What now appears is ‘impressions passing by’, a variety of parts of what will eventually be the ‘whole’ Appearance of Something. Thus the Laws of the Identity of Unity and Variety of opposites manifest within the laws of Appearance – all performing a positive function. From the concepts Identity, Difference and Contradiction which characterised Subjective Cognition we have reached the stage of the emergence of the categories of dialectical logic through which we will analyse the relation of these ‘parts’ to the ‘whole’.
 
The categories of ‘parts’ and ‘whole’ within Appearance
AS THE properties of the ‘parts’ build up, their forms will become more easy to recognise and analyse in relation to the ‘whole’. ‘Parts’ and ‘whole’ exist solely in relation to one another and since they are changing all the time, they manifest change through the law of opposition to one another. At first, ‘parts’ seen on their own are no longer ‘parts’ but ‘wholes’. Each of them exists-for-itself. As categories, ‘whole’ and ‘parts’ are related essentially to their ‘other’. The ‘whole’ must hold the ‘parts’ as self-subsistent, whilst understanding a ‘part’ presupposes understanding a ‘whole’.
If ‘something’ has real existence as a ‘whole’ then we must be able to define its ‘constituent parts’. The ‘whole’ must be seen as an inner force which will strive to manifest itself in external reality as essence which must appear. Real ‘wholes’ must have elements bound together by the interaction of parts’ and ‘whole’. Since the ‘parts’ and ‘whole’ are constantly changing, the ‘whole’ as such can never be a sum total of its ‘parts’. It is instead the sum total and unity of opposites in constant change, which are simultaneously not only single ‘wholes’ but many ‘wholes’. Thus ‘wholes’ change into ‘parts’ and ‘parts’ into ‘wholes’.
Any category claiming to be the ‘totality’ of something must be exceeded in its constant movement and change, since there is always an inherently negative movement outwards beyond the limits of negation in general. It is this movement which exceeds such limits that constitutes the category of Necessity which arises out of Essence in Existence, with its internal properties building up towards Appearance.
The ‘whole’ must be seen as ‘parts’ standing in a certain relation to each other. Through analysis we identify the properties of an object which transform it from a ‘part’ which is a ‘whole’ into a ‘part’ of a larger ‘whole’. Cognition of the ‘whole’ and its ‘parts’ proceeds simultaneously. As we single out ‘parts’ for analysis we do so as elements of a single ‘whole’.
As the result of the synthesis [1] between the ‘whole’ which is Appearing and its ‘parts’, the ‘Whole’ Appears consisting of parts in conflict between themselves and the ‘whole’ and vice versa. As Lenin explains: ‘Every notion occurs in a certain relation, in a certain connection with all the others’ (Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 197) and he adds: ‘the relativity of opposition between notions ... the identity of opposites between notions.’ (ibid.)
 
‘Form’ and ‘Content’ within Appearance
THE category of Appearance describes a ‘moving form’ within thought itself as in the case of the growth of a baby from different substances in its mother’s womb before birth. It is an inner form in which a variety of Essences must eventually appear.
The development of Form and Content is the development of two sides of the same phenomenon. The division of the ‘whole’ into these two branches inevitably gives rise to contradictions and conflict leading to the discarding of ‘form’ through the changes necessitated by the growth of its ‘content’.
The unity of ‘form’ and ‘content’ within Essence in Existence is relative and subject to change, because of the struggle between different functions in its development. For example a change of content becomes the basis of development within Form as the mode of existence of a ‘thing’ before it Appears.
The ‘content’ possesses its own motion which ‘form’ depends on, although it (form) has its own relative motion also. It can either hold back development or speed it up; in such a way that it can sharpen the contradictions between ‘Form’ and ‘Content’. At one point it can stimulate development and at another it may conservatively retard it. This process cannot, however be simply relegated to the contradiction between the active and passive sides of ‘Form’ and ‘Content’, since through the interaction of them as opposites) the old form is either transformed or abolished.
 
The sum total and unity of opposites in analysis
THE Category of Appearance incorporates the sum total of the elements and objects which reveal through External Reflection the dialectic of internal matter in motion. It describes the phenomena and processes which arise from the first of Lenin’s basic elements of dialectics: ‘The determination of the concept out of itself (the thing itself must be considered in its relations and in its development). (Volume 38, p. 221)
‘Being’ as the source of sensation in the external world has its Finite ‘other’ in ‘Not Being’ (sensation – Existence). ‘Holding fast’ the opposites (Being, ‘other’) through Becoming is achieved by mediation. In the first, determinate ‘Not Being’ is immediate and ‘coming to be’. In the second, “Being is immediate and ceasing to be’. Each sublates itself insofar as it has a unity with its opposite. (See Hegel’s Science of Logic, p. 106)
‘Becoming’ is understood only in the separateness of Being and Not-Being. Their vanishing into one another is the vanishing of ‘Becoming’. The self movement of the external world is here seen to be the basic mode of existence of matter as it is reflected in thought. The use of the word sublate means ‘to preserve, to maintain, to put an end to’. Being is preserved in its ‘other’ (Not Being). The ‘other’ is maintained in Being. Because they are separate moments of the movement of matter, they are also terminated.
External reflection by itself leads to one-sided determinateness which apprehends as the source of sensation, only the infinite positive side of the image. ‘Finite’ (its ‘other’) is the same as Existence, ‘something’ preserves itself as the Finite Negative of its determinate Being in a way in which it is ‘at one with it’, since it is a moving Finite negative of life itself. Its ‘otherness’ is both contained and separate. Infinite negates the Finite until it again has the Finite as a different moment confronting it. The ‘Finite’ posits ‘other’ as ‘infinite’ and the infinite posits its ‘other’ as finite. Thus we have the transition of the ‘infinite’ into the ‘finite’ and the finite into the infinite (antithesis) within the outer form of Negation in general.
Negation in general is completed with both Infinite and Finite in unity, conflict and transformation into each other, whilst being negated into absolute essence. As the negative nature of semblance this negative of absolute essence drives forward beyond the limitations of its negation in general, to penetrate through antithesis into Positive Semblance.
There now follows a state in which unity through inter-penetration is accomplished in absolute contradiction.
 
Appearance in Actuality
THE ground on which the dialectical relationship between ‘parts’ and ‘whole’ is established is Essence in Existence. The law of Existence reveals the properties of Essence to be constantly changing in a relative and richer way towards each other as ‘parts’ in relation to some presupposed ‘whole’. This reaches a point in which the emerging form of Appearance is grounded on the changing qualities of Existence which gives rise to the law of Necessity. The method of synthetic analysis will begin to concentrate on the dialectical relation between content and form thus reproducing the law of EXISTENCE on a higher level.
Existence now bases itself on Appearance until ‘Form’ and ‘Content’ are identically and abstractly revealed in the category of the ‘Unity and Identity of Opposites’. The two sides of Appearance are contained in this abstraction. Inner ‘Form’ and ‘Content’ being equal have now become self identical and at the same time reflected into self in Appearance as well as reflected into the outer world of Actuality. ‘Possibility’ is a category which reveals itself as two opposing self subsisting existent moments. It has the ‘Unity and Identity of Opposites’ posited as a positive reflectedness into self of external Actuality as well as a moment which points to the outer forms of the Actuality of the external world.
In these two moments ‘Possibility’ is grounded in the external world. It has arisen from the Necessity of the inner ‘form’ of Appearance as Essence which is formed and must appear. Thus the subsistent ‘other’ moment of the external world arises as ‘Possibility’ through the unity of the ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ moments contained in the category of the ‘Unity and Identity of Opposites’. Within the category of Possibility’ we have the unity of the ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ moments of Appearance and Actuality as opposites existing independently of each other.
‘Actuality is the unity of Essence and Existence ... ‘ (Volume 38, p. 156)
Lenin reveals the perspective of Actuality, in Essence and EXISTENCE. (See box on the side Volume 38, p. 156)
‘Usually: from one extreme to the other totality = (in the shape of) dispersed completeness ...’
‘“The one-sidedness of one philosophic principle is generally faced by its opposite one-sidedness, and, as everywhere, totality at least is found as a dispersed completeness.”
‘Actuality is higher than Being, and higher than Existence.’ (ibid.)
‘(1) Being is immediate – “Being is not yet actual.” It passes into other. [It is still only Appearance, GH]
‘(2) Existence (it passes into Appearance) – arises out of Ground, out of conditions, but it still lacks the unity of “Reflection and immediacy.”
‘(3) Actuality – unity of Existence and Being-in-Self.
‘... “Actuality also stands higher than Existence” ...’ (Volume 38, p. 157)
Actuality stands in ‘dispersed completeness’. It is the unity of Existence and Being-in-self, on the verge of the Notion.
Lenin tells that this relation is ‘full of content’. ‘But this necessity is at the same time relative.’ (ibid.)
‘The unfolding of the sum-total of the moments of actuality NB = the essence of dialectical cognition.’ (Volume 38, p. 158)
‘... in the same Encyclopaedia, the eloquent words on the vanity of mere delight at the wealth and flux of the phenomena of nature and on the necessity ... “of advancing to a closer insight into the inner harmony and uniformity of nature ...”’
Lenin concludes: ‘(Closeness to materialism.)’ (ibid.)

CAUSALITY starts in the external world and is manifested in thought through ‘Finite Cause’ as the ‘other’ of ‘Being’. Finite ‘Cause’ becomes ‘Effect’ and ‘Effect’ becomes ‘Cause’ in the transformation of the ‘Finite’ into the ‘Infinite’ and vice versa.
‘But the movement of the Determinate Relation of Causality,’ wrote Hegel, ‘has now resulted in this, that the cause is not merely extinguished in the effect, and with it the effect too (as happens in Formal Causality) – but the cause in its extinction, in the effect, becomes again that effect vanishes into cause, but equally becomes again in it. Each of these determinations cancels itself in its positing and posits itself in its cancellation;’ (Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 161)
Hegel continues: ‘At this point Reciprocity presents itself as a reciprocal causality of presupposed substances conditioning each other; each is, in relation to the other, at once active and passive substance.’ (ibid.) ‘Causality presents itself as ... Becoming.’ (ibid.), in movement and change.
When Subjective Cognition interpenetrates through antithesis the ‘theory of knowledge’ it conditions itself as substance similar in example to positive and negative electricity.
 
Substance and Measure
SUBSTANCE as a dialectical category has proved to be a necessary condition, without assuming which it was impossible in principle to understand, the mode of the interaction between the thinking body and the world within which it operated as a thinking body. Dialectical materialism rejects the idea of any immutable, homogenous substance and holds that which is in constant motion and development is the substance.
At the same time ‘Measure’ is a category which seeks to establish an organic unity between quality and quantity. Every qualitatively distinct object has its own quantitative object. It has its own quantitative attributes, which are both immobile and immutable. This very mutation, however, is of necessity bound by certain limits (beyond which quantitative changes lead to qualitative changes).
These limits are the limits of measure itself. The connections and unity of quantity and quality are simultaneously conditioned by the nature of a given object.
Lenin, in a quotation from Hegel, says:
‘“Necessity and Causality have, then, vanished in it, they contain both the immediate identity (as connection and relation) and the absolute substantiality of distincts, and therefore their absolute contingency – the original unity of substantial variety, hence absolute contradiction.’ (Volume 38, p. 161)
Lenin describes this as the ‘unity of substance in the distinct’. (ibid.) Being and Essence are the moments of Becoming of the Notion – ’from Intuition to Cognition of objective reality’.
Lenin’s reference to ‘unity of substance in the distinct’ refers to the ‘nodal lines’ in which either quality or quantity, depending upon conditions, may emerge in existence. Subjective cognition is a decisive impulse, through antithesis and interpenetration it is negated into the ‘theory of knowledge’ and into the mental world embodying the individual in which Causality and Substance build up to Reciprocal action through Necessity to the leap to the abstract Notion.
The Abstract Notion is obliged to unavoidably become a ‘positive or theoretical Notion’.
This means that it returns to Semblance on a higher level. The self-movement of matter is responsible solely for the movement of thought through Semblance, Appearance and Actuality, once the stage of the abstract Notion is reached, practice itself generates the self-movement of matter. The break with subjective thinking is reached and the objective side of practice is implemented.
The abstract notion completes the dialectical process of thought within the self-relation between individual and Universal and vice versa. The theoretical Notion is the external world itself which supplies the positive side to the Notion. The practical impulse has emerged from subjective self-impulse, which is thought to objective practice.
 
The notion
‘“THE NOTION”,’ writes Hegel, ‘“is determined in and for itself [abstract], and is the middle member” (in the logical figure of the syllogism) “only because it equally has the significance of the objective”.’ (Volume 38, p. 220)
The form and content of the Notion is the same, that is why it draws its determinate element directly from its object.
‘In reality,’ says Lenin, quoting from Hegel, ‘subjectivity is only a stage of development from Being and Essence – whereupon this subjectivity “dialectically ‘breaks through its Barrier’ “ and “opens out into objectivity by means of the syllogism”.’ (Volume 38, p. 183)
The subjective is a moment in the development of the objective. Having emerged, the subject exercises an active influence on the object, thus revealing itself within it. The dialectical whole is thus revealed in objective thought, in a way in which the one-sidedness of both subject and object is abolished. (Volume 38, p. 208)
‘Theoretical cognition ought to give the object in its necessity, in its all-sided relations, in its contradictory movement an-und-für-sich [in and for itself]. But the human notion “definitively” catches this objective truth of cognition, seizes and masters it, only when the notion becomes “being-for-itself” in the sense of practice (my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphaisis visible in this scan]). That is, the practice of man and of mankind is the test, the criterion of the objectivity of cognition.’ (Volume 38, p. 211)
Lenin insisted that ‘... the conformity of concepts with objects is not subjective’. (Volume 38, p. 194.) ‘... Man’s consciousness not only reflects the objective world, but creates it.’ (Volume 38, p. 212) The world in itself is relatively different from the world as a thing for us. ‘Practice is higher than (theoretical) knowledge, for it has not only the dignity of universality, but also of immediate actuality.’ (Volume 38, p. 213)
 
Man expands nature through practice
THE HISTORY of human beings is organised in society as the history of the growth of the creative element, man’s initiative, both employers and working class. The higher the consciousness of people, the higher their cognition of the objective laws of nature and history. Through the union of cognition and practice social man changes and expands his external conditions of existence in accordance with his needs.
When we speak of the activity of dialectics, dialectical logic and the theory of knowledge in thought, we are posing the question of the dialectical transition. ‘What,’ asks Lenin, ‘distinguishes the dialectical transition from the undialectical transition?’ And he answers: ‘The leap (my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in this scan]). The contradiction. The interruption of gradualness. The unity (identity) of Being and not-Being.’ (Volume 38, p. 284)
The ‘leap’ is to practice under conditions in which ‘consciousness creates it. (Volume 38, p. 212) This is extremely important and reveals that the law of the unity and struggle of opposites of theory as a guide to practice, reveals the source of all internal self-movement, and self-development of objects in the external world.
‘Dialectical transition’ builds up to a point where the ‘leap’ takes place and this is where practice really begins. A transition can be gradual, slow or fast, but a leap is a jump – a complete change in the ‘subject as a result of the activity of the ‘object’ of cognition.
For Lenin, the unity of theory and practice was the essence of dialectical cognition, because it was man’s interaction and dependence upon the external world in order to live.
Or, as he himself explains it:
‘... the practical activity of man had to lead his consciousness to the repetition of the various logical figures thousands of millions of times in order that these figures could obtain the significance of axioms.’ (Volume 38, p. 190)
Subjective dialectical thought becomes submerged in the objective situation thousands of millions of times so that the ‘consciousness of man’ can attain ‘the significance of axioms’.
As Lenin explains on page 191, Volume 38: ‘Man by his practice proves the objective correctness of his ideas, concepts, knowledge, science.’
Practice is not just another category of dialectics, a criterion of truth as the theory of man’s practical activities. It is the dialectics of the object as well as the subject of action – action as the goal and action as the result as well as the theory. Thinking is subjective practice, and physical practice is objective and both interact on each other.
Practice, according to Lenin, is Subjective end; it is also external means (‘man’s tools’) as well as the coincidence of subject and object. Hence as Lenin explains it: ‘... the activity of man, who has constructed an objective picture of the world for himself, changes external actuality’. (Volume 38, p. 218)
The concept of subjectivity ‘... is the impulse to destroy this separation (of the idea from the object).’ (Volume 38, p. 194.) What this means is that the subjective must be understood as the content of man’s cognition of the world, although it appears to be independent of the world.
‘In actual fact,’ writes Lenin, (Volume 38, p. 189) ‘men’s ends are engendered by the objective world and presuppose it – they find it as something given, present. But it seems to man as if his ends are taken from outside the world, and are independent of the world (“freedom”).’
‘The laws,’ explains Lenin, ‘of the external world, of nature, which are divided into mechanical and chemical (this is very important) are the bases of man’s purposive activity.’ (Volume 38, p. 187)
And again:
‘In his practical activity, man is confronted with the objective world is dependent on it, and determines his activity by it.’(Volume 38, pp. 187–188)
‘From this aspect,’ comments Lenin, ‘from the aspect of the practical (purposive) activity of man, the mechanical (and chemical) causality of the world (of nature) appears as something though external, as though something secondary, as though something hidden.’ (Volume 38, p. 188)
The dialectical training of subjective ‘purposive’ thinking leads to the dialectically practical goals men have set themselves and to the enrichment of the dialectical laws of countless practices. A dialectically organised human being is one who clearly recognises the dialectical laws of thinking in their natural practical surroundings determinated by practice.
It is presently possible with subjective and objective dialectical training to set aside sufficient components, as it were, from human knowledge, that is, at the point of ‘living perception’. These are moments revealed by the unity of the negative and positive nature of semblance at the stage reached by abstract thought, such as Marx in his work on Capital.
The interaction of opposites is a finite manifestation which is undergoing constant change in mutual and reciprocal action and reaction between the most elementary particles, between particles and fields of particles.
Without the capacity for the interaction of particles at all levels, matter as such could not exist. Interaction emerges in the relation in which cause and effect constantly change places. On page 318, Volume 38, Lenin, in assessing the role of scientific knowledge, writes: ‘The concept (cognition) reveals the essence (the law of causality, identity, difference, etc.) in Being (in immediate phenomena) – such is actually the general course of all human cognition (of all science) in general.’
What has to be understood is that the dialectical method of cognition is both mediated and substantiated by dialectical practice. ‘If Marx,’ wrote Lenin on page 319, Volume 38, ‘did not leave behind him a “Logic” (with a capital letter), he did leave the logic of Capital, and this ought to be utilised to the full in this question. In Capital, Marx applied to a single science logic, dialectics and the theory of knowledge of materialism (three words are not needed: it is one and the same thing) which has taken everything valuable in Hegel and developed it further.’
On the same page Lenin notes:
‘Abstract “Sein” [Being] only as a moment in everything flows.’
‘Commodity – money – Capital leads to:–
(a) production of absolute surplus value
(b) production of relative surplus value
‘The history of capitalism and the analysis of the concepts summing it up.’ (Volume 38, p. 320)
‘The beginning – the most simple, ordinary, mass, immediate “Being”: the single commodity (”Sein” [Being] in political economy). The analysis of it as a social relation. A double analysis, deductive and inductive – logical and historical (forms of value).
‘Testing by facts or by practice respectively, is to be found here in each step of the analysis.
‘Cf. concerning the question of Essence versus Appearance – price and value – demand and supply versus (crystallised labour) – wages and the price of labour-power.’ (ibid.)
Lenin’s emphasis here upon testing by ‘facts’ and practices throughout analysis does not mean that perception only is a realisation of man’s aims – it is also a means of perceiving ever new tasks. In his article On the Question of Dialectics (Volume 38, p. 361), he writes:
‘Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with other kinds of individuals (things, phenomena, processes), etc. Here already we have the elements, the germs, the concepts of necessity, of objective connection in nature, etc. Here already we have the contingent [my emphasis] and the necessary, the phenomenon and the essence; for when we say: John is a man, Fido is a dog, this is a leaf of a tree, etc., we disregard a number of attributes as contingent; we separate the essence from the appearance (my emphasis [Note by ETOL: No emphasis visible in this scan]), and counterpose the one to the other.’
The Appearance is Price – The Essence is Value.
The Appearance is Wages – The Essence is the price of Labour Power.
Dialectical interaction between theory and practice enables the mind to be trained simultaneously in thinking about what the individual is doing as part of the ‘theory of knowledge’, as well as the world which he sets out to change through his practice. The ability to think arose initially out of practice, which means that it follows the same dialectical pattern as the struggle to change the world in relation to the requirements of human beings.
The best known work of Marx in this respect is Capital, where he selected his dialectical tools as laws of analysis which enabled these laws to be abstracted out of living events.
‘In his Capital,’ writes Lenin, ‘Marx first analyses the simplest, most ordinary and fundamental, most common and everyday relation of bourgeois (commodity) society, a relation encountered billions of times, viz. the exchange of commodities. In this very simple phenomenon (in this “cell” of bourgeois society) analysis reveals all the contradictions (or the germs of all the contradictions) of modern society. The subsequent exposition shows us the development (both growth and movement) of these contradictions and of this society in the summation of its individual parts, from its beginning to its end.’ (Volume 38, pp. 360–361)
 
Empiricism and theoretical thinking
THE SOURCE of ‘sensations’ in the external world constitutes countless moments of empirical origin and has important implications. It is a natural beginning which means that this is the only way we can, in fact, subjectively appraise the world.
The purpose of theory is to mentally reproduce reality, but initially it is impossible to achieve this at an empirical level, the unfolding processes of theoretical knowledge are at this point far from taking shape as a specific investigation. Scientific knowledge at this early stage arises from an interaction between sensuality and thought, wherein the source of sensation is in the external world.
The process of cognition presupposes on a theoretical level of sensuality and science, in particular, the acquisition of ‘fantasy’. Creative imagination in many ways can predetermine success, provided it is not used solely as a substitute for imagined successes. It has to be dialectically processed from practice to thought.
As Lenin points out:
‘Feuerbach very ingeniously and clearly explains how ridiculous it is to postulate a “transcendence” from the world of phenomena to the world in itself, a sort of impassable gulf created by the priests and taken over by the professors of philosophy. Here is one of his explanations taken from Feuerbach.
‘“Of course, the products of fantasy are also products of nature, for the force of fantasy, like all other human forces, is in the last analysis both in its basis and in its origin a force of nature”.’ (Volume 14, p. 118)
In a quotation from Anti Dühring referred to by Lenin, Engels states:
‘“The unity of the world does not consist in its being, although its being is a precondition of its unity, as it must certainly first be, before it can be one. Being, indeed, is always an open question beyond the point where our sphere of observation ends. The real unity of the world consists in its materiality and this is proved not by a few juggled phrases, but by a long and wearisome development of philosophy and natural science.” ‘ (Volume 14, p. 117)
Beyond the sphere where our observation ends, ‘such being’, as Lenin stressed, is indeed ‘an open question’. Our empirical investigation orientates cognition towards the identification of relationships between the conceptual apparatus of science and the reality which is beyond and which is seen through analysis as a whole as being beyond the conceptual field, only to be revealed in ‘living contemplation’. Science, it must not be forgotten, provides a knowledge of objective reality and not some closed conceptual structure.
Whenever the empirical and the theoretical concept interact, a very definite function takes place in the interaction. This is in accordance with the findings of observation and experiment with corresponding results through improvement in the cognitive process itself.
By way of developing scientific knowledge, an empirical examination may be oriented by conceptual theoretical tasks. Concepts such as elaboration and perfection constitute an act of singling out and penetrating objective reality, in an ever-fuller and ever deeper reflection of its substance.
What must be understood about the abstractly positive nature of theoretical thinking is that it manifests its own content through the form which encourages mentally reflective contact between the external world and the individual.
The ‘content’ is contained in the ‘form’ of the initial undefined image of ‘sensation’ itself. ‘Imaginative wholeness’ which comprises the content of theoretical thought is not a ‘product of the notion, thinking and self-developing outside of contemplation and imagination’, but is ‘a processing of contemplation and images into Notions’. (Karl Marx, Grundrisse, p. 22)
This is understood as two aspects of a single process. There is internal perfection and development of its means and the external which is the application of these means towards the assimilation of material which is beyond the cognitive system itself. Examples of the dialectical and empirical process of cognition are obliged to take into account the existence of historically different stages of science which brought together these two fundamentally different types of cognitive activity (Empirical – Dialectical materialist) through the development of their possibilities in relation to each other.
In the early stages of dialectical materialism as a scientific study, we quickly arrive on the scene of a study of concepts. In this relationships such a study provides guidance for empirical examination in the proper sense of the word. That is why induction as a method in science, through which a general conclusion is drawn from a set of premises, must not be used at the empirical stage of science.
To further emphasise the highly-speculative nature of cognition, in the process of studying the object of cognition, it is highly important to bear in mind the process of cognition as a whole. As Lenin described, ‘the old, formal logic is exactly like a child’s game, making pictures out of jig-saw pieces.’ And he comments: It has ‘fallen into disrepute’. (Volume 38, p. 96)
Lenin goes on to quote Hegel: ‘“For method is the consciousness of the form taken by the inner spontaneous movement of its content”.’ (ibid.) This is an extremely important observation, as we shall see.
The negative nature of semblance takes us up to the end of the first negation which was initiated in the external world at the source of sensation. From sensations to the negative nature of semblance. The negation of this negation comprehends ‘the antithesis in its unity’ (Volume 38, p. 98) in the course of the interpenetration of negative semblance into positive semblance. Until that dialectical interconnection is made, negative semblance cannot manifest itself in positive semblance and a unity of the two in contradiction cannot be established.
A synthesis manifesting antithesis is decisive here, otherwise no connection can be made, and the negation of negation cannot be completed. There can only be a word form which would be meaningless without essence as content. Without the negative and positive nature of essence in antithesis and interpenetration being established, a word form would be an absurdity.
But ‘theoretical thinking’ as a guide to ‘empirical examination’ is an essential aspect of speculative thinking in the process of cognition itself. The dialectical materialist safeguard is the process of antithesis through the interpenetration of negative into positive semblance. The unity of antithesis in interpenetration of one into the other must exist in a state of absolute contradiction otherwise it is not dialectical essence.
In turn, this means, that we must allow for the use of ‘word forms’ with only implicit reference to the first Negation. If we are to avail ourselves of the deepest aspects of material gathered from empirical observation and examination under conditions in which the knowledge dialectically and materialistically gathered from empiricism yields ever richer and wider sources of knowledge, we must be prepared to ‘grasp the nettle’ where it stings most.

Footnote
1. This is the same synthesis which arose out of the interpenetration of Negative into positive Semblance. The method of analysis which follows is therefore called synthetic analysis.
 

rry Healy: Contradiction, reflection and cognition (2. Determinations of Reflection)




Gerry Healy Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

3 Articles

Gerry Healy
Contradiction, reflection and cognition

2. Determinations of Reflection

The unbridgeable gulf between the various forms of idealism and materialist dialectics centres upon the objective material content of sensuous reflection. Materialism declares that sensation is an image of the external world, and that the latter exists independently of its image.
As Lenin explains in his Materialism and Empirio-Criticism [1], “an image cannot exist without the thing imaged, and that the latter exists independently of that which images it”. He further emphasises this point when he writes: “The recognition of objective law in nature and the recognition that this law is reflected with approximate fidelity in the mind of man is materialism.” [2] [emphasis GH]
The objective IDENTITY of the source of sensation is simultaneously negated into its relative finite DIFFERENCE. As a self-related concept it constitutes the “antithesis” in dialectical thought: the unity of this antithesis of negative IDENTITY into a POSITIVE image on the negative of difference which contains contradiction is Essence.
The “antithesis” drives on to negate the negation into the theory of knowledge.
Lenin approvingly reproduces the following quotation from Hegel’s Logic which describes the antithesis as follows:
“It is the simple point of negative self-relation, the internal source of all activity, vital and spiritual self-movement, the dialectic soul which all truth has in it ...” [3]
In the side margin, Lenin describes this as the “kernel of dialectics”. Hegel continues:
“... for the transcendence of the opposition between the Notion and Reality, and that unity which is the truth, rest upon this subjectivity alone. – The second negative, the negative of the negative, which we have reached, is this transcendence of the contradiction ...”
Lenin comments on the side margin, “the criterion of truth” and in brackets he explains this “truth” as “the unity of the concept and reality”.
Lenin further approvingly comments on this paragraph from Hegel:
“Important here is:

the characterisation of dialectics: self-movement, the source of activity, the movement of life and spirit; the coincidence of the concepts of the subject (man) with reality;
 
objectivism to the highest degree (‘der objektivste Moment’ [the most objective moment – GH])”. [4]

Lenin is here explaining the “coincidence” of dialectical nature, society (class struggle) and thought which apprehends the external world (dialectical logic) and the “theory of knowledge”.
 
The Role of Concepts in Dialectical Logic
Concepts are terms which enable us to use the method of dialectical logic to analyse the relation between the universal and the individual and vice versa. For the idealist, only the sensuously perceived image of sensation is concrete.
Materialist dialectics analyses the “antithesis” or “thing-in-itself” negated into the “theory of knowledge”; concepts establish the concrete relation between the universal and the individual in the form of internal contradictions in dialectical abstract thought.
Lenin emphasises that:
“The abstraction of matter, of a law of nature, the abstraction of value, etc., in short all scientific (correct, serious, not absurd) abstractions reflect nature more deeply, truly and completely. From living perception to abstract thought, and from this to practice, – such is the dialectical path of the cognition of truth, of the cognition of objective reality.” [5]
Living perception of the “universal whole” must be the content of our reflection, and not sensations as an image of that “whole”. However, mere IDENTITY of the object or objects which provide the source of our “sensations” is inadequate for establishing their interconnection in the external world and in dialectical thought. Only abstract scientific thinking in concepts reveals the real living unity of things in the external world which in their constant interaction are concretely connected through the operation of the dialectical law “from the abstract to the concrete”.
The process of cognitive interaction manifests itself most clearly when an object at the source of sensation in the external world discovers in an adjacent object something which it itself needs. Whilst our starting point is the material universal “whole” existing independently outside of us, we reflect the many-sidedness of the source of our sensation in the particular relation between the universal and the individual. The “in-itself” unity of opposites contained in the “antithesis” will be negated into the theory of knowledge through the law of the negation of negation.
The “thing” contained in the “antithesis” is an individual manifestation of the universal external source of sensation. Concepts of these “parts” (particulars) emerging in phenomena must be understood concretely through their interaction in abstract dialectical thought.
Concepts scientifically exist and interact as phenomena with one another only through the self-relation between the universal and the individual and through the individual back to the original source of sensation in the external world. Therefore, the individual concept of the “part” contains the “universal” as its content. Both are in constant interaction with one another and in continuous change. The universal external source of sensation constitutes the material connection of all the parts at the source.
Concepts, seen in this dialectical way, theoretically manifest the external world, scientifically apprehending it through the concepts of its “parts”. In this way the abstract analysis of those “parts” is reproduced in new concrete “wholes”, although since “time is a form of being of objective reality” [6], they are opposites. Therefore a “new whole” is a “unity of opposites”.
They express, what Lenin describes in his essay on Dialectics when he writes:
“The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts ... is the essence (one of the ‘essentials’, one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) of dialectics. That is precisely how Hegel, too, puts the matter...” [7]
 
The Role of Reflection in Dialectical Logic
Determinations of Reflection enable us to analyse through the use of concepts the abstract internal contradictory sides of living perception. Lenin, again quotes Hegel approvingly when the latter writes:
“If now the primary Determinations of Reflection – Identity, Variety and Opposition – are established in a proposition, then the determination into which they pass over as into their truth (namely Contradiction) should much more so be comprehended and expressed in a proposition: all things are contradictory in themselves, in this meaning, that this proposition as opposed to the others expresses much better the truth and essence of things.” [8]
These Determinations of Reflection firstly “express the concept of things and their relations” in the external world as the IDENTITY of the sensation. We shall explain this further in the next section on the “union of analysis and synthesis”.
“Thinking reason (understanding) sharpens the blunt difference of variety; [second determination – insertion & emphasis added GH] the mere manifold of imagination, into essential difference, into opposition [third determination – insertion GH]. Only when raised to the peak of contradiction, do the manifold entities become active (regsam) and lively in relation to one another, – they receive/acquire that negativity which is the inherent pulsation of self-movement and vitality.” [9]
 
The Union of Analysis and Synthesis
Lenin writes:
“The result of the negation of the negation, this third term is ‘not a quiescent third term, but, as this unity’ (of contradictions), ‘is self-mediating movement and activity ...’” [10]
So far we have had 1) the Negation of the Identity of the source of sensation into 2) Difference as a negative containing the positive image of Identity together with Contradiction as a result of the first Negation 3) The transition of DIFFERENCE into CONTRADICTION which drove forward to Negation of the Negation.
In analysing Hegel, Lenin says:
“The result of this dialectical transformation into the ‘third’ term, into the synthesis, is a new premise, assertion, etc., which in turn becomes the source of a further analysis. But into it, into this ‘third’ stage, has already entered the ‘content’ of cognition (‘the content of cognition as such enters within the sphere of contemplation’) and the method is extended into a system.” [11]
“The beginning,” emphasises Lenin, “of all consideration, of the whole analysis – this first premise [proposition – insertion GH] – now appears indeterminate, ‘imperfect’; the need arises to prove, ‘derive’ it and it turns out that ...”
Lenin immediately goes on to quote Hegel approvingly:
“‘this may seem equivalent to the demand for an infinite backward progress in proof and derivation’ but, on the other hand,” writes Lenin, “the new premise drives forward ...”
He returns to Hegel who writes:
“... Thus, cognition rolls forward from content to content. This progress determines itself, first, in this manner, that it begins from simple determinatenesses and that each subsequent one is richer and more concrete. For the result contains its own beginning, and the development of the beginning has made it the richer by a new determinateness.” [12]
Content to content is “antithesis to antithesis”. “Simple determinateness” is the first “antithesis” which through negation of negation (third term) is now the “theory of knowledge”. This is negated back to the external source of the original sensation and negated as a new “part” of that “external source”, with the result that, as Hegel puts it, “each subsequent one is richer and more concrete. For the result contains its own beginning, and the development of the beginning has made it the richer by a new determinateness.” [13]
 
Whole and Parts
The dialectical conception of the union of analysis and synthesis is expressed in the following process.
Analysis enables us to identify the properties at the external source of sensation, that make it a “part” of a new emerging “whole”, while in Synthesis the “new whole” is understood as consisting of these parts as a unity of opposites standing in certain relation to one another. Thus synthesis is carried out through analysis and analysis through synthesis. Both synthesis and analysis are interdependent upon each other.
Cognition of the “new whole” and its “parts” is a simultaneous process. By dialectically reflecting the parts from “the concept of things and their relations” in the external world, we analyse them as “a unity of opposites” in a new “whole”. This “new whole”, therefore consists of a summation of “parts” which are opposite, being negated from the Identity of the original source of sensation at different times.

Notes
1. Lenin: Collected Works, Volume 14, Progress Publishers, 1962, p. 69.
2. Ibid., p. 155.
3. Volume 38, p. 229.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid., p. 171.
6. Ibid., p. 228.
7. Ibid., p. 359.
8. Ibid., p. 138.
9. Ibid., p. 143.
10. Ibid., p. 230.
11. Ibid., pp. 230/231.
12. Ibid., p. 231.
13. Ibid.
 

rry Healy: Contradiction, reflection and cognition (3. Cognition of Objective Laws)



Gerry Healy Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

3 Articles

Gerry Healy
Contradiction, reflection and cognition

3. Cognition of Objective Laws

The cognition of dialectical “parts” contains many dangers of a bourgeois idealist origin. These arise particularly in the form of superficially plausible “left phraseology” used in arguments as a kind of shortcut in arriving at insufficiently worked-out dialectical concepts.
Not only are events in the class struggle taken out of context and lumped together in a kind of “sophisticated package deal”. It happens also in the misuse of the dialectical method through the transfer, both in theory and practice, of laws peculiar to one set of ideas to others of an entirely different origin. In the case of history, by confusing quotations derived from one historical period of events with another, entirely different period, without proof of their historical interconnection.
A typical example of this eclectic method is provided by Lenin in State and Revolution. For Marx and Engels, “Force” was “the midwife of every old society which is pregnant with the new”.
The history of German social democracy (1878–1894) eclectically combined the theory of revolutionary force with the theory of the “withering away” of the state to form a single theory.
Lenin most emphatically denounces this eclectic method as follows:
“Usually the two [‘force’ and ‘withering away’ – insertion GH] are combined by means of eclecticism, by an unprincipled or sophistic selection made arbitrarily (or to please the powers that be) of first one, and then another argument, and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, if not more, it is the idea of the ‘withering away’ that is placed in the forefront.
“Dialectics are replaced by eclecticism – this is the most usual, the most widespread practice to be met with in present-day official Social-Democratic literature in relation to Marxism.
“This sort of substitution is, of course, nothing new; it was observed even in the history of classical Greek philosophy [emphasis GH]. In falsifying Marxism in opportunist fashion, the substitution of eclecticism for dialectics is the easiest way of deceiving the people. It gives an illusory satisfaction; it seems to take into account all sides of the process, all trends of development, all the conflicting influences, and so forth, whereas in reality it provides no integral and revolutionary conception of the process of social development at all.” [1]
 
The Concept and Objective Laws
In a dialectical concept, the object at the source of sensation in the external world is reflected in a “particular” or one-sided “part” of the “object” at the external source.
As the Soviet philosopher E.V. Ilyenkov explains: “Each separate element of any dialectically divided whole, expresses one-sidedly, the universal nature of this whole precisely through its difference with other elements rather than abstract affinity to them.” [2]
Lenin refers to this dialectical process as follows:
“The universal exists only in the individual and through the individual. Every individual is (in one way or another) a universal. Every universal is (a fragment, or an aspect, or the essence of) an individual. Every universal only approximately embraces all the individual objects. Every individual enters incompletely into the universal, etc., etc. Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with other kinds of individuals (things, phenomena, processes), etc. Here already we have the elements, the germs, the concepts of necessity, of objective connection in nature, etc.” [3]
The IDENTITY of the objective source of our sensation in the “external world” is a quantitative infinite, law-governed process of dialectical nature, human society (the class struggle) and thought.
Its self-related negation into qualitative finite DIFFERENCE in subjective thought as a “particular” or “part” is the interpenetration of opposites (object into subject). The “antithesis” is the unity of negative infinity (IDENTITY) into finite (DIFFERENCE) and is a negative with a positive image, which as a result of the first negation contains contradiction. The “antithesis” whose unity of negative and positive is the essence of “something” whose source is in the external world.
Hegel explains that:
“Something, taken from the point of view of its immanent Limit – from the point of view of its self-contradiction [emphasis GH], a contradiction which drives it (this Something) and leads it beyond its limits, is the Finite.”
Hegel emphasises that:
“It is the nature of the finite to pass beyond itself, to negate its negation and to become infinite”
Lenin adds, “Not external power converts the finite into the infinite, but its (finite’s) nature.” [4]
Lenin comments approvingly in the box on the side-margin: “The dialectics of things themselves, of Nature itself, of the course of events itself.”
At the top of the same page Lenin writes “Ought or Should-be; and Bound or Boundary – Moments of the Finite” followed by a reference to Hegel who notes “… At Ought the transgression beyond finitude, Infinity, begins.” [5]
This is the manifestation through, as Lenin explains, [6] “the first universal concept (also = the first encountered, universal concept)” of the objective laws of (1) Quantity (infinite) into Quality (FINITE); (2) Interpenetration of opposites (object into subject); (3) Negation of Negation and vice versa which is now Quality into Quantity – to the external infinite source of sensation. Referring to this dialectical materialist process Lenin emphasises: “In fact, however they are (the finite and the infinite) inseparable. They are a unity.” [7] This is an objective law-governed process.
The development of the theory of knowledge here, through negation of negation, means the passage from one concept of a given object at the source of sensation to another concept at the same source. In this dialectical way, we deepen our knowledge of the essence of the original object, first as “opposites” or “parts” of the same external source of sensation, thus opening the way for the union of analysis and synthesis, through the determinations of Reflection.
 
Problems of Speculative Thinking
“Dialectics”, wrote Lenin, “as living, many-sided knowledge (with the number of sides eternally increasing), with an infinite number of shades of every approach and approximation to reality (with a philosophical system growing into a whole out of each shade) – here we have an immeasurably rich content as compared with ‘metaphysical’ materialism, the fundamental misfortune of which is its inability to apply dialectics to the Bildertheorie (theory of reflection), to the process and development of knowledge.” [8]
The “infinite number of shades” [emphasis GH] are dialectical (antithesis) which, as Hegel wrote, go from “content to content”. In each content, the Infinite is “inseparable” from, and contained in the finite. As Hegel explains, “the universal is the foundation; the progress therefore must not be taken as a flow from Other to Other.” [9] [emphasis GH]
OTHER to OTHER is Infinity to Infinity or IDENTITY to IDENTITY, with self-related Qualitative finite Difference omitted, or incorporated into an eclectic “unity”.
“Speculative thought” is prepared to consider the “Infinite” as a “Unity” with the finite but ignores their inseparable self-related connection.
In Volume 4 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels in the section on the Holy Family, they deal with the “Mystery of Speculative Construction” when they write:
“If from real apples, pears, strawberries and almonds I form the general idea ‘Fruit’, if I go further and imagine that my abstract idea ‘Fruit’, derived from real fruit, is an entity existing outside me, is indeed the true essence of the pear, the apple, etc., then in the language of speculative philosophy – I am declaring that ‘Fruit’ is the ‘Substance’ of the pear, the apple, the almond, etc. I am saying, therefore, that to be a pear is not essential to the pear, that to be an apple is not essential to the apple; that what is essential to these things is not their real existence, perceptible to the senses, but the essence that I have abstracted from them and then foisted on them, the essence of my idea ‘Fruit’.” [10]
By separating the FINITE pear from the finite apple or a finite almond and replacing them with the abstraction Fruit in general we fall “into the most irrational and unnatural bondage to the object.” [11]
 
The Concrete and the Most Subjective
Lenin comments on a lengthy paragraph from Hegel which we have already referred to (see page 15). “This extract,” he writes, “is not at all bad as a kind of summing up of dialectics.” He continues: “But expansion requires also deepening (‘going into itself’) ...” Lenin completes the sentence with a quotation from Hegel: “... and greater extension is also higher intensity.” [12]
On the top of the next page of his notebooks Lenin quotes Hegel:
“... The richest consequently is also the most concrete and subjective, and that which carries itself back into the simplest depth is also the most powerful and comprehensive.” Lenin comments: “This N.B.: the richest is the most concrete and most subjective.” [13]
Lenin proceeds to quote the next paragraph from Hegel with approval:
“In this manner it comes about that each step in the progress of further determination in advancing from the indeterminate beginning is also a rearward approach to it, so that two processes which may at first appear to be different (the regressive confirmation of the beginning and its progressive further determination) coincide and are the same.” [14]
Immediately underneath in a one-sentence paragraph Lenin emphasises: “It is impermissible to depreciate this indeterminate beginning.” The “indeterminate beginning” is the “antithesis” before it negates the negation that started at the external source of sensation.
Negation of negation is from the finite indeterminate beginning in “a rearward approach” to the infinite external source of the original sensation. A new “part” is negated and analysed (see box on page 143, Volume 38) through dialectical logic and is enriched by going more and more deeply as “part” and as an “opposite”.
As a new unity of opposites consisting of a variety of “parts” builds up, “the regressive, rearward confirmation of the beginning” “and its progressive further determination coincide and are the same”. A new “whole” consisting of new parts as a unity of opposites is ready to appear in the form of “Essence-in-Existence”.

Notes
1. Lenin: Collected Works, Volume 25, Progress Publishers, 1972, pp. 399/400.
2. E.V. Ilyenkov: The Dialectics of the Abstract and Concrete in Marx’s Capital, Progress Publishers, 1982, p. 98.
3. Volume 38, p. 361.
4. Ibid., pp. 110–111.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid., p. 225.
7. Ibid., p. 112.
8. Ibid., p. 362.
9. Ibid., p. 231.
10. Marx & Engels: Collected Works, Volume 4, p. 57.
11. Ibid., p. 61.
12. Volume 38, p. 231.
13. Ibid., p. 232.
14. Ibid.
 

rry Healy: Contradiction, reflection and cognition (1. The Dialectics of Contradiction)




Gerry Healy Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

3 Articles

Gerry Healy
Contradiction, reflection and cognition

1. The Dialectics of Contradiction

Idealist and metaphysical thinking tends to describe contradiction in a formal way – as a word form without a content. In his book In Defence of Marxism Trotsky emphasised that Hegel in his Logic “established a series of laws”, amongst them “development through contradiction”. [1]
He explained that because Hegel wrote before Darwin and before Marx “... he operated with ideological shadows as to the ultimate reality. Marx demonstrated that the movement of these ideological shadows reflected nothing more than the movement of material bodies”. [2]
Lenin further emphasised this when he wrote “I am in general trying to read Hegel materialistically: Hegel is materialism which has been stood on its head (according to Engels) – that is to say, I cast aside for the most part God, the Absolute, the Pure Idea, etc.” [3]
On the question of contradiction, Lenin quotes from Hegel extensively and approvingly. We reproduce for the benefit of the anti-Hegel, Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky brigade, the following quotations on contradiction:
“Ordinarily Contradiction is removed, first of all from things, from the existent and the true in general; and it is asserted that there is nothing contradictory. Next it is shifted into subjective reflection, which alone is said to posit it by relating and comparing it.” [4]
By “subjective reflection” Hegel is referring to the “self created” thought images of individuals, which by comparing contradiction to equally sceptically created “thought images”, “posit it” within these “self created” images by relating it and “comparing it”. Hegel continues:
“But really it does not exist even in this reflection, for it is said that [A] it is impossible to imagine or to think anything contradictory. Indeed, Contradiction, both in actuality and in thinking reflection, is considered an accident, a kind of abnormality or paroxysm of sickness which will soon pass away.” [5]
Lenin uses a heavy rule on the side margin for emphasis where Hegel writes that:
“Contradiction is the root of all movement and vitality, and it is only insofar as it contains a Contradiction that anything moves and has impulse and activity.” [6]
Contradiction, therefore, cannot be regarded as an “empty word form” or by a “subjective” external impression, because it is contained within the very essence of all material objects and processes. It is the dialectical unity of external and internal contradiction. Thus the infinite self-movement of matter is contradictory.
Hegel is again quoted with obvious approval by Lenin when he writes:
“We must grant the old dialecticians the contradictions which they prove in motion; but what follows is not that there is no motion, but rather that motion is existent Contradiction itself.” [7]
 
An Exhibition of Contradiction
On the side margin of his notebooks, Lenin takes a quotation from Hegel and says of it: “This is very important for understanding dialectics.” [8] [emphasis GH]
“... But the Other is essentially not the empty negative or Nothing which is commonly taken as the result of dialectics, it is the Other of the first, the negative of the immediate; it is thus determined as mediated, – and altogether contains the determination of the first. The first is thus essentially contained and preserved in the Other. – To hold fast the positive in its negative, and the content of the presupposition in the result, is the most important part of rational cognition.”
The development of Contradiction in the essence of objects manifests itself as IDENTITY of the infinite source of sensation in the external world. As active participants in the class struggle, internationally and in Britain, this will include an important source for our sensations.
Because it contains DIFFERENCE already in the external world, as a self-related concept, IDENTITY is negated into finite DIFFERENCE in thought. Since IDENTITY contains DIFFERENCE it is a negative only “in itself”. As Hegel explains: “It is the Other of the first, the negative of the immediate ... and altogether contains the determination of the first. [INFINITE IDENTITY – GH] The first is thus essentially contained and preserved in the Other.” [9]
IDENTITY as a Negative now becomes a POSITIVE image on the Negative of the finite negative of Difference in thought. That image is called Sensation, whose as yet unknown properties incorporate the antithesis of IDENTITY (Negative) and DIFFERENCE (Positive) as well as Contradiction derived from the first negation of IDENTITY into DIFFERENCE. “The dialectical,” writes Lenin, “ = ‘comprehending the antithesis in its unity ...’ [Hegel]” [10]
When Trotsky emphasised in In Defence of Marxism that “Marxism without the dialectic was a clock without a spring”, this antithesis “comprehended in its unity” is the dialectical spring of contradiction which as Hegel so correctly wrote is the “root of all movement and vitality”. [11]
Let us now examine how the dialectical spring as antithesis works. Hegel writes:
“Thus although Imagination everywhere has Contradiction for content, it never becomes aware of it; it remains an external reflection, which passes from Likeness to Unlikeness, or from negative relation to intro-reflectedness of the different terms. It keeps these two determinations external to each other, and has in mind only these and not their transition, which is the essential matter and contains the Contradiction.” [12]
Lenin comments: “Ordinary imagination grasps difference and contradiction, but not the transition from the one to the other, this however is the most important.” [13]
The transition of “difference” into contradiction is through the law in which the antithesis as the dialectical spring negates the first negation as “negation of the negation”.
 
Negation, Connection and Transition
Lenin defines negation materialistically in the following way:
“Not empty negation, not futile negation, not sceptical negation, vacillation and doubt is characteristic and essential in dialectics, – which undoubtedly contains the element of negation and indeed as its most important element – no, but negation as a moment of connection, as a moment of development, retaining the positive, i.e., without any vacillations, without any eclecticism.” [14]
Dealing with this question 25 years later, Trotsky was to write:
“Dialectic training of the mind, as necessary to a revolutionary fighter as finger exercises to a pianist, demands approaching all problems as processes and not as motionless categories.” [15]
Lenin is training the Bolshevik cadre in the dialectical materialist method of resolving problems as the outer form whose internal essence is Contradiction. In the paragraph he makes three main points:

He warns against the danger of ignoring negation as “empty” and “futile”. In this way the contradictions build up, thus appearing to idealists as insoluble under conditions where they become politically paralysed and drift rapidly rightwards into the swamp of reformism and subservience to the capitalist state.
 
“Vacillation and doubt is characteristic and essential in dialectics” so we must avoid “sceptical negation”. This is especially important because the IDENTITY of this sceptical source may reveal itself after being negated into the many DIFFERENCES which have emerged through negation of the negation into the theory of knowledge. We must avoid the tendency to posit sceptical images derived from what has already been proved in past knowledge.
 
We must train ourselves to understand “Negation as a moment of connection” between the IDENTITY of the external source of sensation and the negative of finite Difference upon which we retain the positive, i.e. “without any vacillations, without any eclecticism”, such as imaginary positives.

Lenin continues his dialectical training on how to mentally and physically apprehend contradiction at the very essence of objects in the external world. He writes:
“Dialectics consists in general in the negation of the first proposition, [IDENTITY (infinite and objective) into DIFFERENCE (finite and subjective) – GH] in its replacement by a second (in the transition of the first into the second, in the demonstration of the connection of the first with the second, etc.) The second can be made the predicate of the first.” [xvi16]
The second records the changes in the first and Lenin quotes Hegel to demonstrate the source of these changes:
“… for example, the finite is infinite, one is many, the individual is the universal”. [17]
This is possible because we are dealing with law-governed connections between the external world (object) interpenetrating with law-governed thought (subject).
 
Hegel and Lenin on Contradiction
Hegel writes: “The first or immediate term is the Notion in itself [which is Nature as a law-governed process – GH], and therefore is the negative only in itself.” [18] On the side margin, Lenin notes: “‘in itself’ = potentially, not yet developed, not yet unfolded.” Hegel continues: “The dialectical moment with it therefore consists in this, that the distinction which it implicitly contains is posited in it.”
IDENTITY which contains DIFFERENCE exists in the external world of Nature. Hegel continues:
“The second term on the other hand is itself the determinate entity, the distinction or relation; hence with it the dialectical moment consists in the positing of the unity which is contained in it …” [19]
This unity is antithesis.
Lenin submits these paragraphs from Hegel to the analysis required for Trotsky's “dialectical training of the mind”. “In relation to the simple and original, ‘first’, positive assertions, propositions etc., the ‘dialectical moment’, i.e., scientific consideration, demands the demonstration of difference, connection, transition.”
Nature and the class struggle in society exist independently in the external world, the identity of our first positive assertions start here and contain Difference. Since the IDENTITY of the source of our sensation is in the external world this is also the source of external reflection and negation as a moment of connection. Identity is negated into Difference as a process of transition. Identity now becomes a negative negated as a positive image on the negative of difference, which also contains contradiction as the result of the first negation (IDENTITY).
Lenin continues: “Without that the simple positive assertion is incomplete, lifeless, dead. In relation to the ‘second’, negative proposition, the ‘dialectical moment’ demands the demonstration of ‘unity’, i.e., of the connection of negative and positive, the presence of this positive in the negative.” [emphasis GH]
The Negative here is IDENTITY which has been negated as a Positive image on the Negative of DIFFERENCE.
Lenin concludes this vital paragraph:
“From assertion to negation – from negation to ‘unity’ with the asserted – without this dialectics becomes empty negation, a game, or scepsis.”

Footnote
A. The words underlined (it is said that) are missing from Volume 38 – see Hegel’s Science of Logic, Allen & Unwin, 1969, p. 439.


Notes
1. Trotsky: In Defence of Marxism, New Park Publications, p. 66.
2. Ibid.
3. Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 38, Progress Publishers, 1972, p. 104.
4. Ibid., p. 139.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid., p. 140.
8. Ibid., p. 226.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid., p. 98.
11. Ibid., p. 139.
12. Ibid., p. 142.
13. Ibid., p. 143.
14. Ibid., p. 226 (box).
15. In Defence of Marxism, p. 70.
16. Volume 38, p. 226.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid., pp. 226/227.
19. Ibid., p. 227.
 





1. The Dialectics of Contradiction

2. Determinations of Reflection

3. Cognition of Objective Laws


Notes
1. These articles were written in July 1986. They were first printed in the daily News Line; then republished in Marxist Review, August 1986. See Gerry Healy, A Revolutionary Life, Lupus Books, 1994 by Corinna Lotz & Paul Feldman, pp. 51–54.
 

ter from Gerry Healy to Farrell Dobbs (January 11, 1955)




Marxists’ Internet Archive: ETOL Home Page: Trotskyist Writers Section: Gerry Healy
Gerry Healy
We shall handle the parity commission
question as you suggest
Letter from Gerry Healy to Farrell Dobbs (excerpt )

Written: 11 January, 1955.
Source: Struggle in the Fourth International, International Committee Documents 1954–1963, Volume 1, page 7. Education for Socialists bulletin; issued by the National Education Department of the Socialist Workers Party (US). No copyright.
Transcription/Proofing: David Walters and Andy Pollack.
HTML Markup: David Walters.
Public Domain: Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line 2005. This work is completely free to copy and distribute. Please cite the Encyclopepedia of Trotskyism On-Line if the contents herein are reproduced.

Dear Farrell,
I have received your letter, the greetings to our conference, and the enclosed note on Tribune many thanks.
As far as I can see your letter on the tactics to be employed against the Pabloites coincide with our basic opinions here. We should commence a discussion on international perspectives within the International Committee as soon as possible when you get the draft ready. Ceylon is a special problem and whilst everyone is aware of their shortcomings it should be clear that we must leave no stone unturned to win them to our side. This is a mass party in a most important colonial sector, and for us it poses a major problem requiring great patience and tact.
Whilst I know there is complete understanding between us on this matter, it is not the case amongst our French comrades who proceed in a somewhat sectarian way on this matter. We have extremely friendly relations with the Ceylon comrades in this section and their treatment of our struggle is much appreciated.
You can rest assured that we shall handle the parity commission as you suggest. We will waste no time on this question.
Comradely, Jerry
P.S. I have just read the statements on the internal situation. It seems to me that the party has measured up to its responsibilities very well.
Everyone knows what terrible conditions you work under. During the last two years you have had to lead the fight on Pabloism, in addition to building a new team of leaders. These factors are undoubtedly behind some of the difficulties. This is a time for everyone to keep steady hands on the wheel of leadership I am sure this will be done.

ETOL Index   |   ETOL Writers page

Marxists Internet Archive


Last updated on 9.11.2013





The Development of the Post-war
Economic and Financial Crisis
Draft resolution presented by the Central Committee
of the Socialist Labour League
The latest moves by the Nixon administration in devaluing the dollar mark a rapid acceleration of the capitalist system towards breakdown and crisis deeper than at any time in its history.
All the political work of the Socialist Labour League must start from a grasp of the profound nature and utter insolubility of this crisis. The building of a mass revolutionary party is no longer a propaganda demand, as it has always been for revisionists. It is the urgent, burning question of the hour.
Either the working class, under the leadership of the revolutionary party, takes power and puts an end to capitalist anarchy, or the ruling class will be forced to impose brutal dictatorship on the European, Japanese and American working class.
What is at stake here is the training of workers in a revolutionary party, workers who start, in everything they do, from the nature of the epoch as one of wars and revolutions. As the working class now moves into its decisive and historic struggle with the capitalist enemy, it will need to combat every reformist, centrist and Stalinist, with their opportunist recipes for once again adjusting the relations between the classes.
But these relations cannot be adjusted. Fundamentally, the period requires revolutionary action to smash the state power of the bourgeoisie and establish socialism.
Only the international betrayals of social democracy and Stalinism have permitted the capitalist powers, for longer or shorter periods, to obscure this nature of the epoch. But now the contradictions have once more accumulated so explosively under the surface of the boom that the choice is starkly revealed once again - the crisis of humanity demands the removal of capitalism. But capitalism survives because of the crisis of working-class revolutionary leadership. Therefore this crisis of revolutionary leadership must be resolved as the primary task. In that lies the essence of the nature of the epoch. Only the Trotskyist movement has been built in struggle on this basis.
 
1. The Revisionists and the Crisis
The latest stage in the break-up of the world capitalist money and trade relations is a vindication of Marxism and the struggle of the International Committee of the Fourth International against all brands of revisionism and Stalinism. The revisionists, more than anybody, stand nakedly exposed by the rapid development of the crisis.
Throughout the last 20 years and more, it has been the revisionists, led by the so-called Unified Secretariat, who have preached the theory of “neo-capitalism”. According to this spurious, anti-Marxist theory, capitalism in the post-war period has changed fundamentally.
It was no longer capitalism of the old type, as analysed by Marx. No longer was it prone to crisis and breakdown. Through the action of the state, combined with a series of “science-based” industries which in turn provided the foundation for a “Third Industrial Revolution”, capitalism was now more or less permanently stabilised.
Instead of the preparation for social revolution, this clique of revisionists, deserting everything Trotsky and the Fourth International had fought for, advocated “structural reforms” as the basis for their political activities.
Of essentially the same nature were those theories of the “permanent arms economy”, advanced by the petty bourgeois “state-capitalist” International Socialist Group. This was the tendency which announced in the late 1940’s that Russia was “state capitalist” and could no longer be defended against imperialism. It was this blatantly anti-communist theory which led to their desertion from the Trotskyist movement at the outset of the Korean war.
Like all revisionists, both these trends displayed a deep hatred of the revolutionary power of the working class and a firm belief in the strength of capitalism. Their thoroughly false analysis of capitalism was but a thing cover for their scepticism about the working class, a scepticism which made them willing tools of the Stalinist and Social Democratic bureaucracies.
It has only been through the most tenacious struggle against these ideas, for long periods under difficult objective conditions, that the Socialist Labour League has been able to analyse the unfolding of the present crisis and, on the basis of this analysis, train and educate a cadre of revolutionary fighters in the working class who now have the historic responsibility, in this entirely new situation, of transforming the Socialist Labour League into a revolutionary party.
 
2. The Basis of Bretton Woods
The hallmark of the revisionist method is that it is governed entirely by surface impressions. It is this method which dominated the response of these groups to developments in post war capitalism. For both Pabloism and the International Socialists, the ability of capitalism to avoid a major slump over the last 30 years was a sign of renewed strength and vigour. In fact the very opposite was the case.
The ruling class felt completely unable to impose the kind of solution to its crisis after1945 that it had done after World War I. The fact that after the Bretton Woods 1944 conference it was forced to establish a series of agencies through which the economy was artificially stimulated by means of inflation was its recognition that the working class was too strong to be dealt with at this stage.
Inflation represented a retreat before the working class. This retreat was a reflection of the decline of the capitalist system and the losses it has sustained in 1917 and in eastern Europe and China in the immediate post war period. Capitalism survived the convulsions at the end of the war only through the betrayals of Stalinism and Social Democracy, both of which collaborated openly with imperialism in the restoration of capitalism in western Europe.
This overall decline of capitalism must be stressed when considering the present crisis. For it is not one which takes place in the system’s growth and expansion, but one in its death agony. This theoretical conception has always stood at the centre of the work of the International Committee and is one for which it has fought against all revisionists.
This historic decline of capitalism can be seen in the very nature of the Bretton Woods agreements. Their basis was the setting up of the International Monetary fund, which commenced operation in March 1947. The IMF was to be provided with a pool of gold and currency, contributed according to an agreed plan by a number of nations. This pool was to be used to allow any country suffering balance of payments difficulties to overcome them without precipitating a major international crisis.
The second element of Bretton Woods was the privileged position given to the dollar. The cornerstone of post-war monetary arrangements – until President Nixon’s August 15, 1971, announcement - was the fact that the dollar was guaranteed at a fived rate against gold for the purpose of international trade and capital movements. It was only because the dollar holders could, if they wished, exchange their dollar holdings into gold at the fixed rate of $35 to a fine ounce of gold, that the dollar could become the main reserve asset throughout Europe during the post-war period.
But these arrangements were not like the old Gold Standard which existed for much of the 19th Century during capitalism’s expansionary period. Bretton Woods had to allow the use of substantial quantities of paper money alongside gold. The contributions which each country made to the IMF pool consisted of 75 per cent in local currency and only 25 per cent in gold. On this pool any debtor country could draw in return for a promise that currencies would fluctuate by only 1 per cent either side of their “par” value against the dollar.
 
3. The Growth of the American Balance-of-Payments Crisis
The inexorable growth of the post-war crisis can be seen in the steady increase in the American balance-of-payments deficit when compared with the continual reduction in the American gold reserve. There have been several factors behind the growth of this payments crisis. But they all reflect the ever-growing unevenness of capitalist development in its period of decline.
After 1945 only American capitalism could shoulder the overall responsibility for the future of the entire world system against the threat of both the working class and the challenge to its future which was implicit in the existence of the Soviet Union, eastern Europe and China.
But the eruption of the present crisis has proved once more the soundness of Trotsky’s judgement that no matter how strong American capitalism appeared, the contradictions of imperialism were even stronger.
In the first place America had to make considerable loans to Europe after the last war in order to prop up a number of near destitute regimes and preserve the capitalist social structure intact. Following the war-time Lend-Lease programme, the “aid” programme initially took the form of Marshall Aid (The European Recovery Programme) which came into operation at the end of 1947.
The Americans had also to make even greater overseas military expenditures to preserve their strategic and economic interests. Again, this was never a purely “economic” question. War and the preparation for war can never be divorced from capitalism as the theories of “permanent arms economy” imply.
The military expenditures were to gain in importance with the outbreak of the 1950 Korean war. In the 1960’s the Vietnam war also hade a major impact as a source of worsening the US payments deficit. Much of the means to fight the war were purchased outside America and this meant either a loss of gold or a further poling up of external dollar balances. Spending on armaments were financed almost entirely out of budget deficits and have thus been one of the major causes of inflationary instability with which capitalism must now deal so ruthlessly.
Finally, the American payments deficit has been considerably worsened by the vast outpouring of private capital from the US. Here again we are dealing with no “accident” which as earlier change of policy might have corrected. For the outflow of capital was testimony to the powerful operation of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall. It was in an attempt to avoid the consequences of this law that the American monopolists sent their capital abroad.
The net result of all these developments was a constant piling up of external debt along with a steady decline in the US gold holding. At the outbreak of the Korean war the US held roughly three-quarters of the world’s mined gold. Today the figure has fallen to under a quarter.
 
4. Gold and the Dollar
In the post-war period, the dollar replaced sterling as the major international currency which, along with gold, provided the major source for the finance of world trade and payments. But one more, we should be clear that the dollar was unable to occupy the powerful position enjoyed by sterling for much of the 19th Century.
During the Gold Standard’s operation down to 1914, sterling was used as the main means of financing capitalist investments throughout Europe and north America. But so powerful was British capital and so overwhelmingly important was sterling that this did not lead to crises of anything approaching the depth of those after Word War II.
This was so because although considerable capital flowed out of London throughout the 19th Century, Britain was able, in the main, to force those countries which borrowed it to purchase British goods. In other words, considerable capital outflow did not lead to a serious balance-of-payments crisis.
Although by far the most powerful capitalist country since the last war, the US has never been able to achieve the relative dominance which Britain achieved for much of the last century. American capital has moved into Europe and has, in part, been used to build up local industry which was later able to compete against American firms in world markets. Japan and West Germany are classical examples of this development.
So although the Americans tried to make the dollar “as good as gold”, it was an aim which could never be accomplished. For capitalism, only gold can constitute money. There can be no new “international currency” which detaches itself from gold. The truth of this was established once more in 1943 when John Maynard Keynes proposed a new world paper currency, Bancor, to replace gold. The Americans were forced to reject such a scheme: the world capitalist system had to remain firmly tied to gold which, unlike paper money, represents real value, that is, the expenditure of human labour.
Since the IMF started operations in 1947, the growth of the American payments deficit has developed alongside a decline in the proportion of gold, as against paper, in the world monetary supply. In the early 1960’s gold constituted around 60 percent of total world liquidity (that is gold plus foreign exchange); today the figure has fallen to a little over a third. In other words, roughly two-thirds of world trade assets no longer have any value because they are no longer convertible into gold.
When this decline in relative gold holdings is measured against the expansion of world trade, the extent of the crisis and the tasks which it presents to the capitalist system are immediately apparent. In the early 1960’s as the present crisis was beginning to gather momentum, gold held as reserve assets within the capitalist system represented around 30 per cent of total world imports. Today that figure is a little over 10 per cent. Here again are the seeds of a catastrophic collapse of world trading relations.
 
5. Development of the Crisis
From the late 1950’s onwards, the first signs of the contradictions of capitalism as analysed by Marxists began to assert themselves. From this point onwards the US payments deficit was growing at an alarmingly fast pace as against its reduced gold holdings.
Fears grew that the Americans would be unable to maintain convertability of the dollar into gold. Several European governments, most notably the French, began to convert their dollar and other currency holdings into gold. This further accelerated the loss of gold in American reserves and, in turn, forced other governments to follow the French lead.
The first response of the American administration, under President Kennedy, was to slash the “aid” programme to the colonial and semi-colonial world. Expenditure abroad to countries like India and several African states was reduced as much as 25 per cent and restrictions imposed on the export of private capital to these areas were considerably tightened.
The political results of this move are a warning to the whole European working class today. For the result of the Kennedy move was a sharp swing to the right in countries like Ghana, Algeria and Indonesia. “Left” national bourgeois governments which had managed throughout the 1950’s to balance between the State Union and imperialism were removed and replaced by reactionary regimes immediately subordinate to the direct needs of American imperialism.
But the results of the crisis could not be confined to the colonial and semi-colonial countries. This was the “theory” of Ernest Mandel and the Pabloite revisionists. Impressed by the upsurge of the struggle in the colonial countries, they wrote off the revolutionary potential of the working class in Europe and north America.
Indeed the present crisis will expose mercilessly the Pabloite “theory” of the “Three Sectors” of the revolution. It was this theory which allowed Mandel and his fellow renegades from Trotskyism to reject the role of the working class in the metropolitan countries, while at the same time prostituting Trotskyism by lending their uncritical support to the petty-bourgeois nationalist leaders in the colonial and semi-colonial countries.
But now the crisis is joined throughout Europe and North America. The workers of the big capitalist countries are moving into revolutionary struggle along with workers and peasants in the colonial countries. This is bound to have a direct impact on the working class and intellectuals of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. Once more the unity of the international working class is reasserting itself as the most powerful force in history.
Developments in Britain were to establish the utter bankruptcy and counter-revolutionary nature of such “theories”. In 1961, sensing the changed international situation, the Tories, with Selwyn Lloyd as Chancellor, introduced their “pay pause” designed to reduce wages and halt inflation. At this stage they were forced to retreat. On the one hand they faced determined and widespread opposition to their unemployment policies (unemployment rose to above the million mark in the winter of 1962–1963), and on the other the government was plunged into first-rate crisis in the form of the 1963 Profumo scandal.
It was under these conditions that the Tories, from the spring of 1963 onwards, began their reflationary pre-election boom. Working class opposition to the Tory unemployment policies and determination to preserve all their gains of the 1950’s produced a Labour victory in October 1964, although with only a small majority.
It was a government which came into power in the midst of a balance-of-payments crisis produced directly by the Maudling inflationary boom. The payments deficit for 1964 was a record £800m. At his stage, however, the Labour Leaders were able to turn to the Americans for financial assistance. James Callaghan was able to negotiate considerable loans from the IMF and directly from the Johnson administration in return for promises to introduce legislation to halt wage increases.
For three years after taking office help continues from the Americans in a desperate attempt to avoid a sterling devaluation. Here again is revealed the basic instability of the capitalist system, despite all appearances of prosperity during the 1950’s.
At Bretton Woods, although the Americans rejected Keynes” plan for a “new money”, they could not dispense entirely with sterling’s role as a reserve currency. Despite the dominant position of the dollar, sterling still accounted for over a quarter of world trade in the immediate post-war years, a legacy from its 19th Century position. And although continuing to decline, it was still the second most important trading currency after the dollar.
Johnson and the American ruling class knew that, if the pound was devalued again (it had already been devalued under Stafford Cripps in 1949), the spotlight of the crisis would inevitably fall on the dollar. The fight to save the pound was therefore a fight to defend the dollar.
 
6. The Sterling Devaluation
The forced sterling devaluation of November 1967 was therefore a defeat not merely for the Labour government’s economic policies, but, much more important, a defeat for the strategy of American imperialism. From this time onwards, the world crisis of capitalism has developed at an ever-increasing pace. From November 1967 the Americans have had no choice but to prepare for economic and financial warfare against the rest of the capitalist world, and particularly against Europe.
The next stage of the crisis came with the March 1968 run on gold. So great was the demand for gold and the loss of confidence in the dollar that the Americans were driven to introduce a two-tier system. This ended dollar-gold convertability other than for “official” (that is government) purposes. From that date there were in fact two gold markets, an official one, in which the dollar-gold price was held to its Bretton Woods level, and a “private” market which saw the gold price continuing to rise.
Despite the fond hopes of all the reformists and revisionists, such a two-tier system was inherently unstable and could not hope to survive. It was a mere holding operation on the part of the American ruling class while the 1968 presidential elections were dealt with. All attempts even to arrest the development of the crisis could only aggravate it. This was already clearly the case with the creation of Special Drawing Rights (SDR’s or “paper gold”), which was designed to ease the liquidity crisis. In fact it only made worse a situation where paper debts were accumulating and gold declining in a world money system.
 
7. The Meaning of August 15, 1971
The most decisive turning point in the whole crisis came with Nixon’s August 15, 1971 announcement that the dollar-gold link was broken for all time. Bretton Woods was dead and could never be resurrected.
From this point onwards a vast pool of money was in circulation outside the United States with no gold backing. Estimates now place this pool of paper at around $70 billion.
In no way could the implications of the crisis after August 1971 be likened to those of 1931. Despite the depth of the earlier crisis, it was one in which the world’s major trading currency, sterling, was replaced by another currency, the dollar. The blunt fact today is that nothing can replace the dollar. Here, once more, is expression of both the enormity of the uneven development of world capitalism, which has concentrated all economic and financial power in the hands of American capital, and at the same time the historic decline of this system. The fact that in August 1971 Nixon took the dollar “off gold” means that he destroyed the basis whereby the vast proportion of world trade has since the war been conducted.
All measures taken since August 1971 to alleviate this crisis have collapsed almost as soon as they were introduced. This has been the case of both the Washington “currency re-alignment” negotiations of December 1971, as well as all attempts to hammer out a unified European financial strategy in response to the American declaration of economic war.
Significantly the latter agreement was broken first by the Tory government in Britain which was forced to “float” (in effect devalue) sterling in June 1972. This, in itself, was the clearest indication that Bretton Woods, with its agreement on “fixed parities” was now finished. The efforts at a common European financial policy are also doomed to utter failure. As the trade and financial war intensifies, the conflicts between the capitalist states – economic, financial and military – controlled during the period of capitalist expansion since the war, are bound to sharpened enormously. This must call into question the immediate future of the Common Market, to which the Stalinists and Pabloites in all countries are giving their increasingly enthusiastic support.
The revolutionary [wave] of 1943–1947 was betrayed by Stalinism and social-democracy especially in western Europe. US imperialism, in its role of world policeman, poured in masses of paper dollars and dollar credits to rehabilitate European capital and enable the bureaucracies to hold back the working class. Military loans to NATO to “contain communism” in the Cold War were part of the same process in which the framework of the post-war boom was constructed.
The decisions forced on US imperialism today by the fall in the rate of profit are thus the direct negation of the basis on which the revolution was avoided at the end of the war. The contradictions of imperialism, built up beneath the surface for 25 years, now mean the rapid and ruthless transformation of the relations between the capitalist states and between capital and the working class into their opposites.
 
8. Not Merely Trade War
The implications of the present stage of the crisis, of course, involve the immediate start of s trade war between all the major capitalists countries. This is the meaning of the latest Nixon dollar devaluation and the threat of a 15 per cent tariff wall if the Europeans and Japanese do not at once step in line with his requirements. In such a war, all the devices of the 1930’s – price cutting, dumping etc. – will be employed in an even more ruthless manner.
But the crisis must extend far beyond that of trade war, important thought this undoubtedly will be.
For it is one thing to conduct a war under conditions where there is a stable means in which to conduct trade; it is quite another to engage in such a war when all the rules of international trade and payments, created at Bretton Woods, have been destroyed.
With gold now supporting perhaps 10 per cent of the value of world trade, the implications of the crisis must be a collapse of much of the other 90 per cent. For no matter how much the revisionists sneered at the analysis of the monetary crisis made by the SLL, golf and commodities are tied together inseparably. This was the whole purpose of Marx’s analysis in Capital, a work which all these gentlemen said was now “out of date”.
Now the correctness if its analysis haunts every capitalist financial centre and banking house throughout the world. Monet grows out of commodity production as the means by which the particular values of all commodities are expressed in some universal form. Money is not, as Mandel and others thing, merely a device for overcoming the problem of barter. It is the necessary base on which commodity production alone can take place and it can never be replaced by paper, despite all the technical devices which the capitalists try to invent to dislodge it from its pre-eminent position.
The crisis of the capitalist system, in any case, is not fundamentally a crisis of commodity over-production, but one involving the over-production of capital. All the institutions of Bretton Woods have for the last 25 years and more been employed to build up a huge superstructure of credit. The vast majority of trade has not been carried out with either gold or dollars but through credits arranged against the dollar. These credit institutions have in turn been used to invest in machinery and equipment on a huge scale through the capitalist world. In this process, share values have been inflated beyond their remotest connection with their real value.
Now this hugely inflated volume of capital must seek to earn its rate of profit through the exploitation of labour power. But not even the most brutal increase in the rate of exploitation of the working class of Europe and America can solve this crisis for the capitalists, although of course, they must be driven to attempt a solution in this direction.
Only the violent elimination of capital values on a vast scale can now restore the “correct” proportions between the pool of constant capital and the available surplus extracted from the working class.
A destruction of capital along these lines must take the form of stock price collapse, bank failures leading in turn to the forcible closure of many of even the largest European and Japanese monopolists who will be totally incapable of meeting the American financial war.
It is in this context that the American devaluation – following that after August 15, 1971 – must be seen. For each devaluation, at a stroke, reduces the value of the $70 billion pool outside the US, much of it held by governments or used by the European monopolists to finance capital expansion.
What we are witnessing in short is the operation of the law of value. As an objective law which asserts itself against both classes, it is, in a sense, seeking its violent revenge for the last 25 years in which the capitalist class and its revisionist and reformist hangers-on have tried to ignore it or wished it away. And, like all laws of social development, it does not operate in a smooth manner, not in one which can be anticipated beforehand, but only in the most convulsive way.
 
9. Defence of the USSR, China and Eastern Europe
The great depth of the capitalist crisis also raises as an immediate and vital question the defence of the USSR, Eastern Europe and China. Despite the counter-revolutionary role of the Stalinist bureaucracy, which becomes more naked as it moves closer to the imperialists in their crisis, the gains of 1917 and those which followed after the last war have not been lost. In these countries, the property and means of production remain nationalised and the state, through its monopoly of foreign trade, regulates all economic relations with the capitalist world market.
It is these gains which the “state capitalist” International Socialists reject. Under the direct pressure of imperialism they abandoned the Trotskyist movement on the outbreak of the Korean war, exposing themselves as a thoroughly anti-communist group. Their “theory” leads them to write off not only the revolutionary potential of the British working class, but the whole of the international working class which alone made October 1917 possible. The role of such groups as the International Socialists can only become more reactionary as the crisis deepens and imperialism seeks to regain the great losses it has sustained in the USSR, eastern Europe and China.
For us, the defence of all rights and gains made by the British working class over the last 200 years is inseparable from the defence of all the gains of the international working class, the greatest of which have been the Russian and Chinese revolutions. Only those who defend these gains will be able to struggle to defend the rights of the British working class.
This is a question, because the depth of the crisis must involve the drive to war by the capitalist class. To destroy capital on the scale now required means to destroy vast quantities of surplus labour. Under such conditions, imperialism cannot for long tolerate apposition where a large area of the world is closed to its plunder and exploitation.
Every worker and serious socialist must ask himself the question: would the re-conquest of the Soviet Union, eastern Europe and China strengthen capitalism all over the world? Clearly it would. It is for this reason that we reject utterly the anti-communism of the Cliff “state capitalist” group, [International Socialist group – Ed.], and affirm the unconditional defence of the USSR as the cornerstone of the revolutionary party.
 
10. The Position of Britain
British capitalism and the British ruling class are at the very heart of this crisis. This poses enormous tasks before the ruling class as well as the working class. We have entered a period of intensive revolutionary struggles. In the outcome, either the capitalist class will impose a bloody dictatorship on the working class, or else the working class, under the leadership of the revolutionary party, will smash the capitalist state, establish its own power and use that power to eliminate capitalist anarchy and chaos.
The crisis is not at all merely a “loss of competitiveness” by British capital. The relative decline of British industry and finance has been a common theme for all the reformists and revisionists. But the crisis is infinitely more serious.
The chaos into which the capitalist international economic and financial arrangements are now plunged finds the most direct reflection in class relations in Britain. The armoury of legislation which the Heath government is now assembling is not just for the purpose of wage-cutting, as the revisionists naively imagine. It is designed to put an end to trade unionism and working class rights as they have been established in struggle over the last 200 years.
Only the SLL has warned the working class of this situation and roused the advanced workers to the enormous dangers inherent in it.
Any stability retained by the declining British capitalism of the last 28 years depended entirely on the maintenance of the international inflationary boom and the Bretton Woods arrangements. The rapid deterioration of Britain’s relative position in the capitalist system has been obscured. But now the decline must become absolute.
For such a situation, wage-cutting is hopelessly inadequate. To survive, capitalism is faced with the destruction of every basic right of the working class, every historical gain through which the workers have organised themselves into a class. When the revisionists reject the political implications of the fight against the Tory government, this is not just a “mistake” on their part. What is at stake, we repeat, is the whole nature of our revolutionary epoch. The crisis once again lays bare this fundamental problem.
The revisionists are carrying out the class role historically assigned to centrism. Centrism feeds only on the defeats of the working class. In attempting desperately to tie the working class to purely syndicalist horizons, the revisionists, Stalinists and centrists are working for the defeat of the working class, just as their predecessors did in the 1930’s.
The fact that the capitalist crisis now takes the form of an unprecedentedly severe financial crisis also has the gravest implications for British capital. The self-satisfied revisionists throughout the boom of the 1950’s and 1960’s poured scorn on Lenin’s theory of imperialism, the final stage of capitalism dominated by a financial oligarchy centred on the banks.
But the great power of this theoretical conquest is more apparent every day. The fact that world capitalist finance is in crisis must create a crisis for the merchant banks, which in turn must react back on industry as the banks ruthlessly destroy capital in order to enforce repayments of their debts.
Britain was able to avoid the consequences of her loss of industrial hegemony at the end of the last century only because of the position of the City of London as the leading centre of world trade and finance. The City was able to bring in a huge income which offset the losses sustained by industry. With sterling’s role finished, and the Empire a thing of the past as a means of escape, all the powerful contradictions of British capitalism accumulated over the last century are now erupting in the most violent and decisive manner. What the working class now faces is not another stage in the steady decline of British capitalism, but the social revolution.
The purpose of our analysis of the contradictions of post war capitalism is in no was merely to “prove” who was right on all the main questions. In any case that is abundantly clear and beyond argument. The crisis of the capitalist system has exposed the theoretical and political bankruptcy of every reformist and revisionist tendency in the working class movement in a manner which until now would not have been possible. The purpose of a re-examination of the nature of the present capitalist crisis is to warn the working class and the revolutionary party of its implications and the tasks which it imposes on them.
The time has come to arm the movement with a real conception of the revolutionary nature of the period in which we are living and fighting, and to combat every vestige of reformist and middle-class pressure which encourages scepticism about the urgency of the situation or capacity of the movement to rearm and transform itself in time to defeat the capitalist class enemy. There can be no middle-of-the-road solution to the crisis. At stake is the preparation for the struggle for working-class power. It demands the immediate fight to build the revolutionary party, to transform the Socialist Labour League into that party.

A Chronology of the Crisis
1943 – Keynes’ proposal for Bancor, a new international paper currency, rejected.
1944 – Bretton Woods talks. Dollar as major currency for capitalist world trade and finance.
1947 (June) – IMF and other Bretton Woods institutions begin operation.
1947 (November) – Marshall Plan (European Recovery Programme) launched.
1950 (June) – Outbreak of Korean war.
1950 – Cliff, [leader of International Socialist Group – Ed.], deserts Trotskyist movement via “theory” of state capitalism.
1958–59 – Growing fears expressed in Europe at American ability to maintain dollar convertability. French begin to swap their paper money for gold.
1961 – Tory (Selwin Lloyd) “Pay Pause”. Unemployment begins to grow.
1962 – US slashes aid to colonial and semi-colonial countries.
1963–64 – Tories retreat in Britain. Maudling pre-election boom.
1964 (October) – Labour government elected. £800m payments deficit. Large borrowings from IMF. “Strings” willingly accepted.
1966 (March) – Labour re-elected with large majority.
1966 (July) – Savage credit squeeze in an attempt to save pound. From this time onwards “basic” unemployment trend is upwards, despite temporary fluctuations.
1967 (November) – Sterling devaluation. Immediate run against the dollar.
1968 (March) – Gold crisis. Gold market closed for several weeks. Two-tier system introduced. Creation of Special Drawing Rights later that year.
1971 (August) – Gold-dollar link broken. Bretton Woods finished.
1971 (December) – Currency re-alignment talks. Dollar devalued against gold.
1972 (June) – Sterling “floated” by Barber. Currency agreements of previous December in ruins.
1972 (November) – Nixon re-elected for second term.
1972 (December) – Italy and Britain refuse to repay EEC debts in gold
1973 (January) – US decision to get out of Vietnam in order to concentrate on economic war against Europe.
1973 (February) – Share prices slide on all leading stock exchanges. US announces second dollar devaluation in less than two years and prepared for world-wide trade war.
 

olutions of International Committee meeting in Paris (November 7-8, 1955)




Marxists’ Internet Archive: ETOL Home Page: Trotskyist Writers Section: Gerry Healy
International Committee of the Fourth International
Resolutions adopted at the
International Committee meeting
in Paris on November 7–8, 1955
(November 7/8, 1955)

Adopted: November 7 and 8, 1955.
Source: The Struggle to Reunify the Fourth International (1954–1963), Volume I: The First Parity Commission and Peng Shu-ste’s Pabloism Reviewed, May 1977, pp. 15–16.
Transcription\HTML Markup: David Walters

1. PARITY COMMISSION
At its meeting on November 7 and 8, 1955, the International Committee had occasion to review the progress of its work over the past two years since its foundation on November 25, 1953.
It records with pride that since that historic date when the overwhelming majority of the World Trotskyist movement decided to definitively break with Pabloite revisionism, its sections on a world scale have maintained the high level of progress inside their respective countries. This is emphasized by the important industrial struggles and movements for colonial liberation which have been strongly influenced by the work of our sections in a number of important countries. This has greatly strength-ened World Trotskyism amongst decisive layers of poor and oppressed peoples. In addition it is being consolidated by the steady numerical growth of our forces.
The International Committee maintains that these successes were assisted considerably by the political struggle against Pabloism. Our cadres benefited enormous-ly politically and this fact has assisted the work of Party building. Real mass work consist’s of an irreconcilable struggle against revision in all fieids.
In the struggle against Pabloism, the high mark of political clarification was reached in April 1954, with the publication of the LSSP criticism of the Pabloite resolution Rise and Decline of Stalinism. This was accompanied by the open break of the Iceland [Canadian] section from Pabloism. All these developments were facilitated and prepared by the Open Letter which inaugurated the public political fight against Pabloism.
At the Pabloite rump Conference in June 1954, the position of orthodox Trotskyism was powerfully vindicated by the open liquidationist proposals of the pro-Stalinist Collins [Lawrence] and Clarke. These policies which were the logical outcome of Pabloism, demonstrated to the world movement once again that under such circumstan-ces the break with Pabloism and the conditions under which it took place were unavoidable. Since then Collins has publicly endorsed the official policy on foreign affairs of the British Stalinist Party.
The International Committee, following June, 1954, are duty-bound to acknowledge that the political task of reorienting the World movement has since slowed down. This has been due to the mistaken idea that a parity commission with the Pabloites which could organise discussion would help some in the Pabloite ranks to make up their minds. The International Committee now believes that this would have been more easily accomplished had it continued its political exposés. The parity commission has served to confuse such a struggle and has consequent-ly tended to weaken orthodox Trotskyism.
It is necessary, however, to state here that nobody in our movement believed that unity could be established with the Pabloites via the parity commission. There was no illusions whatsoever on this score. Events have proved that our apprehensions were not ill-founded. Whilst the Pabloites hypocritically talked of unity they advised their contacts in the Port of Bremerhaven, Germany, not to solidarise themselves with the English dock strike of June, 1955, because it was “Cannonite led”. Thus they once again emerged in their real role of strikebreakers. All this time some undecided people were encouraged to believe that a parity commission with such renegades could by some miracle or another accomplish something. The International Committee openly acknowledges and corrects it mistake. It therefore withdraws forthwith from the parity commission.
At the same time the International Committee enthusiastically acknowledges the support of the LSSP (Ceylon) for the English dock strike. Such actions prove once again their hostility to Pabloite policies and their adherence to orthodox Trotskyism.
To them and to all those who desire genuine unification, we declare that such possibilities were never brighter provided it is understood that unity can only be firmly founded on the great principles of our movement as ciaborated by Comrade Trotsky.
The International Committee initiates an international discussion in preparation for the 4th World Congress of World Trotskyism. All orthodox Trotskyists are warmly invited to participate. Upon the measure of political agreement which emerges during the course of this discussion, genuine unification proposals can be considered.
This resolution was adopted as follows: 5 For (Representatives of the French, British, Swiss, German and Dutch sections), 1 Against (Representative of the Chinese section).
An alternative resolution submitted by Peng (Chinese section) was defeated – I as above and is attached at the end of this document – It was agreed to ask that all sections. leaderships consider this matter and inform the IC secretary of their decision as soon as possible.



2. Resolution of Solidarity with the Algerian Struggle for National Liberation
Speaking for the Trotskyist militants of the whole world, the International Committee of the Fourth International greets the heroic struggle of the peoples of North Africa. Despite fierce repressions, they have already struck significant blows against French imperialism. The struggle these people are waging is bound to end with their winning complete independence.
The International Committee greets the Algerian revolution, which for the last year has pressed the offensive. The revolution has dealt increasingly severe blows to French imperialism in one of its vital centers, although the government has concentrated in Algeria the greatest part of the repressive forces at its disposal. These are more considerable than the forces employed at any given time in the Indo-Chinese war. The Algerian revolution has also advanced in the faee of repressive measures of unprecedented ferocity whose victims – murdered or locked up in concentration camps – number in the tens of thousands.
The International Committee is fully aware of the enormous importance the Algerian revolution holds for the development of the proletarian revolution in France and all Europe.
It hails the Algerian National Movement, which, operating under the most stringent conditions of illegality, wages an intransigent fight against imperialism under the leadership of the working masses. In the person of Messali Hadj, the oppressed and exploited of the world possess a living symbol of this struggle.
The International Committee treats with scorn the efforts of petty-bourgeois democrats, Stalinists, and Stalinoid groupings to help French imperialism. They rush to aid imperialism now that the imperialists, forced to retreat by the Algerian revolution, seek to set up a “bargaining agent” that will accept – behind the backs of the Algerian masses – any scheme providing for “independence by stages,” This would safeguard the essential positions of imperialism in the country.
For their part, the Trotskyists give wholehearted support to the central slogan of the Algerian National Movement. This slogan – the only one in keeping with the principles of democracy and socialism – calls for a Constituent Assembly in Algeria enjoying sovereign power in the nation.
The International Committee salutes the Internationalist Communist Party (French Section of the Fourth International) in its campaign to organize the active solidarity of French workers with their Algerian brothers and link them in a fight against their common enemy.
The International Committee calls on the exploited and oppressed of the whole world to demonstrate concretely their solidarity with the Algerian revolution. It calls on the Trotskyist militants to organise this solidarity by every means at their command.
This was unanimously adopted, but Comrade Peng asked that his following statement he included in the report: “We accord our solidarity to all mass movements in North Africa in the struggle against French imperialism even if their political features are still not clear”.
3.The International Committee decided that in view of the possibility of early French elections all sections should immediately consider rendering the maximum financial assistance to the ICI. This matter is one of great urgency.
4. It was decided to make every effort to translate the draft International Resolution into French. German, and Spanish so that it would be ready for general distribution by January 1, 1956.
5. The next meeting of the IC to he held on January 6 and all sections are requested to submit reports of their activity which will be considered at this session.



 


Preston [Healy],
Secretary International Committee





Gerry Healy Writers Index

The International Committee of the Fourth International 1953–1963 Documents

Marxists’ Internet Archive

Last updated on 8.11.2013






Introduction
The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 is the touchstone of revolutionary politics today.
At the time of the Hungarian uprising in November 1956 there were many trends and individuals in the working class movement who were only too ready to denounce the abomination and excesses of the Soviet and Hungarian Stalinists and pay homage to the grandeur and pathos of the Revolution.
Some protested in the name of a spurious middle-class Humanism, some others objected because their anti-communist susceptibilities had been outraged and a few, like Isaac Deutscher, hung tight-lipped from a precarious and undignified diagonal drawn between the Soviet tanks and the barricades of the Revolution.
Only a small minority of people led by the International Committee of the Fourth International defended, unconditionally, the Hungarian insurrection in the name of International Socialism and fought for the realization of the programme of political revolution first advanced by Leon Trotsky in his struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
Revolutions, like wars, expose all that is filthy, treacherous and compromising in the working class. And so it is with the Hungarian Revolution, the first, but by no means the last, political revolution of its kind. With an implacable logic it has exposed not only the manifest rottenness of he Stalinist system but also – and more important – it has revealed to many Communists the corrupt and two-faced nature of pseudo-Marxism, better known as Pabloite revisionism, represented by the United Secretariat in Paris and the Socialist Workers’ Party in New York.
It is sufficient to say that none of these groups, for all their verbal pretensions of anti-Stalinism, could summon enough political courage and integrity even to commemorate the 10th Anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution.
On the contrary, so far have these gentlemen travelled from Trotskyism to Stalinism that their supporters in Belgium did not see anything wrong in calling the police (unsuccessfully) to haul down the British Young Socialist banner proclaiming solidarity with the Hungarian Revolution, which was raised at the Liege demonstration against NATO and the Vietnam War in October 1966!
The events of the last decade show conclusively that the only political allies of the Hungarian working class and the best defenders of the programme of the political revolution is the International Committee and the parties which it leads.
There is no other.
 
STALINSIM IS DEAD BUT STALINISM LIVES. That is the message spelt out in letters of blood by the Hungarian people.
The labour movement of the world is rightly shocked at the brutality and ruthlessness of the Soviet armed forces. But this fact must not permit us to be taken off guard for one moment by world imperialism and its agents. Stalinist rule has always been associated with persecution and murder, both inside and outside the Soviet Union. Eden and Eisenhower have never protested when revolutionary opponents of the regime have been smashed. They helped to whitewash and justify the Moscow trials through the book and film Mission to Moscow written by American ex-ambassador Joseph E. Davies. Both the British and American governments refused asylum for the great revolutionary Leon Trotsky when he was being hounded from one country to another by Stalin’s GPU.
If these gentlemen shed tears for Hungary today it is not for the workers and peasants who have born the brunt of the fight against Stalinism but for their fascist and landlord friends.
What happened in Hungary, as we shall see, was a revolution for national independence and democratic rights. Connected with this was a series of demands passed by the trade unions.

Workers’ councils in every factory to establish workers’ management and radically transform the system of state central        planning and directing.
Wages to be raised immediately by 10 to 15 per cent and a ceiling (about £106 a month) fixed for the highest salaries.
To abolish production norms except in factories where the workers or workers’ councils wish to keep them.
The 4 per cent bachelor and childless family tax to be abolished; the lowest retirement pensions to be increased; child allowances to be raised with special reference to the needs of large families.
Speed up house-building with the state, co-operatives and other organisations launching a powerful social movement to mass produce houses.
Negotiate with the governments of the Soviet Union and other countries in order to establish economic relations that will ensure mutual advantages by adhering to the principle of equality.
(From Daily Worker, October 27, 1956) [1]

The backbone of this movement was the demand for the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Hungary. The imperialists were against this type of revolution. On the same day, October 27, the New York Times, mouthpiece of American big business, declared:
“The view prevailing among United States officials, it appeared, was that ‘evolution’ towards freedom in Eastern Europe would be better for all concerned than ‘revolution’, though nobody was saying this publicly.”
The New York Times returned to this theme the next day, October 28, when it declared that the problem of western imperialism is “how to encourage the nationalist and libertarian spirit in the satellites without flaming it into a large scale revolt.
As if not to be outdone by the New York Times the London Daily Worker, echoing Moscow, declared on October 25: “Only false friends resort to the gun ...”
Five days previously, John Foster Dulles, speaking in Washington, defended the legality of the presence of Soviet troops in Poland under the Warsaw agreement.
“From the standpoint of international law and violation of treaties,” he said, “I do not think you can claim that it would be a violation of a treaty.”
Mr. Dulles was fully aware at the time he made that statement that a revolution was under way in Hungary and that Hungary was also a party to the Warsaw agreement. Hot on the heels of Mr. Dulles came R. Palme Dutt of the British Communist Party.
“The Soviet armed forces”, he wrote, “were legally in Hungary by agreement under the Warsaw Pact.” (Daily Worker, November 10)
In a cable from Washington by its correspondent Philip Deane, the London Observer, November 11, 1956, reports that:
“High Administration sources say that the United States has tried to let the Russians know, without being provocative, that Berlin and Austria will be defended by American forces, Hungary, meanwhile, has been officially and finally abandoned to its fait.”
And Basil Davidson, one of the last journalists to leave Hungary, reports that, speaking of the American financed propaganda station Radio Free Europe, one revolutionary said:
“I wish I could shut its ugly mouth. It lied to us just as the Russians lied to us.”
Neither the Soviet bureaucrats nor the imperialists and their representatives, Palme Dutt and Foster Dulles, care two hoots about the working people of Hungary. They were both, for different reasons, opposed to the revolution, and in each case supported their own particular agents and not the movement of the Hungarian people as a whole.
 
How the Revolution Began
On October 23, a large group of unarmed students gathered outside the Budapest radio station and demanded that their 17-point programme of democratic demands be broadcast. After the police opened fire the government, dominated by Erno Gero, a notorious Kremlin hack, promptly called for Soviet troops.
On Wednesday, October 24, Russian tanks and artillery fired on demonstrators in Budapest killing and wounding hundreds of men, women and children. It was these actions which sparked off the revolutionary armed resistance. During the next day, October 25, armed rebellion broke out. Workers on Csepel island in the Danube took up weapons against the security forces. Radio Budapest announced this as a rebellion of the working people. Absolutely no mention was made at time that this was the work of armed gangs and the counter-revolution.
The spearhead of the whole struggle was a general strike. In cities and towns under their control the rebels set up councils of workers, soldiers and students. The first to down tools were the railway workers. They were quickly followed by workers from factories and plants. The strike was directed by a ‘Central Workers’ Committee.’
At the same time Imre Nagy, who had previously been jailed, was installed as premier to help win back popular support.
 
On October 29, a parade of workers’ delegations from the provinces presented its demands to the new government. They demanded the removal of Russian troops, unconditional amnesty for revolutionists and the release of all political prisoners.
According to reports, the peasants were passive at the beginning. The New York Times of October 30 quoted some insurgent leaders who attributed the failure of the army as a whole in the early days to the fact that they were for the most part “farm boys”. According to the same reports it (the army) had given them small arms. These insurgent leaders declared:
“The peasant is conservative by nature and therefore passive. But the workers have fought with us, even the workers from ‘red Csepel’ which contains the biggest concentration of industry in Hungary.”
By October 29 revolutionary workers councils had taken control of several large towns. These included Gyor, Szombathely, Sopron and Papa, Kaposvar Viszprem, Pec, Miskolc, Szolnok, Szeksbard and Magyarovar.
On the same day Miskolc radio station broadcast in the name of the workers’ councils of Borsod Province. In another industrial town, Sopron, the streets were patrolled by groups of three: one soldier, one student, one worker. The uprising was symbolised throughout by the unity between the workers, soldiers, and students – clear proof that it was a popular revolution in which the working class occupied the vanguard positions.
 
Finally, if there is any further doubt on this point, just read over the dispatch sent on November 3 to the Daily Worker by its correspondent Peter Fryer who was sent to Hungary to get the FACTS. His first job was to interview Mr. Charlie Coutts, another member of the British Communist Party, who was there for three years editing World Youth, the paper of the Stalinist-dominated WFDY in Budapest. Here are extracts from the interview. Mr. Coutts reported as follows:
“The Hungarian uprising – the result of eight years pent-up feeling – arose from the refusal of Communist leaders to make real changes after the 20th Congress.
“The people did not oppose everything that happened in their country since 1945. They had wanted to build socialism in Hungary. They established the basis but they were never allowed to build their own socialism on it. After the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party everyone expected there would be a complete change. There were some timid changes but nothing that met the needs of the situation”, said Mr. Coutts.
“In both the Communist Party and its youth organisations there were people who had not joined either on principle or because of political understanding but to advance their careers. They had joined for money and for power. There was no free discussion at all inside the Party. It follows from this”, Mr. Coutts went on, “that in order to maintain its position the Party leadership had to use the security police which was created in 1948. The Party as a whole, and Parliament of course, had no control over the security police at all. They had copied the worst features of the Soviet security police as it was under Beria.”
Mr. Coutts said it was only after Soviet troops entered the fight that it became a national movement, with the two main demands, “Russki go home” and “Abolish the AVH” (security police).
Mr. Coutts said that from the Thursday onwards the security police became completely isolated. Everyone’s hand, including honest Communists, was against them. Much of the fighting from the Thursday onwards was simply to kill off the security police.
“I have seen the hatred against them expressed in the most terrible scenes”, said Mr. Coutts. “I saw an AVH man clubbed to the ground with a rifle butt then literally kicked and torn to pieces.”
 
The Daily Worker Stands by Stalinism
It would be difficult to find an occasion in history when there was a more discredited political party than the British Communist Party. Having served Stalin loyally for well nigh 30 years, and justified his most brutal crimes, the men who lead the CPGB [2] are incapable of offering anything but a classical Stalinist answer for the events in Hungary – and as always this has led them to the most ridiculous positions. Here is the record:
“Counter-revolution in Hungary staged an uprising in the hours of darkness on Tuesday night.” (Daily Worker, October 25)
The same edition carried an article entitled The Hell that was Horthy’s. Whilst factually it contained material that was accurate, its purpose was to smear the revolution that had begun in Hungary as “fascist inspired”. The Daily Worker stuck more or less to the counter-revolution theme for several days. In this it was faithfully supporting the line taken by Pravda, the Kremlin’s mouthpiece, which right from the start denounced the Hungarian events as “counter-revolutionary”.
Then came the formation of the Nagy government and the repudiation of Pravda by Szabad Nep, the Stalinist paper of the Hungarian workers’ Party. In strong language it denounced a Pravda dispatch which was headed Collapse of the anti-peoples” adventure in Hungary – as a “mistake”
“What happened in Budapest,” says Szabad Nep, “was neither anti-people nor an adventure, and it did not collapse. The slogans on socialist democracy were the loudest, not those of the reactionaries nor of counter-revolutionaries. The revolutionary people of Pest and Buda want freedom, people’s freedom, a life without despotism, terror and fear, more bread and national independence. Would this be ‘anti-people adventure’?” asks the paper.
The first point in the Hungarian revolutionary demands of 1848 was national independence.
“Today also this is the first point. What has collapsed and can truly be called anti-people is the reign of the Rakosi-Gero clique.”
Saying that the Hungarian nation wanted independence, and that this was the first among its demands, the article continued:
“Let Hungary be free. Let it be an independent country, and let it live with its neighbour the Soviet Union in peace and friendship on this basis.”
 
This scared the Daily Worker editors, especially as it was rumoured that the Soviet armed forces were being withdrawn. They felt that perhaps it was Moscow policy to let the Nagy government get on with things, so they I began to change the line, and what was previously denounced as counter-revolutionary they now I recognised as having perhaps been “revolutionary” after all. The editorial on Tuesday, October 30, remarked:
“In the course of the struggle in Hungary many sections of the working class people have put forward proposals which are justified, which arose from the bitter experiences of the past period, and which the government, the Party and the people should work in unity to implement. This is not a sign that the majority of Hungarians want to return to the days of landlordism and capitalism, as the western press would like us to believe.
“Whatever deep resentment and burning criticism exists as a result of mistakes and wrongs since the end of the war, communists and socialists in Hungary and outside know that to attempt to put the clock back would be the worst possible disaster for the Hungarian people.”
Diplomatic language to be sure, but a decisive change from its editorial on October 25. If we had relied upon the Daily Worker for our news and policy on Hungary, we would be forced to reason something like this. From October 25, to somewhere in the region of October 30 the Hungarian events were counter-revolutionary; then they began to change to revolutionary. This was, by implication, acknowledged in the publication of the dispatch by Peter Fryer (quoted above) on November 3.
On Sunday, November 4, Soviet tanks in large formations opened fire on Budapest and other cities. It was now clear that the rumoured withdrawal of Soviet troops was a smokescreen behind which massive troop and tank formations for an all-out assault were mustered. Immediately these forces went into action the Daily Worker changed its line, and on November 5 proceeded to support the intervention of the Red Army, again denouncing the Hungarian events as “counter-revolutionary”.
What is clear from all this is that the British Communist Party leadership and the Daily Worker have one simple guide to help them work out their policy, and that is “watch Moscow and the Red Army and support them under all conditions.
When Gero called upon the Red Army to fire upon an unarmed population the Daily Worker denounced the Hungarian events as counter-revolutionary; when it appeared that the Nagy government was being supported and the Red Army withdrawn, these same events became revolutionary, and when once more the Red Army returned to the attack they again became counter-revolutionary. Where in the world could be found a more glaring example of Stalinist reasoning?
 
Stalinism and Counter-Revolution in Hungary
The events in Hungary after the end of the war were similar to what took place in all Eastern-European countries with the exception of Yugoslavia. In 1945 the revolution was bureaucratically carried out through the intervention of the Red Army. The Hungarian Stalinist Party was hoisted into power, not through the popular intervention of the masses, but upon orders from Stalin in Moscow.
The Russian Revolution in 1917 established the complete overthrow of the Czarist regime by the democratic power of the workers and peasants through their soviets. In the early days they defeated the internal forces of counter-revolution not so much by force of arms as by argument and policy. The Soviets were supported by the overwhelming majority of the Russian population. That is why the Russian Revolution was a comparatively peaceful affair, with only a handful of people losing their lives. The real struggle and loss of life began when Winston Churchill and is armies of intervention endeavoured to restore the old ruling class.
When Lenin died in 1924, Stalin and his bureaucracy captured power in the Bolshevik Party and destroyed all democracy and opposition. This was the beginning of Stalinism – the rule of a powerful bureaucracy safeguarding the privileged positions they had gained as a result of the revolution. Though this bureaucracy rested upon the nationalized property relations established by the revolution, its role from the start was predominantly counter-revolutionary, in that its first consideration was to protect itself and its positions of power. Since it rested on the property relations of the October Revolution, it was always forced to defend this economic base from attack by the imperialists, and this was done not by revolutionary appeals but through typical bureaucratic and military methods. For instance, during the second world war it denounced all Germans as fascists; never once did it make a revolutionary appeal as Lenin and Trotsky did during the Russian Revolution and the war of intervention.  It relied solely upon military means and the help which it received from the British and American imperialists.
Stalin dealt ruthlessly with all those on the left such as Trotsky who sought to re-introduce Lenin’s revolutionary policy. As Khrushchev remarked, he (Stalin) coined the phrase “enemies of the people” and this became a substitute for all discussions. You either agreed unreservedly with Stalin or you were an imperialist agent of fascism. It was under those conditions that the Moscow frame-up trials were organised in the 1930’s, the object being to direct opposition away from the bureaucracy by creating a diversion along the lines that the forces of imperialism were preparing to take over in the USSR. From all this the Soviet workers were left with no choice but to support Stalin. Indeed we know that the victims of the trials themselves, having become completely demoralised, actually agreed to tell these monstrous lies because they felt, in their demoralisation, that this was the only way they could defend the gains of the revolution. [3]
To Stalin, Hungary was a buffer zone of military importance only – but having decided to intervene in 1945, he had to face a number of problems: the chief problem being the fact that Hungary was a capitalist state, and in order to gear its economy to that of the Soviet Union he was forced to destroy the capitalist property relations and replace them with state ownership.
Insofar as this was done, it was supported by the overwhelming majority of the working class who, directly of indirectly, participated in the event. The Stalinist bureaucracy in Moscow and their Hungarian agents never for one moment relaxed their tight hold over this movement. Power in Hungary was maintained in a similar way to that maintained in Moscow. The Rajk trial was staged for similar reasons to those of the Moscow trials. The regime was propped up by the secret police.
The tragic story of 61-year-old Dr. Edith Bone, an ex-member of the British Communist Party who was jailed by the Hungarian Stalinists confirms this in most concrete form:
I had been in the cellar cells for over two months”, she says, “when the police decided to declare their real purpose. I was taken again to the third floor.
“There had been many big industrial accidents in Hungary, due to the lack of higher skilled technicians, and the workers were getting restless. The communists needed a scapegoat. Britain was to be that scapegoat. I was to ‘confess’ that I was a secret agent, sent by the British Intelligence Service to organise sabotage. I was to be given a list of names, and was to say yes, these men were the saboteurs.
“I was to ‘confess’ all this at a public trial and in return, said the police, I would get a light sentence of four years. This sentence, they promised, would be reduced to two, and I would serve them in good conditions.”
 (I suffered and I accuse, Daily Express, November 9, 1956)
And if any loyal Stalinist should think that this is a pack of lies let the Daily Worker put him right. In its issue of November 3 appears the editorial statement:
“The Daily Worker expresses its condemnation of the inhuman treatment of Dr. Edith Bone and our deep sympathy with her in the ordeal to which she has been subjected.”
This bureaucratic transfer of power had another side to it. In politically expropriating the Hungarian working class, it enabled the remnants of the old ruling class to find an effective cover for counter-revolutionary work amongst the masses who more and more became hostile to Stalinism. Since the workers were not permitted to deal with the old capitalist elements through democratic organs of power such as the Soviets in Russia in 1917, the basic class struggle remained unresolved. Stalinism in Hungary was like a repressive lid which since 1945 had clamped itself down upon the whole nation, rightist and leftist elements alike.
When the revolution finally blew the lid off, events in Hungary expressed themselves through the centre Nagy government as a state of dual power. Right-wing, capitalist inspired and peasant elements demanded recognition, as well as representatives from the revolutionary workers. This was also the case inside many of the workers’ councils, and it was similar to what happened in the Russian Soviets immediately prior to the revolution. This situation is also described by Peter Fryer of the London Daily Worker in his interview with C. Coutts, November 3, 1956:
“A great number of political groups were now active in Budapest and the rest of Hungary. The air was thick with manifestoes ranging from those who wanted to defend collective ownership, to those who were against it but could not say so yet, and therefore put the people’s genuine national demands in an anti-socialist way. What the outcome was going to be nobody could say with certainty. The revolutionary committees in the factories, and the revolutionary workers’ councils had no overall direction and aim, no overall basis  of policy.
“I don’t want to minimise the danger of the return of the émigrés”, said Mr. Coutts. “But if the revolutionary committees can hammer out some form of unity around the basic demands for an independent, democratic and socialist Hungary, then all attempts at counter-revolution will be defeated.”
Mr. Coutts believed the working class was now without an organised leadership.
“There are dangers of terrorism against individual communists. In fact, that has begun. But in spite of everything there will be a Party that will identify itself with the Hungarian revolution and will be forced now to win the Hungarian working class for revolutionism on the basis of conviction.”
We can see therefore that by November 3 the situation was crying out for genuine socialist leadership and that, according to Coutts and Fryer, it was possible that this could have come from the working class. On the other hand, the centrist government of Nagy was swinging steadily to the right, thereby encouraging capitalist intervention.
At this juncture the labour movement of the world is able to see clearly what has happened in the Soviet Union since Khrushchev’s speech. [4] Stalin is dead but the bureaucracy which he personified continues to rule. They have been forced here and there to retreat by the mass pressure and the hostility of the Soviet people (Khrushchev’s speech was one example of this), but such retreats are one thing – giving power back to the working people is quite another. Long ago in 1927 Stalin, referring to his ruling clique, explained that they could only be removed by civil war. The present bureaucracy in the Soviet Union will never liquidate or liberalise itself out of existence. It will only be removed finally by the actions and struggle of the Soviet people led by a conscious socialist leadership.
In typical bureaucratic style, the Soviet bureaucracy turned its armed might, not only against the capitalists and Cardinal Mindzenty elements in the Nagy government, but against the revolutionary people as well. The usual stooge government of Janos Kadar was set up and the shooting began. No socialist programme was presented by the Russians – just giant T34 tanks and masses of armour. The Soviet troops who were in Hungary when hostilities began and who, according to Coutts and Fryer, fraternised and discussed with the Hungarian people, appear to have been withdrawn. Fresh troops replaced them and the attempt to restore bureaucratic rule, as in 1945, commenced.
The tragedy of Hungary today is that the brutal war begun by the Soviet troops is no longer directed against the capitalist elements, but against the revolutionary forces. The most stubborn resistance comes from the industrial areas; a general strike continues despite the reports that 20,000 have been killed. The Kadar regime has no basis whatsoever, and is distrusted by everyone. This is shown by what the Manchester Guardian describes as the “helplessness of the regime when it was forced to admit that the free forces may have been inspired by ‘genuine and honourable motives’ in taking up arms.” Hitherto it had been calling the forces fascist and counter-revolutionary. (November 11, 1956)
Again, on November 9 the Manchester Guardian reported:
“The Minister of the Interior, Ferenc Muennich, today issued instructions to all Hungarian troops to remain in their barracks, thus proving that none is fighting on the Russian side. They were ordered to dissolve their revolutionary committees, which were formed during the first Hungarian crisis. Civilian revolutionary committees were told that they must eject counter-revolutionary elements. Political ‘advisers’ will be appointed by the government and attached to them.”
In other words, the struggle is now to take political power away from the working class, and replace it with the “Kadar” clique.
The hirelings of the British Communist Party and the Daily Worker have scoured everywhere for some factual information, which would prove that capitalist elements control the situation in Hungary, but little appears to have been found apart from the speech of Cardinal Mindzenty, and as soon as this is quoted it immediately defeats itself. For the fact remains that if the capitalist elements have such a mass base, why did the cardinal have to take refuge in the American embassy? Capitalist agents there are, to be sure, but the movement right from the start was predominantly revolutionary, and it is this fact which must guide the Labour Movement.
 
Hungary and British Labour
The responsibility for the emergence of capitalist elements in Hungary, and for the war now being waged to crush the revolutionary workers, rests entirely on Stalinism, and those who defend its policies inside and outside the Soviet Union. For an example of this type of individual, listen to Mr. D.N. Pritt.
“Anyone”, he says, “who joins in the shouting against the Soviet Union at the moment is helping the American ruling class and bringing the third world war nearer.” (Daily Worker, November 9, 1956.)
Simple, isn”t it? You are either for Russia right or wrong, or with the imperialists.
This is the line which Messrs. Pritt, Palme Dutt, Gollan, Pollitt and the rest of them [5] peddled in order to justify the Moscow trials and all the horrors which Khrushchev revealed in his speech. The fact that Mr. Pritt, who has never publicly commented on Khrushchev’s speech, has emerged from his legal hole in order to repeat the same line, illustrates how the old Stalinist hacks in Russia and elsewhere are preparing for a last ditch stand.
Fortunately, Mr. Pritt’s return to the “old vomit” is not being followed by many members of the CPGB and readers of the Daily Worker. In the same issue Gabriel, its cartoonist for twenty years, resigned over Hungary. Eric Hobsbawm, one of the leading intellectuals in the CPGB, demands that the Soviet troops be withdrawn. Another reader, Ken Jones from Bristol, writes:
“We owe it to our Hungarian and Polish comrades, as well as to ourselves, to settle accounts with all responsible for providing us with such a grotesque caricature of the real developments in Poland and Hungary over the past five years.”
British labour must stand by the working people of Hungary and help them defend their revolution. This can only be done provided we expose and fight any attempts by the imperialists in the west to exploit the situation in order to restore capitalism. We must support the demand not only for the immediate withdrawal of the Red Army, but for the withdrawal of all the imperialist armies in Western Europe as well.
There is a movement afoot by right wing Labour leaders to cover up their disagreements with the Tories on Suez and slip into national unity behind the capitalists over Hungary. This must be pitilessly exposed and fought. All monies, food parcels, and medical supplies which are collected by the labour movement should be distributed in Hungary by the representatives of our movement. They should not be left to imperialist agents who will utilise them in an effort to raise the prestige of the capitalist countries. Labour can help Hungary only if it does its work independently of all Tory forces.
 
Labour must organise itself if necessary to prevent British fascists and their Tory friends from launching a witch-hunt either against members of the British Communist Party or members of the Labour Party. There is a danger of this taking place here as it has in France. We must be on our guard. No matter how we detest Stalinism, we must preserve the democracy of the movement.
All members of the Communist Party and Young Communist League should immediately demand a special Congress to repudiate the leadership’s line on Hungary. STAY IN THE COMMUNIST PARTY AND FIGHT IT OUT.
The people of Hungary do not want to return to capitalism. They want to preserve the system of centralised planning and state ownership, and get rid of Stalinism forever. This we must support with all our might.
At the same time, the people of Hungary must deal with capitalist elements in their own ranks. That is their job, and we are sure they can do it. The socialist and communist movement in Hungary must win its right to govern not through the indulgence of the Moscow bureaucracy – its guns, planes and tanks, but by means of a socialist policy which will secure for it the support of the overwhelming majority of the people.  There is no other road for Hungary – or for the working people in any country.
DOWN WITH IMPERIALISM
DOWN WITH STALINISM
LONG LIVE THE HUNGARIAN SOCIALIST REVOLUTION
November 1956

At the end of his article, Healy includes the following reports in the pamphlet as appendices under the general heading What the Stalinists Did NOT Report.
STRANGEST WHITE TERROR IN HISTORY
The Kadar Government has issued the third volume of its “White Book” on last autumn’s “counter-revolution”. It gives a list of communists who were killed by freedom fighters.
There are 201 names on the list – and it turns out that 166 of them were members of the AVH, the hated security police. Of the remainder, 26 were party officials or in the service of the AVH.
The Kadar regime has been claiming that ’white terror’ was raging in Hungary on the eve of the second Soviet intervention and that thousands of communists were lynched by mobs.
Of the 2,829 persons who were imprisoned by revolutionaries between October 23 and November 4, over 2,000, it turns out, were members of the AVH.
The number of communists and socialists executed by the Kadar Government since the revolution was repressed is reliably reported to exceed 201 – and the number held in jail far exceeds 2,829.
(The Newsletter, Vol. 1 No. 18, September 7, 1957)

MORE HUNGARIAN COMMUNIST IN JAIL THAN UNDER HORTHY
There are more Hungarian communists in Kadar’s prisons than were imprisoned under Horthy.
They include such veterans of the Hungarian working-class movement as Zoltan Vas and Geza Losonczy; communists and intellectuals Tibor Dery and Gyula Hay; the young novelist Tardos; the journalists Haraszti and Gimes; the young communist Gabor Tanozos, secretary of the Petofi Circle; the communist officers Maleter and Kopacsi; the communist student leaders Markus, Janos Varga and Pozsar.
Hundreds of communists have been executed by Kadar’s AVH. Among them are the communist journalist Gabor Follv, the communist poet Istvan Eorsi, Maleter’s lieutenants Praszmayer and Kabalacs, Istvan Angyal, the leader of the revolutionary youth of the Ninth District of Budapest, Balint Papp, the leader of the party’s youth organisation in Dunapentele (Sztalinvaros)
Kadar’s police have, however, at last found a real live white terrorist, whom they have put on trial for killing progressive people.  He is 70 years of age, and his crimes date from – 1919. Why he was not punished between 1945 and 1956 has not been explained.
(News Letter, Vol. 1 No. 6, June 1957)

Editorial Notes
1. The Daily Worker was the paper of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). It later became The Morning Star. – Ed.
2. Communist Party of Great Britain.
3. The accused agreed to make false confessions. – Ed.
4. In 1956.
5. Leaders of the British Communist Party.
 



Introduction
IN APRIL 1966, the International Committee of the Fourth International called its Third Congress. At this gathering, representatives of Trotskyist organisations in several countries argued out the problems of building the International revolutionary movement.
The task of this movement is to resolve the crisis of leadership which has held back the working class from overthrowing capitalism on a world scale.
Cynics have often sneered at the many splits and disputes which feature in the history of the Marxist movement. This reveals their adaptation to the bureaucratic apparatus which shackles the workers’ movement, channelling its consciousness within the confines of capitalist society.
Fighting with the weapons of gossip they slander those who strive to break the working class from the bureaucratic stranglehold. They play their part in the stranglehold. They play their part in the attempt to debase the ideas of the revolutionary movement.
Marx, Lenin and Trotsky, each in his time, showed that, in order to liberate itself from capital, to establish its political independence, the working class had to become conscious of its historic role. This involved a scientific understanding of the class struggle and, in order to achieve this, a centralised organisation, fighting to lead the workers in all their national and international struggles, had to be constructed.
The process of building such a movement is complex and contradictory. It raises problems whose solution embodies a distillation of the experience of the working class in active struggle.
The fight for theory within the revolutionary vanguard of the working class, whose importance is stressed continually in this pamphlet, is thus not an abstract, academic exercise, but is cradled within the living reality of the class struggle Itself.
In 1967, the class struggle will sharpen throughout the world, throwing the Stalinist and social-democratic bureaucracies and all their hangers-on into violent crisis. Marxist preparation for these battles must comprise a careful examination of the problems faced by those who have fought to build a conscious revolutionary leadership. For a new generation of revolutionaries, especially, the experiences summarised in these pages are an essential basis for such preparation.

Problems of the Fourth International
World imperialism is drifting rapidly towards its most severe economic crisis since the end of the Second World War. Foremost amongst those countries on the downward plunge is Great Britain. As the unemployment figures commence to climb, hundreds of previously well established businesses are threatened with bankruptcy during the coming months. The Prices and Incomes Bill, which seeks to tie the trade unions firmly to the capitalist state machine, will introduce an era of political strikes which will continuously pose before the working class the problem of power.
The lessons from the seamen’s strike confirm this perspective. When the strike began it was looked upon by rank-and-file seamen as an industrial dispute. Yet when the Labour government and the state showed their hands in support of the ship-owners, it immediately became clear to these same seamen within a matter of days that theirs was a political struggle against the Wilson government. A rapid political development had taken place in a union which had not engaged in a strike for 50 years.
Our Responsibility
This experience is an indication that a similar politicalisation of the British working class is on the way. A powerful new force is entering the arena of class struggle and that force is the working class, which is now embarking on the road of class struggle in one of the most powerful countries in the world.
For over 25 years it has held back, so long as it could improve its wages and working conditions in a period of capitalist inflationary boom. But this is now a thing of the past.
What the Labour Government, the monopolists and the state machine propose to do today is to attempt, in the course of the coming year, by means of unemployment and legislation against trade unions, to take away these gains and reduce the standard of living to what it was before the Second World War.
A period of unparalleled revolutionary conflict lies ahead.
The Socialist Labour League now shoulders an enormous responsibility – that of constructing a mass revolutionary party which will lead the working class to power. By doing so, it will inspire revolutionists in all countries to build similar parties to do the same.
We follow the traditions of the Bolshevik Party which so far remains the only party in the world, guided by Marxists, to consciously lead a successful socialist revolution.
Because of these aims, our organisation and members have to face a constant barrage of lies and hostility from the right wing traitors of the Labour Party, the fake “lefts” around Tribune, who cover up for them, and the Stalinists, as well as a variety of revisionist groups, such as the Pabloites and the Paris “United Secretariat” who masquerade under the name of Trotskyism, and who have long ago liquidated themselves into the camps of Stalinism and social democracy, depending upon the countries they are operating in.
This is as it should be. The Socialist Labour League is engaged in a fight to a finish against these betrayals of the working class and we won’t yield an inch. We didn’t in the pre-war days when the might of Stalinism, through its propaganda machine of lies and falsifications, was turned full blast against the international Trotskyist movement, denouncing us as fascists and agents of imperialism in order to cover up Stalin’s foul deeds against the working class.
Trotskyism, which is the fight for the development of revolutionary Marxism in the post-Lenin era, can be best described by paraphrasing Trotsky’s own description of Leninism – it is warlike from head to foot. In the struggle against its enemies, the Socialist Labour League follows in the footsteps of this tradition.
 
Revisionist Slanders
Our revisionist opponents such as Hansen of the American Socialist Party – the party which sent the telegram of condolences to the arch imperialist Mrs. Kennedy when her husband, the President, was assassinated in 1963, are fond of slandering the Socialist Labour League on the grounds that it is insular to world problems, because it is working in Britain, which as everyone knows is a island off the continent of Europe.
Undoubtedly, the Socialist Labour League reflects the strength and weaknesses of the working class movement, but merely to say that is not enough. We are obliged to examine the history of the working class and the Socialist Labour League in a more serious way.
Behind Hansen’s slander there is also a snigger of contempt for the British working class, who, having been the first to arrive on the historical scene, reflect in their thinking the trial and error, improvised empirical methods of thinking which characterise the methods of the industrial capitalists who were forced to develop their industrial machines by “trial and error”.
Amongst other things, this industrial machine built a huge empire, which in turn supplied vast sources of income, part of which was used by the British capitalist class to corrupt the leaders of the English Labour and trade union movement, as well as enabling the working class to enjoy standards of living even in the darkest days of slump and trade recession, far in excess of their colonial brothers in the Empire.
Thus the working class suffers from two serious handicaps.
The petty-bourgeois leaders and university-trained radicals of the labour movement constantly inject idealist and empirically formed ideology into their ranks through all manner of propaganda techniques, thus taking advantage of its peculiar national historical origin. In this way, the struggle against Marxism is maintained by the Fabian Society.
The working class have up to now been prevented from relating the theories of Marxism, which supply a conscious understanding of the history of the class struggle, to the historical tasks which face them in Britain. This is the task which must be undertaken by the Socialist Labour League.
Secondly, the crumbs from the table of empire which provided them with reforms in the past also tended to make them insular and divide them off from the struggles of the colonial peoples. Today this danger is reflected in the growth and dangers of racialism and forms a stubborn barrier which is exploited to the full by the Tory and Labour leaders as well as miscellaneous groups of fascists in preventing the working class from attaining class consciousness.
But these obstacles, although extremely powerful, must not be taken out of historical context. We are obliged to take note of a further characteristic of the working class which it has inherited from the ruling class and which today conceals a highly revolutionary content. We are speaking about the tendency towards compromise.
Again the resources of the empire enabled such a tendency to develop as a dominant method of capitalist rule, under conditions where our rulers rule almost exclusively through the labour and trade union bureaucracy.
But this was also a characteristic of the period before the seventeenth century Cromwellain Revolution. Trotsky, in quoting the French historian Guizot in Where is Britain Going?, warmly applauds his comment on this period. “When the time came for drawing the sword”, wrote Guizot, “all were astonished and deeply moved.”
For impressionist demagogues such as Hansen, this “compromise” is deceptive. To him it appears to bolster up his cliché about “insularity”, but in reality it simply acts as the thinnest of covers for a molecular revolutionary process going on today beneath the surface of class politics.
All appears well in the field of compromise on the top, until suddenly this period is over and there rushes now to the surface a revolutionary era of unprecedented proportions. That is the meaning of the present stage in British politics, a stage in which the working class is about to join the great colonial revolutions of Asia and Africa in the struggle against the common imperialist enemy, world imperialism.
The seamen’s strike supplied us with a small glimpse of what is on the way. It is this new wave of class struggle that will destroy forever the historical obstacles which hold the British working class back, and that will enable the revolutionary party to be built.
Hansen in his ignorance of the history of the British working class tries to create as amalgam between its historical difficulties and the Socialist Labour League. This is something which will call forth titters of laughter amongst anti-theoretical ignoramuses around Tribune, The Week and similar centrist publications, but it is nonsense so far as a Marxist interpretation goes.
To take a fixed impression like “insular” and then relate it in a mechanical way to the revolutionary experiences of the working class now on the order of the day in Britain, is to confuse form with content. To take this fixed impression further and attach it to the SLL and its struggles to build the party is to reveal oneself as a complete bankrupt in the field of Marxism, as a brief analysis of the history of our movement goes to show.
 
A Consistent Defence of the Fourth International
Against National Insularity
Of course the history of the Trotskyist movement in Britain is cradled within the working class and must directly or indirectly reflect its problems. In fact, it had grown up in a struggle against these problems – that is, a constant defence of the international teachings of Marxism and the Fourth International.
Shortly before the founding conference of the Fourth International in 1938, the Workers International League opposed the unification of British Trotskyists on the tactical grounds that it was necessary to discuss our attitude towards entry into the Labour Party before unification could be achieved. This was a serious mistake, which certainly had at its roots a rejection of international responsibilities in favour of a nationalist approach. But it was corrected in 1943 when some of the present leaders of the Socialist Labour League re-analysed their mistake an explained its origin within the movement.
The correction was made at the second National Congress of the Workers International League in September 1943 and it was bitterly opposed by the overwhelming majority of those present, led by Jock Haston, now educational director for the right-wing Electrical Trades Union.
Despite this it brought the movement back to a political understanding of internationalism, so much so that by March 1944 re-unification had been achieved and the Revolutionary Communist Party was founded.
 
The Meaning of Haston’s Split from the Fourth International
Haston and his majority continued to oppose the policies of the Fourth International, especially towards work inside the Labour Party. During this period, from 1943 onwards, we collaborated closely with the international movement and its various bodies. We fought the opportunist and sectarian effects of Haston’s anti-internationalism right up until February 1950 when he deserted the Trotskyist movement and applied to join the Labour Party. Haston undoubtedly reflected the insular nationalism of the working class. He openly advocated and defended empirical thinking as a means for building the revolutionary party.
In the end he went to the right wing and broke for all time with Marxism. It was a fitting end, but it may well not have happened in this way had it not been for the struggle which the present leadership of the SLL carried out against him in defence of the programme and policies of the Fourth International.
Having corrected the mistake made in 1938 we have always insisted and defended the principle that it is impossible to build a revolutionary party in Britain except through the clearest understanding of the role of the Fourth International. We subordinate always the building of this party to our international obligations. Any other course would be a return to the barren nationalist course of Haston and company.
 
The Pablo Experience
Then, in 1951, came Pablo, at that time Secretary of the International, with his theory that, because of the imminence of the third world war, the Stalinist parties could, under the impact of this war, transform themselves into revolutionary parties. His entry policy into the Communist and social-democratic parties now became the vehicle of liquidationist policies. Only the majority of the French section of the Fourth International opposed him at first.
The Socialist Workers Party supported Pablo against the French section and we made at this point our second most serious mistake in the international movement, because we also supported the decision to expel the French comrades. We didn’t have long to wait to see the bitter fruits of that one. Barely over a year later Pablo started his groups hell-bent on a liquidationist course inside our organisation in Britain and the SWP in the USA.
In Britain he gave full powers to the Lawrence minority to ignore the decisions of our majority. This encouraged them to publicly violate the discipline of our organisation. Naturally we expelled them immediately. Later Lawrence and his friends joined the Communist Party.
The SWP meanwhile publicly broke from Pablo’s international leadership and issued the Open Letter to all Trotskyist Organisations in November 1953. This letter spoke about the struggle of the French comrades against Pabloism as follows:
“By fiat of the International Secretariat, the elected majority of the French Section was forbidden to exercise its rights to lead the political and propaganda work of the party. Instead the political bureau and the press were put under the control of a ‘parity commission’.
“At the time we deeply disapproved this action by which a minority was used to arbitrarily overturn a majority. As soon as we heard about it, we communicated our protest to Pablo.
“However, we must admit that we made an error in not taking more vigorous action. This error was due to insufficient appreciation on our part of the real issues involved. We thought the differences between Pablo and the French section were tactical and this led us to side with Pablo, despite our misgivings about his organisational procedure, when, after months of disruptive factional struggle, the majority was expelled.
“But at the bottom the differences were programmatical in character. The fact is that the French comrades of the majority saw what was happening more clearly than we did. The Eighth Congress of their party declared that:

“‘A grave danger menaces the future and even the existence of the Fourth International – Revisionist conceptions, born of cowardice and petty-bourgeois impressionism have appeared within its leadership. The still great weakness of the International, cut off from the life of the sections, has momentarily facilitated the installation of a system of personal rule, basing itself and its anti-democratic methods on revisionism of the Trotskyist programme and abandonment of the Marxist method.’”

How easy it is today for Hansen, Cannon and Dobbs to forget what they wrote in 1953. At that time we heartily endorsed the contents of the “open letter” and we have never changed our minds.
All these important historical experiences establish one thing very clearly. In sharp contrast to the nationalist insular tendency on the British working class, the education of the present leadership of the SLL and through them the rank-and-file members is internationalist to the core. All our political successes in Britain are due in the main to this basic factor.
 
The Legacy of Pabloism
It would be very wrong to lay the blame for the development of liquidationist revisionism solely on the shoulders of Pablo. He was one of the principal mediums through which it penetrated the Fourth International, but only one. Pablo was an impressionist and an idealist. His theory about the inevitability of a third world war fought out under conditions where the Stalinist parties would be transformed into revolutionary parties was impressionist to the core.
It left out of account the reactionary bureaucratic nature of the leaderships of these parties and the role of the international class struggle against imperialism. It superficially saw things from the standpoint of great power politics and the goings-on in the apparatus of the corrupt leaderships.
Once a Marxist departs from a continuous study of the workers” movement from the standpoint of the struggle to build the revolutionary party, he departs from the science of Marxism and becomes an impressionist. From impressionism to idealism is an easy jump either way.
After a wrong estimation of the international perspectives Pablo rabidly developed his theory of self-reform of the Soviet bureaucracy, especially following Stalin’s death in 1953. This was only logical especially since he had already come to the conclusion that the Stalinist leaderships outside the Soviet Union could transform themselves into revolutionary parties. Here he substituted an idealistic conception of a self-reform of a bureaucracy, whose very presence on the international scene represented the results of the counter-revolutionary role of international capitalist pressure on the workers movement.
From that time, that is from 1953 onwards, degeneration was rapid. The Marxist method was completely cast aside and the road to one betrayal after another was opened up.
 
Pabloite Disintegration
In the summer of 1954 just after the split between the International Committee and Pablo, Lawrence and his group in England, together with the Mestre group in France, left him and turned towards the Communist Parties.
Pablo and his tendency gave up all pretences of being a revolutionary tendency and liquidated themselves into the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN), subordinating themselves to the leadership of Ben Bella and Boumedienne. Those of their followers such as Germain in Belgium who joined the social-democratic parties rapidly dissolved themselves into centrist “left wings”.
The stage was set for the 1964 betrayal in Ceylon when the overwhelming majority of Pablo’s section joined the Bandaranaike government, under conditions where even Pablo’s heirs, Frank and Germain, had to expel over 500 members of the Lanka Sama Samaja Party.
Nothing like this had ever been seen in the whole history of the Trotskyist movement since its foundation. Just as the sectarian debacle of the German Communist Party in 1933 allowed Hitler to come to power and necessitated Trotsky declaiming that the Third International was dead, so the Ceylon betrayal signified the complete bankruptcy of Pabloism and the United Secretariat. The responsibility for building the Fourth International now rests entirely with the parties of the International Committee.
 
Some Important Lessons from the Entry Experience
It is at this point, however, that the International Committee should take another look at the tactical question of entry, so that it may avoid the opportunism of Pablo which led to liquidationism and the sectarianism which has in the past led to the isolation of so many potentially revolutionary groups.
The tactic of entry into the social-democratic parties was elaborated by Trotsky around 1934 in order to try and win over to the Fourth International the left-centrist layers of those parties who were hovering between us and Stalinism. It must be understood the Trotsky viewed entry as a tactic and not a principle.
It is necessary to emphasise this because there are still alleged supporters of Trotsky who wrongly insist that it is necessary for our parties to go through the social-democratic or Communist parties at some time in their development. This is the case of the so-called Revolutionary Socialist Labour League (Grant group) in England who in all essentials agree with Pablo’s revisionist theories.
In order to liquidate the Fourth International Pablo insisted in practice that entry was a principle. He then went on to adapt his weak forces to the prevailing centrist currents within the social-democracy. Gradually they completely lost their political bearings and became centrists themselves. The classical example is Belgium.
Although today Germain is expelled from the social-democratic party on the organisational grounds that he wanted minority rights, he still has not declared for a revolutionary party. On the contrary, he continues with a small centrist party whose weekly paper La Gauche has less than a 2,400 circulation.
Germain did not fight the right wing around the programme and principles of the Fourth International. When he joined their party he became a centrist and remained a centrist even when he was expelled.
This was not Trotsky’s conception of entry. He conceived of it as a temporary measure which was necessary in order to fight the right wing and win over members to the Fourth International. Experiences have shown that this conception needs further elaboration. Entry cannot be successfully carried out unless there is a strong independent revolutionary party functioning actively in the daily experiences of the working class. Only under exceptional circumstances can total entry of a section of the Fourth International be contemplated, and even then it will be absolutely essential for those who enter to be actively engaged in the struggles of the class so that they can bring their experiences into the fight against the right wing of the apparatus.
The essence of the entry tactic is that the revolutionary party and its leadership must constantly function within the working class independent of entry whilst at the same time utilising its experiences to fight the right wing. Pablo, Germain and company turned their backs on the struggle of the working class and concentrated instead on a verbal centrist argument against the bureaucratic right wing.
The essence of Marxism which is a continuous analysis of the experiences of the working class by an active participant in the building of the revolutionary party was cast aside. In its place came the idea that things were decided not by the working class but by developments within the bureaucratic apparatus.
Having abandoned a study of the working class for the theory of the inevitability of a third world war and self-reform of the Stalinist bureaucracy, Pablo, Germain and company turned the entry tactic into the opportunist opposite of what Trotsky originally proposed.
The work of the Socialist Labour League in the Young Socialists between 1960 and 1964 corrected to the full this mistake. Not only was this work most successful but it proved that by maintaining a strong independent revolutionary organisation and combining faction work with serious activity amongst youth in the local areas it was possible to win over the forces necessary to defeat the Labour Party bureaucracy.
We established in practice a united front from within with those youth who were moving left, whilst at the same time we exposed the role of the fake lefts in the fight against the right wing.
That, in our opinion, is how Trotsky advocated the application of the entry tactic.
 
How Pabloite Congresses Are Reported
The Pabloites on the United Secretariat are constantly boasting about the strength of their international relations, in the same way as they used to boast about the “great party” in Ceylon.
In the winter 1960–61 issue of their magazine Fourth International, No. 12, they report their sixth Congress as follows:
“The 6th World Congress of the Fourth International was held in Switzerland from 10th to 15th January 1961. More that a hundred delegates, fraternal delegates, and invited comrades, coming from about 30 countries of all continents, participated in its labours.”
In June 1963 the 7th Re-unification congress was held and its character was noted as follows in Fall 1963 issue of International Socialist Review:
“The overwhelming majority of the Trotskyist movement representing 26 countries have now been united.”
Note how the number of countries dropped from 30 to 26.
Now take a look at the representatives at the 8th World Congress held at the end of 1965. There were delegates present from Britain, Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, West Germany, Belgium, Austria, Italy, France, Ceylon, Greece, Switzerland, Algeria, Argentina, Denmark, and one other country – in all 16 countries, a huge drop of 10 since so-called unification of 1963. Needless to say this decline was never explained. – the Congress was simply noted as “a great success”.
There were observers from Spain, Iraq and Nigeria. Some of whom were also present at the third congress of the International Committee held in April 1966.
To describe the two tiny groups, (one opportunist and one sectarian) in Britain as “a section” [at the 1963 congress – Ed.] is to scrape the barrel to the utmost.
These people represented nothing of the slightest importance, and, in practice, are irreconcilably divided among themselves. From these examples it can be seen that no reliance whatever can be placed on the way the Pabloite United Secretariat reports its congresses. Because of revisionist policies, their movement is disintegrating in one country after another.
 
Pablo Has Gone, but Pablo Lives On
It was at the VIIIth Congress that Pablo was expelled on the grounds that he and his followers had violated discipline over two years. But his departure did not in any way signify that his political ideas were rejected. On the contrary, Livio, representing the Italian group and leading collaborator of Germain and Frank, took the floor to report on the African revolution, claiming that in Egypt and Mali there was a possibility of a socialist transformation without revolution.
Here we have the essence of Pablo’s revisionism. But that is not the whole story. After Livio spoke, Germain introduces an amendment making a definite concession to him. He declared that he is against opposing the Egypt led by the bourgeois nationalist Nasser. On the question of Ceylon the congress allowed one and a half hours to the discussion and report covering the expulsion of 500 members. As soon as a crisis of this magnitude has to be discussed, Pabloite congresses are not really interested. It took just 90 minutes to dismiss what happened in Ceylon.
Although Pablo has been expelled, his political methods still dominate the thinking of the United Secretariat. Pablo has gone, but the legacy of Pabloism lives on.
 
The Role of the Socialist Workers Party
The Socialist Workers Party of the United States cannot for legal reasons be affiliated to the Fourth International. In the past, however, because the founders of this party, Cannon, Shachtman and Abern, worked in the closest association with Trotsky, it exercised considerable influence within the international movement. During the period of the late twenties and thirties its leadership, in collaboration with Trotsky, harnessed their experience of work in the mass movement to a greater extent than any other section at that time.
The early successes of the SWP were based on a combination of Trotsky’s brilliant political analysis of the international scene as well as the problems of the Trotskyist movement and the maturity of its leadership in relation to their approach to the problems of the working class in the United States. In this respect, James P. Cannon was undoubtedly the most outstanding international Trotskyist leader during Trotsky’s lifetime.
How then and under what conditions did the degeneration take place which today has transformed the SWP from being the staunchest defender of Marxism and Trotskyism into the leader of a rump of Pabloite revisionist supporters who have betrayed every principle of Marxism over the past 15 years?
 
Dialectical Materialism and the Revolutionary Party
The answer to this question does not lie in the difficult conditions of the cold war and the boom under which the SWP has been operating in the United States, especially since 1949, although these have played a role, but in the origin of the early Trotskyist movement.
From its inception, this movement was based on a profound contradiction. Its founder, Trotsky, went through all the early political experiences of the pre-revolutionary Soviet Union, the revolution itself, when he led and organised the Red Army, the post-Lenin degeneration and the growth of the Soviet bureaucracy under Stalin.
His supporters in the USA and other countries came mainly from those who entered the communist movement after the foundation of the Third International in 1919. Their development was conditioned by the post-World War I defeats of the working class outside the Soviet Union and the growth of Stalinism.
These experiences should not be considered in an unrelated and superficial way. Building the revolutionary party is conditioned by them; but in a more fundamental way it is determined by a consistent struggle for the Marxist philosophy of dialectical materialism against all forms of idealism which is the predominant philosophy of the ruling class. Only Trotsky had participated in such an experience, especially during the pre-revolutionary period.
Lenin’s leadership was constantly strengthened and developed around a constant struggle for Marxist philosophy against all brands of idealist revisionism. Such a struggle was greatly facilitated by the growth of the revolutionary forces which were the forerunner of the revolution itself.
Without this experience the revolutionary leadership cannot be trained. The education of a Marxist cadre requires a continuous ideological struggle derived from Marxist theory in participation in and study of the workers movement. Only in this way can leaders be historically selected for the great task of overthrowing capitalist society. This was precisely the weakness of the Cannon-Trotsky combination.
Trotsky’s theoretical genius flowed from the entire revolutionary experience of the Soviet Union, both in its triumph and degeneration.
Cannon’s politics, on the other hand, were mainly derived during the period of Soviet degeneration and defeat for the international working class outside the USSR. His early years in the Communist Party of the USA provided him with a meagre grasp of Marxist theory. Like the rest of the party leaders he was imbued with pragmatism (if it works it is right), and his relation to Trotsky was based on this method. He correctly saw Trotsky as the co-leader with Lenin of the Russian Revolution, and when the break with Stalin took place after Lenin’s death, he concluded that Trotsky had the correct political position.
Cannon was strengthened in his conclusion by the immediate conflict of factions within the American Communist Party. William Z. Foster and others joined with Stalin, Cannon took political sides with Trotsky. It was a pragmatic decision dictated by the factional situation within the CP of the USA which produced important results, especially during Trotsky’s lifetime.
But this was not enough so far as the training of the leadership of the SWP went. Cannon and his supporters accepted Trotsky’s leadership without understanding the implications of the theoretical experience which lay behind it. Their political development was therefore of a one-sided character – in effect they remained pragmatists.
At this point we can see the reason why Trotsky had to wage a struggle on dialectical materialism in 1939–1940 against Burnham and Shachtman.
Although the American Trotskyist movement was 11 years old, he had to begin his struggle against the revisionists by outlining and explaining dialectical materialism, the ABC of Marxism, (see In Defence of Marxism).
Trotsky’s tragic assassination by the Stalinists in August 1940 left Cannon on his own.
 
Cannon and Trotsky
Now the real test began, and Cannon faced it in the following way:
The legend was fostered up that the SWP and its members were Trotsky’s “heirs”, which to inexperienced people might seem plausible enough. It was implemented by the publication of Trotsky’s writings, implying that he had said the last word on all the important questions.
Trotsky’s insistence that the SWP should wage a continuous struggle within its ranks for dialectical materialism was ignored. Cannon replaced it with the conception that so long as he reprinted Trotsky’s books it was sufficient. In this way Trotsky was transformed from a revolutionary Marxist into an idol. After he died Cannon went straight over to idealism and kept the old leaders of the SWP in the dark as to his method. They, in any case, were unable to discern it since they were themselves educated under it.
From there on Cannon was forced more and more to rely on pragmatism in his approach to the international as well as American problems. Such an approach dominated his early relations with Pablo. Cannon desired “another Trotsky” so he latched on to Pablo. Almost immediately international relations were resumed after the end of the second World War, Pablo was taken to the USA so that he could be “looked over”. He passed the test, if you can call it that, and then became the SWP-appointed “Trotsky” for Western Europe.
So far, so good, but then the real crisis began because Pablo himself needed political assistance and guidance. Cannon desired Pablo to be another Trotsky. But the whole thing was based on a pragmatic illusion. Pablo wasn’t Trotsky yet Cannon wanted Trotsky tailor-made. Having “got away” so to speak with his pragmatic relation to Trotsky in the thirties, Cannon was on the look-out for replacements.
This is where the Marxist method came in. Cannon, from his insular nationalist United States outlook wanted someone to take charge of “Fourth International” affairs, so he chose Pablo, under circumstances where Pablo was being pushed from pillar to post by his impressionism. Coming from a middle class intellectual milieu in Western Europe Pablo was incapable of replacing Trotsky.
So Cannon had what appeared to be a breathing space until 1951. Then Pablo utilised a minority of the French Section to expel a majority.
At first Cannon applauded Pablo on this issue, then, when the latter began to organise a minority inside the SWP, Cannon was spurred into action against Pablo. It was OK presumably when it was going on in France, but quite a different story when it began to happen inside the USA.
 
1953 – A Year of Decision
The year was 1953 and the full implications of Cannon’s pragmatism were now becoming clear to the international movement.
From the end of the Second World War onwards he had utilised the international movement as an international front for what was happening in the United States. Just so long as Pablo kept his nose out of what was going on inside the SWP Cannon was happy.
Now we see the other side of Cannon’s pragmatic method. During the period when Trotsky was alive it produced what appeared to be favourable results. Now after his death these results were dialectically turned into their opposite. Cannon, who accepted pragmatically Trotsky’s political line without question during the period before the Second World War, was now plunged into an extremely different situation after his death.
His pragmatic use of Trotsky was now transferred to a pragmatic use of the Fourth International, which in practice meant that he based himself on a completely American nationalist approach to the international movement.
From a pragmatic attitude towards Trotsky and his teaching it was but a small step towards American nationalism, which is the most reactionary version of idealist philosophy in the world. It was this methodology which was responsible for the complete disintegration of the SWP as a Trotskyist organisation.
The struggle by Cannon against Pablo in 1953 marked the beginning of the end for the SWP. Pablo’s supporters, Cochran and Clarke, forced Cannon’s hand. He fought them back by organisational means – that is he expelled them. Now, 13 years later, he and Farrell Dobbs, the present secretary of the SWP, completely support every point which Cochran and company fought for in 1953.
In other words, Cannon and Dobbs, after expelling Cochran and Clarke, then proceeded to adopt their revisionist programme.
The history of Cannon and Dobbs since 1953 is one of expelling those who disagreed with them in order to adopt the policy which those who were expelled advocated. This was the end of the line for the pragmatists of the SWP. From 1953 onwards they were, politically speaking, turned upside down.
Almost immediately they turned towards the English Trotskyists in order to find an excuse for what they proposed to do. They built up the legend that because the English Trotskyists were victims of Pablo’s attack (they had broken from Pablo by means of the Open Letter of 1953) they needed to save the English Trotskyists, which included Healy, from Pablo by way of the Open Letter.
That was a lie. The English Trotskyists in 1953, like the French Trotskyists in 1951, were well able to look after themselves.
 
Cannon Turns Back to Pablo
When the split with Pablo was over in November 1953, we began immediately to discuss ways and means to bring the differences with Pablo into the open. In the spring of 1954 we proposed a renewal of the discussion with Pablo and a committee was set up with an equal number from both sides to organise it.
The purpose of this discussion was not to heal the split but to bring out more clearly the fundamental reasons for it. It was conceived by us as another stage of the struggle against Pablo. The unavoidably abrupt nature of the international split in November 1953 had left a number of comrades in different sections still confused – we wanted to expose Pablo and clarify them.
At first Cannon gave half-hearted support to these proposals, then in the late autumn of 1954 we suddenly received a letter calling upon us to abandon the discussion. From that moment it was clear that an even more serious conflict was brewing between the International Committee and the SWP. Even at this early date in 1954, when the split with Pablo was just concluded, the split with the SWP was on the agenda.
We believed that the political fight against Pablo was not an issue of abstract Marxist theory but one which was directly related to the struggle to build the party. We felt it was necessary to carry the fight against revisionism into the day-to-day work of the sections of the Intentional Committee and ruthlessly expose Pabloism in the process.
The SWP wanted to forget about the fight as soon as it was over. In his usual pragmatic way Cannon couldn’t care less about problems of the international movement just so long as he had defeated Pablo’s supporters inside the SWP. So far as he was concerned it was the SWP first, last, and always, no matter what happened to the international movement. Thus did pragmatism merge with nationalism.
The discussion on Pablo’s role in the 1953 split was abruptly terminated by the SWP by June 1954. There matters stood for three years until Cannon, without consultation with the International Committee, wrote to Leslie Goonewardene, the secretary of the Lanka Sama Samaja Party in Ceylon in April 1957, suggesting that a fresh effort should be made to achieve re-unification between the International Committee and the Pabloites. This was the same Leslie Goonewardene who led the movement into the coalition government of Mrs. Bandaranaike in June 1964.
Cannon was at the end of his pragmatic road; now he had to do a political “about face” before the entire international movement. Having split from Pablo and his own factions, Cochran and Clarke, in 1953, he now had to find ways and means to accept the policies of those from whom he had split since his own “majority” was breaking up fast. This is how his ideas were developing.
 
Dobbs, Novack and Cannon
Almost immediately after the split with Pablo in 1953 George Novack (Wm.F. Warde) announced to Cannon one day that he was in reality a supporter of Pablo’s and was on his way over to join Cochran and Clarke. This caused consternation in the Cannon camp because he had been boosted as their main theoretician.
Immediately they went into action. According to Cannon, Evelyn Reed, Novack’s wife, announced she was staying with the SWP and he, Cannon, arranged that they (the Novacks) were to join him in Los Angeles, California, as soon as possible. So they did, and that silenced George Novack, at least for the time being. He didn’t break from Cannon but he temporarily kept his views on Pablo to himself.
George Breitman who went to Detroit in 1953 to replace the Cochran faction did the same in 1954. Both Novack and Breitman were Pabloites from the start, but they were also friendly with Cannon. So, for the time being, they went along with him instinctively, knowing very well that sooner of later he would join them.
The reader may well ask: Why did Cannon eventually join the Pabloites? In answering this question we do not have to refer to Novack (Warde) and Breitman. The answer lies in Khrushchev’s speech at the 20th Congress of the USSR [CPSU – Ed.] early in 1956. But that, our readers may ask, is surely very difficult to understand – nothing of the sort.
Immediately, that is, from the split of 1953, Cannon rejected the ideas which led to Khrushchev’s speech. He didn’t accept that the struggle against Pabloism was tied up with building revolutionary parties throughout the world and especially in the United states. Once he believed that the SWP was free from the immediate menace of Pabloism, which to him meant Cochran and Clarke, he just turned his back, politically speaking, on the international movement.
But Khrushchev’s speech, which virtually admitted that everything the Trotskyists fought for was right, changed all that. In effect he posed an all out struggle to expose and destroy Stalinism. It was at this point that Pabloite revisionism really strangled the international Trotskyist movement. For five years it had turned the sections towards the possibility that the Stalinist bureaucracy, after Stalin’s death, would reform itself. Now the cat was out of the bag.
It became a question as to whether or not the Fourth International would take advantage of Khrushchev’s speech and fight as never before to expose and defeat Stalinism, or whether or not to adapt to Khrushchev’s variety of Stalinism.
Cannon then asked for unity with Pablo. That is the real significance of Cannon approaching the Ceylonese renegade Goonwardene in April 1957. He had decided to sell out to the Stalinist bureaucracy and the imperialists.
The Socialist Labour League saw things in an entirely different light. We saw Khrushchev’s 20th Congress speech as an opportunity to expose Stalinism and Pabloite adaption to Stalinism. When Cannon was looking for unity with the Pabloites in 1957, we were fighting to clarify the 1953 split, and to extend the struggle against Pabloism, utilising Khrushchev’s speech in order to do this.
Immediately upon hearing about Cannon’s letter to Goonewardene we wrote to the SWP and dissociated ourselves from Cannon. He wrote back the kind of a letter the lord of the manor writes to a serf. It was a letter from an arrogant American nationalists telling the English comrades where to get off.
We put the question about the importance of prior discussion before unification took place. Cannon said that there was no need for any discussion. He had in effect completely capitulated to Pabloism. Right at the point when Khrushchev’s speech opened up a real opportunity for the Trotskyist movement to fight Stalinism, Cannon ran into the arms of Pablo.
The leadership of the Socialist Labour League lost no opportunity in exposing the Stalinists over Khrushchev’s speech. We were prepared, because of our political hostility to Pabloism, to take the fullest opportunity in order to fight the Stalinists – we gained more from this approach than all the Pabloite sections, including the SWP, did together.
Now let us look a little more closely at Cannon’s cadre. Following the split of 1953 and Novack’s threat to join Cochran (the American Pabloite), things went from bad to worse inside the leadership of the SWP. Farrell Dobbs, who, before the split with Pablo, had been elected general secretary of the SWP, found he was unable to carry out his assignments because Cannon, he said, continuously interfered with his work as secretary form Los Angeles.
Dobbs came to England in early 1958 in order to gain our support to fight Cannon. He told us what happened to George Novack and his relations with Cannon. We insisted that the solution to these problems must be political and accordingly we told him to participate to the full at the first congress of the International Committee which was held in June 1958, although the SWP was not a member because of the Voorhis Act.
But he did nothing of the sort. He was, he said, under instructions not to comment on the political questions. Just imagine it. Here we were at the first Congress of those sections who had fought the revisionism of Pablo, and the section which has led the fight in 1953 had nothing to say!
It was equally clear from the informal discussions with Dobbs that the SWP was being torn asunder by an internal crisis which on the surface appeared to centre around organisational issues. Its failure to clarify that reasons for the Pablo split now meant that a number of factions inside the party were blindly fighting each other, without the political issues being clear. The one thing that did emerge from all this squabbling was the undoubted right-wing revisionist orientation of all the factions.
Cannon did nothing to clear up this political mess; he simply intensified it. He took a position where he could play off the right-wing faction of Murry Weiss against the Dobbs faction. Small wonder that, during his visit to Europe in 1958, Dobbs spent most of his time looking for allies in the struggle against Cannon.
Towards the end of September 1958, just before he was due to return to the United States, he called for a special meeting of English and French comrades at which he could deal with the problem of Cannon. (There is a stenographic report of the meeting available.) At this meeting he announced that in all probability he would be removed from his post of general secretary of the SWP by Cannon when he returned from Europe.
Both ourselves and the French comrades were amazed by such a revelation. We told Dobbs bluntly that under no circumstances could we take any sides between him and Cannon. It was agreed also that a comrade should travel to Canada in late November 1958 to see if it were possible to assist the leading members of the SWP to overcome this crisis. Dobbs returned to the USA and things more or less stayed as they were until the visit of a member of the International Committee.
 
The SLL Prepares the Split
At this meeting Cannon proposed to the English comrade who was the delegate that they, the British, should join the Americans and break from the French comrades who led the fight, on the grounds that they were “sectarian”. We told them that this was not our conception of how an international movement should be educated and built. Just as we refused to line up with Dobbs against Cannon, so now we refused to line up with Cannon against the French Section. We had made up our minds not to be pawns in the SWP pragmatic game with the international movement as the board.
The time had almost certainly come for the Socialist Labour League to split openly from the SWP. Since the split with Pablo in 1953 we had utilised every availably means to fight his revisionism. Now that it was clear that the SWP had capitulated to Pabloite revisionism, our task was clear – we had to organise the split from Cannon, Dobbs and co. who had betrayed Trotsky and the Fourth International.
The development and growth of the Socialist Labour League is directly related to the struggle against Pabloite revisionism and the degeneration of the SWP. There can be no compromise on these issues. The Socialist Labour League is out to destroy Pabloism and its SWP accomplices. There can be, and we repeat, there never will be a compromise on these questions – the fight will go on until we destroy the Pabloites and the revisionist SWP.
Today the Socialist Labour League is, even in the eyes of its bitterest opponents, the strongest section of the international Trotskyist movement. We are confident we can continue along these lines and smash the unprincipled SWP leaders, Cannon, Dobbs, and co.
 
Who is Joseph Hansen?
The Socialist Labour League delayed its political break from the Socialist Workers Party until the end of 1960. We wanted, if possible, to have a serious discussion inside the International Committee in order to educate our comrades around the nature of the differences. We even arranged a special trip to Canada early February 1960, in order to meet the main leaders of the SWP to see if there were some common grounds to heal the breach between the two sections. There were none. In our opinion they were moving more and more towards a public acceptance of Pabloite revisionism.
Still we hesitated. When we finally wrote concerning the differences to their National Committee early in January 1961, we hoped that there would still be a discussion under circumstances where the differences would be eventually clarified. We had no such discussion. Apart from a few brief letters of acknowledgement of correspondence between the SWP and the SLL the months dragged by without any discussion, either written or oral.
 
Cannon Shows His Hand
Suddenly the whole shabby business became clear. A letter from Cannon in Los Angeles instructing the SWP national office in New York not to have any discussion with the Socialist Labour League came into our possession.
The political degeneration of the SWP was now out in the open. Here was a party claiming to be Trotskyist, whose leaders had pioneered the Trotskyist movement, the most controversial Marxist movement in the whole of history, deliberately evading discussion. How was it possible to educate anybody with such a method? How was it possible to build the Fourth International in this way?
Cannon knew full well that if he began a discussion with the SLL his so-called cadre would fall apart. After all, there had been close on 20 years” collaboration between leading members of the SLL and SWP. But Cannon, starting from his pragmatist relation with Trotsky, was now an opportunist and a political coward.
He took full advantage of the insular “all American way” in which the leaders in the SWP had been educated. His argument was, by implication: “Don’t discuss with the leaders of the SLL, they are ‘sectarian and insular’”. In other words, he fell back on the arguments which the Stalinists had been using against us for almost 30 years in order to defend and justify capitulation to the pressures of American imperialism.
 
Enter Joseph Hansen
And so, discussion between the SWP and the SLL was halted for over a whole year. Then Joseph Hansen entered the scene. His job was simple.
“Eventually”, said Cannon, “we cannot avoid discussion so your task Joe is to poison the political atmosphere inside the SWP against the SLL, so that when we have to discuss our members will be dead against them.”
By implication he was saying; “Never mind about principles and truth. We’re pragmatists like John F. Kennedy, so we do what is ‘best’ to preserve ourselves now”. And Joseph Hansen got to work.
His task, as an ex-Mormon from Salt Lake City, was to discredit the SLL not by political argument, but by poisonous slander and gossip. But let us look back a little. Who is Joseph Hansen?
Hansen was one of Trotsky’s secretaries for a period during his exile in Mexico before his assassination. There were other secretaries such as present day anti-Trotskyist Raya Dunayevskaya. There are no records available to show that Hansen was politically outstanding as a secretary. Ever since Trotsky’s assassination he has been trying to build up a legend about himself, but as the years go by it becomes more and more faded and obscure.
One reason why he has gone unchallenged is because those who worked with Trotsky during this period have mostly left the SWP and dropped out of political activity. Following the assassination, Hansen returned to New York and immediately appointed himself as cheer leader for Cannon. During the period early in 1944, when he and other leaders went to jail following the Minneapolis trial, he was in his element. His story describing how Cannon left New York is a masterpiece of journalistic bootlicking.
“As the crack train gathered speed along the banks of the river, the man soon to be locked in a cell because of his beliefs leaned back in his seat watching the barren trees and the ice-fringed water skim by. The pillars of famous geologic formation moved in stately procession into the past – scenes of the Hudson warmed by the winter sun for this socialist fighter to remember in hard days ahead. The sun fell on hid hair as the train leaned round a curve and the iron gray waves lighted up luminously. Jim’s lips moved; The palisades are beautiful.”
 
Hansen’s “Qualifications”
From then on Hansen had and has today a special role inside the SWP leadership. As a member of this leadership once said:
“When it comes to normal polemicising against opponents there are all sorts of comrades who can undertake this task, but when Cannon wants to sharpen things up with a real dirty below the belt job, all eyes on the Committee turn automatically in the direction of Joe Hansen.”
This man is tailor-made for this kind of work, for he can write for or against the same argument with equal enthusiasm the moment he is called upon to do so. In 1952 and 1953 he bitterly attacked the Cochran and Clark faction who were supported by Pablo. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the Open Letter exposing Pablo. For six months following the split, he wrote article after article in the Militant in 1954 denouncing Pablo.
As Cannon’s interest in the whole affair began to wane because he pragmatically believed that what was left of the SWP was out of harm’s way, Hansen stopped writing just a abruptly as he started. After that he switched to an entirely different controversy, on, believe it or not, cosmetics. Writing under the nom de plume of Jack Bustelo he plonked a large mimeographed bulletin into the SWP ranks late in 1954 (see Struggle for Marxism in the USA, by Tim Wohlforth, page 143, Fourth International, number 3, November 3, 1966).
In 1961 when Cannon, out of fear, told his henchmen in New York not to discuss with the SLL, Hansen was then a natural for the “dirty work”. His job was to listen to all the tired middle-class renegades who had deserted the Trotskyist movement in Britain, chew over their gossip, add a few bits here and there himself and toss the garbage into the disoriented membership of the SWP.
 
What the SWP Used to Think about the SLL
At first Hansen encountered some temporary difficulties. For had not the SWP leaders described the SLL as follows in the Spring 1960 International Socialist Review:
“In Britain during the past two years a major group of highly qualified intellectuals and workers in the mass movement broke away from the Communist Party. The break was programmatic, entailing a thorough review and study of the very ‘Stalin-Trotsky’ dispute which Cochran and his collaborators put in the same category as the Dempsey-Tunney fight. Among those in Britain who have broken definitively with Stalinism there has been an impressive ideological ferment. A significant group, having studied the programmatic issues to the end, turned towards fusion with the British Trotskyists. This resulted in the formation of the Socialist Labour League, a group within the Labour Party and the unions dedicated to advancing the Marxist view.
“As an organising centre of both class struggle action by militant unionists and theoretical struggle for Marxism, the SLL has been selected as a target for witch-hunting. The British capitalist press and the right wing trade union bureaucrats are displaying the keenest alarm over the fact that the SLL has become an inspiring and attractive force for radical youth, for trade union militants for the entire left wing in the Labour Party. The SLL is in the forefront of every struggle to unite workers, students and intellectuals in the fight against British imperialism, for withdrawing British troops from every part of the world, for ending the H-bomb tests, strengthening the socialist program of the Labour Party and defeating the right wing’s attempt to scuttle the party’s stand in favour of public ownership.
“The SLL is taking the lead in the fight for full democracy in the unions, the Labour Party and in every aspect of British life. The SLL has shown its fighting mettle in beating back racist attempts to whip up a lynch movement against Negro workers in London.
“Where did this magnificent movement come from? It is obviously without a trace of sectarianism or disdainful aloofness fro the actual movement and life of the working class. It is popular energetic and colourful in its public appeal.
“The real secret of the strength of the SLL is its concern for the theoretical basis of socialism, its ‘preoccupation’ if you please with the ‘old disputed’ and its rejection of every attempt at light minded improvisation in the field of principle. This is true of the SLL and its leadership as a whole, both those who came recently from the Communist Party as well as the older Trotskyist cadre.
“The British Trotskyists prepared for the opening of the kind of opportunities prevalent in their country today and that will surely confront us in the US tomorrow by struggling against their own Cochran faction, the Lawrence group, back in 1953. They faced the same problems as the American Trotskyists in coping with destructive factional intervention on the part of Pablo. They, too, had to overcome the effects of a split that was unnecessarily deep due to Pablo’s influence. Their success in overcoming the internal dispute in a principled way, in strict accordance with Leninist tradition, is what prepared them to play their magnificent role today.”
Had not Hansen himself publicly endorsed in the pages of the weekly Militant the statement of the Socialist Labour League on the expulsion of Peter Fryer and four of his cronies in the autumn of 1959, after they had publicly attacked the League?
Of course, and every informed comrade in the international movement knows this. Hansen had to invent his stories about the British Trotskyists.
 
Hansen Gets Busy
Hansen set about his task in two ways. Firstly there was the issue of Cuba. Hansen, of course, as well as the rest of the SWP leadership, got off to a very slow start so far as Cuba was concerned. The revolution was nearly two years old before they began to discuss it. Indeed it was Henry Gitano, a supporter of Murry Weiss, who first started the ball rolling with an article also in the Spring issue of International Socialist Review. This was followed up with another piece from Hansen himself.
Around that time Dobbs and Hansen visited Cuba and reported favourably on what they saw there. But Cuba itself did not become an issue of difference between the SLL and the SWP until after we opened up the discussion early in 1961. For two whole years after the Cuban revolution the SLL and the SWP were able to collaborate with each other despite the implications of the Cuban revolution. Now, however, when Cannon wanted to avoid a discussion on Pabloism, things took a different turn.
Together with the Pabloites, the SWP almost instantaneously, after having ignored the Cuban revolution for two years, now recognised Cuba as a workers state. This was the first major public turn towards Pabloite methods.
Hansen, who under instruction from Cannon in 1953–54 castigated Pablo for such methods, now became the most devout supported of them. He argued with equal vehemence in favour, just as he was arguing a few years before against them.
Hansen got busy with his slander. Was it not US imperialism which oppressed the Cuban people? Of course it was, and if the SLL hesitated in characterising Cuba as a “workers state” did not that automatically mean that the SLL was an ally of US imperialism? This was the story peddled around the SWP in order to poison the political atmosphere against the SLL with whom they collaborated for twenty years.
Alongside all this, members of the SWP were organised to go to Cuba so they could see the “land of socialism” for themselves. Coming from the USA and its anti-red, witch-hunting atmosphere, everything which they saw in Cuba seemed fine from the tourist point of view, the one difficulty being that they were there only for a short time.
Nevertheless it served Hansen’s purpose. When the American and Canadian tourists returned he was saying: “Now you see how the SLL helps US imperialism. Don’t bother to read their bulletins, Jim Cannon is right not to have discussion with supporters of US imperialism, is he not?” And they, in turn, unfortunately said “yes” to what was nothing more than shades of Stalinist distortion of Trotskyist method.
 
Cuba – a Cover for a Right-wing Turn
The issues, however, were quite different. The SLL was not necessarily opposed to the designation of Cuba as a workers state. We wanted to keep a open mind until after we had an objective discussion with those in the SWP we believed to be our co-thinkers. They didn’t want such a discussion because they were deserting to Pabloism. They were in fact rapidly turning towards the right and to liquidationism into the pacifist movement within the USA. Cuba was just a cover for this project.
For example, in discussing the class nature of the Chinese state in the years 1954–55, Hansen himself circulated a memorandum to the SWP National Committee “suggesting a state capitalist theory for China” (see Struggle for Marxism in the US, Fourth International, No. 3).
If it was permissible to have such a discussion inside the SWP in the middle fifties, why not between the SWP and the SLL on Cuba in 1962, especially since we had not characterised Cuba as “state capitalist” and we were open to be convinced by those whom we believed to be our collaborators?
We wanted a discussion over the class nature of the Cuban state – the SWP did not because they were bust capitulating to the liquidationist policy of Pablo. Their turn to the right wing and the pacifists had now begun in earnest. At all costs they had to break from the SLL in order to get closer to their real international allies – the right wing Pabloites.
But how can such methods build the Fourth International in the revolutionary way that Trotsky wanted it to be built? The short answer is that they cannot. That is also why the split between the International Committee and the Pabloites of the United Secretariat cannot be healed in such an unprincipled way.
 
Cannon, Dobbs and Hansen Prevent International Discussion
In the autumn and winter of 1961 Hansen was sent on a tour of Latin America in order to confuse and disorient those sections supporting the International Committee. He utilised the “workers state” theory in Cuba to the full in order to separate them from the SLL.
Once again the pragmatic SWP was using the international movement to turn towards Pablo just as it had tried to use it in 1953 against him. Understandably, the Cuban revolution made a big impact on the Latin American comrades, especially in Chile and the Argentine, but the practice of placing ready-made labels, such as “workers state”, without adequate international discussion on such developments is not only dangerous but downright opportunist. It politically suited the SWP but it greatly weakened the comrades in Latin America.
The “workers state” theory in Cuba was the vehicle which finally dragged the SWP back into the Pabloite camp. Behind this theory was essentially the idea that a revolutionary party was not necessary. It met with immediate response from the disorientated petty bourgeois inside the SWP. Led by Hansen and fortified by tourist trips to Cuba, they were ready to believe anything they were told about the SLL.
Cannon gradually dropped his support for the Murry Weiss faction and switched it to Dobbs. Weiss, in turn, resigned and opened a bookshop. Cannon, it is reported, sent him a donation so that he could buy some books, with a comforting letter saying that he understood how he felt.
After that the road was clear for Dobbs. Hansen naturally fell into line, voting with both hands for Dobbs. Everything was set for the second stage of the campaign of slander against the SLL.
Early in February 1962 Hansen arrived in Europe for the funeral of Natalia Trotsky. During his stay he visited England and attended a Central Committee meeting of the SLL. On his return to the USA he immediately began a slander campaign against leading members of the SLL around gossip he picked up from renegades, although he never at any time opened his mouth when he was here.
At the meeting we briefly discussed the difference between the SLL and the SWP. Hansen freely admitted that he was a consistent empiricist. Our next experience with him came later on it 1963, when he arrived in Europe to negotiate closer ties with the Pabloites.
During the summer of 1962 the International Committee, accepting a recommendation of the Socialist Labour League, opened up negotiations with the Pabloite International Secretariat for discussion on the disputed questions. This was decided after we found it absolutely impossible to draw the SWP into the open as regards their political positions.
Since we knew they now supported Pabloite revisionism we felt that an international discussion with every tendency involved would help the movement re-organise itself, by clarifying issues. But the SWP were dead against such discussion.
They formally agreed with the negotiations we had started because it provided them with organisational reasons to collaborate more openly with the Pabloites. But now, as in the past, they wanted this collaboration to proceed as if the split in 1953 had never taken place.
Just as the discussion was about to open and documents were exchanged, Hansen suddenly announced that a unification had been arranged between a minority of the International Committee affiliates, namely the small Swiss and Canadian sections, supported by the Chinese Peng who represented no-one but himself. We appealed to them to proceed with the discussion but it fell on deal ears.
Then in May 1963, just before the farcical unification, Ernest Germain, a leading Pablo man, came to England and told the SLL that irrespective of unification the negotiations would go on with those sections of the International who desired discussion on unification. He repeated the same proposal when he spoke to our summer school two months later in early August. There are hundreds of comrades who heard him say these things.
After the unification Hansen returned to the USA for further instructions. He arrived back in Europe in late August and immediately told the Pabloites that the SWP was opposed to any discussion with the International Committee so all negotiations were immediately broken off.
 
How the No-discussion Decision Applied in Ceylon
The most disastrous side of this decision was that it prevented all discussion inside the Pabloite ranks about what was happening in Ceylon, where already the majority of the Lanka Sama Samaja Party were preparing to enter the coalition government. By preventing such discussion they also prevented the LSSP from waging an all-out political fight against the opportunist majority.
They were silenced by orders of Hansen and Co. right at the time they should have been fighting tooth and nail to clarify the Party. Hansen, Dobbs and Co. had achieved what they set out to achieve.
Once more the small Pabloite rump in Paris, now masquerading as the “United Secretariat” became the cover for their “Fourth International”. Thus they were able to turn to the pacifists inside the USA without fear of international criticism.
The pragmatic methods flowing from nationalism had now merged with the completely opportunist Pabloite currents. This was essentially Hansen’s contribution towards the destruction of Trotskyism, especially in the US and Ceylon.
 
The Good Name of Trotskyism in Britain
In the period especially from 1940 onwards, the leadership of the SLL learned much from the SWP in the USA. Our fundamental criticism of the revisionist policy of this organisation today is not intended in any way to denigrate the positive side of the relationship.
The SWP members were especially helpful during the period 1943 to 1949 in the struggle against the Haston clique. This group, which comprised a majority of the English Trotskyist organisation, was led essentially by Haston, his wife Mildred Haston and Ted Grant. The Hastons deserted in 1950 and moved towards agreement with the right wing of the Labour Party.
Grant, however, did not take this road. Although he had been the political attorney for Haston, he could not bring himself to agree with the latter’s liquidation into the Labour Party. At the same time, he could not bring himself to publicly denounce Haston’s desertion from the Trotskyist movement.
When it was proposed on the Political Bureau early in March 1950 that Haston should be expelled for his renegacy, Grant abstained. The man is an incorrigible opportunist.
It was for this reason that Grant was expelled from the Trotskyist movement at the Third World Congress of the Fourth International in August 1951. Ernest Germain proposed the resolution for his expulsion and it was carried unanimously, on the grounds that Grant was a renegade. Even Pablo, who at that time was already scheming to expel a majority of the French section, supported the expulsion.
The split between the forces of Pablo and the International Committee took place in the winter of 1953 and nothing was heard about Grant until 1957. Pablo was at this time fighting the forces of the International Committee tooth and nail.
When the English organisation during 1956 gained numerically from the crisis in the Communist Party following the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Pablo was desperate. He went to Tribune, the weekly paper of the fake “left” inside the Labour Party, and inserted an advertisement appealing for someone to come forward and help him.
 
Pablo Rescues Grant
Grant answered the advertisement and offered the same kind of service to Pablo as he had given to Haston in his day – he was prepared to stop at nothing in his efforts to slander the English Trotskyists.
Earlier, in 1954, when a leading Trotskyist, Bill Hunter, was being expelled from a north London Labour Party, Grant, who was a member of the Management Committee, abstained when the right wing proposed Hunter’s expulsion. Afterward he proposed a vote of thanks to the Assistant National Agent of the Labour Party who was present at the meeting and who had instigated the expulsion in the first place.
Naturally, Pablo was delighted with such a recruit. Forgotten was the decision of the Third World Congress expelling Grant for covering up for Haston. He was welcomed back as an ally in Pablo’s unprincipled revisionist struggle against English Trotskyists. Forthwith, he was provided with the label “official section” in an effort to confuse the situation in England.
The technique employed by Grant and Pablo to disrupt our movement was simple. Normally the Grant group carries out little or no activity inside the labour movement. It is a thoroughly sectarian group which has opportunistically liquidated itself into the Labour Party. The tactic of “deep entry” in fact provided Grant with a cover to do nothing.
On occasions, however, the Grant Group comes to life, but this has nothing to do with the struggle of the working class. Such outbursts are invariably connected with the difficulties of the Socialist Labour League.
When someone leaves our organisation, such a Peter Fryer, Daniels and Cadogan in 1959, they are immediately approached by the Grant Group (in this particular case by Pablo himself), who immediately proceeds to ignore the political reasons why they deserted the SLL, in order to glean whatever petty gossip they can against the League. Such gossip is then utilised to obscure the real political issues in dispute.
This is the essence of unprincipled factionalism, the method of the petty bourgeois in the struggle against Marxism. Whereas the Marxist will always try to reveal the class nature of the political differences, the petty bourgeois revisionist will endeavour to obscure them with subjective gossip and slander. It was this method which Grant and Pablo applied against the SLL from 1957 onwards.
Now, we come to another ally of Pablo at that time, the group headed by T. Cliff, which claims that the 1917 revolution in the Soviet Union has been completely defeated and that Russia is today a state capitalist country. Cliff arrived in England from Palestine (Israel) in September 1946. He immediately joined forces with the Haston-Grant group and opposed those leaders who were opposing their opportunist role.
After February 1950, when Haston deserted the Trotskyist movement, Cliff’s small group remained inside the Trotskyist organisation, until the Korean war broke out in the summer of 1950. Delegates from Cliff’s group proposed to our annual conference in August 1950 that we denounce the North Koreans as being just as responsible for the war in Korea as the United States imperialists. This position was overwhelmingly rejected by the delegates with one notable exception – Grant. He attended the conference as a delegate and when the vote was taken against Cliff he abstained.
After the conference, the Cliff group then proceeded to open disruption of the majority conference decisions. On the Birmingham and St. Pancras Trades Councils they proposed resolutions denouncing the North Koreans as being as equally responsible for the war as the American imperialists. Naturally we expelled them immediately.
However, much water has flowed under the bridged since that time. Today, the same Cliff group unites with the pro-Stalinists on the Vietnam Solidarity Committee in proposing “peace” in South Vietnam. They have joined forces in the campaign against the Prices and Incomes Act with the Stalinists in England who have betrayed and sabotaged this struggle and opposed the campaigns and demonstrations of the Young socialists.
 
State Capitalists Join Hands with Stalinists against the SLL
In other words the state capitalist anti-Stalinists of the Korean war have now found themselves in the same camp as the Stalinists in 1966. One of their youth members, Mr. Cafoor, openly writes in Communist Party publications whilst, at the same time, he denounces the Young Socialists and the Trotskyists. So the anti-Stalinists of 1950 become the pro-Stalinists of 1966. Their method is the same.
When the Cliff group refused to defend the Soviet Union and the North Koreans against American imperialism in 1950 they were acting not on the basis of the Marxist method of class analysis, but on the method of petty-bourgeois impressionism. That is why they have wound up supporting the same Stalinism which they opposed in 1950.
Up until the time the SWP refused to discuss with the SLL in 1961, there was no disagreement between us about the revisionist role of the Pablo. Grant and Cliff groups. Then as soon as Cannon, Hansen and Dobbs made the political shift to Pablo, they also began to fish around in these gossip sewers in order to attack the SLL.
 
Hansen Adopts Grant
In the autumn of 1964 Hansen took over where Pablo left off and called a conference in an effort to achieve a unification between the Grant group and another small band of middle-class warriors residing in the Midlands.
This latter group moves around in fake “left” Labour circles and produces a duplicated periodical which is distinguished by the fact that it never deals with a single problem from a Trotskyist point of view. Apparently its motto is “if you want to convince the centrists, you must talk and look like them.”
Hansen’s main trump card was that both groups hated the SLL and he imagined that this would be sufficient to keep them together. On the surface of things the conference appeared to produce a limited success, but shortly afterwards trouble broke out between the group leaders about what they were going to do inside the Labour Party and the whole thing blew apart, despite last-minute intervention by Hansen himself.
So now the SWP sponsored “united secretariat” is without any section in Britain, although it favours the Midlands group more than Grant. This experience reveals the blind-alley politics of revisionism.
From time to time it is possible for the method of subjectivism and gossip to make an impact on cynics and tired refugees from the class struggle, but this is purely temporary. No movement can be build on such as basis, which is after all nothing more than a reflection of the idealist method of thinking. The differences between revisionism and revolutionary Marxism today boils itself down to the differences between idealism and dialectical materialism, and not what this individual or that individual is supposed to have done.
It is also very easy to exploit those tendencies who slander and gossip. The police do this constantly. They simply send agents into those groups who will be prepared to join heartily in condemning the SLL. Naturally such leaders as Cliff and Grant, despite their politics, are sincere in their beliefs and have nothing whatsoever to do with the police. It is simply that the irresponsible anti-SLL factional climate in their groups assists the police.
The SLL leadership has plenty of information at its disposal to prove this and it is the reason why, from time to time, we make it our business to look into the affairs of these relatively tiny organisations. So far as we are concerned, dealing with the activities of Hansen (who is not a police agent) in Britain was indeed a very simple job. The man has little knowledge of a mass movement activity and is wide open to the crudest impressionism.
The real political battle in Britain since 1940 between ourselves, the state capitalist Tony Cliff group, and the Pabloite Grant Group, was waged inside the Young Socialists where both groups joined hands with the right-wing Labour leaders in fighting our tendency. We won outright victory against them all, even under conditions where Grant and Cliff joined hands to found the youth paper Young Guard in opposition to the most successful youth paper since the end of the war, Keep Left.
Our paper was proscribed in 1962 and theirs was allowed to function with the blessings of the right wing leaders. In spite of all this our youth comrades organised around Keep Left won an outright majority at the Young Socialist national conferences in 1963 and again in 1964.
At this latter conference Hansen supported a united opposition of the Wilson right wing, the Grant group and the Cliff outfit, against Keep Left. Here is a classical example of real petty-bourgeois factionalism in practice, at a decisive turning point in the conflict with Wilson and Co. The Tory agents inside the British labour movement, Hansen, Grant, et al. line up with Wilson.
 
“Ugly Rumours”
In a recent pronouncement Hansen declared:
“For years rumours have circulated in the British labour movement about Healy’s methods. Generally the sources turned out to be dissidents who walked out or were expelled from the socialist Labour League. Some of the stories they told sounded to Trotskyists in other countries like gross exaggerations and thus tended to be discounted as due to factionalism. Yet it had to be noted that in the international scene, Healy’s organisation was the only one claiming to represent Trotskyism that had such an ugly reputation in the Labour movement because of continual tales about gross violations of democratic rights of its own members.”
Everything that is said here is a lie from beginning to end. Mr. Joseph Hansen, ex-secretary of Trotsky, and now renegade from Trotskyism, conditionally supports the arch-Stalinist rogue Apthecker (who justified the Moscow trials and the rape of Hungary on behalf of the Stalinists) in the coming New York elections.
Tell us why it is that you backed the Grant and Cliff groups who supported Wilson, the biggest renegade in the Labour Party since Ramsay MacDonald, when the Young Socialist majority were being expelled in 1964?
You protest, but the facts are clear.
You, Messrs. Hansen, Grant and Cliff, did support Wilson against the Young Socialists when they were warning the working class to fight Wilson’s betrayal in 1964. They, the Young Socialists, were right, and you, the self proclaimed “Marxists”, were wrong.
You still protest, Mr. Hansen.
All right then, tell us why your duplicated house magazine, World Outlook, refused to publish a single protest about Wilson’s attack on the Young Socialists? Yet you can support all sorts of renegades who now make “left” noises to cover up their renegacy.
Mr. Hansen, you have rejected every principle the Comrade Trotsky fought for. The “good name” of Trotskyism in Britain today does not reside with your pet renegades, the Midland group, Grant or Cliff. It lies with the Young Socialists and the Socialist Labour League.
What “ugly rumours” does Hansen talk about in relation to the SLL? Let us list our disagreement with various tendencies since 1938 by asking him directly:

Were we right to expel Haston and his tendency in 1950 when they denounced the Fourth International for ultimately joining the right wing of the Labour Party?
 
Were we right in expelling John Lawrence, the disciple of Pablo, in 1953, when he [later] left in 1954 to join the Communist Party?
 
Were we right in expelling Peter Fryer who left in 1959 when he publicly denounced us to the capitalist press on his way toward writing idealist books on “sex”?
 
Were we right in expelling Peter Cadogan in 1959 who insisted that he should have the right to denounce the policies of the League publically? This man is now a leading pacifist opportunist.

But nobody else has been expelled from the SLL since then (1960). What other organisation in the working class movement can claim such a record?
Are we intolerant? Of course not. We try to keep every comrade in our movement, but when they join hands with the capitalists publicly, of course we expel them.
But then, and this is the real problem for Hansen, how can he explain the fact that so many, many comrades who join the SLL remain members? Inside the Socialist Labour League and Young Socialists are hundreds and hundreds of young people who are fighting side-by-side, day-in and day-out with the SLL and Young Socialists to build a socialist Britain.
Listen Hansen! When you talk about the “good name” of Trotskyism in Britain you are using a phrase to cover up your own support for renegades who have long since deserted the movement.
 
The Robertson Group of the U.S.A.
An important source of revisionism in the United States today is the protracted and relatively low political development of the working class. The post-war inflationary boom strengthened temporarily many illusions in the viability of American capitalism. At the same time the cold-war witch-hunt resulted in the best militants being expelled from their trade unions and sacked from a large number of the most important industries. The Socialist Workers Party suffered very severely from these setbacks.
The break-up of this situation became discernable in the early 1960’s with the emergence of powerful movements amongst student youth around civil rights and later the war in Vietnam. In some respects this development resembled the CND movement in Britain during the late 1950’s. They were, and are, predominantly middle-class movements which indirectly reflect the re-emergence of the working class into class politics in the metropolitan capitalist countries.
But for a revolutionary Marxist Party to orientate itself exclusively on such manifestations of struggle is a fundamental error in terms of Marxist theory. In practice it means basing the activity of the party around the idea that the middle class can change society, when, in fact, this is the task alone which the working class has to perform under revolutionary leadership.
This does not in any way mean that the working class no longer needs the support of such middle-class layers. It does indeed, but here again the vehicle of consciously guiding such support towards the working class is the Marxist party, which on matters of principle bases itself on the revolutionary role of the working class.
The political degeneration of the SWP internationally was greatly accelerated by its about turn towards the petty-bourgeois radical movement inside the USA.
From here on it was only a stone’s throw to sympathising with the late President Kennedy’s wife when he, the President, was assassinated and from demanding that Federal troops be sent into Mississippi to aid the Negroes. This also marked the uncritical turn towards Malcolm X and the later slogan of Black Power. Whilst it is the duty of the revolutionary party to provide critical support for such movements in order to direct them towards the working class, the SWP completely capitulated to them.
And yet, without intervention of the powerful American working class, all these movements are in a blind alley from which there is no way out unless the revolutionary party mobilises this working class against capitalism.
 
Robertson Rejects Internationalism
It is at this point that we can see the real political implications of internationalism for the SWP. The Fourth International – its theory and organisational conceptions – is the only force capable of guiding and rectifying the course of a national section when it starts from impressionism and begins to capitulate to its capitalist environment. It was precisely when such a need arose that the SWP broke of all its relations with the International Committee of the Fourth International and turned towards Pabloite revisionists.
Only the International Committee could have at this stage assisted the SWP to overcome its difficulties, but Cannon, Hansen and Dobbs were contemptuous of the Fourth International outside the United States.
They had become arrogant American nationalists who were now hopelessly entangled with the politics of the petty bourgeois in the USA. They wanted the kind of international they could utilise for their own revisionist ends and Pabloism filled the bill.
When the Fourth International was founded in the summer of 1938, it based itself essentially upon the revolutionary potential of the international working class. Into its theoretical armour Trotsky poured all the lessons and principles derived from the struggles of the modern proletariat against the forces of international capital. Revolutionary internationalism is inseparable from the Marxist conception that the working class is the only class capable of overthrowing capitalist society and establishing socialism.
The revisionist Pabloite conception, which produced the split in the Fourth International in 1953, maintained that sections of the petty-bourgeois Stalinist bureaucracy would, under pressure, move into a leftward direction and substitute themselves for the revolutionary party by taking power. Here is the essential revisionist bond which binds the SWP to the rump Pabloite outfit of Germain, Pierre Frank and Livio, which masquerades as the “United Secretariat of the Fourth International” operating from Paris.
From its infancy the group in the USA, which is now led by James Robertson, was nurtured in the worst environment of petty-bourgeois politics, the Shachtman group, which denounced the defence of the Soviet Union in 1940 and split from the Fourth International. The group joined the SWP in the late 1950’s at a time when Cannon and Co. were rapidly moving away from the Fourth International. Hence the early anti-internationalist training which Robertson’s group brought with it from Shachtman now blended with the anti-internationalism of the SWP.
 
Back to Revisionism
This did not at all mean that from then on relations between Robertson and the SWP leadership would by plain sailing. The basic core of Robertson’s group is first and foremost a clique of petty-bourgeois friends whose politics are determined by the need to maintain at all costs their own little group.
If the preservation of this clique sometimes takes on the form of abstractly defending the correct principles of the Fourth International, then they will turn enthusiastically towards defending them, provided it does not interfere with their little friendly circle.
At the time when Robertson joined the SWP the party leaders, having made up their minds to capitulate to Pabloism, were busy turning their attention towards the liquidation of all opposition to their policies. They saw in Robertson’s group a potential source of such opposition and this immediately raised the future of the clique.
For a time Robertson appeared to move politically in the direction of the Socialist Labour League and the International Committee. Then came the crucial test. Since the struggle of the SWP was essentially being waged against the International Committee of the Fourth International it became essential that all those who supported the Committee should work under its leadership.
This is something which Robertson would not tolerate. He and his clique wanted the right to say and do as they liked inside the SWP and the USA without any interference from the international movement. In other words they wanted the political authority of the International Committee without in any way being organisationally responsible to it.
Naturally, bearing in mind the anti-nationalism which was prevalent in and around the SWP, we could never agree to such a position. Accordingly the Committee drew up a list of proposals in 1962 which we insisted must be agreed by all the US participants in the political fight against the revisionist SWP leadership. These were as follows:

The tendency expresses its general political agreement with the tendency of the International Committee which has agreement around the 1961 international perspectives presented by the Socialist Labour League. It must therefore begin from the standpoint of its responsibilities towards the political struggle of this tendency in relation to the construction of the revolutionary party in the United States.

This tendency recognises that the building of the SWP as a revolutionary party depends on and derives from its adherence to the revolutionary international perspective and approach.

All discussion and disagreement within the [national – Ed.] tendency is part of the discussion within the international tendency. Patience will have to be exercised so that while time is allowed for such differences to be adequately discussed internationally, the political aims and functioning of the tendency remain unimpaired.

For this purpose, there will be facilities available for all members of the tendency to express their opinions in a special international tendency bulletin to be published by the Socialist Labour League. This bulletin will have a limited circulation amongst leaders of the international sections who will be invited to comment and participate in the discussion inside the tendency. All written discussion must be carried out within this bulletin.
 
The tendency must pay particular attention to the development of a perspective for work in the United States in relation to the trade union and the Negro movement. The main political work of the tendency within the party will be to patiently explain the nature of the Pabloite revisionism and liquidationism as a method, and its relation to the problem of developing a concrete revolutionary perspective for the work in the trade union and Negro movements. (Such a policy must be carefully presented, not in an artificial factional way, that will make sense to the activists in the party. The elaboration of the policy is therefore a matter that can only be carried out by most careful preparation.)

The more careful and thoughtful the preparation, the easier it will be to convince people in practice. If the preparation is carried out in a factional and subjective way, then barriers can be raised between the tendency and the rank and file which will slow down the rate of clarification.

The main political fight of the tendency must be directed against the right-wing elements in the party, the Weiss group and the Swabeck tendency. This does not in any way mean that we make the slightest concession to the centre element in the party who up to now have been trying to have the best of both worlds, but who have gradually shifted this position, for the time being at least, in a leftward direction. Because this shift to the left on pacifism is carried out empirically, it can easily become a shift to the right under different conditions. What it does is to open a favourable opportunity for a real struggle against the right-wing elements.

An analysis of the Weiss position adopted by the Pabloites, especially the French Pabloites, on Cuba will show a very clear difference between them and the majority of the SWP.

Our strategy should be to establish a political cohesion of our tendency in a way that can effect a united front where possible with the centre elements in the SWP against the right.
 
The tendency must recognise that the SWP in the main instrument for the realisation of socialism in the United States. There is no other organisation outside that movement which can decisively aid the struggle for socialism at the present time. Our comrades must therefore work as loyal party members; Contribute to all aspects of the work, literary and practical, taking part in all its electoral activity and sub-drives and accepting the administrative decisions of the leadership even though we might be very much against them.

Members of the tendency must recognise that the SWP is their party, and they must speak as people who are responsible to their party. The difficulties of the party must not be exploited in a factional way. This must be seen as the overhead price for the lack of political clarification. Since the responsibility for this clarification now rests squarely on the shoulders of the tendency, to make factional capital out of the party’s difficulties would be nothing more than shelving that task which is the main purpose for the existence of the tendency.

The tendency must not make premature characterisations of the leadership of the SWP except of those groups such as Weiss and Swabeck who have clearly revealed their Pabloism in theory and practice.

The centre group, which is of course the majority, cannot be described as a finished centrist tendency in the same was as the Pabloites. To be sure there are elements of centrism in its thinking and activity, but these do not predominate. To characterise the SWP majority tendency as a finished centrist tendency is to give up the political battle before it has begun.

We must believe that by common work and political discussion it will be possible to win a majority of the party to adopt the correct line on Pabloism and for the building of the revolutionary party in the Unite States.
 
The present tendency shall dissolve and shall re-establish itself on the basis of the preceding point.
 
Only those comrades who accept these conditions can be members of the tendency.

Robertson and his clique rejected these proposals out of hand. They were not really concerned with the struggle inside the SWP to clarify the party, they were more concerned about what was to be the future of their own little group, which was now being pressed to makeup its mind by two irreconcilable and antagonistic forces – the International Committee and the Pabloite revisionists of the SWP.
Caught by his unprincipled politics in this trap, Robertson beat a hasty retreat into the camp of revisionism.
Right in the middle of the most critical stage of the political struggle between the International Committee and the American Pabloites he preferred to split the weak forces of the Committee within the SWP rather than accept the international recommendations on how the struggle should be conducted.
Thus, Robertson’s anti-internationalism played right into the hands of the revisionists and correspondingly strengthened them.
This was a serious warming to the International Committee and the Socialist Labour League as to the treacherous middle-class nature of this group. Still we resolved to proceed in a most patient way to try and educate Robertson and as many of his supporters a possible.
A few days after the split from comrade Wohlforth’s group we replied to their arguments justifying the break as follows:
London,
November 12, 1962
Dear Comrades,
We have received a letter dated November 4 in the names of L. Harper, L. Ireland, S. Mage, J. Robertson, S. Stoute, written on behalf of a majority of the New York section of the Revolutionary Tendency of the SWP
There appears to be some misunderstanding amongst you about proposals which we submitted through comrade Phillips. You appear, for example, to be labouring under a misapprehension that these proposals were drafted after we listened to an attack upon you by comrade Phillips.
This, of course, was not the case. If we had any criticisms to make of your good selves, we would do so in writing. We would certainly not listen to any kind of gossip in relation to your activity. We start from the assumption that you want seriously to construct the revolutionary party in the US and we would like to assure you that we are only too happy to discuss with you about the best possible way to do this.
We ourselves have, as you know, a long experience of working as a minority faction inside the British Trotskyist movement. We began this work in 1943 and it lasted for seven years. We did not assume leadership rights in England until 1950.
The proposals are based upon experiences we had during that time and are certainly not dictated by comrades Wohlforth and Phillips. During this period we accepted on a number of occasions advice with which we ourselves disagreed, but which we operated in practice because we accepted the revolutionary integrity and rich experience of those comrades who gave it to us. In this way we began to understand the real value of international collaboration.
Between September 1943 and March 1944, we fought a sharp struggle for the unification of all the Trotskyist groups in Britain. At the conference of our organisation, the Workers International League, in September 1943, I was in a minority of one supporting this proposal. Then advice came from comrades in New York which laid down the terms for unification. These terms were presented as final and could not be debated or discussed. They had to be accepted or rejected as they were by all parties concerned, including our minority.
Since the unprincipled majority of our section wanted to deprive us of an opportunity to continue the struggle against them, the immediately opened up relations with the opportunist elements in other groups and decided to accept the terms. Their reasoning was that by moving towards acceptance of such terms they could isolate us by an unprincipled combination. They did just that. When the unification congress took place in March 1944, we were deprived of minority rights on the National Committee of the fused organisation, the Revolutionary Communist Party. Prior to this conference we raised the matter with the comrades responsible for the fusion terms but they told us that we could not insist on any rights and that we had also got to accept the terms as they were.
So reluctantly we accepted the terms and went ahead to make the fused organisation work. History has since revealed that the fusion was in our favour and not on the side of those who were manoeuvring and intriguing. If we had not accepted the terms and split from the fused organisation because we were not given our rights, then surely our tendency would have been destroyed.
I might add that we did not receive minority rights on the National Committee of the Revolutionary Communist Party until almost two years later. Everything was done to persecute us as a faction but we refused under any circumstances to split no matter what the differences or to be driven out of the party. Our people were the best workers and nothing could be done to take this right away from them.
Early in the fusion it became clear that the leadership of the Revolutionary Communist Party contained a mixture of ultra-lefts, opportunists and centrists, but we resisted all attempts to characterise them as a centrist tendency since a premature characterisation of this description would have acted as a barrier between ourselves and the rank and file. Many comrades in our own tendency felt strongly about the politics of the majority but they had to resist their feelings in order to undertake a long term perspective of work to equip them to become what they did at a later stage – the leadership of the party.
The international struggle against Pabloite revisionism which resulted in the split of 1953 has now taken on a new form. Due to the lack of political clarification about the nature of revisionism, the Leadership of the SWP are tending to succumb to it as an approach to world problems. But this is by no means a clear-cut development. We know from reading the documents and publications of the party that certain elements such as Weiss, Swabeck, Warde and Hansen have now developed a rounded out Pabloite approach. Others are, however, still very unclear and hesitant because amongst other things the SWP has a long record of fighting for a principled Trotskyist position, although it cannot, because of the Voorhis Act, participate in international activity.
Unfortunately, the activity of the Pabloites has been to some extent successful in provoking a factional atmosphere between ourselves and the majority. A good percentage of the activity of people like Dowson during his visit here was taken up with misrepresenting small factional points which were then relayed to the US in order to sharpen up the differences. We know only too well the harm that this kind of thing can do. The longer we have to discuss with the SWP, the more opportunity we will have to expose the Pabloites and assist the Party itself. Our policy is to speak up clearly and sharply on the political differences and maintain a collaboration with the SWP for as long as possible.
For this reason we have been opposed to any attempt sharpen up the internal faction struggle inside the SWP no matter what the provocation. Our proposals are designed towards this end in line with our past experience. We do not want to impose them on you. If you do not like to accept them, then there is no need to accept them. All those comrades who do accept them will be considered as part of an international tendency, as we were in the early days of our movement. Contrary to what comrade Mage said in his letter, it is perfectly permissible for this international tendency to discuss its affairs internally either in writing of oral discussion. We are part of a world party and not separate national groupings. The SLL, as part of a world movement has every right to establish tendency relations when it feels these are necessary.
You can decide whether or not you want to be part of this international tendency. The SWP in the past has constantly spelled out its advice – and correctly so – not only to ourselves but to comrades in many parts of the world who have supported it in the various struggles. It is perfectly permissible for you to contribute to an international tendency bulletin all the opinions which you have about the centrist nature of the SWP leadership and we will seriously discuss them with you.
We do not want to bring to an end the internal struggle inside the minority so that comrades can bend their entire efforts towards clarifying the party and helping it in this struggle. We feel sure that if you can see your way to do this we shall make important gains in the future.
We would like to ask you to accept these terms and continue a written discussion with us here, if it were possible you may be able to arrange to visit us some time in the spring or earlier if it could be managed.
Acceptance of the terms does not mean you give up your political positions. We are asking you to do what we had to do in the past, that is to accept the lessons of international experience and work together with us as part on an international tendency fighting against Pabloite revisionism for revolutionary Marxism.
We are asking you to put the international movement and the building of the party first, before any factional considerations. No one amongst us wants to lose a single comrade as a result of a misunderstanding. What you do is being decided not by us but by yourselves.
The political differences which Comrade Phillips has are in some respects much more serious than yours, yet he has decided to accept these terms. We urge you to do the same.
Awaiting your reply.



 


Best wishes,
G. Healy
on behalf of the Organising Committee



We have reproduced this letter in full so that those who are interested may contrast the educational way in which we tried to assist Robertson, with the lies and slander which he now utilises against the Socialist Labour League. The same method on our part prevailed during the April 1966 International Congress, which we shall deal with later.
Robertson’s split from the International Committee in 1962 was a god-send to the revisionists, and he proceeded to help them in their moves towards the unprincipled unification with the Pabloites during the summer of 1963.
The split was carried out without any prior discussion. This, in turn, prevented the serious situation in Ceylon, which was developing towards a coalition between the Lank Sama Samaja Party majority and the Bandaranaika government, from being discussed. Robertson in his political ignorance and lack of understanding of the struggle which the International Committee had waged against Pabloism since 1953, came out in favour of this unprincipled unity. In a statement which he issued in January 1964 he said:
“We also made it crystal clear in advance (his emphasis) that should the pro-Pabloist unification win a majority and go into effect, then the dissident and opposing minority internationally who shared our general outlook should go through the experience of the falsely-based unity attempt.”
At the most critical stage of the international struggle against revisionism, when the fate of the Ceylonese section hung in the balance, Robertson, for formally different reasons, found himself in the camp of the revisionists. He accepted a revisionist unification which has from its inception led to one disaster after another.
 
Robertson Returns to the Politics of the S.W.P.
Their split from the International Committee in 1962 did not save Robertson and his group from expulsion from the SWP. As soon as Cannon, Dobbs, Hansen and Co. had come out in support of the reunification conference with the Pabloites they also made preparation to throw Robertson and his Group out of the SWP. This they did in December 1963, after a fake enquiry following so-called charges that in fact amounted to a frame up.
Robertson went quietly. He did not volunteer to supply the Socialist Labour League and the International Committee with copies of the relevant documents, just as one of his members supplied Hansen and the SWP with correspondence arising from the international conference of the International Committee of the Fourth International last April.
 
Ready to Accept SWP Discipline
He presented a mildly written statement to the Control Commission of the SWP which pledged his group to abide by “the discipline”, i.e., the discipline by the Pabloite revisionists and to “accepting decisions”. Contrast this declaration to the slander and lies which he pours out today in relation to the circumstances of the split from our International Conference.
In addition the chief witness in his favour at the Control Commission enquiry was one of the oldest advocates of unity with the Pabloites, Myra Tanner Weiss. Her testimony reveals the middle-class nature of Robertson’s group.
“Dobbs”, she says, “gets up and says they, [Robertson’s group], want to split the party, they don’t want to remain in an empty shell. These comrades get up an say ‘We do want to remain in the party. We regard the SWP as being the basic revolutionary cadre in this country’. They say [again referring to Robertson] ‘We will abide by discipline’.”
Such a witness is naturally very hostile to the SLL. “Healy”, she says, “is a sectarian”, and “Shane Mage [Robertson’s chief collaborator at the time] together with Robertson will have nothing to do with his procedural tyranny and bureaucracy.”
“Mage”, she goes on to say, “discussed his verbal disagreements with Healy – I was thoroughly convinced that any collaboration between Healy and Mage and Robertson was out of the question.”
It should be understood that this statement of Myra Tanner Weiss was compiled from a discussion which she previously had with Robertson and Mage.
 
Theoretical Sceptics
This same Mage has now left the Robertson group, rejecting Marxism and suggesting that what everybody needs is a dose of the drug LSD. Yet when we characterised him as a renegade, we were indignantly rebuked by two of Robertson’s members, Turner and Sherwood, who wrote to us on April 30 insisting that “he” (Mage) “is neither anti-Trotskyist nor a renegade”. To this day there are no written documents discussing the differences between Robertson and Mage before the latter departed.
Another small and extremely pessimistic group formally associated with Robertson, headed by one Peter Freidlander recently put out a leaflet which asks the question “is Marxism dead?”, and answers it by saying “it looks like it”.
The contents of the leaflet go on to reject Marxism and raises a series of questions such as “why did Stalinism become a mass movement embodying the most intelligent and dedicated workers and intellectuals, while remaining an organisation of mysticism and deceit, a living lie?”, and they again supply an answer.
“We are tired of the old Trotskyist formula, which has nevertheless been the best answer so far” – every word a masterpiece of theoretical scepticism. What they are saying in effect is that “we are tired of Trotskyism and we’re looking for something new”.
 
After Expulsion from the SWP
Following his expulsion from the SWP Robertson kept up the formal pretence of general political agreement with the International Committee, but this by itself was not enough. The main question involving the political reasons behind Robertson’s split from the International Committee in 1962 still remained unsettled. A further attempt had to be made to see if the political experiences of his group had produced a change in this respect for the better, or whether or not the gap had widened.
This was the purpose of the Montreal Conference, which took place in October 1965 and brought the Wohlforth and Robertson groups together around a unity agreement. The salient points of this agreement were as follows:
It could not become effective until after the International conference on the International Committee in April 1966. We wanted to see if Robertson still maintained his old political hostility towards internationalism before the International Committee agreed to unification. The next most important point was contained in Section 4, which reads:
“4. The American Commission would be empowered to insist that the resolution or resolutions on perspectives, which was to be presented to the Unification Conference, accepted the principles embodied in the decisions of the first four Congresses of the Communist International, the resolutions and documents agreed to by the 1938 Founding Conference of the Fourth International and the International resolution on perspectives adopted by the International Committee of the Fourth International Conference April 1966.
“Tactical disagreements on the USA would not be an obstacle to unity provided they did not contravene the above decisions. They would be left to the majority of delegates at the Unification Conference to decide. The International Committee of the Fourth International reserves the right to make its political position on these matters known to the delegates at the Unification Conference if it considers this necessary.”
Both groups accepted these proposals unanimously and it was now left to the experience of the International Conference to see if unification could be realised.
Over the past few months, Robertson, actively assisted by Hansen of the SWP (one of the men who supported his expulsion in 1963), has been busy spreading lies, slander and gossip about what happened at the conference.
We are not in the least interested in such politically degenerated methods, except in so far as they reveal the political method of those who peddle such stories around. A ready-made audience for this sort of thing always exists in the ranks of disorientated petty bourgeois who have no belief in the power of the working class to change society, and, as a result, no confidence in their ability to build a revolutionary party.
In the months preceding the conference we had a glimpse of the unprincipled kind of politics which Robertson pursues in practice. A member of his group, Mark Tishman, who was temporarily resident in Britain, collaborated closely with the renegade state capitalist group of Tony Cliff. Immediately the International Conference was over he supplied this group with a full report of what took place.
A few weeks before the conference, Robertson proposed that this man should be one of his group’s alternative delegates. Our first reaction, knowing Tishman’s associates, was to refuse this request, but we did not want to place any obstacles to Robertson attending the conference so we allowed the proposal to go through.
 
What Happened at the Congress?
When Robertson and his delegation arrived in England for the international conference they were treated with the utmost courtesy. The Young Socialists invited them to their annual conference at Morecambe as their guests where their nominee spoke as a fraternal delegate. To facilitate their political work at the conference an apartment one minute away from the meeting place was placed at their disposal. No other international delegation enjoyed such good conditions of work.
We were sincerely working for the success of the unification, if it could be achieved on a principled basis. If this could be attained we did not want the slightest hitch in the arrangements. The conference opened with the main political report presented by comrade Cliff Slaughter.
On the morning of the third day (Wednesday), Robertson intervened and, whilst expressing his general political agreement with the report, proceeded, as of right, to make certain criticisms. About ten minutes before the afternoon session was due to commence, Robertson said he wanted to rest because he was tired, having been working on a document on US perspectives the night before.
He had in fact been assigned to write this document as a result of the Montreal Conference decisions nearly seven months previously. Having left it to the last moment, he now claimed that he was tired and could not listen to the discussion of his own report. Having made political criticisms he was not interested if hearing the answers.
Such arrogance immediately revealed the real role of this petty bourgeois leader, For, if he was not prepared to listen to those who had differences with him in the international movement, it was reasonable to assume that he would not be prepared to listen to those who had differences with him in the proposed fused organisation in the Unites States.
He was, first and foremost, a clique leader who relied on his little group of cult worshippers to support and provide him with a majority at all costs. If he didn’t to listen to criticism then he did not feel obliged to do so since he was assured of a clique vote in favour of such a position.
It was clear that since Robertson felt that he would have a majority inside the fused group in the USA the Wohlforth minority could be curbed effectively and if necessary driven out at a later stage. It was now established for all to see the kind of unprincipled unification which Robertson was working for.
But still the international conference was anxious to give him every opportunity to change his opinions. When it resumed in the afternoon a special messenger, (Tishman), was sent to Robertson’s apartment asking him to return to the conference and participate in the discussion on his report. So far as physical tiredness was concerned, he was no more tired than any of the other delegates, some of whom had been concerned with the organisation of the conference, and others who had travelled long distances.
Robertson refused to return, knowing that such a refusal would be looked upon very seriously by the conference. It was obvious that he was not really concerned with the political work of the conference but saw it merely as a stepping-stone towards an unprincipled unification inside the USA where his clique felt they had a majority. It now became necessary to put this wrong approach to the test and that is what we proceeded to do.
When he returned later in the evening, he was asked to accept the authority of the conference and apologise for his absence. This he refused to do. He was then allowed time to think out his position and remain until the vote was taken on the political report. During the interval a number of delegates tried to prevail on him to accept the authority of the conference, even if he did this under protest. But he adamantly refused to do anything of the sort.
Such a reaction then prompted a question – if Robertson wouldn’t accept the authority of the conference, there was not the slightest doubt that he would ignore the advice of the international movement if he became the leader of the fused organisation in the United States. In other words, section 4 of the unification agreement would become meaningless.
 
Robertson Wants a Centrist International
Naturally Robertson, Hansen and Co. like to snigger about the discipline of the International Conference, but all this arises from the fact that they have an entirely different conception of responsibilities to the Fourth International than we have.
For us the conference was the highest and most authoritative body in the international movement. It embodied all the lessons from the theoretical and practical struggle of the Fourth International since in was founded in 1938. These included the experience of the international communist movement to apply the policies of the first four congresses of the Third Communist International in the period before Stalinist bureaucratic degeneration. There is no other body more politically authoritative today than the International Committee elected by the April conference.
When Robertson decided to split from this conference because he would not accept its political authority he split from the international Trotskyist movement. He could have stayed even if he disagreed with the decisions. Indeed, one of his closest disciples, Rose Jersawitz, wrote in a letter dated April 9, “In hindsight, it was probably a mistake for Jim [Robertson] not to have attended the session, or to have done or said anything which could have been misinterpreted for that matter.”
Without knowing it, Rose Jersawitz has let the cat out of the bag so far as Robertson’s alleged “illness” is concerned. She knew, better than anyone else, since she was a member of his delegation, that the “illness” of “tiredness” need not have prevented him from participating in the conference. This was nothing more than a cheap fraud and she pulls back from repeating it. Likewise, the allegation that the conference wanted Robertson to denounce himself as a petty bourgeois is just a downright lie. It did nothing of the sort.
She had, of course, a definite political point of view so far as her estimations of the conference went, and that was, together with the French group Voix Ouvriere, a confirmed centrist position. In a letter dated May 6 she reports a conversation with Hardy, a representative of Voix Ouvriere:
“On rebuilding the FI (H)
“(a) This task remains for us. The IC was (and maybe is) a hindrance only is so far as the illusion is held that they might have the capacity can best be shattered by going ahead with the task on two fronts: (1) building our own national sections and aiding those we can; (2) establishing as much of a dialogue as possible between as many tendencies as possible. V.O. plans to have an international mimeo publication soon, taking out the various pol. and org. questions beginning with recent conference. In this way we are hoping to begin an exchange with ICers and will attempt to draw in US Pabloites and Posadasites as well as many “independents” (such as us) and contacts of internationals (such as Japan). And to begin to establish working relationships, personal exchanges, travelling, translation aides etc. In other words to begin the establishment of org. committee which we had expected to come out of conference, (me – Rose). I said that I did think we were in a position to initiate or even play a major role in these activities.”
In other words, they envisaged a type of conference such as was organised by what Trotsky described as the “International Bureau of squeezed lemons, the three and three quarter international”, in the years before the Second World War. The Independent Labour Party and others were members of the bureau which advocated “all inclusive” conferences with opportunists, revisionists and others.
Hardy of Voix Ouvriere and Rose Jersawits, Robertson and co. wanted a similar type of conference where Pabloites and Posadists participated in order to finally agree that no one would be responsible for what was decided. Thus they could all go their own way immediately the conference was over.
In a letter written on 23 May 1965, when arrangements were already under way for the Montreal meeting, G. White, a colleague of Robertson’s from Berkeley, placed a question mark over the issue of unification with the International Committee. “What about our relations with the Posadas?” he said. The Posadas group is an ultra-left split off group from the Pabloites in Latin America.
It is now clear that Robertson proceeded in the period before the conference as a man with two political faces. One of these was turned towards the clique, assuring them that since they would have a majority in the fused group, they had nothing to fear from Wohlforth. The other was turned towards the International Committee Conference mouthing left phrases whilst at the same time doing everything to avoid being brought under the discipline of the Committee.
He was prepared in December 1963 to work under the discipline of the Cannon, Hansen and Dobbs group of revisionists but he was not prepared to work under the discipline of the International Committee of 1966.
 
Robertson Returned to the Politics of the SWP
It was very natural therefore for Hansen of the SWP to offer full support to Robertson in his unprincipled fight with the International Committee after the conference was over.
It was equally natural for Robertson to uncritically accept this support. He ordered bundles of their pamphlet attacking the International Committee and distributed them everywhere he could. An unprincipled united front was launched against the International Committee, but with absolutely no success.
The anti-internationalist Robertson had merely rejoined the anti-internationalist SWP and nobody really cared two hoots what either of them would do. They had this much in common.
The SWP since Trotsky’s death had utilised the Fourth International as a front, behind which they carried out their nationalist orientation inside the USA. Robertson wanted to use the International Committee of the Fourth International as a front behind which he arranged unprincipled unification inside the USA for purely national reasons.
The “real issue” at the conference is summed up by his disciple Tishman when he posed the question in his letter of 7 May as to “whether the present international committee – constitutes the sole organised successor to the Trotskyist movement?”
He, together with Robertson, rejects this, we support it – that is why a definitive split had to take place both with Robertson and the Voix Ouvriere. Following a highly successful conference it was a good, clear, politically motivated split on the principled issue of responsibility for carrying out decisions of the international conference.
All the lessons which we had to learn in England from the experiences of the Founding Conference of the Fourth International in 1938 were applied at this juncture. We have broken from Robertson and his anti-internationalism for all time.
There is no future for such a group, no matter how much activity it carries out. Revolutionary parties who will take power can only be built henceforth on the principles, organisation and discipline of the International Committee of the Fourth International.
 
The Socialist Labour League
The history of the Fourth International, and before it the Left Opposition inside the Soviet Union, is devoted entirely to the defence and application of revolutionary Marxism. This is not an abstract question. It is one which has required the concrete investigation of all major happenings inside the international labour movement over the past 30 years. But the success of such investigation could not have been achieved, above all by Trotsky, without a continuous study of all the day-to-day happenings in his own organisation, the Fourth International.
The most important Marxist analysis of the origin and role of the Soviet bureaucracy is undoubtedly Revolution Betrayed which appeared in the late 1930’s. At the time when Trotsky was writing this book he was also actively intervening and seeking solutions to the hundred and one different problems which affected the various sections of his movement.
It was a period of entry into the centrist and social-democratic parties, and the difficulties were numerous. But all this was in the political day’s work so far as Trotsky was concerned. It was, in fact, intimately bound up with writing Revolution Betrayed, as well as the dozens of other articles which appeared in his name during those years.
So far as circumstances would allow, he was an active participant in the building of revolutionary parties until the day he was assassinated by Stalin’s agent. This was his greatness, and it was the crowning achievement of his political life, because it fused his whole thinking being with Lenin and Leninism.
No revolutionary fighter ever got closed to applying the real meaning of Lenin’s teachings than Trotsky. He was Lenin’s great disciple, because at all stages he fought to fuse theory with practice. To him the theoretical analysis of Stalin’s bureaucratic degeneration was inseparable from building the sections of the fourth International.
 
Centrist Theory
As usual, he came under fire from the centrists of the Independent Labour Party and the London Bureau. Since the hallmark of centrism is contempt for theory, they rounded on Trotsky for “splitting hairs”. Today the ILP has been reduced to the status of a small sect. The London Bureau disappeared long ago and with it any connections it had on the international field. Its old leaders who are still left alive, such as Lord Brockway, have for some time come to terms of co-existence with the Establishment.
In comparison to the fate of these anti-theory specialists, the Socialist Labour League goes forward amongst the youth and industrial workers and has established itself a much more influential position that ever the ILP enjoyed, even in its hey-day.
Anti-theory methods take different forms. There are those who try to place themselves on a small pedestal “above disputes” by playing upon weaknesses of people who just want to carry out practical activity, without bothering about reading and thinking. In countries such as Britain where, in the past, the development of the class struggle has been slow, such people have sown confusion, invariably winding up in the camp of the opportunists around the Labour Party. Their spokesmen are to be found chiefly in the ranks of the fake Parliamentary “left”.
 
The Role of Stalinism
The Stalinists in the Communist Party are constantly denouncing the Socialist Labour League as “sectarian”. By using this term, they endeavour to prevent a serious discussion on the political differences. Close on their heels come the Socialist Workers Party of the USA, the Pabloite Unified Secretariat in Paris, the state capitalist group of Tony Cliff in England and the small gang of Pabloites, Messrs. Jordan, Taite, Coates etc., who worship at the shrine of the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation. On every conceivable occasion they take time out to explain the SLL away as “sectarian”
When the SLL and the Young Socialists mobilise 1,500 trade unionists and youth in a demonstration, they say it is “sectarian and unimportant”. When 500 Young Socialists travel to Liege in Belgium, they look the other way and say it doesn’t matter – yet they themselves only represent a tiny handful.
However, this does not at all mean that such groups are Stalinist in their complete political outlook. For Stalinists, the use of the word “sectarian” is merely a continuation of their description of the Trotskyist forces as fascist agents of Wall Street. Between Trotskyism and Stalinism there can be no compromise.
Although Stalin has been dead for over 13 years, the basic revisionist ideas for which he stood still dominate the thinking of the Communist parties all over the world. Stalin represented the most privileged caste ever to arise in the international workers” movement during the history of capitalism.
The bureaucratic caste in turn reflected a profound opportunistic degeneration in the Soviet Union which is today expressed in the policy of the “peaceful road to socialism”. This policy emphasised that the bureaucracy wants peace with capitalism at all costs, which means that it is constantly in conflict with the working class, whose problems can only be solved by the overthrow of capitalism.
So far as the Soviet bureaucracy is concerned, their privileges come first and in order to protect them they are constantly prepared to do a deal with the imperialists at the expense of the working class.
Trotsky fought for the establishment of international socialism, which was Lenin’s policy. In doing so he came into violent conflict with the Stalinists who persecuted, framed and murdered the majority of Lenin’s Central Committee because they opposed them. They murdered some of the most prominent of Trotsky’s secretaries, and, in the end, Trotsky himself.
For us, today, Stalin is dead, but the ideas of Stalinism live on. Any revisionist tendencies which in one form or another adapt themselves politically to the Stalinists are, in our opinion, mortal enemies. This is the essence of our split from the Pabloites and other revisionists. Let us start with the Pabloite Unified Secretariat.
They broke from Trotskyism in 1951 by developing the theory that de-Stalinisation after Stalin’s death meant a decisive change in the Stalinist Bureaucracy. Five years later the Stalinist chieftain, Khrushchev, drowned the Hungarian Revolution against the Rakosi-Gerő bureaucracy in a sea of blood.
At that time the Pabloites formally criticised Khrushchev’s intervention, but at the international youth demonstration in Liege, Belgium, on October 25, they called in the police to remove banners from the French and English contingents who advocated support for the Hungarian Revolution on the occasion of its tenth anniversary.
Herein lies the difference between the Stalinists and the Unified Secretariat-revisionist capitulators to bureaucracy.
During the Hungarian revolution there was a powerful outburst of imperialist propaganda against the Soviet Union which took full advantage of the criminal actions of Khrushchev.
The gentlemen supporters of the United Secretariat found little difficulty at that time in condemning these actions. Today, it is different.
Now US President Johnson needs the Soviet Bureaucracy to help to strangle the Vietnamese revolution, as well as the rising tide of revolutionary opposition from the working class in the metropolitan capitalist countries.
The youth, who perhaps more than any other section of the working class movement enter politics as a result of a struggle against bureaucracy, are proving a real danger to the Soviet bureaucracy, which is moving steadily towards agreement with the arch-imperialists.
The Pabloite Unified Secretariat senses this rapprochement, and now emerges as the “left cover” for the bureaucracy, and calls in the police to deal with the Young Socialists who commemorate the Hungarian Revolution.
 
The SWP Covers up for the Stalinists
One of the most spectacular developments in the USA in recent years has been the vast movement to the left amongst the middle-class intelligentsia and university youth. Unfortunately, this movement still remains isolated from the working class.
The policy of the Communist Party of the United States is to turn it politically towards the capitalist Democratic Party, by taking advantage of this isolation. However, it faces certain difficulties in the forthcoming Congressional Elections. Because there is widespread opposition to the Democratic Party, the Communist Party has, especially in New York, to arrange a stepping stone towards it.
That is the reason why Apthecker, a leading United States Stalinist, is standing for office in Brooklyn. He supports to the hilt the Democratic Party orientation of the Communist Party. A vote for Apthecker today is an invitation to be led by the nose to the Democratic Party tomorrow.
At this point the Socialist Workers Party intervenes and gives critical support to him. Whilst it criticises his attitude towards the Democratic Party, it nevertheless advocates voting for him. The significance of such a decision cannot be estimated solely within the geographical boundaries of New York.
Apthecker is an old Stalinist hack who has toed the Party line at all times, especially over Hungary. He is prepared to support not only the Democratic Party, but any deal which the Soviet bureaucrats cook up with Johnson to betray the Vietnamese revolution. He is deliberately trying to manoeuvre United States radicals towards the capitalist Democratic Party.
By exploiting the use of the term “critical support for Apthecker”, the SWP is merely covering up for the fact that it is initiating a sly, stage-by-stage orientation towards the Democratic Party itself. If the SWP was really seriously inclined towards an exposure of Stalinism, and warning those who will be confused by Apthecker, then it should openly expose him and the counter-revolutionary policies of the Communist Party of the United States today.
The SWP will not take long to find out that revisionism must ultimately lead towards political capitulation to the politics of the capitalist parties.
On the experience of Liege, the weekly paper Militant, published by the SWP, remains silent, although it had a number of leading members present who were aware that the police were called in to take down the banners of the British and French Young Socialists. So be it, gentlemen. When you say A for Apthecker, you will be soon shouting P for the police.
The state capitalist group of Cliff characterises the Soviet Union as a capitalist country. On the surface this group is supposed to be very hostile towards Stalinism, but this is purely superficial. By designating the Soviet Union as a capitalist country it contemptuously dismisses the economic conquests which remain as a result of the 1917 revolution. Over the past few years, this position has enabled it to cuddle up closer to the Labour Party right wing in the struggle against the Young Socialists.
Now that these same Young Socialists have emerged as a powerful force against the Prices and Incomes Act, the state capitalists weigh in what ever support they can muster behind the Stalinists. From serving the social-democratic bureaucracy, they now embrace the agents of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Up until recently this change of ally did not bring them into open alliance with the Pabloites. However, the Bertrand Russell Foundation has established the bridge-head.
On that committee the three open supporters of the Paris United Secretariat joined hands with the state capitalists recently in an attempt to prevent a speaker from the Socialist Labour League from exposing the counter-revolutionary role of the Soviet bureaucracy in relation to the war in Vietnam.
Thus all those revisionist forces, no matter what their reservations about the role of Stalinism, inevitably find themselves in the same camp when it comes to providing a left cover for imperialism. Trust Bertrand Russell to thoughtfully provide the platform for such united action.
These anti-Marxists reject the principle that the working class can emancipate itself and overthrow capitalism through the building of a revolutionary party. They are turned exclusively towards the politics of the petty-bourgeois revisionists. As a result, they constantly tend towards liquidation into Labour and social-democratic parties in some countries, and Stalinist parties in others.
The socialist Labour League has taken its stand clearly against these parties and their counter-revolutionary role. We politically oppose them and have set our course firmly towards the building of the revolutionary party, within the framework of the International Committee of the Fourth International.
This does not at all mean that we will not carry out an entry into their ranks in order to do battle against them as we have done in the past. It means that our principled conception of the struggle to develop Marxism against revisionism and its reformist and Stalinist allies is inseparable from the day-to-day struggles to build the revolutionary party.
The Socialist Labour League follows in the footsteps of Lenin and Trotsky in the constant struggle to develop Marxist theory.
 



Some notes towards a study of
THORNETT’s PHILOSOPHY
Thornett – in General
“All knowledge”, says Thornett, “begins from the struggle of man against nature, now in the form of the class struggle – the conflict of revolutionary theory in the form of the party with spontaneity in the form of the class.” (p. 20, Internal Bulletin: Thornett on Philosophy)
This, as we shall show is a vulgar one-sided materialist conception of history, which in turn leads the author inevitably into the swamp of subjective idealism.
Despite their protestations to the contrary, Thornett and his followers reject dialectical materialism as the theory of knowledge of Marxism. Like all idealists they are so anxious to discredit their Marxist opponents with slander and lies that they invariably resort to tearing quotations from their context, rewriting the history of the Trotskyists movement in the subjective way they would like to see it written, and slyly papering the whole thin over with references to “man’s struggle against nature”. They then sit back hoping that the resultant confusion will stampede the young membership of our movement to pull back from building the Workers Revolutionary Party on the basis of the consistent struggle for dialectical materialism, the theory of knowledge of Marxism.
Surrounded by his small clique of petty bourgeois idol-worshippers who, like Thornett, made absolutely no theoretical contribution to the development of Marxism during the time they were in the WRP, they dismiss our consistent struggle for dialectical materialism as a “schoolboy” exercise. Here they have the unqualified support of every anti-Trotskyist renegade from the Blick-Jenkins group to the French OCI, reinforced by the Pabloite SWP of the USA, the IMG and its rag-bag the Unified Secretariat. Even the professional centrists such as those around Tribune speak approvingly of Thornett against the WRP.
In his critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, Marx insisted that philosophy was the head and the proletariat the heart. “The emancipation of Germany” , he said, “is the emancipation of man. The head of this emancipation is philosophy, its heart is the proletariat. (p. 142, Cambridge University Press edition.) This was Trotsky’s method in 1939–40 when he waged his last great battle against the opponents of dialectical materialism and it is our method today.
Let us remind Thornett that much more talented revisionists such as Burnham and Shachtman have in the past sought refuge in a similar subjective idealist method only to wind up breaking from the movement on the fundamental principles of Marxist philosophy. Whilst Burnham and Shachtman protested loudly when Trotsky introduced polemic over the class nature of the USSR, Thornett knows that this is not enough today within the Workers Revolutionary Party whose cadres have for many years now been consciously educated in the Marxist Philosophy as insisted by Trotsky in his historic struggle of 1939–40. Herein lies the basic difference between then and now. Trotsky insisted upon tracing the differences to their philosophical roots, much to the annoyance of his opponents; Thornett advocates falsification of our philosophical method from the word go.
In doing this he has overlooked the most vital element in the struggle between Marxism and revisionism. Subjective idealists can at times develop what appears to be the most plausible arguments, on the basis of quotations torn from their material context, skilful but false references to history, interlaced with a pandering to the everyday spontaneous requirements of the working class. The mess is then served up to the middle class and politically immature workers with references to the “suffering” of the authors (Thornett & Co.), under the “anti-democratic” and “dictatorship regime” of the party leadership. For those who don”t like reading but like the look of Thornett’s face, there is always gossip about the alleged private life of this or that leader of the party to drag them into line.
 
No Compromise
In a serious discussion on Marxist philosophy this method cannot work. The Marxist conception of the dialectic is abstracted from the universal movement of matter in motion, which includes nature, society and the class struggle. Here there is neither room for compromise or a lasting basis for falsification. Without being aware of it, Thornett’s emphasis in his paragraph on the central reference in our polemic has revealed in all its crudeness the disorientation of the subjective idealist, who is so eager to destroy his opponents that he winds up destroying himself.
Marxists start from the unconditional primacy of universal matter in motion.
In Anti-Duhring, Engels explains the dialectical relation between matter and motion as follows:
Motion is the mode of existence of matter, hence more than a mere property of it. There is no matter without motion, nor could there ever have been. Motion in cosmic space, mechanical motion of smaller masses on a single celestial body, the vibration of molecules as heat, electric tension, magnetic polarization, chemical decomposition and combination, organic life up to its highest product, thought – at each given moment each individual atom of matter is in one or other of these forms of motion. All equilibrium is either only relative rest or even motion in equilibrium, like that of the planets. Absolute rest is only conceivable in the absence of matter. Neither motion as such nor any of its forms, such as mechanical force, can therefore be separated from matter nor opposed to it as something apart or a1ien, without leading to an absurdity. (p. 402)
And again, man is part of nature which in turn is part of universal matter in motion. Engels describes the relation between man and nature as follows:
In like manner, every organic being is every moment the same and not the same; every moment it assimilates matter supplied from without, and gets rid of other matter; every moment some cells of its body die and others build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time the matter of its body is completely renewed, and is replaced by other molecules of matter, so that every organic being is always itself, and yet something other than itself. (ibid., p. 32)
Man, since he is part of nature, belongs inseparably to the eternal motion of matter – but, precisely because he is part of Nature, Man is forced, in order to satisfy his physical needs, not to remain a passive spectator of Nature but to consciously alter matter and motion through production.
In the German Ideology Marx and Engels describe such activity in the following way:
But life involves before everything else eating and drinking, or habitation, clothing and many other things. The first historical act is thus the production of means to satisfy these needs, the production of material life itself. And indeed this is an historical act, a fundamental condition of all history. (German Ideology, p. 16)
Being, that is living man’s unity and dependence upon nature determines consciousness – “Nature”. said Engels, is “proof of dialectics.” Man is part of Nature as an integral part of the universa1 movement of matter. Through the struggle to develop the productive forces he is in conflict with nature. It is from this material relationship that we abstract the core and essence of all dialectical thinking, the unity and conflict of opposites, the conflict of opposites being the source of all development. Man is part of nature and in conflict with it. This is the starting point of all knowledge and not Thornett’s one-sided assertion that knowledge begins “from the struggle of man against nature”.
Thornett subjectively separates the struggle between man and nature from the fundamental unity of man with Nature, thus destroying the dialectical relationship between the subjective (men’s thoughts) and the objective material world. He then transfers the source of consciousness to the brain as something separate from Nature. Here is the basis of all idealism, that it is consciousness which determines being and not being which determines consciousness. Having subjectively separated man’s struggle with nature from the unity of this struggle with nature, Thornett can only start from the threadbare idealist baggage of idealist reasoning which begins in his own head, and is arbitrarily used to prove any argument which he thinks necessary to attack the Workers Revolutionary Party. That is why we designate his method that of subjective idealism.
 
The Subjective Idealist Method
Subjective idealism is a method of bourgeois ideological analysis. It starts from the conception that in the beginning, there was the word, in this case Thornett’s word. In reality, our analysis must begin from the deed based on the purposive activity of man tied to nature, engaged in production against nature in order to live. Thornett posits his idealist theories as dead abstractions on living purposive activity – practice – and emerges with all the subjective idealist political conclusions he would like to see. Marxists start from the richness of living perception of the universal movement of matter, that is, we proceed from the individual to the universal. Here is how Lenin describes the process in Volume 38 of his Collected Works, p. 361:
Consequently the opposites (the individual is opposed to the universal) are identical: the individual exists only in the connection that leads to the universal. The universal exists only in the individual and through the individual. Every individual is (in one way or another) a universal. Every universal is (a fragment, or an aspect, or the essence of) an individual Every universal only approximately embraces all the individual objects. Every individual enters incompletely into the universal etc., etc. Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with other kinds of individual (things, phenomena, processes), etc. Here already we have the elements, the germs, the concepts of necessity, of objective connection in nature etc. Here already we have the contingent and the necessary, the phenomenon and the essence –
Lenin thus describes living perception as the process through which the revolutionary party grasps the universal movement of matter.
The results of Man’s struggle against Nature when separated from their unity with Nature can only produce relative abstract concepts (things in themselves separated from the objective world). It is from their unity with Nature that these concepts reflect the Universal movement of matter. The “thing in itself” must find its reflection in the universal movement of matter, and it can only do this through its unity with the universal movement of matter.
Subjective idealists such as Thornett base their thought concepts on the mechanical comparison of one relative political conclusion with another which they derive from the class struggle. (In society – all human beings – this is the reflection of man’s struggle against nature.) However there is within each relative concept drawn from the class struggle an absolute (universal movement of matter). No sooner do we derive a concept than it becomes an abstraction which can only find its reflection in the Universal movement of matter through us (life).
“There is,” says Thornett, “no real discussion or analysis within the Party of the party’s practice in the class struggle.” But to him this is an exercise carried out on the basis of the comparison of abstract concepts, between what we did within this union as against some other union, or this campaign as against some other campaign. He sets out with his subjective impressions of these experiences and separates them from the living experience of the Workers Revolutionary Party as a whole united and in conflict within the class struggle and Man’s struggle against Nature. That is why he remains silent when the Party asks him to explain its correct leadership within the trade union dispute at Cowley when he was victimized last year. Here was a major experience in which all the Party’s knowledge of work in the trade unions, its press and the ATUA, was brought to bear. If there were fundamental errors in our trade union work why did they not emerge at Cowley? Thornett is silent here because he prefers, through his method of mechanical comparison, to subjectively drag snippets of trade union problems out of their context of the whole work of the party as in the case of the All Trades Unions Alliance. From this method of subjective idealism when he refuses to answer almost eight years work at Cowley he slips automatically into the crudest distortions of the Party’s Position.
His rejection of dialectical materialism as the theory of knowledge of Marxism leads Thornett naturally to an anti-party position. For the first nine months of 1974 he voted for every major decision which the CC made except on the July amendments to the constitution. He then attacks the CC for carrying out the very decisions he voted for himself. Having cut loose from leadership responsibilities he sets out to launch a vicious attack on the character of leading members and behind the back of leading committees, peddling his slander by constitutionally ignoring the democratic rights of those he slandered. Small wonder he became the bright boy of all the revisionist renegades, who like himself enthusiastically practise the method of subjective idealism.
Through the separation of the conflict between man and nature and the class struggle from their unity with nature, Thornett can only proceed to falsify and lie about the experiences of the Workers Revolutionary Party in its everyday practice.
This is the essence of subjective idealism. [1]
 
Notes on Dialectical Cognition and Practice
The dialectical process of cognising objective reality consists in the transition from living perception to abstract thought and from this to practice. Subjective idealists posit their abstract thoughts on living practice. They set out to make living practice comply with their abstract thoughts. Marxists, starting from the Universal (living perception) posit their immediate abstractions of this Universal on the abstract knowledge already posited within themselves (the Party). In the initial stage of living perception this takes place through the dialectical transition of thought concepts into one another, reflecting the self-movement of universal matter.
Lenin explains the dialectical movement of thought as follows:
Dialectics in general is “the pure movement of thought in Notions” (ie., putting it without the mysticism of idealism: human concepts are not fixed but are eternally in movement, they pass into one another, they flow into one another, otherwise they do not reflect living life. The analysis of concepts, the study of them, the “art of operating with them” (Engels) always demands study of the movement of concepts, of their interconnection, of their mutual transitions).
In particular, dialectics is the study of the opposition of the Thing-in-itself (An sich), of the essence, substratum, substance – from the appearance, from “Being-for-Others”. (Here, too, we see a transition, a flow from the one to the other: the essence appears. The appearance is essential.) Human thought goes endlessly deeper from appearance to essence, from essence of the fist order, as it were, to essence of the second order, and so on without end.
Dialectics in the proper sense is the study of contradiction in the very essence of objects: not only are appearances transitory, mobile, fluid, demarcated only by conventional boundaries, but the essence of things is so as well. (Vol. 38, pp. 253–4)
Living perception grasps the Universal whilst the Universal is in turn reflected into living perception. The immediacy of living perception is contained in the dialectical moment of SEMBLANCE. This is thought concept which has not yet penetrated the Universal movement of matter. All thought concepts are part of universal matter in motion, but initially before they penetrate into it they are a Reflection of it. The transition from Semblance is into its opposite, Appearance. Through the self movement of matter, the abstract knowledge already posited within us (EXISTENT OBJECT) finds its reflection in Appearance. (Already derived from living perception in the form of Semblance).
The unity of SEMBLANCE and APPEARANCE is a moment – Essence. The beginning of the penetration of dialectical thought through us (the Existent object) into matter is the start of the moment of Actuality. Lenin explained on page 158 of the Philosophical Notebooks that “The unfolding of the sum total of the moments of Actuality NB equals the moments of dialectical cognition.” Dialectical thought concepts are now entering matter through us via the self-impulse of universal matter in motion. As this takes place we arrive at the second moment of actuality which is Causality. At the moment of Causality, the Cause, (Essence), cancels itself into Effect (abstract thought already posited within us as a result of a similar dialectical process). Likewise the Effect cancels itself into the Cause.
We use the term Cancel here because it is at this moment when Dialectical thought enters matter in motion that we have in such Causality the posited moments of dialectical cognition. This is the highest approximation of thought to Universal matter in motion. Finally through the self-movement of matter the NOTION appears as an abstraction from the cancellation of cause into effect and vice-versa.
It is this Abstract Notion which is called Abstraction (From living Perception to Abstraction.
Now or Practice (the activity generated by the self-impulse) take over from the self movement of matter.
The abstract Notion can only be reflected in the external objective world of the Universal Movement of Matter. This is realised through our practice. The Notion becomes transformed into the idea. Here there is a moment before the idea becomes an abstraction when the idea as the thing in itself becomes the objective idea facing the objective world as part of the Universal movement of matter. This is the moment of objective truth. Through our practice we again proceed to posit living perception (dialectical thought concepts) on our abstract idea (ideas). We do this not by contemplating the world but by changing it through building the Workers Revolutionary Party.
The conflict with Thornett is one that embodies the basic principles of dialectical materialism as the theory of knowledge of Marxism. There could by and there will be no compromise with his practice which is derived from the method of capitalist ideology – subjective idealism.

Footnote
1. “Regarding the practice in certain sciences (e.g., physics) of taking various ‘forces’, etc. for ‘explanation’, and of pulling in (stretching), adjusting the facts, etc., Hegel makes the following clever remark: ‘It is now seen that the so-called explanation and proof of the concrete element which is brought into Propositions is partly a tautology and partly a confusion of the true relationship; partly, too, it is seen that this confusion served to disguise the trick of Cognition, which takes up the data of experience one-sidedly (the only manner in which it could reach its simple definitions and formulas) and does away with refutation from experience by proposing and taking as valid experience not in its concrete but as example, and only in that direction which is serviceable for the hypotheses and the theory. Concrete experience being thus subordinated to the presupposed determinations, the foundation of the theory is obscured, and is exhibited only from that side which is in conformity with the theory.’” (p. 210, Lenin’s Philosophical Notebooks)
 

