

On November 10 the newspapers carried two important news items in regard to French affairs. The first was Giraud’s retirement from his position as chairman of the French Committee of National Liberation in Algiers. With the General went four of the Commissioners who were his supporters in the Committee, leaving de Gaulle sole chairman with an indisputable majority behind him. Giraud’s elimination from the committee marked the final collapse of the set-up arranged by Washington and London beginning with the Darlan deal. After the assassination of Admiral Darlan, Giraud was installed by the American and British governments, but despite this help, he could not conceal the complete vacuum of his regime. A compromise with de Gaulle became unavoidable and last June a new regime was formed, crowned by a committee in which the two factions had equal representation. All these moves and the forces behind, them have been analyzed in previous issues of this magazine. The instability of the new committee was foretold at the time of its formation (Fourth International, July 1943.) Giraud’s departure from the committee marks a new victory for the left bourgeois-democratic tendency which de Gaullism has become, mainly under the pressure of the underground movement in France.
The second news item informed that the Chamber of Deputies of Lebanon had voted for full sovereignty and independence. Lebanon is a small state in the Middle East, the control of which was given to France after the last war, by the League of Nations in the form of a “mandate.” After the departure of the reactionary Giraud did the Algiers Committee, bursting with democracy, undertake to put an end to colonial oppression? If anybody had that illusion, he was to lose it quickly.
The Lebanese Chamber unanimously passed a law to the effect that the French should henceforth have no say in what might or might not be discussed in the Chamber; the Lebanese would have their own flag and Arabic would be the one recognized State language. Immediately after the vote, the French authorities clamped a strict censorship on communications and the press. French police occupied newspaper offices in Beirut, the Lebanese capital. Then Helleu arrived, the delegate of the French National Committee of Liberation (one has to laugh in writing down these words). And his first action, on November 11, was to order the arrest of President Bedhara El-Khoury, Premier Riad Solh and other members of the Lebanese Chamber of Deputies and of the Government. Helleu appointed Idde, “one whom the French can trust,” as “Chief of State.” Such is the irony of history that this Quisling was invested with the exact title that Petain had taken in France.
After Lebanese police refused to obey French orders to suppress protests against the arrests, Senegalese soldiers, whom French imperialism has traditionally used for its dirty work against French workers in strikes and against revolting colonial peoples, fired on demonstrators at Beirut and at Tripoli. Street fighting ensued for several days, with an undisclosed number of victims.
 
True Visage of Committee
By its actions the French National Committee showed to everybody – even to those who do not want to see – what it really is, namely, a rescue committee of French imperialism. The Gaullists have been fond of speaking of the “new France” of tomorrow that will make a clean sweep of the filth of past French politics. But in the Lebanese affair the Gaullist Committee showed that it has remained true to the imperialist traditions of the Third Republic.
Syria and Lebanon, countries long civilized, were formerly part of the Ottoman empire in which they were relatively autonomous. Lebanon is partly inhabited by a population of Catholic faith, the Maronites, and this was France’s original pretext for showing a special interest in the country. Catholic schools and missions were the carriers of French penetration. During the last war “for democracy” Turkey sided with Germany and in 1916 the British and the French entered into a secret agreement known as the Sykes-Picot treaty, by which they divided the spoils: Palestine and Arabia for the British; Lebanon and Syria for the French. Is it necessary to add that these champions of “democracy” did not even bother to consult the peoples concerned?
After the last war, France swept away the Lebanese national government and moved in. French corporations and banks grabbed all they could. The political regime under the Third Republic became more severe than it had been under the Ottoman empire. The whole operation was juridically sanctioned by the League of Nations which gave Lebanon and Syria to France as a “mandate”.
The history of Lebanon and Syria since then has been one of incessant revolts against the French yoke. In 1925 armed rebellion broke out and for a while it seemed almost successful. But French imperialism managed to crush it, and has since then maintained its rule by a combination of open violence and innumerable promises of independence which have never been fulfilled. Political oppression goes hand in hand with economic exploitation and pillage.
De Gaulle promised independence to Syria and Lebanon in June 1941. And during an official trip in November 1941, General Catroux announced to the Lebanese and Syrian peoples that their independence was coming, although the “how” and the “when” were left in the dark. When de Gaulle failed to keep that promise but instead in November 1943 shot and jailed those who asked for its fulfillment, he simply followed the long tradition of the Third Republic. De Gaulle’s main argument during the crisis was that France had received her “mandate” over Lebanon and Syria from the League of Nations and could not relinquish it except by action of the League of Nations. What the League of Nations is nowadays is hard to say. But if we place ourselves for a moment on this juridical plane, isn’t it clear that de Gaulle made a promise he knew he could not fulfill?
By invoking the sanction of the League of Nations, de Gaulle revealed the hypocritical character of his previous promises of independence, made at a time when his movement was extremely weak and had to marshal support by any means. Moreover, during the twenty years of her “mandate” over Lebanon and Syria, France has many times violated the rules prescribed by the League of Nations for a mandatory power (the establishment of a constitution within a certain time, etc.) These “obligations” had been fixed by the great powers, mainly Britain and France, but France did not even bother to respect them. De Gaulle’s invoking the juridical impossibility of granting independence only reveals the emptiness of the case of French imperialism.
Lebanon is a mountainous country and as such has been a refuge in the past for heretic religious sects. The population of the country is now divided mainly into Maronites, who are Catholics of special denomination, Druses, who have a religion of their own, and Moslems. In past centuries bloody conflicts took place. The French have incessantly played on these religious differences, as the British do in India. But the failure of these intrigues is patently clear in the present crisis. The unity of the nation against French oppression is symbolized by the fact that the jailed President El-Khoury is a Catholic while Premier Sohl is a Moslem.
Immediately after Helleu’s first repressions, both the Maronite Archbishop and the Grand Mufti of Lebanon protested against the French action. A dispatch to the New York Herald Tribune stated on November 16, in the midst of the crisis: “For the first time in many years Moslems and Christians are united against the French.” And, further: “The most interesting aspect of the present disturbances is that members of all religions and sects are united.”
Before the present war the French colonial empire was already out of proportion with France’s economic strength. Defeat has now changed France into a minor power. However, she still formally remains the second greatest colonial empire in the world. This is a very unstable situation.
The prestige of France has greatly suffered from her defeat, creating an objective condition for colonial revolts. The cry for independence heard today in Lebanon will be heard tomorrow in Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria. Three weeks after the Lebanon crisis de Gaulle has felt obliged to grant more civil rights to the Arabs in Algeria. In Morocco French administrators have had to make in recent weeks quite a few promises to the Arabs. Tomorrow promises will not be enough.
The measures taken by the French in Lebanon aroused angry protests throughout the Arabic world. Sympathetic demonstrations were especially vehement in Egypt. War has brought to the Middle East economic disorganization. On tEe other hand, phrases about democracy and freedom have little appeal in countries plundered by those who utter these phrases. And so, the Arabic world has been watching with a growing impatience a war from which it expects nothing. Egypt, for instance, remained neutral while the British and German armies were fighting on her soil.
When Egyptian students demonstrated in the streets of Cairo shouting “We are soldiers of Lebanon!” – this is easy to understand. However, something quite unexpected happened. It soon appeared that Churchill was also ready to fight for Lebanon. Churchill? Yes, Churchill himself, the chief of a government that holds four hundred millions of Indians in political oppression and economic destitution. But didn’t Churchill put Gandhi and Nehru in jail for exactly the same reasons that de Gaulle jailed El-Khoury and Sohl, namely, for asking the independence of their respective countries? In this Lebanon crisis, it is hard to decide where the most disgusting hypocrisy lies: in a de Gaulle, head of a Committee of Liberation, fighting tooth and nail against the independence of Lebanon, or in a Churchill, oppressor of India, proclaiming himself champion of this independence.
On November 12, at the opening of the crisis, the British Foreign Office announced that the British government had protested to French officials in Beirut against their summary measures. The following day the British were reported “ready to act.” The British government made it clear that it was ready to seize control quickly in Lebanon “if necessary,” the Associated Press reported. On November 15 it was reported that the United States had joined Great Britain in making strong representations to the French Committee. On November 17 it was learned from London that “unless the situation is speedily cleared up, it is possible that British military power will intervene.” Churchill was really going to fight for Lebanon’s independence!
British arguments against the French can be reduced to two. First, Lebanon is situated in an area of vital strategic importance. Second, the British government has associated itself with the pledge of independence given by de Gaulle and Catroux to Syria and Lebanon; and, in consequence, the British government has to keep its pledges to the Lebanese in order to maintain British honor throughout the Arabic world.
These arguments are, to say the least, rather strange. The military location of the country was precisely the reason invoked by Britain in India for “postponing” the independence of this nation until after the war. In Lebanon, however, it becomes an argument for immediate independence – from the French. The casuistry of imperialism is very rich indeed. The second argument – that Britain cannot break one of her pledges – can only make us smile if we remember, among many others, the long series of broken pledges to India.
During the last war France and Britain divided the spoils of the Ottoman empire among themselves, but the Middle East and especially Syria and Lebanon became a field of intrigues and a battleground between the British Intelligence Service and the French Deuxième Bureau. Now, with her prestige below par in the Arabic world, Britain is of the opinion that Lebanese independence would be a good concession – the more so since she has in this case no need of giving something of her own. Whether Britain started the crisis by letting the Lebanese leaders know that she would not oppose their move or whether she availed herself of an opportunity not originated by her, it is impossible to say with the information available here. In any event Churchill could not let such an opportunity pass.
There is another reason behind the Anglo-American intervention. The Darlan deal and the Churchill-Roosevelt friction with de Gaulle have tarnished the democratic reputations of these two gentlemen and they are only too eager to show that, after all, de Gaulle was no more of a democrat than they, and perhaps even less. Finally, Anglo-American intervention in the Lebanese crisis is a serious warning to de Gaulle. All the French colonies are now in the power of Anglo-American armed forces. On the morrow their independence can become the object of the solicitude of London and Washington – if de Gaulle, that is, the resurgent French bourgeoisie, is not subservient enough.
When the crisis developed, de Gaulle sent to Beirut General Catroux, a professional colonial administrator, known for his cruel regime in Indo-China. Catroux’s first action was to complain about British interference. He is reported to have said in Beirut on November 19 that “Great Britain should confine its interest in Lebanon to purely military affairs and leave France to deal with political matters.” However, the position of French imperialism is not such that a Catroux could give lessons to Great Britain and on November 21 the French Committee in Algiers approved a settlement involving the immediate release of the arrested president and ministers. They were released and reinstated on November 22. (French troops had been withdrawn from the streets on November 20.)
But the whole situation still remains quite obscure. The crisis had started with the vote of independence by the Lebanese Chamber of Deputies. Was that vote to remain valid or was it nullified? Nothing precise has appeared in the press, and after the bare announcement of the settlement news practically ceased.
What probably happened is that the reinstatement of the nationalist leaders was the beginning of a period of bargaining, with British and American diplomacy active behind the scenes. Formally, the settlement seems like a return to the status quo ante. But exactly which status? The situation preceding the vote by the Lebanese Chamber of Deputies or the one immediately following the vote? This point, which is decisive to the entire question, remains obscure. However, it may be said that a return to the status quo preceding the vote is hardly conceivable. The impotence of the French to act in the present situation has been clearly demonstrated. On the other hand, it is not sure that London and Washington want to damage the prestige of the French too much. Moreover, the Lebanese nationalist leaders have in the past shown more than once, their ability to collaborate with the French. Therefore some new compromise may be reached.
But besides the French, British, American imperialisms and the nationalist leaders, there are other forces. There are the Lebanese masses. Nobody, the British no more than the French, has been eager to mention the participation of the masses in the present crisis, but from a few indications we can measure its extent. On November 21 a dispatch from the Palestine-Lebanon frontier states that:
“The general strike in Lebanon is reported to be continuing today, the twelfth day in all the large towns. Only a few foreign commercial establishments are not affected.”
“The twelfth day” means that the general strike broke out immediately after the vote for independence. On November 22 a dispatch from Cairo, reporting the releasing of the President, and the Premier, added: “Strikes are continuing.” Since then no news has been forthcoming.
The problem of the immediate future of Lebanon may be clarified a little if we look at what has just taken place in Syria. The crisis in Lebanon had immediate repercussions in neighboring Syria. On November 30 the Syrian Chamber of Deputies voted to rid the Constitution of Article 116. This article is the only one which refers to France. It gives the French authorities the right to veto any bill proposed by the Chamber of Deputies. The vote to abolish Article 116 took place a few days .after Catroux’s visit – on his way back from Beirut to Algiers – to Damascus, Syria’s capital, and was not followed by any reaction on the part of the French. Under these circumstances the vote would indicate that the political grip of the French has been broken and that Syria and Lebanon are henceforth politically independent, no matter what formal gestures may be taken in order to save the prestige of France.
This is the most favorable hypothesis allowed by the complete and strange lack of news since the announcement of the settlement and the extreme vagueness of the news of the settlement itself. The precarious character of such independence is obvious. It may disappear at the end of this war as it disappeared after the last war. But even if Lebanon and Syria can keep their political independence, French investments – in banks, railroads, port facilities and utilities – remain. Tomorrow British and especially American investments will increase. The fate of these countries is foretold by Irak. Irak was a “mandate” given by the League of Nations to Great Britain in the same way as Lebanon and Syria were given to France. Subsequently Irak became politically independent, but, held in the grip of British imperialism, cannot escape from economic poverty. The national independence of the people of the Middle East is only a stage in their fight against imperialism. This struggle cannot be carried to the end by the native bourgeoisie. The young proletariat of these countries, in alliance with the workers of the great imperialist powers, can alone break the grip of imperialism that keeps the whole Middle East in stagnation and misery.



The swift expulsion of the German armies from France has not been merely the result of the Anglo-American military superiority, but was precipitated by the uprising of the French people. In Paris and in the second largest city of France, Marseille, the masses rose up, took guns into their hands, erected barricades and drove out German troops and French fascists before the arrival of the Allied troops. The action was repealed in many less populated cities. In the countryside, the guerrilla bands, the “maquis” or, as they have been respectably baptized, the French Forces of the Interior (FFI) have taken innumerable towns and villages, whole departments.
 
The Uprising of the French Masses
In Paris (information about other cities has been very scarce) the insurrection was preceded by strikes. A railroad strike started as early as August 13. Then the postal workers struck. On the 18th the General Confederation of Labor, the central organization of French trade unions, joined by the Confederation of Christian Workers, called for a general strike. Soon afterwards fighting broke out in the streets.
De Gaulle and the Allied command were taken aback by such an independent intervention of the masses, that they had not called for. On August 26 a correspondent cabled from Algiers to the New York Times:
“Local leaders precipitated the uprising and battle in the capital without awaiting the approval of either General De Gaulle or the Allies, who had hoped to avoid that battle.”
This is a fairly good account, except that the insurrection was not “precipitated” by a few leaders. It came from the irresistible pressure of large masses.
As soon as the Parisian workers saw that, with the advance of the Allied armies, they had some chance to get rid of the Nazi hangmen, they rose up and fought. They could not wait for the few days until the Allied armies would have arrived. They had to settle their own accounts with the regime that had tormented them for four years. What an example of indomitable energy and independence!
The Paris insurrection was fought by the workers. This is confirmed by Le Populaire, organ of the Socialist Party published in Paris. On August 29, writing shortly after the event, it declares:
“To drive away the Nazis, the Parisian workers have known how magnificently to stop all work, to arm themselves and to defend their barricades.”
This short description coincides with the picture we can reconstruct here through the press dispatches. Undoubtedly, the Parisian workers carried along with them large strata of the petty bourgeoisie, not only its lower ranks, but also civil servants, students, sons and daughters of bourgeois families. The insurrection, the immediate objective of which was the overthrowing of the German yoke, thus took a “popular” and “unanimous” aspect. With its democratic and patriotic illusions the atmosphere was somewhat reminiscent of that of the 19th century revolutions.
The power fell into the hands of the insurgents. Their military organization, the FFI, which in Paris consists mainly of workers and workers’ sons, took over the policing of the city. A correspondent cables from Paris to the New York Times on August 31:
“The French Forces of the Interior, which have their share of young hoodlums, have taken over the city.”
(Only a journalist who feels more comfortable in reactionary salons than near barricades could call “hoodlums” the Gavroches who fought and died for freedom.) Then he continues:
“Their members [of the FFI] ride around armed with Bren guns, hand grenades and rifles. They guard the entrances and exits of Paris and they allow none but military personnel to pass in or out. It is to them that the people go to denounce collaborationists, and it is to them that people who have endured four years of German occupation look for leadership and direction.”
On September 7 another correspondent cables to the same paper, relating how the purge of collaborators is conducted:
“There are now 5,000 internees at Drancy [a town near Paris]. Most of these were taken there by the FFI during the first exciting days of the liberation of Paris.”
Similar news came from the provinces. A UP correspondent cables from Rouen on August 30:
“This correspondent saw police loyal to the republic talking orders from the maquis and aiding them openly.”
The masses, crushed under despotisms for four years, lifted their heads, now bursting forth with courage and hope. In Paris the president of the Tribunal d’Etat (something like a Supreme Court Justice), who had sent many anti-Nazi fighters to the guillotine, was arrested by his janitor.
The offices and the large printing plant of Le Matin, a rightist newspaper that had turned collaborationist, were taken over by the Socialist Party. In the days following the insurrection the circulation of the workers’ newspapers, or rather of the newspapers that the workers consider theirs – L’Humanité, organ of the Stalinist Party, and Le Populaire, organ of the Socialist Party – rose to about ten times the circulation of the bourgeois, mainly Gaullist, press.
What is the situation in the factories, now that the workers have gone back to work, after the fighting? The scarce information about France in the American press is still scarcer on that point. In fact, it would be a complete silence, if it were not for a dispatch from David Anderson to the New York Times on September 9, which provides illuminating information.
 
Workers Take Over Factories
Mr. Anderson writes:
“Rumors of workers having taken over great industrial establishments in the Paris suburbs, particularly in the ‘Red Belt’ to the north and west, have been circulating for days. This morning I happened to run into one when visiting the Hispano-Sulza plant in Bois-Colombes on an entirely different matter.”
Although rumors of a fact as important as the taking over of great industrial establishments in Paris suburbs had been circulating for days, neither the correspondent nor, it seems, any of his colleagues found it interesting enough to investigate these rumors in order to inform the outside world. The whole situation was revealed to the American readers only because of a visit “on an entirely different matter.”
What a commentary upon the objectivity of the bourgeois press! Thousands and thousands of words are written, cabled and printed about the charm of Paris boulevards, but such a fact, big with most important consequences for the future of France, is disclosed to the public only by accident. However, let us thank Mr. Anderson at least for that accident.
On September 9, more than a week after the street fighting has ceased, he writes:
“Committees manned by the rank and file of some of the most important factories in the Paris area are growing in strength daily.”
The committees are growing at that time; thus they are obviously not momentary organs of the uprising, but rather a product of it. In fact, they consider future tasks:
“The men serving on them refer to themselves as ‘les responsables’ and profess to be the forerunners of permanent groups that will represent the workers in the direction of the plants after the war.”
What the workers want is control over the production of factories that they keep in motion through their hard and long labor. They have had enough of the uncontrolled dictatorship of the bosses. How can they express their will? It is not clear to them yet:
“They envision an equal three-way division of power among the workers, the technical staffs and the managements.”
The bosses will never share power in a permanent way. They may be compelled to do so for a short time when they are threatened with losing everything. But if the threat does not materialize, they will compose their forces, retake power, more dictatorial than ever. A permanent division of power over the factories is impossible. The unlimited power of the boss can be “controlled” permanently in one way: by socializing the factories. Who will do that? The present government? Of course not. Only a workers’ government can do it. That is why we have to build such a government.
The first necessary conditions to go along this road are already here: a firm will among the workers not to go back to the past, a deep contempt for the ruling classes, a great confidence in their forces. That’s what the mere existence of the workers’ committees means. They will gradually fully understand the implications of their position and draw the revolutionary conclusions. The obstacles will not be lacking, the moat dangerous of them being the treacherous policy of the Stalinist Party. But the French workers are on the march.
How did the Hispano-Suiza committee studied by Mr. Anderson come into existence? The plant was producing war material (probably airplanes’ engines) for the Germans. And then:
“The company’s regular management decamped on August 18 on the eve of the liberation of Paris ... The Hispano-Suiza management’s position can be made clearer when it is pointed out that the heads of many French firms deemed it wise to remain away from their plants until the fever of excitement over liberation had died down and they could explain why valuable aid had been given to the Germans during the occupation.”
What a telling story! The excitement over liberation was just too much for “many” capitalists! The bosses’ “explanation” had been in the past that the best way to sabotage the German war machine was to produce arms for it. As Mr. Anderson reports:
“This reasoning was not always understood or accepted by most of the employees.”
It was so little understood or accepted that, when the German bayonets were about to stop supporting the “explanation,” the bosses decamped, probably in search of a better explanation. It must have been hard to find, for by September 9 they had not yet returned with it. It is not too risky to predict, after the Italian experience, that some American official will soon help the unfortunate management to “explain.”
The way the committee appeared indicates that national feelings must run quite high among the workers. This is confirmed by the committee’s declaration to Mr. Anderson that “the workers are interested solely in producing weapons,” apparently for the war against Germany. The word “solely,” if correctly reported, is probably a kind of excuse the workers felt obliged to give to an American journalist. But the existence itself of nationalism cannot be doubted. In the present circumstances, with the bosses’ subservience to the German masters, this nationalism contributed to the sharpening of the class struggle which led to the taking over of the factories. In other circumstances it can work as a brake on the revolutionary initiative of the workers. It would be dangerous to close our eyes to that.
 
The F.F.I.
Mr. Anderson’s dispatch is rich in interesting pieces of news. Among others the following:
“The spokesman for the factory ... insisted on receiving visitors with a half-dozen of his associates, wearing French Forces of the Interior armbands, in attendance.”
With the present scarcity of news these few lines represent invaluable information. It shows that workers actually employed at the present time are in the ranks of the FFI, which is extremely important; but still more important is the fact that these workers wear the FFI armbands in their factory, where apparently they are the sole authority. It means that they consider their FFI group not as an alien organization in which they feel uncomfortable, – for in that case these class-conscious workers would hardly have kept their armbands at their place of work, – but as their own organization. It appears thus that certain FFI groups are groups of armed workers; they are, in fact, a workers’ militia.
On the character of the FFI organization as a whole, it is difficult to make general statements, in view of the scant information available abroad. Its strength is put by the most conservative estimates at 300,000 men and is certainly quite higher than that. Many of the members belong to the generation that was too young to be taken into the French army in 1940. Stories frequently refer to 17-year-old fighters. The ranks of the FFI are certainly far from being politically or organizationally united. In fact, they look rather like a conglomerate of semi-autonomous groups and bands. Information on what their members think about the future is scarce. A correspondent cables from London to the New York Times on August 26:
“The FFI have all the strengths of a people’s army and all the weaknesses of a league of non-professional soldiers bound toy a holy desire to free France but somewhat divided by the various political, economic and religious dogmas held by its members.”
What are these “dogmas”? Probably all kinds, from chauvinistic revanche to proletarian socialism. What is the relative strength of the various tendencies? No precise answer to this question is possible from afar. The strongest single tendency is, undoubtedly, the Stalinist, although the movement is far from being in the hands of the Stalinist Party.
On the whole, a leftist spirit must dominate, – a great thirst for freedom, a deep distrust for authority, a complete contempt for the old ruling classes, with their industrialists and bankers compromised by collaboration, a strong desire for something new. For what exactly? These aspirations remained probably until today rather vague, the immediate task having been the struggle for the liberation of the country. But questions that were able to wait for an answer yesterday will now have to be answered soon, – and precisely.
 
De Gaulle’s Program
De Gaulle’s program is, nationally and internationally, the restoration of bourgeois France. Nationally, his first aim is the reestablishment of “law and order.” The present objective of De Gaulle is to stifle the uprising against the Nazis and Vichy in the noose of “republican legality”, – which, of course, would not prevent the general from using in the future, if need be, the Bonapartist sabre. He now meets the popular opposition to Vichy with a loudly proclaimed loyalty to the Republic. But it remains to be seen if, by calling to his side Jeanneney, senile president of the senile Senate of the senile Third Republic, he can satisfy the aspirations of the masses for liberty.
To the workers, who have suffered so much and fought so heroically, the De Gaulle government has nothing to give, except a few niggardly increases of salaries (when the cost of living has been multiplied by five to ten), which represent the bare minimum of what it was forced to do. To cover up this vacuum it speaks of a “legal revolution” which will bring “social changes” (?) “in the coming years.” The hungered and exasperated workers will soon see through such empty promises.
The government speaks of elections, – when the situation will be settled, “in nine months or more.” Meanwhile De Gaulle appoints his hand-picked men as prefects in every department, and they intend to rule in the good old bureaucratic way. They will inevitably come into conflict with the organizations which have sprung from the masses, the department committees of liberation, the FFI groups, the committees of the workers who have taken over factories.
The De Gaulle government has already been reorganized a few times in the past three weeks. The meaning of the changes, when seen from afar, is not always clear. Of the ministers brought from Algiers half a dozen were dismissed to make room for men from the resistance movement in France. From that movement De Gaulle is not, of course, taking into his cabinet the young “hoodlums” who fought with gun in hand. He is picking up “respectable” men, judges or professors, who under Vichy helped the resistance movement with money or otherwise while keeping a bourgeois facade and now think of nothing but of returning as soon as possible to “law and order.”
On the whole, the De Gaulle cabinet is composed of personalities of second rank, belonging to the administrative personnel of the Third Republic. One Socialist, not a leader of the party and belonging, it seems, to its extreme right, is now in the cabinet. In Algiers there were two Stalinist ministers. On September 9 one of them was dropped. No reason was given. Three days later it was reported that he had “resigned from the government to agitate freely for the cause.”
 
Perspectives
The relations between the Stalinists and De Gaulle remain unstable. If such a supposition is permitted, it can be said that, had the government directly sprung out of the uprising and not come from outside, it would have been much farther to the left, probably with a Stalinist and Socialist majority.
The Stalinist Party tries to channel the first deception of the masses in an attack against the “Algiers men”, who have kept too many ministerial posts in their hands and not given enough of them to underground leaders of France, that means, to the Stalinists.
The Stalinist influence among the Parisian workers is very great, far outstripping that of the Socialists. In the FFI the party has strong positions. In fact, the Stalinist Party is the strongest organized political force in France. It has avoided outright collaboration with De Gaulle and is, at the present time, in a kind of opposition, which cannot fail to increase its influence.
The resistance movement and the FFI are going toward a quick polarization. The conservative element, whose sole aim was the struggle against the Germans will rapidly separate itself from the proletarian and plebeian core for which the fight against German oppression has been a springboard for a struggle against bourgeois society.
After the first “popular”, “unanimous” stage of an uprising is over, a problem inevitably rises up: what to do with the arms that brought victory? Today in France hundreds of thousands (maybe over a million) have arms in their hands. The De Gaulle government cannot tolerate such a situation for long, so fraught with dangers for the bourgeois “law and order.” It can do, and is probably attempting to do, two things: either outright disarming the FFI groups or incorporating them into the regular French army. In the second case the question of the discipline would immediately rise up. The FFI elected or chose their own leaders. In the regular army they have to obey officers imposed upon them from above. Conflicts on that point have already sprung up, although American journalists are not too prompt nor too wordy in reporting them.
The problem of disarming the population will occupy a large part of the political arena in the coming period. De Gaulle has certainly not forgotten the story of the Commune: Thiers had come to the conclusion that the disarmament and crushing of the armed Garde Nationale was a necessary preliminary to the restoration of “order.” In a night of March he sent one of his generals to seize the cannon of the Garde Nationale parked in Montmartre. The Parisian masses rose up.
De Gaulle has obviously not the force at the present time to imitate Thiers. His first task is the regrouping of the bourgeoisie. He will eliminate its most discredited and hated representatives, soothe its divisions, try to give it back its internal strength and cohesion and an honest face. He needs time. He will postpone elections, postpone answering the urgent problems of the day, postpone everything ... until the day when the bourgeoisie feels strong enough.
At the right of De Gaulle the bourgeois factions will keep a cautious silence for some time, pushing him forward as their best cover. A Darlan-Giraud adventure is impossible at the present time.
A more and more loudly voiced opposition to De Gaulle will come from his left. A possible variant is an increasing Socialist and Stalinist participation in the cabinet. We may even see a Stalinist-Socialist cabinet, with De Gaulle relegated to the decorative post of president of the Republic.
Behind De Gaulle there is, of course, the Anglo-American power, with its various arms: food, the hopes that rich America will help economic reconstruction, and, if need be, military force. This power is great and it may for some time slow down the tempo of political developments, but only to make them more dramatic at a later stage. For the French workers are not alone, tomorrow they will have allies throughout all Europe. Their struggle will merge with that of hundreds of millions fighting for their emancipation. Victory will not be easy. But the French workers have made a good start: coming out of the political primitivism of German oppression, they have immediately started to storm capitalist society. The greatest hopes can be theirs.
September 17, 1944



The Russian armies, after their victory over Germany, have occupied Eastern Europe and, in great part, Central Europe. Nobody, of course, expected that they would stop at the borders of the USSR, and the mere fact of crossing borders, in the last act of a gigantic war, has no independent political significance in itself: its military necessity is obvious. The problem to be examined is not the mere crossing of borders, but the policy followed by the occupying authorities.
 
Three Aspects of the Policy of Occupation
The first point to be noted in this policy is the total absence of internationalism. The Soviet authorities sow and cultivate with great care blind chauvinism, a spirit of revenge. Internationalism and even every elementary human compassion are trampled. This fact alone would be sufficient for our condemning Stalinist policy in Europe. But in this there is nothing new. Only illusions about Soviet reality could have made one expect something else.
As the second point, it is necessary to mention the conduct of the Soviet soldiers. There is no reason to embarrassedly keep silent on this repulsive aspect of the occupation, provided that the cause of it is properly explained and the responsibility placed where it belongs. Twenty years of Stalin’s political barbarism have not passed without leaving their mark. The Soviet soldier, constantly inoculated with strong doses of chauvinist hatred, treated as cattle by his officers, compensates himself by brutalities against the local population, by plunder and rape. Cars full of plundered goods were recently crossing Poland, according to an American journalist, decorated with the Soviet star (!) and with inscriptions like this one: “We belong to a nation of conquerors.” This moral depravity is a direct product of the brutal regime of the bureaucracy. To keep silent on this aspect of the occupation is to keep silent on one of the most monstrous crimes of Stalin.
However, when everything has been said about the reactionary chauvinist policy of the bureaucracy, about the corruption of the Soviet army, there remains a series of facts, such as the truly fantastic indemnities, the dismantling of factories, the forced labor on a grand scale, etc., that cannot be explained except by deeper economic and social causes. The dismantling of factories, systematically practiced from Austria to Korea, is not merely due to the depravity of some Soviet general or bureaucrat We have here a series of phenomena whose social and economic roots are to be looked for in the bureaucratic management of Soviet economy. This last aspect of the occupation I propose to name imperialism, more precisely bureaucratic imperialism, for a series of reasons that I will try to present.
Still more precisely, it is more correct to speak of elements of imperialism. We have observed these new phenomena only during a period that, historically, is still very brief. They have been until now explosions, violent indeed, but concentrated in an interval of time still very short. These elements of imperialism are playing in Soviet economy a role still secondary; they are still very far from having engendered a whole system, such as the British Empire. However, as elements, their existence is undeniable.
The imperialism that now dominates the world is finance imperialism. Bureaucratic imperialism is obviously not finance imperialism. Quite the contrary. Finance imperialism has its inner spring in a superabundance of capital, previously accumulated, in quest of investments. The distinctive feature of Soviet economy is still the low degree of industrialization, and the problem that confronts it does not at all resemble the one that confronts mature capitalism, but rather the one that nascent capitalism had to solve, namely the problem of primitive accumulation.
The country that came first in capitalist development, England, solved the problem of primitive accumulation through barbaric methods which Marx has so vividly described in the next to last chapter of the first volume of Capital: the laws against paupers and vagrants, the kidnapping of children, etc. In the countries that followed England on the road of capitalism the same methods were combined to various degrees, with the investment of British capital, previously accumulated, which permitted solving the task more easily.
Soviet economy is still far from having realized an industrialization of the country comparable to that of the advanced capitalist countries. However, Stalinist bureaucracy manages Soviet economy in such a way that the yearly fund of accumulation is greatly reduced. Not only does the bureaucracy appropriate a disproportionate share of the national income, but also – and that is the more important point – by its methods it retards the increase of the productivity of labor, multiplies losses and, in general, increasingly hampers the development of the economy. Thus, the bureaucracy finds itself forced, lest the rate of accumulation fall to a ridiculously low level or even become negative, to plunder means of production and labor power, everywhere it can, in order to cover the costs that its management imposes on Soviet economy. The parasitic character of the bureaucracy manifests itself, as soon as political conditions permit it, through imperialist plundering.
The policy of the Soviet bureaucracy outside the USSR is but the continuation of its policy inside. From this fact, incontestable in itself, some may conclude that the eruption of bureaucratic imperialism hardly deserves any special attention and that it is merely a geographical extension of an already existing system; therefore, nothing politically new. This means to simplify the problem too much, for the action of the bureaucracy, inside and outside of the USSR, does not operate in the same milieu.
Russian armies have occupied in Europe regions that are much more advanced than the USSR in the development of the productive forces and of technique, in the cultural level of the workers and of the working population in general (the extreme cases are those of the industrial regions of Czechoslovakia, Germany, and Austria).
The bureaucracy found its historical raison d’étre in the USSR in the barbaric condition of the country, in the necessity of transplanting foreign technique. It fulfilled these tasks in its own way, that is, very badly, and, to the extent to which it partly fulfilled them, it became a greater and greater brake on the further development of industrialization, of technique, of culture.
The extension of the power of the Kremlin bureaucracy to a backward country, such as Outer Mongolia for instance, may still signify for such a country a quicker industrial development. (Even in this case one may now be skeptical after the dismantling of factories in Manchuria and in the part of Korea occupied by the Russian army.) But in the highly industrialized parts of Central Europe, Soviet occupation has directly and terribly reactionary consequences.
The “abolition of the kulaks as a class,” fifteen years ago, did not lack in horrors. According to a testimony cited by Trotsky, the troops of the GPU took away boots of young “kulak” children. However, whatever may be our indignation at such methods, the expropriation helped fulfill the first Five Year Plan.
The present situation in Europe is very different. When the Soviet bureaucrats dismantle factories in Vienna, they condemn the Viennese worker to a death more terrible than just physical death; it is the death of his class, his social death. It means to condemn the country not to get out of economic, social, political and cultural stagnation. It means to instigate the disintegration of the proletariat, the only class from which the salvation of Europe can come. It means to deal a blow at the very heart of the perspective of socialism.
 
Dismantling of Factories and Forced Labor
According to official figures, the Kremlin bureaucracy had already last September dismantled and shipped to Russia twenty per cent of Czech industry, thirty per cent of Polish industry. These are “allied” countries. What has happened in Austria, in Silesia, etc.? And these figures are merely quantitative: the bureaucrats have certainly not taken the least modern material. Moscow has claimed the privilege of seizing in the occupied countries, “friendly” or enemy, every machine of German make; in fact, it means to claim the right to grab all the industrial equipment of these countries. The economy of the enemy countries is, moreover, crushed by tremendous war indemnities for an indefinite period.
To the dismantling of factories must be added forced labor. War prisoners, Polish and Baltic exiles of 1939-40, political prisoners, German minorities deported from the Volga or from Rumania, etc., form a herd of unfortunate forced laborers, the number of which is certainly higher than eight millions and maybe not lower than fifteen or twenty. [1] The fate of these unfortunates is below that of slaves, for the owner of slaves ordinarily provides conditions that allow their indefinite reproduction. But the Soviet bureaucrat, because of his own situation, thinks only of drawing from the forced laborers all the possible labor in the shortest possible time. From one group of 100,000 German prisoners, six thousand were still alive three months ago, after three years of captivity, according to one of these unfortunates who had escaped.
Forced labor has occupied, in Soviet economy, a place which is far from being negligible compared to wage-labor. With eight to twenty millions of forced laborers side by side with the Russian working class, forced labor has not only a political, but also an economic importance. With the bureaucratic management of Soviet economy, the problem of manpower and efficiency is insoluble. The most immediate result of such management, with its uncontrolled command and its arbitrariness, its iniquities and brutalities, is to keep the productivity of labor at an extremely low level. The worker, deprived of every right and every protection, hardly feels inclined to produce more, to take better care of his tools and of his machines, etc. [2]
The bureaucrat tries to solve this problem by his methods: Stakhanovism, extreme differentiations in wages and, finally, forced labor on a great scale. The latter penetrates the more easily into the system since the efficiency of wage-labor is very low, often hardly higher than that of forced labor, and therefore there are many works which are less costly to execute with forced labor than wage-labor, especially when these forced laborers are deprived of all social life and reduced to being mere givers of labor-power until their death. It would be economically impossible to use forced labor on such a great scale in the United States, for instance, where the labor-power of well-paid workers, equipped with modern machinery, usually would be cheaper than the labor-power of forced labor with a very low efficiency. Thus the bureaucratic management of the economy, while keeping the productivity of labor at a low level, calls for, and at the same time makes possible, the use of forced labor on a great scale.
The most vivid manifestations of bureaucratic imperialism – plunder, requisitions, dismantling of factories, forced labor – are thus the direct consequences of the bureaucratic domination of the Soviet economy and not the product of Zhukov’s caprice, or Stalin’s thirst for power, or the depravity of Soviet soldiers. The whole bureaucratic management of the economy calls for such methods. In this sense, it is fully legitimate to speak of bureaucratic imperialism as a system growing out of definite economic needs.
Every imperialism springs from difficulties in the economy of the country. What this imperialism seeks reveals what these difficulties are. Finance imperialism, in quest of investments, reveals in the metropolis a superabundance of capital that does not find a sufficient rate of profit. Bureaucratic imperialism, with its millions of forced laborers and its carrying away of machines, reveals the need of an economy suffocating under the bureaucratic management.
At this point someone will probably remark that war has destroyed so much in the USSR that this destruction is sufficient to explain the needs of Soviet economy, independently of the disorder and waste of the bureaucracy. This remark remains too abstract. Soviet economy does not start from scratch. In the years immediately preceding the war, in 1938-40, the existence of the bureaucracy weighed more and more heavily on the economy. The rates of development of the key industries had very much decreased in those years. War, with the poverty it has wrought, has deepened, materially and spiritually, the gulf between the bureaucracy and the people. Feeling itself surrounded everywhere by the hatred, the bureaucracy can less and less appeal to emulation, to enthusiasm, to voluntary sacrifice, in order to get out of a terribly difficult situation. How could a bureaucrat ask the Czech or Hungarian peoples to voluntarily collaborate with the Soviet people for the building of a better future? Such appeals coming out of the mouth of a parvenu do not have the accent of truth and remain ineffective. The bureaucrat, in his own way, knows that very well. Nothing remains but the way of violence and plunder.
 
Imperialism and the Degenerated Workers’ State
Does the appearance of elements of imperialism imply the revision of the theory that the USSR is a degenerated workers’ state? Not necessarily. The Soviet bureaucracy feeds in general on an appropriation of the work of others, and we have already, long ago, recognized this fact as part and parcel of the degeneration of the workers’ state. Bureaucratic imperialism is only a special form of this appropriation.
If they do not necessarily imply a revision of the theory, the various manifestations of bureaucratic imperialism force us, nevertheless, to see how far the degeneration has advanced. It is not possible any more to simply speak of workers’ state and to add, as if between parenthesis, degenerated. Of the two attributes, “workers” and “degenerated,” it is the latter that we must now underline with greater emphasis. The degeneration has made such an advance and the impact of this degeneration on Europe has such terribly reactionary consequences that it is impossible to automatically apply to the USSR of today propositions that would be valid for a “normal” workers’ state. The Soviet Union is as far from being a “normal” workers’ state as a rotten apple is a “normal” apple, and nobody would think of biting into a rotten apple. With the present imperialist plundering, the degeneration has reached the last stage of rottenness.
As the result of historical circumstances, which we have very often analyzed, a social formation has appeared which really is a monster of history. As the biologists explain to us, a monster is due to disturbances occurring during the development of the embryo; likewise the isolation of a proletarian revolution in a barbaric country has engendered a society not only without any precedent, but also very different from all the outlined norms.
To repeat today that “fundamentally” the USSR is a workers’ state because the means of production are nationalized is to dupe oneself with words. If it were so, the Poland of Bierut would be a good approximation of the dictatorship of the proletariat! If an economic form is separated from the social and political context in which it is immersed, it becomes an empty abstraction. Trotsky saw much more clearly than all these amateurs of empty phrases when, as early as 1936, he wrote that in the USSR “the character of the economy as a whole depends upon the character of the State power.”
If the Soviet Union still remains today, in my opinion, a degenerated workers’ state, it is because, from that monstrous society, nothing new and stable has yet come out. In the rotten apple no germ has appeared. The personal position of each bureaucrat still remains very precarious. The manifestations of imperialism that we can now observe reveals precisely the parasitic character of a bureaucracy that lives from day to day by plunderings and expediencies. If the monster would reveal itself capable of reproducing itself, it would not be a monster any more, but a new species. If the system of political absolutism combined with state-ownership of the means of production were to extend over the world, the Soviet bureaucracy would already today be, of course, the prototype of this system. But history has not yet proven that from the Stalinist bureaucracy can emerge a social system of an historical scope, in the full sense of the word. To accept today that the proof has been given means, it seems to me, to overlook all that is monstrous, exceptional, parasitic and unstable in the Stalinist bureaucratic regime.
 
Questions of Terms
The various features of bureaucratic imperialism which we now observe are a new phenomenon and, like any new phenomenon, it is difficult to label them. We have to create a new term or use a term already applied to other phenomena. To create a new word is easy, but to create a new word that would be understood by everybody, that could be used in our daily propaganda and agitation, is much more difficult, and Until now, nothing of that kind has been proposed. We are, therefore, reduced to using a term already used for other phenomena, that is to say, to extend its meaning to a certain degree. Two names have already been used: expansionism and imperialism, and the question of choosing between the two would be very paltry if very often deeper disagreements were not hiding behind that choice. Let us weigh a moment the relative advantages and disadvantages of the two terms.
The term “imperialism” is used most of the time to designate the finance imperialism of advanced capitalist countries. (Not only, however. Trotsky, describing Tzarist imperialism, discovers in it many features which do not belong at all to classical finance imperialism.) If we want to use the term for the Soviet bureaucracy, we are then obliged, in order to avoid confusion, to state clearly what are the economic and social roots of bureaucratic imperialism, and that is what I have tried to do above. This task once accomplished, there remains the formal argument that to speak of bureaucratic imperialism means to identify the USSR with the capitalist countries, for it means to use the same word for the two camps. But, the same objection, if it were valid, would equally invalidate the term “expansionism” (and many other terms too, such as oppression, plunder, etc.) for the great capitalist powers also practice expansionism (and oppression, plunder, etc.). Thus, every formal argument directed against the word imperialism strikes also the word expansionism. If the disadvantages are the same, the term imperialism is the better under the heading of advantages. For, what constitutes the difference? Expansionism is a much more neutral term, equally applicable, for instance, to a peaceful expansion into a virgin continent. Imperialism designates much more precisely the oppression and exploitation of foreign peoples and is much more charged with opprobrium, considerations which, in face of the monstrous crimes of the Soviet bureaucracy, should decide us to adopt the term in our propaganda and agitation.
 
A Citation of Trotsky
In October 1939, after the occupation of eastern Poland, Trotsky wrote:
Can the present expansion of the Kremlin be termed imperialism? First of all it is necessary for us to agree on the social content which we put in this term. History has known the imperialism [3] of the Roman state based on slave labor, the imperialism of feudal land-ownership, the imperialism of the Tzarist monarchy, etc. The driving force behind the Moscow bureaucracy is indubitably the tendency to extend its power, its prestige, its revenues. This is the element of “imperialism” in the widest sense of the word which was a property in the past of all monarchies, oligarchies, ruling castes, medieval estates and classes. However, in contemporary literature, at least Marxist literature, imperialism is understood to mean the expansionist policy of finance capital which has a very sharply defined economic content. To employ the term “imperialism” for the foreign policy of the Kremlin, without explaining exactly what one means by it, means simply to identify the policy of the Bonapartist bureaucracy with the policy of monopolistic capitalism on the basis that both one and the other utilize military force for expansion.
From this citation it appears dearly that Trotsky is irritated with those who employ the term imperialism in regard to the USSR as a simple insult in order to vent their indignation, but “without explaining exactly what one means by it.” However, to demand that one explains is to accept implicitly that it is possible, once the demand is satisfied, to extend to the Soviet Union the term imperialism.
In 1940 we were entering a gigantic war that would bring an answer to many questions, and it was legitimate to hesitate at that moment to introduce a theoretical innovation. Moreover, the territories occupied then were economically insignificant, their occupation had almost entirely a military meaning on the eve of an imminent war, the few dismantlings of factories which were then carried out were not known abroad at the time Trotsky was writing. Today, however, it is a question of half of Europe, plus large territories in Asia. A little before the war we were still criticizing the Kremlin for its actions in the League of Nations, for pacifism, pacts, etc. All this appears today almost like child’s play compared to the regime of violence and pillage which has been extended over Europe. Countries with advanced working classes are being condemned to economic, social and cultural disintegration. In the eyes of large masses, communism is being discredited. The parties of petty bourgeois democracy suddenly recover prestige and votes. The very perspective of socialism is placed in jeopardy.
The oppression and exploitation, pillage on a grand scale, the millions of forced laborers, the hopeless situation of the occupied countries – all these facts are undeniable. I have tried to show that it is not a matter of simple political episodes but that it results from the bureaucratic management of Soviet economy and that it is therefore legitimate to speak of bureaucratic imperialism. The reality is so complicated that there is room for discussions on this point. But even on the exact mechanism of finance imperialism the discussions have never ceased among Marxists during a half century! With much greater reason the teratological character of the Soviet Union impels us to a constant reexamination of our conceptions. What is necessary to ask of anyone who takes part in this discussion is, rather than immediate agreement, a desire to learn, a willingness to weigh all arguments, a firm decision to reduce to silence those who want to fetter the analysis by considerations foreign to the discussion. It is only thus that we will be able to advance.



December 25, 1945


DANIEL LOGAN
 






[Editor’s Note – THE NEW INTERNATIONAL holds the position that Russia is not in any way a workers’ state, but a bureaucratic collectivist state. We will comment on the above article from this point of view in a future issue.]



 



(Continued from Last Issue)
The party that during present weeks would untiringly diffuse these slogans among the large masses would infallibly draw their attention and thus prepare their ears to receive more advanced slogans. At a further stage it would enjoy the authority of having foreseen the march of the development and of having been with the masses in their most elementary struggles. The benefit would be tremendous.
The slogan of the republic is imposed all the more by the present situation, since the official workers parties have rallied to the monarchy. The slogan is not only directed against the present regime and the Allies, but is also a sharp weapon against the coalitionists, the Stalinist and Socialist parties.
To throw some light on this problem we have to try to determine at which stage of the Italian revolution we are now. For this purpose historical parallels and examples are useful, even indispensable. Provided we are cautious enough not to forget the differences, they may furnish us with convenient landmarks.
During twenty years Fascism had gradually lost its petty-bourgeois “mass” following, and had become a dried up Bonapartist regime, resting mainly on the police apparatus. Thus Mussolini’s removal was to be almost as painless as the dismissal of another Bonapartist ruler, Primo de Rivera of Spain, in January 1930. Rivera was succeeded by General Berenguer. The first result of the shift was the breaking up of the censorship, political discussions sprang up, and the problem around which they centered was the existence of the monarchy. A year passed, during which the students demonstrated and the workers fought against the police. In February 1931 Berenguer resigned, two months later Alfonso had to flee and the republic was proclaimed. The Spanish revolution was going toward new heights.
If we are to follow the Spanish revolutionary calendar, we must say that the present regime of the Lieutenant General corresponds to the Berenguer interlude.
The differences between the two situations are important and obvious. There is now a world war, in which Italy is participating, being occupied by both camps. Foreign troops will be on Italian soil for quite some time. On the other hand, a general European revolution is coming, to which the fate of the Italian revolution will be most closely connected. However, at the present stage, the historical parallel clearly shows the correctness of the slogan of the republic.
For months the problem of democratic demands for Italy was as good as forgotten by our press. There were journalistic comments on political moves taking place there, such as the formation of the Bonomi government, etc. There was a constant reaffirmation of our Socialist program. But there was no indication of how to call the masses to action. A semi-turn occurred on July 22nd, when The Militant came to write about a series of democratic slogans, although in the most unclear and confusing way. The slogan of the “overthrow of the monarchy” was raised. Why in that negative form and not as the immediate proclamation of the republic?
Since then, our press has come to speak a few times of a “workers’ and peasants’ republic.” It must be clear that this is not a democratic, not even a transition, demand. It is merely a more popular expression for the dictatorship of the proletariat, and, as such, has at the present time a purely propagandistic character. There is no objection to its use, of course, but it must be clear that it does not eliminate the present need for the democratic demand of the immediate proclamation of the republic.
This discussion should not, of course, tend to give to the slogan of the republic in Italy a disproportionate importance. It is at the present time a very useful agitational slogan, the specific weight of which in our daily activities should be left, however, to be determined by comrades who are directly on the stage. If we have insisted upon it particularly, it is because the slogan is extremely important as a test case. It is always very easy to write or adopt general formulations about democratic demands. They have been in our documents for years. But all that has little value if concrete applications are indefinitely postponed. On the other hand, many signs point out that we may soon enter a new stage in Italy. It may happen that the question of the republic will be quickly solved. A slogan which may soon gain great importance is: For a Togliatti-Nenni government!
Some comrades may raise against the present use of democratic slogans the following argument: such use would be all right if the Fourth International now had in Italy a big party capable of setting in motion large masses, but unfortunately this is not yet the case. Therefore the problem is quite different; it is at the present time the building of a strong revolutionary party, and for that purpose any program of democratic demands is useless. The premises of this reasoning are correct, but the conclusion – false. It is true indeed that the building of a revolutionary party in Italy is still ahead of us, and that victory is inconceivable without forging such a party. But this task cannot be fulfilled outside of the daily struggle of the masses – in a hothouse, as it were.
This problem has been discussed in Europe quite often, especially in France and Belgium in 1934-36, at the time when the political situation there was already in a state of pre-revolutionary fluency and the organizations of the Fourth International still very weak. Trotsky and the executive body of the Fourth International always resolutely opposed the tendencies that wanted to restrict our groups to strictly propagandistic programs and slogans until the day when we would have assembled a large party and come like Minerva out of the head of Jupiter. We cannot thwart a possible opportunist danger in a young party by a “little dose” of ultra-leftism, but only by outlining the correct Bolshevik policy.
I think the resolution should contain a short but sharp warning against ultra-leftism. The war has stirred up a tremendous wave of reaction. The official workers parties have not been the last to follow or even to propel this wave. The Stalinists have been, in words and in deeds, at the point of reaction. The remnants of the Second International, slightly shocked by such brazenness, follow them as best they can.
In such conditions one may well say: “The main danger is opportunism. Why bother now about ultra-leftism?” Such a way of putting the question would be utterly wrong. The danger of opportunism is tremendous, indeed, but it is precisely why the danger of sectarianism should not be ignored; on the contrary, it should be carefully watched. Opportunism does not eliminate ultra-leftism, but engenders it. Ultra-leftism is only the other face of opportunism, its shadow, an infantile reaction to it and, in a sense, the punishment the working class has to pay for it.
The putrefaction of the Second International during the last war brought about many an ultra-left tendency. The German organization of Luxemburg and Liebknecht was impregnated with ultra-leftism and broke its head precisely because of that ailment; in France opportunism blended with ultra-leftism in grandiloquent phrases, etc., etc. Lenin had to write a special pamphlet against the infantile sickness of ultra-leftism.
At the end of the present war and in the coming revolutionary upheaval we may expect the same occurrence, probably with much greater intensity. At the last plenum I spoke about this coming danger of ultra-leftism. Since then events in one country at least have arrived, on schedule, as it were, to show the reality of the danger. In England the “breakaways” are becoming a serious problem. Disgusted with the treacherous policy of the union leaders and the Stalinist party, workers quit the unions and ask: why a union? Anarchists are taking advantage of this mood. This is only the first sign of things to come.
A new generation of young revolutionaries is now appearing, which has not accumulated much experience. In many countries they have grown up under illegality, without much opportunity to study the lessons of the past. The crimes of the bourgeois order have been so atrocious, the servility of the official workers parties is so repulsive that many impatient reactions may be expected. Moreover, Europe has known for four years sabotage and terrorism, and these cannot fail to leave traces of adventurism in the policy of many a good revolutionary workers party.
Under the blows of experience ultra-leftism had been forced during the twenty years between the two wars to abandon many of its original positions. But the point to which it clung most obstinately was its opposition to the use of democratic and transition slogans. Our movement had to conduct a long fight precisely on that problem.
We are now entering an historical epoch in which general propaganda is not enough. Liberals, reformists and all the admirers of bourgeois progress always hoped that Czarist Russia would gradually rise to the level of cultured and democratic Western Europe. Quite the contrary occurred. With the disintegration of capitalist civilization, Western Europe has catastrophically sunk to the level of despotic Russia and even far below. Reformists and centrists used to view Bolshevism as a product of backward Russia, not good enough for enlightened Western Socialism. But now all Europe has been made “good enough” for Bolshevism. History puts all the teachings of Bolshevism on the order of the day more imperatively than ever. And one of these lessons is Bolshevism’s contempt for mere enlightening propaganda about the virtues of Socialism, its ability to feel the aspirations of the masses, to seize upon the progressive side of these aspirations and on that point to drive a wedge that would detach the masses from their conservative parties and leaders.
The draft resolution states in point 32 on the slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe:
It corresponds to the needs and experiences of the European masses who are learning that only by the destruction of the outlived and reactionary national state and through the economic unification and socialist collaboration of the free peoples of Europe can the menace of recurrent devastating wars be abolished and freedom and economic well-being assured.
A few lines before, the draft resolution had indicated that the proletariat of a European country will give military help to the workers of another
by boldly disregarding the outlived and reactionary national boundaries.
These formulae are not lacking in ambiguity and they can cover a correct as well as a false position. Without knowing the exact interpretation given to them by the writers of the draft resolution, I deem it necessary to state here my own position, as a contribution toward a more precise formulation of the subject in the final resolution.
No doubt, in the military struggle against imperialism and its agents, the proletariat will not hesitate to “boldly disregard” national boundaries. But does that mean that state borders will disappear from one day to the next? I do not think so. The European national problems cannot be erased by the signing of a decree abolishing state borders. It will take a whole historical epoch to solve them.
“United States” implies the existence of different states, that is to say, borders. It means that each nation of the federation has the right to say or no, the right of self-determination, up to and including the right of secession. Socialist United States can only rest upon the conviction of each people that only by a federative organization Europe can live. Violence cannot speed up the acquiring of this conviction, but on the contrary can only delay it.
After the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, we do not wish to march to Socialism by violence, but by patiently convincing the peoples of the superiority of centralization. Just as, in the agrarian problem, we are not partisans of “forced collectivization,” but we want to demonstrate to the peasant, by his own experience, the advantages of large collective enterprise over small property, so in the national question we are against any “forced unification” and the only real, not fictitious, guarantee is the right of secession.
The slogan of the Socialist United States of Europe is an attempt to solve the conflict between the centripetal necessities of a planned economy and the centrifugal tendencies inherited from past centuries. It is a dynamic formula, the content of which will continuously change. It will probably start with military collaboration, then a coordination of economic plans will come, and so far, up to a complete economic, political, social and cultural unification of the continent. This will not be reached in a day, not even in a few years, and will largely depend, moreover, on what happens in the rest of the world.
At a certain stage, the process of political centralization will be accompanied by the process of the withering away of the state. Will the various European states blend into one state, which will subsequently wither away, or will they begin to wither away before reaching complete amalgamation? We cannot tell now, but we may never have a single state.
The best examples we have until now of federative unification are those of two bourgeois nations: Switzerland and the United States of America. In both cases the driving force toward unification came from an external threat. In Switzerland the urban and rural cantons had widely diverging interests, but upon both the danger of Austrian domination was threatening. In America the thirteen colonies were far from seeing eye to eye with one another on all questions, but they had to unite their forces in order to resist England. Similarly, in Europe the driving power toward unification will be the necessity to fight the domination of the Yankee overlord and it will lead to military, economic and political cooperation.
At what tempo? We cannot tell. The example of America shows also how the building of the federal power was a long process, extending over more than a century and necessitating a civil war of four years. The European nations today are certainly more separated than the thirteen colonies were. Socialism will have, undoubtedly, other methods than capitalism for reaching unification. It would be childish and dangerous, however, to expect the erasing of national boundaries and the sudden disappearance of all national problems some fine morning by the signing of a decree.
Putrifying capitalism will bequeath to the victorious proletariat a continent torn by wars and national hatreds. Suspicions will have to be quieted. Any precipitated step can only revive them again and delay real, Socialist unification. Anyway, whatever may be the tempo, the first big step will not be the establishment of a single European state, but the formation of a federation of states, which implies borders, borders of a new type indeed, borders between workers’ states, but borders nevertheless for some time.
The theoretical errors of the draft resolution about the “naked military dictatorship” or the two kinds of bourgeois democracy have to be unequivocally corrected. That would straighten up the axis of the resolution. The attention has to be focused on the specific problems of the period we are now entering. The question of the democratic demands should not be dealt with in five lines, but all its aspects have to be carefully examined. The slogan of the immediate proclamation of the republic in Italy has to be incorporated. Although many parts of the draft resolution can be used, a great deal of rewriting should be done.
We are now entering a period of transition which will go from the collapse of German domination over Europe to the dictatorship of the proletariat. The question of the character and length of this period is directly tied to the problem of the formation of the revolutionary party. Whoever does not pay enough attention to that period, assumes that we will go through it automatically, tries to jump over it theoretically, ignores its peculiar problems, etc. – whoever does that (and I believe the writers of the draft resolution do it to a great extent) obscures the problems, and therefore increases the difficulties, of the building of the party. The greatest help that the members of the SWP can now give to their European comrades is to carefully correct the draft resolution and present an impeccable document.






We are continuing in this issue the publication of documents of the Eleventh National Convention of the Trotskyist movement.
The following document is a criticism of the first draft resolution of the National Committee on The European Revolution and Tasks of the Revolutionary Party. Logan’s criticisms and position are a continuation of the criticisms and position elaborated by Felix Morrow in his criticism of the International Resolution of the Fifteenth Anniversary Plenum of the Socialist Workers Party. See The Eleventh Convention of the American Trotskyist Movement by the Editors and The European Revolution by E.R. Frank in the December 1944 Fourth International for the convention’s position on this question.
The Political Committee introduced to the convention, in the light of the pre-convention discussion, a number of clarifying amendments and literary corrections to its first draft resolution. The convention adopted the resolution in its amended form by the vote of 51 to 5. The resolution was printed in the December 1944 Fourth International.
By the same vote of 51 to 5, the Eleventh convention of the American Trotskyists rejected Logan’s criticism and amendments as contrary to the general line of the resolution.
We will print in the next issue a section of the International report to the convention by E.R. Frank. – Ed.




When the draft resolution is analyzed, it appears to contain two ingredients. On the one hand, we have informations about the conditions in Europe, or rather in Italy, for, according to the method followed by the writers of the draft resolution, the situation in that country only is examined. These informations are quite minute and the parts of the draft resolution that contain them are often textual reprints of articles published in The Militant or Fourth International a few weeks or a few months ago. Some of these details hardly have a place in a resolution for a national convention, but would have room only in a much more expanded thesis. On the other hand, we have reiterations of our Socialist position, which could have been written one, two, five or ten years ago.
But somehow, between these two component parts of the draft resolution, it seems that the concrete reality of the period we are now entering, with its specific problems, needs and tasks, is not grasped. Some attempts have been made in that direction, but they remain quite limited and, on the whole, unsuccessful. The draft resolution does not seem to be exactly focused. The focus is either too close and too limited, or too remote.
This defect is closely connected to a series of false political appreciations, concerning the coming regimes in Europe (and the present one in Italy), the nature of the democratic interludes, etc. These political errors throw out of balance a resolution which, of course, contains many correct points. The first thing to do is to examine these errors.
Point 73 of the draft resolution states:
Fascism bereft in its last days of all mass support, could rule only as a naked military-police dictatorship. The Allies and their native accomplices are today ruling Italy in virtually the same manner.
The writers of the draft resolution deemed it prudent to put in the last sentence the word “virtually”, which can provide ground for a great deal of casuistry. However, either the manner is the same – then the word “virtually” is useless – or it is not the same, then the first obligation of the writers was to state what the difference is. Since they did not, we will consider the little word merely as an involuntary symptom of uneasiness in the mind of the writers when they put on paper their astonishing affirmation.
What does the draft resolution mean by the “native accomplices” of the Allies? Apparently, the Bonomi government and the parties that participate in it. The two most important of these parties are the Communist and Socialist parties. These two parties have, – as the draft resolution says in point 16 (and rightly so), – the “support and allegiance” of the masses. As far as I know, Fascism did not have, “in its last days”, “support and allegiance” of the masses. Thus, it appears clearly enough that Italy is not at the present time ruled in the same manner, – as the draft claims it is, – as under Fascism “in its last days”.
The draft resolution in point 20 explains – correctly – that, after the Allies entered Rome, the Badoglio government “simply melted away under the hostility of the masses.” A new government, headed by the liberal Bonomi, had to be formed. Why such a move, if the Allies rule by “naked military dictatorship”? Moreover, according to the draft resolution:
the Stalinists, Social-Democrats and their liberal allies directly took over the task of keeping the Italian masses subservient to the Allied invaders.
If the Allies use the Stalinist and Socialist leaders to maintain their rule, it means that their dictatorship is not “naked,” but covered with something, and not merely “military,” for, as far as I know, the Stalinist and Socialist parties do not hold the “support and allegiance” of the masses with naked military force. The draft resolution is clearly incorrect in identifying the present rule in Italy with Fascism, be it “in its last days” or at any other time, and by doing so falls into insoluble contradictions.
These two sentences quoted from point 73 reveal how far the writers of the draft are from understanding the real present political situation in Italy, the mechanism of Allied rule and consequently how ill-prepared they must be to outline the present revolutionary tasks. Suppose that tomorrow the Bonomi government falls and that the Allies call Badoglio, so carefully kept in reserve by Churchill, to “clear the mess,” or even attempt to do this themselves. According to the draft resolution, there would be no political change, for there would be, after as before, the same “naked military dictatorship.” How far is the draft from our tradition of careful and precise characterization of political regimes, or vigilant observation of every move, and how dangerously close it comes to the Stalinist method of sweeping identifications and generalizations (social-Fascism)!
 
“Naked Military Dictatorship”
Point 73, already quoted, declares:
Fascism bereft in its last days of all mass support, could rule only as a naked military-police dictatorship. The Allies and their native accomplices are today ruling Italy in virtually the same manner. This is the pattern of their intended rule in all Europe.
And point 75 states:
The Anglo-American imperialists and the native capitalists do not intend voluntarily to grant the slightest democracy to the peoples of Europe.
Let us note how the problem is put by the draft resolution : the intentions of the imperialist masters are considered. It is, of course, indispensable, to examine the plans of the enemy. This, however, is only a part of revolutionary politics. Another necessary part of it is a careful investigation of whether and how these plans can be carried out. The imperialist overlords do not fulfill their intentions in a vacuum. Their intentions clash with those of other classes. The result of this conflict is a concrete political situation, in which we have to act.
However, the draft resolution does not go through this part of the inquiry and, therefore, the imperialist intentions are given as the coming reality. The discussion of political perspectives thus threatens to take a subjective character (what the imperialists want or do not want to do), which is alien to Marxist method.
Nothing reveals the error of the draft resolution more clearly than the word “voluntarily.” Point 75, as we have seen, declares:
The Anglo-American imperialists and the native capitalists do not intend voluntarily to grant the slightest democracy to the peoples of Europe.
But has the bourgeoisie ever granted any democracy “voluntarily”? Even in the 19th century universal suffrage had to be conquered in many European countries on barricades. Classes never “intend voluntarily” to grant anything. They act under the impact of the action of other classes. This, at least, is the Marxist way of analyzing political moves. And the draft resolution presents this fact – that the imperialists do not intend voluntarily to grant the slightest democracy – as a profound revelation about the character of the post war epoch!
With the investigation of the European political situation so erroneously switched on the plane of intentions, we are forced, in order to proceed with the criticism, to temporarily adopt the assumption the draft resolution implicitly makes, namely, that the imperialist intentions will coincide with reality, and we must examine the question: will the rule of the Allies and their native accomplices over Europe be a “naked military-police dictatorship,” similar to Fascism “in its last days”?
To that question we must answer “no” for many European countries. We must answer “no” even for Italy today, as we have seen. Of course, there is no enthusiastic support of the Allies in that country – far from that. But until now and for some time to come the masses give “support and allegiance” to the Stalinist and Socialist parties and these, in turn, are cogs in the mechanism of Anglo-American domination – which means that this domination is not a “naked military dictatorship.”
How will the situation be in other countries? We have had in the last few weeks the experience of France and Belgium. Thousands of Parisians shouted to the American troops “Thank you!” These are petty-bourgeois crowds? Probably, although there must be many young workers among them. But there is no doubt that the Parisian workers are mightily glad to be freed from German thralldom. Thus, the Allies have accumulated a capital of illusions, which they may quickly exhaust by their reactionary policy, but which nevertheless exists for a certain period; and when a rule is tolerated because of certain illusions, it is not a naked military dictatorship.
Let us even suppose for a moment that the French workers today see no difference at all between the Germans and the Anglo-Americans (and I do not think that is true). There is, however, the petty bourgeoisie. Aren’t there any illusions about the Allies? Won’t they find any support there? If so – and I do not think it can be denied – then the dictatorship will not be “naked,” it will find “covers” and the existence of these “covers” raise many important tactical problems for the revolutionary party. But these questions simply do not exist for the draft resolution. It is based upon a false theory (“naked military dictatorship”) and, in accordance with that theory, ignores the real problems of the real revolution.
In many European countries the situation will be similar to the present one in France. The theory of the “naked military dictatorship” may have immediate reality in one country, Germany. Strangely enough, for that country the draft resolution speaks of a Badoglio-type of government as a definite plan of the Allies (point 70):
These measures (taken by the Allies) are deliberately designed to pin down the German people under a Badoglio-type dictatorship subservient to the conquerors.
Even such a government would be a kind of “national” cover for the Allied military dictatorship. In reality, such a government does not appear to be at the present time the most likely perspective and the Allies seem prepared to rule Germany even without a national government, through High Commissioners. This is one out of two or three historical variants. However, probably because the writers of the draft resolution do not like to outline possible variants but prefer sweeping affirmations, they failed to see the one case to which their theory of the “naked military dictatorship” would immediately apply. An editorial in the August 1944 Fourth International, directly contradicting the draft resolution, declares:
They (the Allies) have no intention of repeating the pattern of the precarious native Bonapartist regime tried with Darlan in North Africa and Badoglio in Italy.
A resolution adopted by a national convention does not have to be as categorical as an article on concrete questions. While giving the general perspective, it can outline various possibilities. If, however we want to choose between the variant given by the draft resolution and the one sketched in the Fourth International editorial, we must say that the latter seems at the present time much closer to reality.
If the Allies’ rule over Europe were to last, it would inevitably degenerate into a “naked military dictatorship.” But we must consider the problem dynamically. Today at the start the Allies have in many countries a certain capital of democratic and patriotic illusions to cover their rule. This capital will be gradually spent? The illusions will disappear? Of course. But that will be a certain process – precisely the process of revolutionary maturation of the masses, and our tactic must be adapted to the different stages of this process. For the draft resolution there is only the end, no beginning and, consequently, no process. No troublesome questions about tactic either!
What political moves have we witnessed during the last months in countries which are in the Allied military sphere? I see three important ones: the shift from Darlan-Giraud to de Gaulle, from Badoglio to Bonomi, from Mikhailovich to Tito. All of these moves are from the right to the left. They represent, in a very limited and very distorted way, the result of the pressure of the masses. Can we expect more shifts of the same kind in the future? I think we can, and they will go much farther to the left. Of course, they will intermingle in the most motley way with “naked military dictatorship.” But it is precisely where such shifts will occur that perspectives will open up for the proletarian revolution. The cases where we will jump from an Allied “naked military dictatorship” to the dictatorship of the proletariat will be exceptions, not the rule.
The draft resolution speaks of possible bourgeois democratic regimes in Europe as “a brief episode in the unfoldment of the revolutionary struggle” (point 77). This is incontestably true, if we call “brief” interludes that may last from a few months to a few years. But from this indisputable fact the draft resolution draws a wrong conclusion, namely, that such regimes do not deserve much attention. As a matter of fact, they deserve just six lines of the draft resolution. Here, however, the time element does not exhaust the problem. From the February revolution in Russia to the October revolution barely eight months elapsed. In the passage from Czarist society to the workers’ state this period is indeed a “brief episode.” But these eight months were packed with more sharp political turns, more tactical, moves by Lenin’s party than eight years of illegality under Czarist despotism. That is why today we study these eight months so carefully. A bourgeois democratic “episode,” however “brief” it may be, is a period of tremendous political responsibility, of which we have had great historical experiences. We will enter such “episodes” in many European countries. At what tempo? We do not know, but it is precisely during such episodes that the proletarian revolution has the greatest chances to prepare for success. It is precisely during such episodes that the most numerous and important problems of tactics rise. That is why a resolution of the national convention of the SWP should devote more than six lines to them. To limit our attention toward such “episodes” under the pretext that they are “brief,” of a “transitional” character, mere exceptions in a general “pattern,” is utter pedantism.
Finally, let us note that the theory of the “naked military dictatorship” implies a complete revision of our conception of the role played by the Stalinist and Socialist parties or by bourgeois-democratic tendencies. If the military dictatorship is “naked,” none of these groups has any role to play. That these groups are not heading toward a bright historical future for decades, we may well agree. However, they may and will play an important role during a period – precisely the period we are now entering – as brakes on the revolutionary locomotive. In fact, the draft resolution says so in another point. But it contradicts itself when later on it puts forward the theory of the “naked military dictatorship” and thus shows that it rests on a theoretical basis which is far from being clearly and thoroughly thought out. We shall now see another example of that.
 
A New Type of Bourgeois Democracy?
One of the most perplexing parts of the resolution is point 76. Let us try to disentangle it, although it won’t be any easy job. The draft resolution tries to establish a fundamental difference between the democratic regimes which existed in the period between the two World Wars (1918-1939) and those that may appear in the future.
The coming democratic regimes in Europe will be more anemic, less stable, more prompt to become dictatorships, than those of the past – there is no discussion about that. But that is not enough for the draft resolution. It intends to establish a kind of essential distinction between the past and the future based upon “economic and political conditions.”
Point 74 declares:
Bourgeois democracy, which flowered in the period of the rise and expansion of capitalism and the moderation of class conflicts which furnished a basis for collaboration between the classes in the advanced capitalist countries, is outlived in Europe today.
The writers of the draft resolution know, I think, that the period of the rise and expansion of European capitalism came to an end not in 1939, but in 1914. And, in a sense, bourgeois democracy is outlived since 1914. But this is not what the draft resolution means. When it says that democracy is “outlived in Europe today,” it does not mean “today” in a general way as being the period we entered in 1944, but specifically as the end of the second World War, in contradistinction to the period 1914–1939. Point 76 says:
Economic and political conditions forbid the restoration of bourgeois democracy even in the crisis-torn forms which existed after the last war.
Stated in clear terms, the theory advanced by the draft resolution is as follows: the end of the period of rising capitalism, which occurred in 1914, prohibits in 1944 the restoration of political forms which existed between 1918 and 1939. One of two things: Either the economic cause has an immediate political effect, then no democratic regime should have appeared or existed after 1914; this is clearly false. Or, although the economic basis has collapsed, political forms may survive, “outlive themselves,” for quite some time because of a peculiar combination of circumstances (failure of the proletarian grave-digger to finish off bourgeois society). This side of the alternative is the correct one. But then why should this “outliving of itself” by bourgeois democracy be stopped in 1944 by an economic condition which came to existence in 1914?
The writers of the draft resolution may cite the second World War as a possible explanation for the impossibility of the restoration of bourgeois democratic regimes even “in the crisis-torn forms” which existed between 1914 and 1939. This, however, would be a completely different theory from the one given in the draft resolution, for this draft tries to base this impossibility upon an economic condition, the end of the rise of capitalism in 1914. But let us wait and see how the writers of the draft resolution will try to get out of the sorry theoretical straits they got themselves into, and, independently of whatever the cause may be, let us look at the alleged impossibility of the return of political forms which existed between 1918 and 1939.
Let us reread point 76 of the draft resolution:
Economic and political conditions forbid the restoration of bourgeois democracy even in the crisis-torn forms which existed after the last war. Bourgeois democratic governments can appear in Europe only as interim regimes intended to stave off the conquest of power by the proletariat.
The possible future democratic governments in Europe will be interim regimes, and they will not be a repetition of forms which existed between 1918 and 1939. This distinction implies that the democratic forms between 1918 and 1939 were not of an interim character. Quite an innovation in our movement! The false perspective about the future suddenly turns into an embellishment of the past.
Do we really have to inform the writers of the draft resolution that most of the democratic regimes in Europe between the two World Wars did have an interim character? It is clear enough in Italy, Poland, Germany, Spain, etc., etc., not to speak of Kerensky’s regime. In certain countries of Western Europe (France, England, Scandinavian countries) bourgeois democracy was relatively more stable, but even there was more and more taking an “interim” character in the years preceding the outbreak of the second World War. No, really, the attempt of the draft resolution to draw a distinction between the two kinds of democracy is not very fortunate.
Maybe the writers of the draft resolution meant that in the past democratic regimes quite often came into existence after an unsuccessful revolutionary upheaval, as a kind of by-product, while in the future they can appear only before a revolutionary assault. This would imply that in the future either (1) no revolutionary attempt will ever be defeated, or (2) every defeat will be followed by a dictatorial regime. In fact, that is what the draft resolution says in point 77:
Inevitably, they (the bourgeois democratic regimes) will be displaced by the dictatorship of the proletariat emerging out of the triumphant workers’ revolution or the savage dictatorship of the capitalists consequent upon the victory of the counter-revolution.
Neither of the two propositions (1) and (2) is justified. Let us take our most authoritative international document, the Manifesto of the Fourth International on The Imperialist War and the Proletarian Revolution. It states:
Will not the revolution be betrayed this time too, inasmuch as there are two Internationals in the service of imperialism while the genuine revolutionary elements constitute a tiny minority? In other words: shall we succeed in preparing in time a party capable of leading the proletarian revolution ? In order to answer this question correctly it is necessary to pose it correctly. Naturally, this or that uprising may and surely will end in defeat owing to the immaturity of the revolutionary leadership. But it is not a question of a single uprising. It is a question of an entire revolutionary epoch.
This answers proposition (1), that defeats are not possible. As for proposition (2), the document goes on:
The capitalist world has no way out, unless a prolonged death agony is so considered. It is necessary to prepare for long years, if not decades of war, uprisings, brief interludes of truce, new wars and new uprisings.
“Brief interludes of truce”, this is precisely what democracy has been in many countries of Europe between the two World Wars, interludes of truce, during which the contending classes prepared for new struggles. This is what the Weimar republic was. Tomorrow as yesterday we may expect such democratic interludes after the eventual temporary defeat of revolutionary assaults. The only difference between the past and the future is that in the future the interludes will be more brief. This is a certain quantitative difference, but there is no qualitative difference between two kinds of bourgeois democratic regimes, before 1939 and after 1944, a difference allegedly based upon “economic conditions” which are present since ... 1914. The statement of the draft resolution that:
Economic and political conditions forbid the restoration of bourgeois democracy even in the crisis-torn forms which existed after the last war shows that it does not clearly understand either the past or the future.
This discussion may seem rather involved and somewhat obscure to the uninitiated reader. But now I shall give the key to the mystery.
The story began almost a year ago, as far back as the Fifteenth Anniversary Plenum (October 1943). The writers of the original draft resolution for that plenum presented a draft which explicitly denied the possibility that bourgeois democratic governments would ever exist again in Europe.
Confronted with the opposition of some comrades, especially comrades Morrow and Morrison, to this conception, the plenum had to abandon such an untenable position, although it did so without full clarity and precision. Since then events have revealed the falsehood of the original theory to everybody, perhaps even to its authors. Thus, the writers of the present draft resolution had to admit the possibility of democratic regimes in Europe, but, since they felt some solidarity with the unfortunate authors of the plenum theory, and maybe even some sympathy for them, had to find some sort of an excuse: “Yes, there will be democratic regimes in the future, but, you see, they will not at all be what they have been in the past.” Thus came to the world the theory of the two kinds of bourgeois democracy, the pre-1939 and the post-1944. The creation was perfected when an “economic” basis was found for it: “The difference comes, you see, from the end of the rise of capitalism” ... which occurred in 1914.
The distinction between the two kinds of democracy is as theoretically false as the alleged impossibility of bourgeois democratic regimes in the future, and, in a way, more confusing, for it creates confusion about the past as well as about the future.
We should not be surprised if the draft resolution, with a theoretical arsenal supplied with such conceptions as the “naked military dictatorship” or the two kinds of bourgeois democracy, is unable to exactly focus the political tasks of the present period.
Europe is now seething with revolutionary movements that have sprung up under the impact of German tyranny. Throughout Europe the masses have moved far to the left; they are crying for freedom, sensitive to any kind of oppression. This is an enormous potential danger for Allied domination and, consequently, for the whole bourgeois rule in Europe. How to transform this potential danger into an actual and direct peril? This is the central problem of the hour. In this transformation programs of democratic demands have an important role to play. Their role has been great in the development of every revolutionary crisis (Russia, Germany, Spain, etc.). But with the conditions prevailing in Europe today they acquire a peculiar importance.
Thousands, tens of thousands can learn through direct propaganda. They constitute the vanguard; they come to the revolutionary party on the basis of its Socialist program. But millions, tens of millions – and revolution is impossible without the active participation of tens of millions – have to come to Socialism through their own experience. They have to discard, one after the other, regimes about which they have had illusions. They have to discard false leaders in whom they have put their confidence. The task of the revolutionary party is to speed up and facilitate that process as much as possible, but it cannot jump over it. This is precisely what programs of democratic or transitional demands are designed for. This is precisely the Bolshevik method of winning the masses, by going together with them through action, as opposed to the propagandistic enlightenment about the advantages of Socialism, in the spirit of the Second International.
Under the monarchy we call for the proclamation of the republic. Under a bourgeois democratic regime we call for the most democratic forms (one House, immediate elections, etc.). When the revolutionary tide is high enough, we call for the expulsion from the government of the representatives of bourgeois parties. We call upon the opportunist leaders to take power if they enjoy the confidence of the majority of the workers. Etc., etc. These will be vital problems of revolutionary tactics in Europe in the coming months.
Truly enough, the draft resolution speaks of democratic demands. It even devotes to the problem at least five lines – no less. But it fails to show the specific connection of such a program with the present political situation. How could it fulfill such a task, armed as it is with the false political theories we have examined? Thus the phrases about democratic demands in the draft preserve a general, abstract character and cannot fail to appear as merely ritualistic.
For years we had discussions with opponents about the problem of democratic demands, especially concerning countries dominated by fascism. We made certain predictions. Thus, Trotsky wrote more than eleven years ago, at a time when fascism had not yet established the most brutal tyranny upon the whole of Europe (four hundred millions have now had to suffer under it!):
The fascist regime preserves democratic prejudices, recreates them, inculcates them into the youth, and is even capable of imparting to them, for a short time, the greatest strength.
What about that prediction? Has the recent experience of France confirmed it or not? What is the present situation? The draft resolution gives no answer.
The casual and perfunctory way the whole problem of democratic demands is treated is exemplified by the slogans mentioned in the text. These democratic slogans are given: “free election of all officials, freedom of the press” (point 33). Why are these two slogans singled out? What about others? True, there is at the end of the sentence a little “etc,,” into which anything can be stuffed.
The “free election of all officials” includes the election of administrators in villages, towns and cities. But does it include the election of deputies? What about the whole problem of the parliament and of democratic representations? More than thirteen years ago Trotsky found it possible to raise in a hypothetical form the slogan of the Constituent Assembly for Italy at the time of Fascism’s downfall. In August 1943 The Militant reprinted Trotsky’s article without adding any commentary about the use of the slogan. However, we are no longer in 1931, but in 1944. We now have – or should have – the reality before our eyes. How does the problem present itself today? The draft resolution maintains on this question the same silence as The Militant did.
Another important democratic slogan in Italy at the present time is the republic. Apparently, the writers of the draft did not put it down among the democratic demands because, although in the tradition of our movement, it is not as ritualistic as the freedom of the press, it does not flow as easily from the pen. Or is there any other reason? The slogan is one of those that seem most indicated by the present situation, and we shall consider it for a while.
One of the central problems of Italian political life has been, until now, the existence of the monarchy. The discussions on that point have thrown a bright light on the servility, the corruption and the ignominy of all the Italian official parties, including the Stalinists. The king was Mussolini’s accomplice for twenty years. Before leaving the United States for Italy, the self-styled liberal Count Sforza wrote: “It may be that a fraction of the Italians is still for the Monarchy, but after so many shameful acts and treasons this could be so only for reasons of expediency.” However, it soon appeared that the “reasons of expediency” were strong enough to be respected, even by Sforza himself. We then witnessed the most repulsive political farce, whose players were some wrecks left by liberalism like Croce or Sforza himself, the Stalinists and the various democratic and Social Democratic parties. Behind the stage, the king and his son, the reactionary upper crust of Italian society and the Allied diplomacy were rejoicing at such an extraordinary spectacle.
Croce, the philosopher of compromise, explained that he was “against the king as a person, and not against the monarchic institution.” It has always been the dream of the craven liberals to keep the monarchy and to have only “good” kings. The Stalinist messenger boy Palmieri Togliatti (Ercoli), arriving from Moscow, declared that he was “against the king as an institution, and not as a person,” having probably been impressed by the remarkable and generous personality of the king. A shameful compromise was attained when the Crown Prince was made lieutenant general of the realm.
The monarchy remains the rallying center of reaction: the reactionaries of the “Blue Party,” the Church and the Allied diplomacy. Any new development of the Italian revolution will inevitably raise the question of the existence of that focus of intrigues against the people, the Court.
To all the horse-trading among the monarchists, the ambulating corpses of liberalism and the Stalino-royalists, the revolutionary party must answer with the cry: Immediate proclamation of the republic! Arrest of the king, the Crown Prince and all of the royal family! Immediate confiscation of all the royal properties for the benefit of the people!
(To Be Concluded in Next Issue)
 






The following article first appeared in the Internal Bulletin of the Socialist Workers Party under the title, The Slogan of the Republic in Italy and Its Discussion in the SWP. Space limitations have necessitated the omission of the first part of the article, giving the author’s account of the background of the question in the SWP discussion and his own difficulty in securing timely publication of his articles in the party’s Internal Bulletin. Comrade Logan has long been a leading member of the international Trotskyist movement. – EDITORS
 



“We are for Socialism!”
This is the common denominator of a great variety of arguments against the slogan of the republic in Italy: “We want socialism, not the republic!”, “We are for a workers’ republic, not a bourgeois republic!”, etc.
These arguments are not new. They are classical expressions of ultra-leftism. Arguments built on the same pattern have often been examined and refuted in our movement, and in the Bolshevik party and the Third International. In my article On the Situation in Europe and Our Tasks, I tried to show how alien that kind of argument was to our methods. Comrade Goldman dealt with them again in his article On the Question of the Slogan “For A Democratic Republic”. (Internal Bulletin, Vol. VII, No. 1, March 1945) I simply summarize again our conclusions.
The method of ultra-left arguments consists in opposing our goal to anything else. The method of those who want to follow Lenin is the direct opposite: it is to find a path of action from the present situation to socialism. The problem cannot be solved by simply stating whether or not we are “for socialism” (a strange thing in our movement!), but by analyzing how to get onto the road to socialism. And here the whole question of democratic demands is involved.
The fundamental defect of such arguments, when used in our ranks against the slogan of the republic, is the following: these arguments about “being for socialism” are so general that hey can equally be used against any democratic demand. That is why we have the right to say that the acceptance of a program of democratic demands by those who use such arguments against the republic is merely ritualistic. The struggle for democratic demands is so unquestionably a tradition of our movement that they cannot oppose it openly. But the kind of arguments they used against one specific slogan, being equally applicable to all, shows that they pay only lip-service to our traditions.
Of course, one can sincerely be for democratic slogans and at the same time be against the slogan of the republic in Italy now. But, in such a case, the reasons against the slogan of the republic must be specific, related to that one particular slogan, and not apply as well to all democratic slogans.
 
The Monarchy in Italy
The inability of some members of the majority to grasp the handling of democratic demands at all is at times suddenly revealed by the surprising arguments they use. Thus a minor spokesman of the majority declared: “If you are for the republic in Italy, why not in England?” And a burst of laughter completes his argument.
This objection is remarkable for its method: if the slogan of the republic is correct in Italy, it should also be in England. Since nobody puts it forward for England, then it is clearly incorrect for Italy. Admirable logic!
However, more than the method is deficient here; the political acumen is not especially sharp either. Today, the existence of the monarchy is in England a tenth-rank question (which, however, should not be completely forgotten in our agitation.) But, when England enters a revolutionary crisis, the Court may become a focus of counter-revolutionary Bonapartist intrigues. Its existence may become a burning political issue. In that case the slogan of the republic will become for a time an important political demand of the revolutionary party. Our critic does not seem to suspect that, and thus reveals how much his thoughts are imbedded in the frame of present reality, how little he sees a political situation in its revolutionary dynamism.
Sometimes spokesmen for the majority tell us, not without a malicious tone: “But calling for a republic means your acceptance of the bourgeois republic!” Such an argument could be directed against any partial demand. Does it mean that we stop there? We support the struggle of a union for a ten-cent increase per hour. Does that mean we are against a twenty-five cent raise? More generally, does our support of a fight for a wage increase mean our acceptance of the capitalist wage system? Etc., etc. But enough about all these ultra-left ratiocinations. Here a clear answer must be demanded about our past.
 
The Example of Spain
Our movement had the slogan of the republic in Spain in 1930-31. In the pre-revolutionary period of 1934-36 Trotsky suggested its inclusion in the program of action of the Belgian section of the Fourth International, where it had incomparably less importance than now in Italy. That does not imply that the slogan is necessarily correct now in Italy. But it does imply that the slogan cannot be opposed for general reasons such as: “We are for socialism, not for the bourgeois republic,” etc. It also implies that the first task of the majority of the leadership should have been to explain what concrete, specific and new conditions, not existing in the past, prevented the use of the slogan in Italy now. As it did not fulfill this elementary duty, as it left the traditions of our movement in the dark, and instead of precise clarification, threw all kinds of general accusations at the opposition, it thus opened the door to the strangest misconceptions in the minds of its own followers. The result of such a policy did not take long to appear. A minor spokesman for the majority declared: “Yes, Trotsky was for the republic in 1931, but because Spain was a feudal country.” Not a voice from the ranks of the majority came to correct such political illiteracy.
It must be repeated once more: As long as the majority does not settle its political accounts with our past, as long as it does not clearly state what specific reasons prevent us today from using a slogan we used in the past, but simply opposes us with general arguments and accusations, the majority must be considered to be in a state of political insolvency.
 
“The masses want Soviets!”
The argument about our being “for socialism” was so shaky, so alien to our methods for solving such a question, that most of the spokesmen of the majority felt obliged to present something a bit more concrete. They discovered, although “more than three thousand miles away,” that the Italian masses “want Soviets,” and therefore ... we cannot call for the immediate proclamation of the republic.
Does that mean we are on the eve of the passing of state power into the hands of the Italian Soviets? In such a situation, of course, the problem of the monarchy would have been solved long ago, or would have been by-passed and would have lost any significance. Unfortunately, we are not yet at such a stage.
There are no Soviets in Italy now. The Italian masses still have very little practical experience about the functioning and the potentialities of such bodies. The present problem is, then, to get Soviets. How can we get them? By the revolutionary action of the masses. How can we help the masses to unleash their revolutionary energy and enter the road of action? On that point the majority keeps silence.
 
How Soviets Are Formed
Soviets are not formed because the masses are intellectually convinced beforehand of their advantages, because the masses set the goal of forming them. Soviets appear at a certain state as a necessary instrument of the struggle. The objective aim of the struggle is, of course, to establish a duality of power and, later on, the power of the Soviets. Subjectively, however, in the consciousness of the masses, Soviets appear rather as a means than as an end. This is especially true at the beginning of the struggle. And we are still at the beginning in Italy.
What are the subjective aims or aims of the struggle at the starting point? There is a great variety of them. Experience in many countries, as far back as 1848, shows that many diverse issues may be incentives to action for the masses in the first stages of a revolutionary crisis. The touchstone of a revolutionary party is precisely its ability to seize upon such questions and use them as a lever to push the masses onto the road of action.
This does not at all mean that the immediate proclamation of the republic is the only or even the main slogan in Italy now. But even if the problem of the monarchy were secondary, that would be no argument for condemning the slogan of the republic. As a matter of fact, the problem of the monarchy, in my opinion, has been for the past nine months and is now one of the four or five major political questions in Italy. But, whatever may be the exact rank of the slogan of the republic in our program, it does belong to it. It is true that the problem may be solved very rapidly, in a few days of revolutionary struggle of the masses, especially if a military front ceases to separate the North from the South. However, the problem of the monarchy still exists today; it has existed since June, it existed at the time of the convention, and only those who voluntarily and obstinately closed their eyes could not see it.
If Soviets appear tomorrow in Italy with the monarchy still in power, will the fight against it lose all significance for revolutionary action? It depends on the tempo of events. If the tempo is not too quick, the duality of power will manifest itself as the opposition of the central authority of the Soviets to the monarchy. The court will become the center of reaction, the focus of Kornilovist intrigues. The question of its existence will be a burning issue, even with Soviets existing. There is the possibility, of course, if the tempo is very quick, that the Soviets will be confronted with the problem of power so rapidly that the issue of monarchy may be by-passed and as good as forgotten before being solved. This, however, seems to me the most unlikely perspective.
 
The Present Reality
But, whatever the future variants may be, the present reality is still the absence of Soviets. The present problem is to enter the path of action, in order to form Soviets. There is not the slightest contradiction between the orientation toward Soviets and the demand of the republic. Quite the contrary, in fighting for that demand, along with many others, the masses will build Soviets.
I have heard the following argument repeated here and there in the party: “Did not Zinoviev, in October, 1917, threaten to lead the Bolshevik Party astray, with his orientation toward the constituent assembly?” The implication is that the use of democratic demands in general and of the slogan of the republic in particular may trammel the party in its offensive for power. Surprising as such an argument may be, its examination helps us to get at the heart of the question, which is: at what stage of the Italian Revolution are we now? Answering this question is an important part of the problem of determining whether the slogan of the republic is correct or not. The majority did not give any clear answer to the question, it did not even notice the existence of a question; but, by circulating or letting circulate such arguments as the one reported above, it confused the present situation in Italy with the eve of October.
I tried to answer that question about the present stage in my article On the European Situation and Our Tasks. Using the Spanish revolutionary calendar, I made a comparison with the Berenguer interlude, trying to show the similarities as well as the differences. If we want to use the Russian calendar, the question which arises is not “Are we on the eve of October in Italy?” but “Are we before or after February?” My answer to this question is as follows: Certain factors of the Italian situation put us after February. The most important of these factors has been the participation of the Stalinists and the Socialists in the government. But other factors place us before February: the Italian masses still have less experience of a generalized political struggle in the streets than the Russian masses had after February, the monarchy is still in existence and, because of that, the Italian ruling classes still have more centralization and cohesion than the Russian ruling classes had after February. The result of the analysis tends to prove the correctness of a vigorous offensive by the revolutionary party on the question of the monarchy.
 
Stages in the Struggle
Certain comrades have objected to this method of establishing points of comparison between Italy now and past revolutionary periods. This method, they say, may lead to the conception of necessary stages: Italy will ascend, one by one, the successive steps of the revolutionary ladder. The objection does not seem to me to be correct. In the period we have now entered, the masses will make, from time to time, tremendous leaps. Problems which have been stagnating for months, for years, will be solved in a few weeks, a few days, even a few hours of tremendous revolutionary passion. This is precisely the true character of every revolutionary period. Moreover, the tempo will not be the same everywhere and will not be the same as in past revolutions. Here slowly, there quickly, it will bear the mark of specific circumstances.
When all this is said, however, it does not mean that anything can happen at any time. Revolutions have their natural history. If not, what is the use of studying the past? We try to establish a correspondence between the different stages in Russia, in Spain, in Italy, never forgetting, of course, that the tempo may be slower or quicker, that whole stages can be skipped over, etc. Analyzing the May days in Barcelona in 1937, Leon Trotsky tried to determine whether they were the Spanish counterpart of the Russian July days or October days. We cannot dispense with such a method. It entails a certain relativity, for events are never exactly repeated, and we must always be on the lookout for possible differences; but to abandon the method of comparison altogether means to abandon all method in political thinking.
To the question: “At what stage are we in Italy now?,” I have given my answer, using either the Spanish or the Russian calendar. I only wish that arguments be presented against me, permitting me to change, to correct or to maintain my analysis, but, anyway, helping clarify the problem. The majority has not made the slightest effort in that direction, has not even considered the problem – which has not prevented it from throwing out the most brazen accusations at its opponents and from letting some of its members here and there argue about and the eve of October.
 
Positive and Negative Slogans
Certain comrades put the problem this way: We can very well propagate the negative slogan: “Down with the King!,” but to call: “For the republic!,” that is impossible! And they think they have thus avoided the sin of opportunism and saved their souls.
The main argument for the substitution is that on the morning after the proclamation of the republic the masses will be disappointed with the bourgeois republic; therefore we cannot call for anything positive. Unfortunately for the proponents of the negative slogan, exactly the same arguments can be directed against it: You called to fight against the King, the King is overthrown, and things are not much better! The solution is, of course, not in the petty trick of substituting a negative slogan for a positive one, but in a proper understanding and use of the slogan.
We call for the republic, but we never take the slightest responsibility for the republic arising out of the dirty compromises between the reactionaries, the liberals and the collaborationists. On the morning after the proclamation of the republic we tell the workers: “Is that the republic we fought for? Is it for this that we have fought in1- the streets and forced the King to flee? No!” And we will develop the next stage of our problem. The masses will lend an ear to us, because we have been with them in their first fight. Bolshevism, real Bolshevism, is precisely that way of going with the masses through all their struggles, and not the lifeless manikin which is presently being built in the central offices of the SWP.
 
Italians’ Point of View
I must say that, if the same place and weight are accorded to them in the agitation and action of the party, the difference between the two slogans – the positive one “For the republic” and the negative one “Against the King” – is very small. If the Italian comrades would for some practical considerations prefer the negative one, I would not spend a minute discussing the change and would accept it readily. However, the Italian comrades did adopt the positive slogan of the republic and put it as the first point of their program. And when some American comrades, on this continent, prefer the negative slogan, it is not for practical considerations on the Italian scene, but the distinction is for them a kind of shelter where they expect to be protected from the scarecrows of opportunism erected by the leadership of the majority. This is why we must discuss with them and force them to bring their reasons into the open.
Since last June, newspapers have reported dozens of incidents which indicate, even more than “three thousand miles” away, that the problem of the monarchy is a burning political question in Italy. These incidents show the wrath of the masses against the accomplices of Mussolini, the King and the Crown Prince. They show also the servility of the official parties, Stalinist and Socialist, on that question.
Here we may stop an instant to answer an argument of a minor spokesman for the majority. According to him, we cannot use the slogan of the republic because the Socialists and Communists are also calling for a republic and we must “differentiate ourselves.”
First, a question of fact. It is not true that the Stalinist party is now calling for the republic or even saying anything against the monarchy. For many months the Socialist Party kept silent on the issue. Last November, Nenni, a bit less cynical than Togliatti, felt obliged to utter a few phrases against the monarchy.
 
What Events Proved
But even if the collaborationists were using the slogan of the republic, that would not in itself prevent us from using it. Very often we do not “differentiate ourselves” by the slogans, but we “differentiate ourselves” by the methods we advocate for their realization. We say clearly that, unlike the collaborationists, we prepare to solve the monarchic problem, as any other problem, by our own methods, through the revolutionary action of the masses. When in 1940 the Stalinists were denouncing the imperialist war, did we feel the necessity of “differentiating ourselves” by ceasing to oppose the war? But enough of that.
A great light has been thrown on the question by the November 12 meeting in Rome. It has, until now, been the greatest political demonstration in Italy since the fall of Mussolini. Let us reread a few sentences of the account in the New York Times:
The meeting was clearly anti-monarchy, as far as the sentiment of the public was concerned, although Signor Togliatti was again careful to avoid compromising himself on what has become Italy’s most delicate problem. Every possible reference to the monarchy, however indirect, was greeted with tremendous hoots, whistles and boos.
What a vivid picture of the situation!
The November meeting was such a blow at the shaky political structure of the majority that its spokesmen had to find some kind of explanation. Until now they have found nothing better than this: “The meeting was for the celebration of the anniversary of the Russian Revolution; the masses showed they were for socialism.” How revealing of their mentality is that explanation! Instead of trying to discover in the shouts, in the interruptions, in what the speakers said and in what they did not say, what questions preoccupy the masses, the spokesmen for the majority simply accepted the official Stalinist version of the meeting.
According to the New York Times’ account of the meeting,
“Signor Togliatti’s address was restrained. It was full of praise for the Russian Revolution ... Whenever possible the crowd shouted: ‘Down with the monarchy!’ But the Communist leader was careful never to mention the subject.”
The Militant was also careful not to mention the subject of the monarchy. Its account of the meeting, in the November 25 issue, simply repeated the official interpretation that “Italian Masses Celebrate 1917 Russian Revolution.” Not a word about the anti-monarchical character of the meeting! Can you imagine? The Italian masses confirming just in time by their action the prognosis of the opposition. What impudence! A letter from Comrade Abe Stein, reminding the editors of The Militant of the obvious anti-monarchical character of the meeting, was buried.
 
The First Step
Yes the Italian masses want socialism. But how to get socialism? How to make the first step? On that, of course, the majority is as dumb as a fish. The whole problem is erroneously transferred from the plane of action to the plane of conviction. The question is not simply to convince the masses that socialism is very beautiful, but to help them to take the first step of political struggle, to find the issues on which they are ready to fight. I have said since last July that an important one of these issues was the monarchy. The November meeting confirmed my prognosis as completely as a political prognosis can ever be confirmed. The answer of the majority is: “The masses want socialism, and you are a literary man.” Everybody can appreciate the pertinence of the answer.
Since the November meeting, new incidents have further confirmed the importance of the problem. After the escape of the Fascist hangman Roatta, a big political demonstration took place in Rome on March 6. Where did the crowd go to express its wrath? To the Quirinal Palace, that is, to the residence of the royal family. The revolutionary instinct of the Roman masses was more correct than all the ultra-left ratiocinations. The whole demonstration clearly had an anti-monarchic character. [1]
The problem of the monarchy has taken on even more political weight than one could suspect last July, when I wrote my first article on the problem. Very likely, when the military front which separates the North from the South disappears, evens will take a quicker tempo. The fate of the Italian monarchy may be sealed in a few days and the Italian revolution will tackle new and higher tasks. But, until then, the question is on the order of the day.
It is not for us, of course, to decide here, in New York, all the details of the use of the slogan of the republic. We can leave that to the Italian comrades. But have not events thrown enough light upon that question in the last nine months to permit us to adopt the slogan in itself?
The majority of the leadership of the SWP has been prevented from accepting the slogan not by lack of information, but by political prejudices. Nothing reveals that more clearly than the fact that they have concealed information about Italy. The press of the SWP has kept silence on the anti-monarchic character of the November 12th meeting and other political demonstrations. The press of the SWP took four months – and then only after a minority motion for it – to publish the program of action of our Italian comrades, which was received in the latter part of November. The delay was for no other reason, as far as we can understand, than that the first point of that program is the demand for the republic.
When political misconceptions come into such conflict with reality, it is high time to abandon them. It is high time to reject all ultra-left ratiocinations. It is high time to come back to the traditions of our movement. It is high time to enter the road outlined by the opposition.
 



March 14, 1945


DANIEL LOGAN



* * *
Footnote
1. Most of the big newspapers were careful not to mention this aspect of the demonstrations. But a UP dispatch, reproduced for instance in Il Progresso Italo-Americano of New York, states:
“The demonstrators shouted ‘Death to the King!,’ ‘Death to Umberto!,’ ‘Down with the House of Savoy!’”
 

" Ideas on Italy



Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris
“New” Ideas on Italy
 “‘New’ Ideas on Italy” (International Notes) Fourth International, February 1943, p.62-63., under the name “Marc Loris”, (1,400 words).
A pamphlet entitled Italy Against Fascism has recently appeared in New York, dated September 1942. We received our copy through the mails. The author (or authors) and the group that published the pamphlet remain anonymous. We can easily understand conspiratorial caution. Unfortunately, however, they take the same precautions on the plane of ideas. They do not say to which tendency they belong, they do not reveal their political past, they do not criticize any definite movement or organization. This attitude gives the pamphlet an extremely vague and to a certain degree equivocal character.
For it soon becomes clear that the authors of the pamphlet are not political novices, youths who are awakening to political life. On the contrary, if we try to reconstruct their history on the basis of the pamphlet, it would appear that these are old routineers of the emigration.
The pamphlet begins by giving a picture of the Italian underground movement. It notes the appearance of a new revolutionary generation of Italy which was not acquainted with the pre-fascist epoch and it declares:
“A young Communist inside Italy would feel intellectually and emotionally closer to a liberal revolutionary in Italy than to a leader of the Italian Communist Party abroad. A young liberal would feel the same way.”
Let us admit for a moment that this fact is true. It can be explained by various factors such as the bankruptcy of liberalism in our epoch and the degeneration of the Communist International (Stalinism). The pamphlet itself does not offer any explanation of this asserted fact, but, as we shall see, builds a whole political program around it.
One sentence betrays the way the pamphlet approaches political problems:
” .... the most important difference between anti-Fascists (inside Italy) is based not so much on ideas as on experience.”
But ideas are generalized experience. They find their expression in programs, tendencies, political traditions. This artificial and superficial opposition between ideas and experience reveals a theoretical carelessness and cannot help but remind us that Italy was one of the hunting grounds of Bakuninism. So it is not surprising that we find, a little farther along, a sentence as shallow as this:
“To the totality of destruction that is Fascism has been opposed the totality of freedom that is revolutionary anti-Fascism.”
What does this “totality of freedom” mean? Contempt for “ideas,” that is to say scientific theory, is always combined with a blind acceptance of empty phrases.
The pamphlet then goes on to say about the Italian underground movement:
“Widespread propaganda has been carried on to weaken the morale of the armed forces and of the civilians; a clandestine press has been set up on an unparalleled scale; political meetings have been held and combat groups formed in nearly every town and village; a strict co-ordination of all these units has been established.”
And further along:
“The production of the clandestine press varies from booklets to loose manifestos, and these are widely distributed by the opposition throughout Italy.”
This information sounds rather exaggerated. Undoubtedly an underground movement does exist and we have seen poorly mimeographed sheets printed in Italy. But printed booklets! Combat groups in nearly every town and village! A strict co-ordination of all these units! We merely have to recall the state of the underground movement in Russia in January 1917 or in Germany in October 1918 to see that we are dealing here with an unpardonable product of petty-bourgeois grandiloquence.
The pamphlet reproduces the program on which “the most active anti-Fascist groups inside Italy are in complete accord.” This also seems to be the program which the author supports; however, he does not state it explicitly.
The first point of the program is:
“They recognize that the present war is a continuation on a world-wide scale of the international fight against international Fascism and its supports, a fight initiated in Italy twenty years ago. “
This is a typically liberal affirmation, completely false. The struggle in Italy twenty years ago was the struggle of different classes inside one nation. The present war is the struggle of contenders who all belong to one class, the imperialist bourgeoisie. (We except, of course, the struggle of the Soviet Union and semi-colonial China.) Let us recall that Churchill declared that if he were Italian he would be fascist. Nevertheless, he is now a valiant defender of “democracy.”
The second point of the program reads:
“Consequently, they believe that imperialistic and nationalistic aims should be excluded from the present struggle, rightly defined as a civil war. They deem it essential for the democracies to understand that Fascism means an international ‘New Order’ of destruction....”
Here is the usual Jeremiad of the liberals, who try to convince the imperialists not to be too imperialist. “. . . it is essential for the democracies to understand “ And what if the imperialists understand how to manage their interests without such unsolicited advice, as the Darlan deal recently showed?
The third point of the program follows the same line:
“They believe that after the victory of the United Nations, no actual peace can be achieved unless the United Nations really become a UNION of PEOPLES on an INTERNATIONAL basis. They point out that the results of the last war have sufficiently proved that nationalism is a negative force, unhealthy even in small doses.” (Capitals and Italics in the original.)
The same pious prayers! Let us note also the denial of any progressive character to nationalism. This is no accident. Liberalism, with its servility before the power of imperialism, very easily joins in contempt for the nationalism of the small oppressed nations, and imagines it is taking on a very left appearance.
Moreover, the author falls into an insoluble contradiction when, in the fourth point, he writes:
“They proclaim that if the war aims and the peace policies of the United Nations are to be based on a nationalistic conception, the Italian people must have the right to ask that all Italian-speaking territory be left untouched.”
The fifth point of the program proclaims:
“On the internal front, they believe that a post-Fascist Italy should be built on the principles of FREEDOM, both political and economic.”
What are the “principles” of freedom? Writing freedom in capitals does not provide the badly needed explanation. What does “economic freedom” mean? Out of “economic freedom” grew the present-day system of trusts and monopolies. Does the pamphlet propose to go back to the epoch of free enterprise? Or does it have in mind some kind of Proudhonist or Bakuninist scheme?
The sixth point announces to us:
“The Italian underground believes that betterment of social conditions cannot he achieved through reforms granted from above, but through immediate political control by the people directly interested in the reforms.”
This statement permits as one interpretation the proletarian revolution but, alas, it is so vague that it also permits many others.
Pseudo-Radical Proposals
The seventh point gives us a program of “fundamental changes":
a) Distribution of the land to the peasants, as individual or collective property according to the different agricultural needs.
b) Socialization of medium and heavy industries with control by factory workers.
c) Socialization of the banks and of the social security institutes.”
Programs like this are nowadays very cheap. If you do not say exactly how they can be materialized, by which forces and against which enemies, they are worthless and even harmful, for they only add to the confusion.
As a fitting conclusion to this pamphlet, there is a chapter on the awkwardness of the American radio propaganda to Italy. This chapter is full of advice to the United Nations: “Their propaganda must show ...” “It must convey the conviction. . . ,” etc., etc. The whole reasoning is abased on the postulate that “this war can best be won by arming and supporting the European Revolutions.” Of course, on this assumption American propaganda is rather stupid and makes many mistakes. But the assumption is false. There is no mistake. The propaganda corresponds to the character of the war. That is why, instead of “arming and supporting the European. Revolutions,” Washington prefers to deal with the Darlans, Francos, Mannerheims, or some Badoglio. “They fail to understand,” the pamphlet complains about the rulers of the United Nations. Not everything. They understand perfectly the realities of imperialism which unfortunately the writers of the pamphlet “fail to understand.”
M.L.

Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



ectives for Europe    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Perspectives for Europe “Perspectives for Europe” Fourth International, July 1941, pp.179-82, under the name “Marc Loris” reprinted from the June issue of La Verité. (3,285 words) During the first imperialist world war German troops in the west occupied Belgium and one-sixth of France’s territory, besides a number of countries in Central Europe and the Balkans. But the existence of a front and its constant shifts imparted a precarious character to the German conquests. A large portion of the civil population had been evacuated and there was hardly any agricultural or industrial productivity in the invaded countries. In the second imperialist war the military collapse of France created a markedly different situation. Hitler’s rule now extends, more or less directly over more than two hundred million non-Germans. In spite of profound differences in the various occupied countries the common oppression compels the relationships within the classes and between the classes to follow parallel lines in each of the occupied countries. Collapse of the Native FascistsUpon his arrival in each one of the invaded countries Hitler found fascist parties in the image of his own. This was one of the clearest characteristics of the decomposition of bourgeois “democracy.” During its advance, German militarism was able to make a judicious use of these groups for its own military and political ends. After a year of Hitlerite control in Europe, however, the evolution of these different national fascisms is an important factor in the determination of our future perspectives. It was in Norway that the German general staff received the most active and the most immediate assistance from the “Fifth Column.” This was the only country in which the fascist party found itself placed directly in power after the invasion. And this is also the country in which German rule has undoubtedly encountered the most difficulties. The Gestapo chief, Himmler, recently discovered that Quisling’s party, because of its growing unpopularity, was far from being an adequately flexible instrument of German rule, and he reduced its powers. The same process may be observed in all the invaded countries: the stagnation or the disintegration of the national fascist groups. The pro-German fascist party of the Sudeten is falling to pieces. In Bohemia the men who had hailed Hitler’s arrival now keep far away from anything German. The national-socialist party in Denmark has split up into a multitude of cliques contending for the favors of the German authorities. Mussert’s fascist party in Holland is stagnating, and no great confidence is placed in it by the invaders. The Flemish intellectuals in whom Hitler had set his hopes have disappointed him. In France Doriot has gathered a few former Stalinist leaders around him, but his party is making hardly any progress. Rumania presents one of the most striking examples. For years there had been a powerful pro-Nazi party there, savagely anti-British. The entry of German troops into this semi-allied, semi-conquered country was followed at once by the violent disintegration of the fascist party. The most radical wing published a manifesto proclaiming that only an English victory could free Rumania. The party was drowned in blood. The present government of General Antonescu is not propped up on an indigenous fascism, but is merely a bonapartism maintained by the German army. These are the signs of currents within the petty-bourgeoisie, in the cities and in the countryside. In all the invaded countries Hitler has, of course, found men to perform his chores. Upon arriving the German generals commandeered a certain number of horses, cattle, swine, politicians and journalists. But as mass movements the various national fascisms are destined to decay. Every day Hitler’s “New Order” reveals more clearly what it is—the old capitalist disorder, with its oppression, hunger, and misery. The petty-bourgeoisie is now going over to the other side; the pendulum is changing its direction. This phenomenon, which is very important and is still in its initial stages, is creating very favorable conditions for the shipwreck of German imperialism, but can lead to nothing by itself, if workers’ action not intervene. As a whole the big bourgeoisie is moving in the opposite direction to the petty-bourgeoisie. More and more it is organizing and systematizing “collaboration.” It is trying to save whatever it can of its profits and privileges. It seizes the slightest opportunity for collaboration that Hitler feels like offering it. And with the continuation of the war Hitler must make greater and greater use of the productive machinery of the invaded countries. The capitalists of these countries ask for nothing but amity with the German generals in order to feed the war machine of the Third Reich. They may of course dream of better conditions, but this does not prevent them from profiting as much as they can out of the present situation. What a lesson for the workers, whose struggles were always paralyzed by the bourgeoisie and its agents in the name of “national welfare"! The most typical example of the behavior of the bourgeoisie is that of France. The French bourgeoisie, one of the feeblest and most decrepit, has already taken advantage of the defeat in order to plunge the country into the blackest reaction and find a language in common with the conqueror more easily. For the humiliations it received the bourgeoisie seeks compensation through the repressions of its own people. From Germany it is seeking, by means of more and more abject servility, nothing but a pardon for its alliance with Great Britain in order to save what it can of its right to exploit the French workers and the colonial peoples. Collaboration has been extended to the economic, military, and political domain. To a large extent French industry is working for the German war machine. The men at Vichy are now gambling on a German victory and the defeat of their former ally. This policy moreover has made Petain’s bonapartism rest upon a new point of support, the French fleet. The abruptness of the military debacle had left the fleet intact, in all its prestige and power. It had maintained its cohesion and stability considerably more than the army, which is the explanation of Admiral Darlan’s ascent to power. And in fact the French fleet was one of the most precious trump-cards in the hands of the Vichy men. Let us help Germany with our fleet which she needs—thought Darlan—and we’ll be able to save something of France’s position in Europe. The traditional animosity of naval officers towards England made the game easy. All this has helped give Petain’s regime a special complexion—made it in a certain sense a “naval bonapartism.” The French bourgeoisie merely offers the clearest example of what the summits of the bourgeoisie in the various occupied countries are tending towards. In the face of such slavishness the Nazis are already dreaming of “unifying” Europe and counterposing it as a continent to the rest of the world, in order to attain their imperialist goals. Nazism succeeded (with the not inconsiderable help of the social-democratic and Stalinist leaders!) in bolstering up Germany with the national idea for imperialist ends. Hitler Cannot “Unify” EuropeIs it possible to believe that Hitler will succeed in crushing internal opposition within the conquered countries, as in Germany he successively vanquished the radical wing of his own party, then the summits of the Reichswehr, and finally the various religious oppositions? A categorical answer may be given this question: No! In Germany Hitler was served by the national sentiment. but throughout all the countries of Europe now this sentiment is rebounding against him with tenfold force. At the time of its historic rise the bourgeoisie was able to build up great modern nations and make all the provincial particularisms vanish, but it was only able to realize this because its dominion also meant a formidable economic expansion and a vast accumulation of new wealth. Even as a conqueror Hitler can bring the peoples nothing but stagnation and poverty. All dreams about unifying the continent must disappear before this reality. The Nazis’ imperialist nationalism exacerbates, and will exacerbate more and more, all the suffocated nationalisms surrounding it. It is chimerical to imagine a stable hegemony of German imperialism over a unified Europe, even in case of a military victory. The Coming European RevolutionWhether the struggle begins in Germany or elsewhere the decisive blows against Hitler can come only from the workers. On the first day of the rebellion they are the ones who will constitute the most determined vanguard. From the very first step in the collapse of the Nazi system they will create their instruments of battle, actions committees, the first form of soviets. The national bourgeoisie will not hesitate to collaborate with the Nazis in an attempt to re-establish “order.” The petty-bourgeoisie will be what it has been in all the modern revolutions, an auxiliary force. No doubt it will give particularly enthusiastic support to the workers, at any rate during the first stage: but it is fundamentally incapable of maintaining the direction of the struggle, or even of sharing in this direction on an equal footing with the proletariat. To put an end to Hitler a workers’ rank and file is needed. The proletarian revolution is what is on the order of the day for Europe. All hopes for a particular “national revolt” in which the proletariat and the petty-bourgeoisie will sharp the leadership are futile. Even more absurd is the notion of a victorious struggle on the part of the petty-bourgeoisie “supported” by the proletariat. The primacy of the workers in the struggle, and the appearance of embryonic soviets in the very first stages, do not imply, of course, that the proletarian revolution will be completed by the day after tomorrow. There will be a more or less protracted period of dual power. The soviets will become aware of their power and of their role, which is that of a new government. Above all the revolutionary party will need time to consolidate its ranks and conquer the majority of the working class before finishing off the bourgeois regime. National Emancipation and Proletarian RevolutionThis general strategic perspective still does not resolve the tactical problems posed by the Nazi occupation of Europe. The national bourgeoisie in the various countries is thinking only of meriting by its servility the good-will of the conqueror. In the face of Nazi violence and plunder a savage hatred of the oppressor is growing from month to month in all the other strata of the population. On pain of suicide, the revolutionary party cannot forget this fundamental fact which is now dominating the life of all Europe. We give full recognition to the right of national self-determination and are prepared to defend it as an elementary right of democracy. This recognition, however, has no effect on the fact that this right is trodden underfoot by both camps in this war and will hardly be respected in case of an imperialist “peace.” Capitalism in its agony can meet this democratic demand less and less. Only socialism can give nations the complete right to independence and put an end to every national oppression. To speak of the right to national self-determination and keep. silent concerning the only means of its realization, that is, the proletarian revolution, is to repeat a shallow phrase, disseminate illusions, and deceive the workers. The Versailles peace gave birth to a certain number of independent states, but in reality they were nothing but the satellites of the victorious great imperialist powers. To the exploitation of their own proletariat they added the oppression of national minorities (Slovaks in Czechoslovakia, Ukrainians and White Russians in Poland, Croats in Yugoslavia, etc.). There can be no doubt that an imperialist peace, whichever camp is. victorious, will realize the right of national independence in an even more caricatural form. In present-day Europe the revolutionary party cannot fail to support all manifestations of national resistance to Nazi oppression, but its active participation in the struggle by no means signifies that it must strengthen any chauvinist tendencies and tolerate any illusions about tomorrow’s reality. It is a particularly serious error to imagine that the struggle against national oppression creates any special conditions in which the proletariat must abandon its own aims and confuse itself with the petty-bourgeoisie (and sometimes. the big bourgeoisie as well) within the unity of the “nation.” National emancipation is by no means a “specialty” of the petty-bourgeoisie. On the contrary, the latter cannot give anything but utopian solutions, especially in our epoch (pacifism, an improved League of Nations, etc.). If the proletariat takes up tasks of national emancipation in its own hands (as it must do now in many countries of Europe) it is only in order to solve them by means of its own methods, the only ones capable of ensuring success, and to integrate national resistance in its general perspective of the total overturn of bourgeois society. The national opposition of the peoples of Europe imparts a thoroughly unstable character to the dominion of German imperialism. But at the same time it forms a screen in front of the fundamental tasks of our epoch: the socialist transformation of society, the only thing capable of putting a stop. to national oppression. This twofold character is what conditions the activity of Marxists. They must support any national resistance to the extent that it represents a real struggle, but they can and must do it without mingling any chauvinist phraseology with their propaganda, without giving birth to illusions concerning the realization of national independence, without ever losing sight of the general aims of their struggle. Besides, the battle is hopeless when limited to one country. The task of the revolutionary party is not to confine the. struggle against German imperialism within narrow national boundaries, but to integrate it in the resistance of all the European peoples to the common bondage. Hitler has already plunged the German workers into this bondage. The Marxists must possess slogans constantly tending to broaden the. arena of struggle, to generalize it, and spread it throughout all of Europe, including Germany, and not limit it, split it up and partition it off under different national banners. This is their rallying cry: Down with the Nazi regime! Long live the Socialist United States of Europe! The European masses must carry on their struggle under terribly difficult and abruptly altered conditions. For years. the reformists and their allies laughed at the Trotskyists who were trying to transplant the methods of Russian Bolshevism, to Western Europe. What a bitter lesson our opponents have had! Czarist Russia now appears, if not actually a paradise, at any rate a purgatory compared with the hell Europe has become. Famine is hovering over the continent which only yesterday led the world. Workers cease their labor in order to demand more abundant food rations. This is a new form of struggle for wages in debased Europe. Demonstrations of starving housewives can only multiply. In the midst of misery and oppression every “economic” struggle at once assumes a political character. The task of the Marxists is not to impose on the masses any particular form of struggle they might “prefer,” but in reality to deepen, broaden, and systematize all manifestations of resistance, bring to them a spirit of organization and open up a broad perspective. The Petty-Bourgeoisie and the ProletariatNational oppression forces broad strata of the petty-bourgeoisie to enter the political arena. Left to itself the petty-bourgeoisie is quite incapable of ensuring the overthrow of the Nazi regime. Its great majority is at present going over to the side of British imperialism. In France this movement supports General de Gaulle, who has no other program but a military struggle against Germany at the side of England. The activity of his adherents in France consists primarily in espionage on behalf of England and the recruiting of young men for the “free” French forces. The Marxist party has nothing in common with such a program and with such methods. For us the success of the revolution does not depend on the victory or on the defeat of one imperialist camp or another, but on the revolutionary training of tested fighters and on the formation of the cadres of an intransigent party. This is the fundamental task. The sympathy for England now spreading in the occupied countries is the elementary initial form of resistance to Nazi oppression (and in France to the national bourgeoisie as well). The task of the Marxists is not to adapt themselves to this (completely sterile) sentiment, but to foresee the forms s of struggle which are coming and to prepare for them. The petty-bourgeoisie makes its appearance on the stage with its own specific weapons. Cases of individual terrorism have already occurred throughout Europe. In Poland, Norway, and France some excessively cynical adherents of an understanding with Hitler have been disposed of. There has been no lack of assassinations of German officers. All this can only multiply. The revolutionary party can do nothing but repeat all the classical arguments of Marxism against individual terrorism—they still retain their full value. Exceedingly symptomatic of the state of mind of the petty-bourgeois masses, sometimes amazingly heroic, individual attempts at assassination can lead to nothing except the sacrifice of lives which would be of incalculable value if they were to find a better use. The duty of the Marxists is to direct the devotion of the adherents of terror into the path of preparation of the mass struggle. Meanwhile the physical struggle can even now take other forms besides individual acts of terror. In Norway, for example, riots between groups of local fascists and the population are not rare. An analogous situation may occur elsewhere. In such cases the Marxists must primarily organize and systematize the spontaneous forms of struggle, constitute detachments of militia, connect their activity with the population, etc. Together with terrorism, sabotage has also appeared in enslaved and degraded Europe. Sabotage is not a specifically proletarian weapon but, rather, peculiar to the petty-bourgeoisie. All the Marxist arguments concerning the ineffectuality of individual terrorism also apply to the destruction of such and such a military or economic objective by an individual or a small isolated group. However, certain forms of sabotage may be found combined with popular resistance. In the factories slowing up of production or the debasement of quality may appear whenever Nazi oppression becomes too brutal. The revolutionary party cannot fail to support and enlarge every form of struggle to the extent that it is intimately bound up with the masses. * * * After what will shortly be two years of war, after sensational victories, no perspective of solution on the strictly military plane has appeared. The generals can only offer humanity larger and larger theatres of war. Even more directly than in the last war it is the social factor that will decide. It is in following this line that it is necessary to outline our perspective, and it is with this perspective that we must align all our tasks. Throughout Europe the proletariat is now submerged in the troubled waters of chauvinism. But the socialist solution, so remote today, obscured by nationalisms of all shades, tomorrow will be placed on the order of the day at once. It is necessary to explain patiently to the advanced workers the lessons of yesterday, the situation today and the tasks of tomorrow. It is necessary to gather together the cadres of the party of the revolution. But this preparation is neither possible nor worthwhile except by participating in all forms of mass resistance to misery and oppression, by working to organize this resistance, to co-ordinate and broaden it. It is a task demanding the greatest efforts. But they are worth it, for tomorrow they will bear fruits a hundredfold.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

alist Economy in War    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Capitalist Economy in War Fourth International, December 1941, pp.313-316, under the name“Marc Loris”. (4,243 words) The striking military victories of Germany and above all the collapse of France have engendered a host of improvised theories, which sprang up like mushrooms after a rain. These theories, diverse though they are, united in positing the birth of a new social system. The point of agreement among these innovators is that fascism is moving toward a social system which is no longer capitalism. While the changes in the political map of Europe explain psychologically the appearance of new theories, they are nevertheless incapable of providing them with a logical foundation. A difference in military strategy manifestly provides little ground for inferring a difference in social systems. In reality, each social system has diverse strategies corresponding to the diverse stages of its development, or, more precisely, corresponding to the ability of the political and military leaders to adapt the science of war to each new phase of this development. Aside from the new strategy, it is German economy since 1936 which furnishes the improvisers with their most fertile stock of arguments. Hitler has, you see, expropriated the capitalists, the old system is dead, etc. The method is simple. It consists in viewing present-day German economy entirely apart from what preceded it, and thereby its features are so distorted as to appear “non-capitalist,” and finally a sonorous name such as “bureaucratic collectivism,” or any other label that strikes the fancy, is pasted on the improvisation. To solve a problem of such scope as the succession of two social systems it is imperative to avoid taking too brief a period of history. It is dangerous to determine a curve by simply extending a very short segment. To know where we are and where we are heading we shall begin by a brief review of the past. In particular, an examination of the first great imperialist war will teach us exactly what are the novel features of the present struggle. A Brief Historical Review In 1914 the major powers entered the war prepared for a short conflict. The measures taken in the economic sphere scarcely exceeded the acquisition of stocks of boots and munitions. But the initial months of war brought two great surprises. First, the war refused to end quickly; and second, the consumption of armaments confounded the imagination—in a few hours munitions were exhausted which had required many months to store up. Confronted with a tremendously increased demand, industry soon found itself in a bottleneck. The entire economic organization threatened to collapse. The state had to intervene and issue rude commands in order to emerge from chaos. In all the chief belligerent countries the same phenomenon was manifested, in France, in England, in Germany. But it was in the latter that it assumed the most finished form. The fundamental reason for this was the central geographical location of Germany: the difficulty of her communications with the world market in time of war, her lack of access to sources of raw materials in the colonies, and then, the British blockade. The country became a besieged fortress. In addition to raw materials the necessities of life soon grew scarce. Prices skyrocketed. The government fixed maximum prices and fought against speculation and hoarding, but met with little success and in a short time was forced to requisition all supplies and apportion them on the basis of individual rationing. Under state initiative and control corporations were formed for each food product; they bought up the entire output at a price fixed by the government and portioned syndicates, to promote new ones and later even to compel their formation (Zwangssyndisierung); and the government itself formed corporations for the allocation of certain basic industrial materials. Foreign trade became the function of a governmental bureau; foreign exchange was similarly controlled. Consumption of non-military nature was rigidly restricted. Middlemen and merchants in general saw their role diminish enormously. The Reichstag heard innumerable complaints from liberals frightened by this intrusion of the state, while social democrats, anxious to justify their submission to the imperialist state, saluted the arrival of “state socialism.” With the end of the war the system of state regulation disappeared, in Germany as well as in the other countries. This does not mean however that capitalism emerged from the war in exactly the same shape as it had entered. Far from it! State intervention in economy took new forms on which we need not dwell here. The essential point is that the state mobilization of economy which had assured a formidable output of armaments proved incapable of surviving the war, let alone raising the level of the productive forces and leading capitalism out of his blind alley. How does the war economy now reigning in Germany differ from that of 1915-1918? Four important differences appear: first, economy was put on a war footing toward the end of 1936, three years before the formal declaration of war; second, the German state apparatus is in the hands of the Nazi party; third, state control of economy is more thorough-going than in the last war; fourth, capitalism is twenty years older. Let us examine attentively each of these differences. State Intervention in 1915-1918 The introduction of war economy (Wehrwirtschaft) in peacetime, as early as the end of 1936, is quite an important political problem. But it has been clear from the beginning that the war was the sole object of the Wehrwirtschaft. In war it has found its logical continuation and without war it would have been inconceivable. Consequently when the issue involves so fundamental a question as the nature of a social system, this difference from the first World War takes on an episodic character, especially if one keeps in mind the fact that the Europe of 1936-1939 was in a latent war stage. Consciously or unconsciously, the gospel of a “new order” in Germany owes much of its popularity to the wielding of state power by a fascist party. Anti-capitalist declarations were not lacking in the jumble of Nazi demagogy before 1933. Would not the “revolution” of the middle classes which carried Hitler to power have an economic basis? And is not this “revolution” precisely the regimentation of capital by the state which we are now witnessing in Germany? Even a cursory examination of German economy from 1933 to 1941 deals an irreparable blow to this fable. The concentration and centralization of capital have proceeded apace since 1933. The large corporations have grown at the expense of the small. Retail trade remains in the condition of a man sick with galloping consumption. The Nazi state has intervened actively to accelerate economic evolution, for example, by hastening the transformation of thousands of handicraftsmen into factory workers or soldiers. But aside from such direct measures the entire state control of economy acts in favor of the big as against the little capitalist. The Nazi bureaucracy acts far more arbitrarily and independently toward the small capitalists (not to mention the handicraftsmen) and is far more “accommodating” in the presence of the big ones. The regulation of foreign trade has greatly favored the big companies and has enabled them to crush their small and middle-sized competitors in this field. State centralization has been combined with economic centralization—the same phenomenon which was to be observed during the first imperialist war. This process is a direct refutation of Nazi “anti-capitalism” which supposedly was to profit the middle classes who brought the party to power. Under the cover of demagogic phrases the Nazi bureaucracy plays the same role as did the traditional bureaucracy of the bourgeois state. Other improvisers depict differently the origin of the “new order”: The Nazi party, financed and called to power by big capital, has freed itself from its master just as the broom did from the apprentice-sorcerer. Nazism has undertaken to eliminate the capitalist bourgeoisie in favor of its own aggrandizement. It “controls” the property of the latter, which means that in reality it disposes of that property. Here the basic flaw in the method of improvisation stands out most glaringly. The improvisers take private property as it is legally defined, jus utendi et abutendi, the right to use and abuse, and they oppose this definition to the actual situation. The divergence is so marked that they rush to conclude that private property has been abolished. In reality all property is social in character, and capitalist property more than any previous forms. A capitalist can “use and abuse” his capital not as his whim dictates but in a certain well-defined manner, otherwise he is liable to an immediate penalty, namely, bankruptcy. He cannot use his profit as he likes. He must accumulate to improve his equipment and expand his enterprise. Otherwise he loses not only his profit but also his original capital. At a certain stage competition forces him even to abandon the individual ownership of his business and to enter into a corporation, and later into a cartel. Finally, he is compelled to wage war, to devote to that purpose an increasingly larger portion of his profits and to endure the haughty intervention of militarists and bureaucrats. All this proves that capitalist property is a contradictory phenomenon, self-devouring in character. And this we have known since the time of Marx. In a war economy the contradictions of capitalist property appear in their most aggravated form, but capitalist property is by no means abolished thereby: the clearest proof of this is the war itself. We now come to the third difference from the first imperialist war. Does not the present state control constitute such a difference in degree as to justify the conclusion of a difference in kind? Such an inference is entirely groundless. In the production of consumers’ goods, food in particular, state regulation in 1918 was hardly less rigorous than now. In heavy industry (armaments and means of production) the current methods of control avoid such nakedly violent measures as the requisition by seizure of certain factories in Germany which were imposed by the army in the last war. Thanks to past experience and to long preparation the activities of the state now penetrate economy in a more organic, and on the whole, more thorough fashion than in the last war. Finally, it does seem that in the sphere of credit, state control has made measurable progress. But while the Nazis have perfected the technique of control, they have not made any great innovations, and it is manifestly impossible to infer the birth of a new social order unless one is prepared to recognize that this order was already born in Germany in 1915. Repetition does not at all signify identity. The capitalism of 1941 is no longer that of 1916. It had passed through the first war, the shocks of the post-war epoch, the great depression. Herein lies the sharpest difference between the two wars. Concurrently, the present conflict imposes still more profound demands on the economy. Every country, victor and vanquished alike, will emerge from the slaughter with their economic systems much more debilitated than was the case in 1918. Can one expect an appreciable upsurge of the productive forces to follow the war? Until now at any rate no indication permits us to entertain such a hope. State intervention in German economy is fulfilling the same task as before: it mobilizes all the national forces for the duration of the struggle only to leave the economy all the more feeble and prostrate. With the exhaustion of all society it is quite possible that after this war forms of state control which disappeared at the end of the last war may be perpetuated. But it is clear that this can be only the means of organizing mass misery. What we have before us is not a new system capable of carrying humanity forward but a form of stagnation and decline of the old capitalist system. What Is the Nature of German Economy? To determine the actual condition of German economy we must do more than oppose to it the serene tableau of a perfect (and unreal) free-trade economy. Above all we must delineate the forms and character of state intervention. German economy is a war economy, designed for war and engaged in war. Its cardinal command is “Guns instead of butter.” Curtailment of consumption is a fundamental trait of the Wehrwirtschaft and in Germany it has been pushed to the extreme. This is directly linked with the limitation of new investments. The object of these measures is to divert all the resources of the nation (capital, labor power, raw materials) from the production of consumers’ goods and to direct them into the production of war materials. The state is, at the same time, enabled to mobilize by loans all the purchasing power which remains unabsorbed because of the lack of consumers’ goods. War which cut off economy from the world market imposed an additional restriction. Autarchy originally engendered by the crisis was transformed directly into military autarchy. If we examine these measures, they appear in and of themselves, as well as in their translation into the language of decrees and regulations, to be restrictive and negative rather than constructive and positive. The state imposes certain limits on economic activity, these limits being dictated by the necessities of war (or by the preparation for war). But within these limits capitalist profit still retains its motive force. One need only pick up one of the official Nazi economic reviews to encounter innumerable references to capitalist initiative. This is no empty rhetoric. If tomorrow Hitler were to state-ize industry, that is to say, sever the bond called property between the capitalists and the means of production, and undertake to run the economy with the aid of state employees, the quantity and quality of armaments production would immediately decline. An important characteristic of German economy is its system of price control. At the end of 1936 prices were “frozen” by the government. This measure was a direct consequence of the need to finance rearmament. Without it inflation was but a step away. At bottom it represents a new manipulation of money rather than an attack on the capitalist character of the economy. The latter moreover did not fail to make its presence felt. The quality of merchandise, particularly consumers’ goods, began to deteriorate at a rate which quickly approximated a rise in prices of 40 to 50 per cent. Prices themselves have not ceased to rise slowly. But even without taking these manifestations into account, one can say that this regulating mechanism did not shatter the framework of private profit. The high priests in charge of price regulation often repeat that “Costs are not Prices” (Kosten sind keine Preise). They mean by this dictum that the prices fixed by the state cannot be determined by the cost of production, nor by the cost of production plus a percentage of profit. This statement is interesting because it recognizes, first, the existence of profit; and second, the absence of any official and automatic rate of profit. Prices (and profits) rise with official sanction, as the demand markedly increases. But it is still more important to understand the justification of this principle by the official commentators. One of them declares:“If the entrepreneur is guaranteed his costs he is no longer forced to seek out and introduce more efficient methods to lower the expenses of his business with respect to wages and raw materials and he is no longer forced continually to invest new capital toward this end” (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 1940). Here, clearly expressed, is the entire difference in the views of the capitalist entrepreneur and the state functionary. Many improvisers invoke Hitler’s second four-year plan to discover a “planned” economy in Germany. Manifestly this is to follow the Nazis in their abuse of language. The difference between the Soviet Five-Year Plans and Hitler’s four-year plan is apparent at a glance. The Soviet plan undertakes (more or less capably) the construction of the whole economy. Hitler’s plan is not a plan in the precise sense of the term but a program, and, besides, rather a vague one, as much political as economic. The first measure was to centralize state control of economy in the hands of Goering, who proceeded to promulgate, since the end of 1936, decrees which are in general restrictive and prohibitive. Whenever the situation in this or that branch of industry became particularly grave, the state made its authoritative voice heard. This is not a planned building of economy but a kind of police supervision which terminates with a club the first conflict that threatens to stop the functioning of a machine geared to the limit of its capacity. All of Goering’s regulations are not constructive and positive but essentially negative in character. This characteristic of the Nazi “plan” is especially clear in the field of investments. The state restricts investments in certain branches in order that funds may flow into others. The state has a positive and detailed plan only for financing a few infant industries which represent a negligible fraction of the national economy, and this has always been one of the functions of the capitalist state. Present-day German economy can by no means be characterized as “planned” economy. The Nazis themselves quite frequently employ the expression “gesteuerte Wirtschaft” or “guided economy.” This is far closer to the truth. The state orients all the national forces in a single direction: the military struggle. Incontestably this imparts to economy certain specific characteristics. But private initiative, channelized into the dikes of state control, still plays far too great a role to even talk of planning. Finally, the idea of planning implies a harmonious development of the productive forces, whereas the military orientation of German economy creates major disproportions. It is also necessary to call attention to a point which the improvisers often pass over in silence. This orientation of the economy is determined in the long run not by the form of political power but by the nature of the economic system itself. Unless one subscribes to the “bad man” theory of history, the explanation for the war lies not in Hitler’s evil character but in the fact that the contradictions between the developed forces of production and the outmoded productive relations, in the absence of proletarian revolution, find their only outlet in war. The state merely aids in the attempted solution of this task imposed upon it by forces beyond its control. The Formulas of the Improvisers Among the improvisers who seek to deny the capitalist nature of German economy, a few have hastily read Marx in order to cull from his works some definition of capitalism which is no longer applicable to the Third Reich. In the main their procedure comes down to defining capitalist economy as a “market economy.” Then they conclude: Since prices in Germany are determined not by the automatic laws of the market but by state decrees, therefore the economy is no longer capitalist. To be sure, the intervention of the state into the sphere of circulation affords certain supplementary channels for the manipulation of prices. But there is essentially nothing new in this. For almost half a century monopolies and cartels have precisely set themselves the task of converting free trade into its opposite. Are monopolies then “non-capitalist” enterprises? The formula of the improvisers is false because they attempt to define capitalism by seeking its essential characteristics in the sphere of circulation. Marxism teaches us that a correct definition of capitalism can be established only by seeking out the essential relations in the sphere of production, which, in turn, determines those in the sphere of circulation. To what extent is it correct to speak of “fascist economy”? If this is intended to establish an all-inclusive correspondence between fascism and the type of economy existing in Germany, then the expression is erroneous. Fascism is essentially a political phenomenon. The economic measures applied by fascism have their parallel elsewhere. Under its heavy feudal shell, the Japan of the Mikado is far closer in its political regime to the Russia of the Czars than it is to Hitler’s Germany. Yet Japan approaches the Third Reich more than any other country in her state control of economy. On the contrary, Franco’s Spain, fascist in the proper sense of the term, by no means follows Germany in the economic field. Finally, the “democratic” United States, not to mention Great Britain, is building her war economy by adapting to her own needs Hitler’s methods. It is clear that war economy adjusts itself most readily to the totalitarian political regime which fascism brings it. Conversely, war tends to render all regimes totalitarian. But fascism remains a specific political phenomenon. The expression “fascist economy” which in effect identifies the political superstructure with the economic foundation can produce only misunderstanding and confusion. A precise definition would read that it is a capitalist war economy in the epoch of decaying imperialism. If this definition seems less “original” than that of the improvisers, it has the inestimable advantage of being scientifically exact, and providing a reliable guide to our action. The improvisers either imply or flatly declare that the state control of war economy in Germany represents a certain progress, just as the trusts and cartels of a few decades ago were progressive. They forget a trifle. The concentration and centralization of capital which reached its peak in the form of cartels, trusts, etc. led to a colossal development of the productive forces, and, literally, brought society to the very threshold of socialism. State control represents nothing of the sort. In wartime it pushes the national productive forces to their extreme limit, only to leave the country devastated and ruined in the end. What country’s economy will emerge stronger from this war than it was before the war? Where then is “progress”? Lenin paid the greatest attention to the intervention of the state in economy during the last war. He termed this phase of capitalism as state-monopoly imperialism. He demmonstrated its continuity in the development of imperialism, and underscored that it constituted the aggravation, in a sense, the culmination of all the tendencies of the latter. In 1916, he pointed out certain progressive features in this phenomenon. Regulation of economy was of enormous educational value for the masses. It foreshadowed, to a greater degree than did the trusts, the future socialist organization; it represented the peak of the entire process of centralization of capital, and was a direct invitation to the proletariat to take into their own hands the direction of economy. But we are no longer living in the year 1916. Since then, society has passed through the Russian revolution, the post-war crisis, the great pre-war depression, the Soviet planned economy, and finally entered the second World War. The methods of control employed in Germany and other countries teach us nothing new after the experiences of the last war and especially after the Soviet planning. The application of these methods far from having any salutary effects on economy, lead directly to vast disproportions and result in the end in a frightful destruction of the productive forces. Finally, we must underscore again the profoundly degenerate character of our epoch. Capitalism has passed its zenith. The defeats of the proletarian revolution, due to the betrayals of the Second and Third Internationals, and its consequent tardiness have not opened any new roads for capitalism but merely extended its period of decay. Society is not only ripe for socialism, but overripe and has begun to rot because of the delay. State intervention no longer appears as the culmination of the dynamics of the preceding development but as the reactionary reorganization of a declining society. That is why it is unpardonable to speak today of its “progressive” character. Occasionally it is stated that the Nazis are building a “transitional” order. Historical materialism has long ago taught us that all regimes are transitional. To invest this statement with any meaning it is first necessary to specify the starting point and the destination of the transition. What the improvisers really mean to say is that present-day Germany constitutes a transition between capitalism and socialism. Is fascism a transition to socialism in the political and social sense? One can reply only in the negative, unless one accepts Nazi ideology. Does the affirmation carry more weight in the strictly economic sense? State intervention in economy, in and of itself, is by no means a socialist tendency. In the march to socialism, economy must necessarily pass through state-ization. But this does not at all mean that every state-ization is necessarily socialist in character. It is still necessary to answer two more questions: Who carries out the state-ization? And for what purpose? Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that German economy is far from stateized. Control of economy by the imperialist state, in itself and in its consequences, cannot carry the productive forces forward but can only plunge them into ruin. Far from being a transition to socialism it represents a retrogression into barbarism. All improvisations on the subject of the “non-capitalist” character of German economy, the progressive aspects of Nazi regimentation, its being something “new,” etc., etc., only represent in the last analysis a capitulation to Nazi demagogy. They are one of the by-products of our period of reaction which has taken its toll in destruction not only of lives and material values but also of men’s capacity to think. November, 14, 1941  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 


Riom Trial: The Truth About French "Democracy"



Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris
The Riom Trial: The Truth About French “Democracy”
“The Riom Trial—the Truth about French ‘Democracy’” Fourth International, April 1942, pp.108-110, under the name “Marc Loris”. (3,348 words)
The political life of unoccupied France is one of prostration. “Sit tight and don’t budge,” seems to be the official watchword. The press submissively follows the instructions of a censorship which oversees everything even to deciding the size of type for the headlines. All polemic is frowned upon, and there is no response except silence to the raging campaign which the Nazi-inspired press of Paris leads against the “Vichy gang.” The octogenarian Petain appropriately heads this senile paternalism.
The Riom trial unexpectedly caused a break in this pattern, from the middle of February to the first days of April. The court sessions were more like a parliament than a judicial tribunal. All the political questions of the recent past and of the present were dealt with. Moreover, the trial seriously affects the French-German relations at the present moment.
The history of the trial is very long. Since the military debacle, that is to say for nearly two years, its preparation has been going on. An entirely new category of law and a special court of justice were created by Petain with the aid of the so-called “Constitutional Acts.” Petain also created a Council of Political Justice which in October 1941, without a public session, rendered what amounted to a verdict on the five men accused at Riom, declaring them guilty and condemning them to “detention in a fortified enclosure.” Many actually believed that this was all of the trial and that the business was finished. But it soon became apparent that this was only a preparation for the trial.
The reasons for the trial are simple. The revenge of the bourgeoisie for the great fright of June 1936, the attempt to compromise definitively the “democratic” ideas of those charged with the military defeat. This blind hate of the revolution led the prosecution to pure idiocy. Thus the indictment charges that Daladier “opened facilities for foreign invasion in peace time, notably through the entry into French territory of thousands of dangerous Spaniards and their leaders.” How this “invasion in peace time” of “dangerous Spaniards” could bring on the very real invasion of the German troops is a mystery which the prosecutor would have difficulty in explaining.
An equally important reason for the trial is to give a badly needed appearance of authority to the Petain government. Immediately after the military debacle, the team of Petain-Weygand-Laval brushed aside the entire republican and democratic apparatus and took the power into its own hands with absolute disregard of constitutionality. The trial must serve as a justification and a sort of post factum consecration of this coup d’etat by juridically establishing the incapacity of Petain’s predecessors.
Gamelin’s Silence
The silence of Gamelin, Commander-in-Chief of the French Armies, revealed immediately the purely political character of the trial: it was the trial of democracy and not the trial of the Army. At the very first session Gamelin, who should know something about the causes of the defeat, declared that he would remain silent during all the debates. His reason: he could not permit that the army be judged! And during all the debates up until the present moment, Gamelin has stayed silent, with the exception of one or two episodic declarations on secondary questions. The Commander-in-Chief has obstinately refused to participate in the discussion on the causes of the military defeat.
But the plot thickens when we learn that the decree by which the special court was created had been slightly altered a short time before the trial, in order to enable the court to prevent the discussion of military operations. In other words, the Vichy government directly permitted, if not ordered, Gamelin to keep his mouth shut.
The Truths Told by Leon Blum
Leon Blum’s defense is as simple as it is explicit: “M. Blum took credit for having saved France from civil war, which he said at the time was a far more imminent threat than that of war with Germany."[1] That which is true is true. Blum does nothing more now than repeat what the Trotskyists had charged as early as 1936. Blum is also reported to have said that when he took power the situation was not “pre-revolutionary but practically revolutionary.” This phrase seems to be taken word for word from the 1936 documents on France of the Fourth International. Blum’s declarations also confirm the estimation that the Trotskyists always gave to all those who saw in Blum a man of good will poorly understanding the needs of the revolution and who tried to enlighten him and convince him: Blum is a perfidious agent of the enemy, perfectly conscious of his role, and he must be denounced as such. Blum himself has just settled this controversy.
At Riom, Blum denounced the hypocrisy of the French bourgeoisie. He recalled that in June 1936 “he found himself considered by French employers and the bourgeoisie generally in the light of a savior, and he denied that anyone had ever appealed to him to use force in repressing sit-down strikes.” In June 1936, the French bourgeoisie, no less exactly than Blum, judged that the situation was “not pre-revolutionary but practically revolutionary.” The bosses hurried to sign the collective contracts, in fact without even an invitation from the government—the “invitation” of the workers was sufficient. The “social laws” were hastily passed the deputies, and the senators approved with a celerity unusual for them. The French bourgeoisie showed excellent political judgment. The slightest resistance on their part would have provoked an explosion. Instead the movement was vanquished by the conciliatory policy of Leon Blum. Without conciliation it would have been an open and armed struggle. The bourgeoisie was right when they considered Blum “in the light of a savior.” And Blum is right when he now denounces the hypocrisy of that bourgeoisie which today pretends to condemn him.
However, there is someone whose hypocrisy Blum forgets to denounce: Blum. In 1936 did Blum tell the workers that the situation was “practically revolutionary” but that he, Blum, was undertaking the job of preventing the revolution and of becoming the savior of the bourgeoisie? No, these truths are told only now and to the bourgeois judges alone. In order to defend himself before the Riom judges Blum was compelled to reveal in broad daylight what a dirty role he had played. We hope the workers will remember these confessions of a traitor.
The Military Preparation of France
It was undoubtedly Daladier who transformed the trial, and from accused made himself the accuser of the High Command. Much more than to the personal efforts of Daladier, however, such a transformation was due to the enormous responsibility of the military chiefs for the defeat of 1940. This responsibility is so direct that one need only glance at this period to be struck by the fact.
Petain, however, did not neglect to take precautions. The first had been the understanding with Gamelin that he would remain silent. Another, so it seems, was the choice of witnesses. During six weeks the court saw not a few witnesses pass before it. They were all military men, colonels or generals. It would be hard to explain why they were chosen—why those and not others. For although some of them are important, they are not the foremost figures of the French army. That is clear. Petain wished to leave the real chiefs out of the trial. This explains the non-appearance of Weygand, head of the army for a number of years and Commander-in-Chief at the moment of the debacle. The witnesses came to the bar to tell their petty personal experiences in their own sectors. It seems that Petain chose those who could throw the responsibility for their particular difficulties on some scapegoat. However, after several questions, the picture becomes perfectly clear: the prosecution is absolutely incapable of showing that the lack of preparation was due to the insufficiency of credits, to the bad will of the government or to the time lost in strikes. The obvious and immediate fact is the incapacity of the High Command, and not only of Gamelin but of his predecessors, Weygand and Petain. The last in particular, president of the Commission of National Defense from 1934 to 1939, made in those years precise and well-known declarations against a too great motorization of the army, against a too great utilization of aviation, against the use of tanks as the main offensive force, against the fortification of the Sedan breach.
Some declarations taken at random show the state of the French army. “General Requin said that tank maneuvers had long been under study but were theoretical, without materiel on the field. General Hering declared that he had always espoused the formation of motorized units and at one point in his testimony exclaimed: I only succeeded in converting one disciple, and that was General von Brauchitsch!” On March 24, “several of the generals professed entire ignorance of German preparations and progress in military science. General Huret declared . . . that they were unaware of the German use of rubber boats. ‘The use of these rubber boats came to us as a great surprise,’ he told the court.” If the use of rubber boats was a surprise, what a greater surprise was the combined use of tanks and planes!
After the experience of Poland the High Command started to wake up a bit. Daladier declares: “Armored divisions were only formed in 1940, but they might have been organized with the material already manufactured long before the war. The obstacle was this singular timidity of the High Command in approaching the question of tanks.” The communications among the different parts of the army on campaign were assured by pigeons or messengers as in 1870. The French High Command wasn’t yet acquainted with the use of the radio. This is certainly not the fault of the forty-hour week.
An X-Ray Picture of the Bourgeois State
Independently of the will of the organizers, there appeared at the trial a new defendant: French capitalism. We suddenly learn (in 1942) of the role the big bourgeoisie played in curbing production. And there is plenty of testimony on the subject. General Bernard declares: “The private purveyors’ cartel did everything to hamstring the spreading out of orders among manufacturers throughout the country.” That is something our American readers understand well! One of the defendants, Pierre Jacomet, former Secretary-General of the French War Ministry, “advanced as a reason for the delay in rush contracts the fact the arms manufacturers, such as Renault, enjoyed a virtual monopoly and so demanded very high prices.” Another defendant, former Air Minister Guy LaChambre confessed that, although Minister, he was completely “dependent on plane manufacturers who could not always be held to their promises.” Daladier himself explained what was meant by nationalization of war industry. “M. Daladier declared that the measure had been limited to ten principal factories that had been working with antiquated methods .... Nationalization had equipped them with modern machinery and made it possible for them to triple their output. . . . He said that generous compensation had been paid by the government to the expropriated munitions makers.” One can believe Daladier that the capitalists lost nothing in the exchange!
However, what happened? “M. Daladier said the Schneider factory has built a wall across its premises to prevent access from the nationalized portion to private shops. He charged M. Brandt [another munitions maker] with having removed official records in the dead of night from one of the factories, so that it was necessary to take police measures to have the documents returned.” Of course, the police took the documents but were careful not to touch M. Brandt. Imagine what would have happened to a worker caught “removing official documents in the dead of night.” How revealing these accounts are. This is a real picture of the French boss, not only in his egotistic thirst for profits, in his blind hate of socialism, but also in his niggardliness and meanness. Schneider, one of the largest French capitalists, raised a wall in the middle of his factory! Brandt, another big boss, stole documents “in the dead of night"! One could not possibly invent more caustic traits with which to characterize a class that has outlived itself. And what to think of the Daladiers and the Blums, not to mention Thorez, who prevented the workers from sweeping away this rottenness!
The government was powerless not only in the face of the trusts, but also in face of the High Command. Daladier lengthily explains how in reality his position as War Minister gave him not the slightest power over the military chiefs, but that on the contrary he could merely act as a rubber stamp for their decisions. The former Air Minister, Guy LaChambre, explains that “Cabinet Ministers did not have full control over the functioning of their own departments.” From one side he had to submit to the decisions of the High Command, from the other “he was dependent on plane manufacturers.”
To complete this picture of the bourgeois state it is necessary to speak also of the attitude of the government towards the fascists in the army. Before the Riom court appears a witness, General Gerodias. “He testified a document reached his hands relating to the Spanish Civil War, describing mutinies against officers of the Spanish Civil War. ‘The document appeared interesting to me,’ General Gerodias stated, ‘and I had it circulated to the officers of the French Army for their information.’” In reality, the document was a piece of fascist propaganda, and the General actively distributed this propaganda in the army. What happened to the fascist general? Listen carefully: “I was relieved of my command on orders of General Gamelin. Six months later General Gamelin gave me another command of equal importance.” Imagine a simple soldier circulating a revolutionary leaflet among the soldiers “for their information"! Five years in prison would be the ordinary penalty. For a general and fascist propaganda it is a six-month vacation. One learns later that this General Gerodias, incidentally, had served on Marshal Petain’s staff.
“Another witness, General Montagne, said he had been removed from his command but was restored to favor and sent to another command in a few days. . . . General Montagne said, ‘The real reason was that I dared to say that if things kept on as they were we might as well give up.’” Imagine a simple soldier going before his general and declaring to him, “We might as well give up.” We doubt very much that he would be “restored to favor” in a few days!
The paradox of the dispute which unfolds before the Riom court is that the defendants can defend themselves only by revealing some truths about the past. By doing this they really condemn the regime of decadent capitalism and they condemn those who defended this regime—themselves.
The Attitude of Germany
Berlin’s attitude toward the Riom trial reflects the dynamics of the French-German relations since the defeat. At the beginning the trial was far from displeasing to the German authorities. The very day after the armistice in June 1940, it is reported, there was German insistence on the establishment of “war guilt.” It was hinted by Daladier, indeed, that there would have been no trial at all had it not been for such insistence. Several different times during the very long preparation of the trial, the press of Paris, inspired by the Nazis, started a campaign against the Vichy government, saying it was seeking to stifle the trial.
Now the situation is completely reversed. The Nazis and their lackeys denounce the trial as a farce and a scandal and demand its suspension as soon as possible. The German attack started at the beginning of March, two weeks after the opening of the trial, with a long and violent dispatch from the diplomatic correspondent of the official German news agency D.N.B. The problem was clearly posed: “Definitely to clarify the atmosphere, a controversy in which the aim seems to be to ascertain whether this or that politician or this or that general is responsible for defeat, is immaterial. What matters is to have the answer to the question: Why did France declare war on Germany, knowing full well the Fuehrer’s desire for peace? That answer might well become an absolute necessity.”
The German opposition to the Riom trial found its expression most clearly in a speech by Hitler himself. The 15th of March, in a Memorial Day speech, the Fuehrer declared: “At present, proceedings are taking place in France which are characterized by the fact that those responsible for this war are not mentioned in a single word. The proceedings merely deal with insufficient preparations for war. This mentality appears to us incomprehensible, but it reveals perhaps better than anything else the causes for this war.” The last sentence is not distinguished by its logic, but one thing is clear: Hitler wants the French to acknowledge their “war guilt.”
This question of the responsibility for the war has always had a burning interest for Hitler. In Mein Kampf his principal grievance against the Versailles Treaty was that it proclaimed German responsibility for the first World War. Now, the bloody clown, in the midst of the carnage and wreckage, proclaims his love for peace: “I did not want this,” trying to convince himself. Besides this personal interest, very apparent in Hitler, the question of war guilt has an enormous political interest. If France’s guilt in starting the war were officially recognized, that would be a trump card in the hands of the Nazis in all the occupied countries and—this becomes important—even in Germany. Finally, the confession of “war guilt” would permit Hitler to extract from France many political and economic concessions. But that is also precisely why the French bourgeoisie cannot make such a confession. The pressure on Vichy is great. After Hitler’s speech, Fernand de Brinon, Vichy’s envoy to the German authorities in Paris, on March 19, came to see Petain especially about the trial. And one can imagine that this question was one of the principal topics of the recent rather mysterious interviews between Petain and Laval. Nevertheless, it is impossible at present for Hitler to get the French bourgeoisie to confess “war guilt.”
The Lessons of the Trial
It seems impossible, however, that the trial will continue as it started. It is too scandalous a defeat for Petain.
It is more important to draw up the balance sheet of that which the trial has already revealed to us. Blum and Daladier by their declarations, Gamelin by his silence, have shown us the real structure of the bourgeois state, the impotence of the elected politicians before the cartels and the General Staff. Blum completely confirmed the analysis of the Popular Front given by the Trotskyists in the face of all the other tendencies of the working class movement.
For the present, the trial has shown the extreme weakness of the Vichy government, the fraud on which it rests. It remains to be seen what the repercussions of the trial are in France. Exactly what do the French know of what is going on in the little provincial town of Riom? Petain took good care of that. Daily instructions are given out by the Bureau of Censorship to the French newspapers indicating even the “commentaries” which are to accompany the reports of the trial. It is certain that from the daily press the French know less about the trial than the Americans. Nevertheless, with the lack of internal cohesion of the police apparatus of Vichy, the debates are probably widely known on the outside; the speeches will very likely be reproduced in the numerous illegal papers. The Riom trial, in revealing the emptiness and the fraud of the Petain government, may under present conditions, contribute to the regeneration of political life in France.
April 8, 1942
[1]All Quotations are from the New York Times’ reports from Riom.

Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



ington's "New Order"



Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris
Washington’s “New Order”

Washington’s “New Order”  Fourth International, July 1942, pp.108-110, under the name “Marc Loris”, (3,511 words) 
Transcribed Edited by Ted Crawford, HTML Markup by David Walters for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2005.

The resistance of the Red Army has shown the limits of the power of the German military machine. The absence of a German spring offensive has started to relieve the “democracies” of the great fear, and some people already forecast the speedy collapse of the Hitlerian empire. What these hopes are worth we will not discuss here. They have, however, already produced their fruits in the literary and oratorical world. Yesterday fear of successful Nazi barbarism was the preoccupying theme of the political speeches. Today the “democracies” are starting to speak of the peace and its organization; Hoover reveals to us the secrets for establishing a “lasting peace”; reinforced by official authority, Sumner Welles sketches the future organization of the world. Moreover, all these speeches on the peace do not reflect merely premature hopes. Peace aims are war aims, and war aims are weapons. In their own way they contribute to the American mobilization for the world offensive. What the speed and success of this offensive will be no one yet knows. Nevertheless, whatever the military changes of fortune and the rhythm of events may be, the most likely perspective remains the defeat, sooner or later, of Germany followed by that of Japan. In any case, this is the perspective that we must accept now in order to discuss the peace of the United Nations, that is, the American peace.
A Question of Historical Fact
One of the most authoritative statements on the future peace is that of Sumner Welles, Under-Secretary of State, before a memorial Day crowd, May 30, in Washington. On June 17 he expounded the same views in another speech in Baltimore. Welles first had to answer a rather embarrassing question : Why did he find himself posing the same problem a second time, less than twenty years after its solemn solution in 1919? Why has humanity found itself precipitated into a second horrible catastrophe twenty years after having gone through a first one? Welles answered this on May 30:
“The failure of the American people to join in international cooperation after the last war played a large part in bringing about the present gigantic world struggle. “
At first sight the Under-Secretary of State’s declaration may seem surprising: the American policy “played a large part” in bringing about the present war!
The reason for this astonishing confession becomes evident when one listens to Welles on June 17:
“Have we all learned in this hard and perilous way that co-operation is no leas essential in maintaining peace than in winning war? . . . We can none of us again afford to forget the lessons we have learned—that cooperation to win the victory Is not enough; that there must be even greater cooperation to will the peace, If the peace is to be that kind of peace which alone can prevent the recurrence of war.”
If Welles does not hesitate to cast against his own country the grave accusation of having “played a large part” in bringing about the present war, it is because he desires to justify more and more direct intervention in world affairs by Washington henceforth ("international cooperation"). In the absence of America, the wretched peoples of Europe were unable to make peace among themselves. If Uncle Sam had been there, there would not have been war. In the future Uncle Sam must be “there,” that is to say, everywhere in the world.
It is worth while pausing a moment over this argument, because this point of history has an enormous importance for the future. Was the anti-Wilsonian reaction, in particular the refusal of the United States to enter the League of Nations, the radical defect which provoked the bankruptcy of the Versailles Treaty? During the first imperialist war the United States accumulated enormous wealth in a few years, and from a debtor country rapidly became a creditor country to which Europe owed many billions of dollars. Precisely because of the prodigious speed of this ascension, the consciousness of the American bourgeoisie lagged behind the new reality. This is rather frequently the case in history. In particular, the whole drama of the present epoch is in the difficulty which the proletariat encounters in adjusting itself to its historic task. But that which requires long effort for an oppressed class is relatively easy for a governing class: the American bourgeoisie rapidly adapted its political consciousness to its new economic power. The anti-Wilsonian isolationism of the immediate post-war period was only a short episode. As early as 1923, to use the language of Welles, the American people had joined in international cooperation. The “American people” was personified by General Charles G. Dawes, who presented to the European governments a plan of reorganization of German economy. And these debt-ridden governments, willy nilly, had to accept the General’s plan, for it was supported by a promise of an 800 million dollar loan from the American banks. From then on American finance did not cease to make its voice, irritating but none the less convincing, understood in impoverished and indebted Europe. Not only the bourgeois leaders, but also the small tradesman, the worker and even the peasant of Europe had to learn from the daily newspapers to pronounce the names of Owen D. Young, Charles G. Dawes, and Kellogg. For on them depended the stability of the mark, the franc, even of the pound sterling, that is, the preservation of the meager revenue and salaries of Europe’s masses. At the risk of contradicting Welles, one must recognize that America throughout played a not negligible role in “international cooperation"!
The Versailles Treaty is now blamed for all the misfortunes of Europe. But it was itself more a symptom than a cause. The cause is the economic and social stagnation of Europe. On the basis of this stagnation, the slightest problems become insoluble difficulties, just as a sick body turns the slightest scratch into a festering wound. Take even the question of reparations. After the war of 1870 France had to pay Germany, on very short order, a billion dollars. For that epoch it was an enormous sum, but the transfer was effected with amazing ease and long before the time-limit set by Germany. The payments contributed to the capitalist development not only of Germany, which is obvious, but also of France, by accelerating the development of its great banks and the transformation of its peasant economy. Ascending capitalism knew how to profit from even its mishaps to expand its empire. In 1919 the Allies fixed a ridiculously high total of reparation. But what Germany really paid for a few years were annuities of 300 to 400 million dollars. These amounts, although enormous, were not out of proportion with the indemnity of 1871, considering the great increase of national wealth in the meantime. However, the transfer of these sums, far from benefiting a single country, even France, provoked crises which menaced the stability of currencies, of governments, even of the social system.
In 1928 one of Dawes’ collaborators, George Auld, published a book to show the workability of the American plan and the capacity of Germany to pay. The book would be convincing, if only there was any truth in the hypothesis on which the whole demonstration rests: “with constantly expanding markets."[1]
Against this background the question of America’s entry into the League of Nations manifestly takes on an episodic importance. Only a legalistic mind could see in it one of the principal causes of the European crisis. This crisis is caused first of all by the impasse of European capitalism. And this impasse was due in great part to the appearance across the Atlantic of a rival, richer in resources and better organized, while the European continent was torn to pieces. The enormous material superiority Of the United States automatically excluded all probability of economic revival for capitalist Europe. In the absence of the proletarian revolution a new war was inevitable, sooner or later, whatever may have been the political combinations. Certainly we do not wish to deny Welles’ affirmation that the United States “played a large part in bringing about the present gigantic struggle.” However, it incurred that responsibility not by some episodic political abstention, but by an enormous economic participation.
Welles’ singular assertion of American responsibility is directed, naturally, against a new threat from isolationism, but it also aims to hide the real character of the present war. If the war is due “in large part” to a political error in the composition of the League of Nations, then it is not the product of a general decline of capitalist society and, consequently, once this unfortunate accident has passed, society will be able to proceed with its march forward. Promises to this effect are multiplying. Doubtless because the phrases about a better political order, about democracy and freedom, have lost their attraction for the people, assurances that the war leads us towards a new era of economic prosperity are becoming more and more numerous. Welles promises a “new frontier of human welfare” and “freedom from want” after the war. Lyttelton, British Minister of Production, assures us that “we have passed from an age of scarcity to an age of plenty.” Henry Wallace, Vice-President of the United States, affirms that “the object of this war is to make sure that everybody in the world has the privilege of drinking a quart of milk a day.” Donald Nelson, chief of the War Production Board, announces to the world that “poverty is not inevitable any more.”
“A New Frontier of Human Welfare”
How to fulfill these extraordinary promises? The heads of the “democracies” have already declared in the Atlantic Charter that their countries “will endeavor, with due respect for their existing obligations, to further the enjoyment by all States, great or small, victor or vanquished, of access, on equal terms, to the trade and to the raw materials of the world which are needed for their economic prosperity.” What they mean by that, however, they will never deign to explain. One of their spokesmen, Viscount Cranborne, Secretary of State for the Colonies, has just stated in the House of Lords on June 2nd the government’s views on the “post-war problems.” The Atlantic Charter, he said, laid down the fundamental aim on which a peace settlement must be based. Then he refused to add anything: “Anything said today would not be merely useless but more likely to do more harm than good.” Let us listen carefully, the question is not the details of some practical application, the question is one of “fundamental aims” for which millions of men are killing each other, but speaking of these aims does more harm than good! A touch of bitter irony is added to this picture by Goebbels. As is known, the free access to sources of raw materials has been one of the demands of Nazi foreign policy. The peculiar position of German imperialism gives this demand a semblance of justification. At the end of May, Goebbels complained bitterly that the “democracies” had appropriated the slogan. “The Anglo-Saxon statesmen are plagiarizing,” he charged. Millions of men are being killed to decide, it seems, which camp has the honor of offering the world free access to raw materials!
In order to reach his “new frontier of human welfare” Welles repeats the Atlantic Charter’s assurances on the “free access” to raw materials; the only clarification he gives is that the United Nations will “provide the mechanism whereby what the world produces may be distributed among the peoples of the world.” What could this wonderful “mechanism” be? Until now, this “distribution” of what the world produces has been operated by the institutions called trusts, monopolies and banks. Where this “mechanism” has led the world, everyone knows. Does Welles propose another “mechanism"? There is none—except socialism.
Reading these fabulous promises of economic progress and well-being for all, one asks some questions: For a long time the “democracies” have had “free access” to raw materials ; how would capitalism be able to make such improvements? Why didn’t they undertake this before the war? Why must it be accomplished only after the war when all the countries will be considerably impoverished and some completely destroyed?
At the end of May, England has spent in this war nearly 9 billion pounds sterling, which was already 200 million pounds more than the total credits voted from 1914 to 1918. British expenses continue at the rate of 12 million pounds per day. In order to visualize what a flood of wealth is being hurled into the abyss, one must recall that in the most difficult moments of the last war, in 1917-18, Great Britain spent daily an average of 61/2 million pounds, that is, the tempo of the spending is today doubled. And how long this will last no one knows. In August 1941, before the difficulties on the Russian front, Germany had already spent more than 100 billion marks in the war, not counting a pre-war armament program of 90 billion marks, and its present total expenditures remain unknown. At the end of May, the United States had already spent 30 billion dollars for the war. The expenditures continue at the rate of a billion dollars a week. At the end of the last war the United States had a national debt of 25 billion dollars, about three months’ national income. Now, if the calculations of the administration are not upset by accidents such as inflation, the national debt in 1943 will be 110 billion dollars, more than twelve months’ national income. No one yet knows what the total will be at the end of the war. How will these enormous sums be paid? There are only two ways: taxation, a tribute paid from the income of the coming generations; or inflation, the impoverishment of entire layers of the population. Whichever method is used, the result will prevent a certain number of persons from drinking the daily quart of milk promised by Wallace.
Not only does the war destroy accumulated wealth. It also destroys the capacity of the system to recuperate. War greatly accelerates the centralization and concentration of capital, it ruins many layers of the middle class. It deepens and exacerbates all the contradictions of the system. It renders the system subject to economic crises always more profound, always more persistent; it reduces the possibility of a way out.
The End of Imperialism ... of Others
The economic realities of the world of tomorrow are indicated by the political program of the “democracies.” Today this program is incapable of reviving the humanitarian and pacifist illusions of Wilson’s 14 points. Today no one speaks like Wilson of general disarmament. Welles, repeating the Atlantic Charter, proclaims the “disarming of all aggressors,” which is a simple measure of war. As for the “peace-loving” nations “and other like-minded states,” they will form “an international police power.” The Earl of Selborne, speaking to the House of Lords on behalf of the British government, affirmed that the United Nations “must keep armed for the maintenance of peace.” Secretary of the Navy Knox, it will be recalled, said the United States will police the world for a hundred years. If capitalism were capable of assuring the entire world an “age of plenty” and “freedom from want,” if it would put an end to “poverty,” then how does one explain the need of “international police” for a regime which would have such attraction for the masses?
However, Welles’ speech on the future economy of the world does not merely consist of empty phrases and false promises. Some of his declarations are much more serious than would seem at first glance. Thus he declares: “The age of imperialism is ended. . . . The principles of the Atlantic Charter must be guaranteed to the world as a whole—in all oceans and in all continents.” The last sentence is a direct and categorical reply to Churchill, who had declared that the Atlantic Charter should not be applied to India. Thus the meaning of the first part of the statement becomes clear: The age of imperialism is ended . . . for England.
Because of the peculiarities of its development, having vast resources on one continent at its disposal, the United States appeared late on the world arena, after the other imperialist powers had divided the rest of the world. So it was able to cover its imperialist expansion with liberal and humanitarian slogans such as “freedom of the seas” or “the open door in China.” Today this American imperialist method is at its peak: the most explosive imperialist expansion in history is being prepared under cover of the slogan “the end of imperialism"!
The United States now occupies the place Britain held in the Nineteenth Century, that of the first economic power of the world. But England still holds an enormous colonial empire from the past. The present war is the struggle between Berlin and Washington for the English heritage. If Germany is defeated the dominant feature of the capitalist relations of tomorrow will be the passage of the British Empire from the orbit of London to that of Washington. Australia and New Zealand are rapidly moving in this direction, while Canada has already preceded them. Tomorrow, America will “open the door” of India after having “liberated” China. England’s resistance will, of course, be hopeless. The whole question is merely one of form and time.
The peace of Versailles was a compromise between the conflicting demands of the victors. Among Lloyd George, Clemenceau and Wilson there was do great disproportion of power. Today, however, America’s superiority over England is much greater than that of England over France, or of America over Europe, in 1919. By the end of the war this American superiority will become still greater. The peace will be, above all, an American peace.
There is, however, a factor which is always present in the minds of all the imperialists and which they scarcely dare to mention: the revolution. That we are soon to enter a new epoch of revolutionary crises no one doubts, especially not the imperialist leaders. The appearance of the revolutionary proletariat on the scene will reveal the lies and emptiness of the imperialist peace plans. It is for this embarrassing situation that Welles has projected a “cooling off” period. The Under-Secretary of State did not reveal an abundance of detail on this period. He contented himself with making it understood that the United States would reshape the world as it pleased, before becoming immobilized in a peace treaty. Since the imperialist adversary will have collapsed, whom will this “cooling-off” period be directed against, except the peoples in revolt?
During the period between the two wars American intervention, especially in Europe, took primarily financial forms. While he carried the title of General, Charles G. Dawes’ arms were the billions of Wall Street, not tanks and planes. But that is now the pre-history of American imperialism. Tomorrow “the international police power” will attempt to enforce Yankee order in the entire world. In Europe the “second front” might be the prelude to military occupation of the continent. On the wasted, starving countries, America will seek to impose its will by the blackmail of food, then loans, and if necessary it will employ the still more convincing argument of bombing planes.
Until lately democrats of all shades were fond of contrasting the German economy, prey of the vampire state, to the American economy, paradise of free initiative. These were two conceptions of the world, two radically opposed philosophies. After a few months of war, the American economy is not easily distinguished from the German economy and will be less and less so in the future. The fundamental difference was that Hitler was five years ahead in his preparation for war. And America must now work twice as hard, both in the war and the organization of the world. Today Hitler’s “New Order” has already shown its real face. It is something old—oppression, misery, exploitation. But the “democracies” as well have nothing else to bring to the world. American imperialism is unable to develop the wealth of the globe by making fantastic promises. Far from raising China and India to the material level of the advanced countries, it can only reduce Europe to the level of India.
But if the democratic “New Order” cannot bring more than the Nazi “New Order,” it will clash with the same obstacle : the revolt of the workers. Even though prepared by a “cooling off” period, the pax americana will be, in the final count, as unstable as the pax germanica. The union of the workers will be the peace of the world.
[1] George P. Auld,The Dawes Plan and the New Economics, 1928. These four little words which underlie the whole reasoning of the book are written a single time, as by chance, page 168. The author does not discuss them at all, as though they were a natural truth.

Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive


ence" - Burnham's Style
  
Jean van Heijenoort writing as Jarvis Gerland
‘Science’—Burnham’s Style ‘Science—Burnham’s Style’ Fourth International, June 1940, pp.55-58, under the name‘Jarvis Gerland’ (2,939 words)
Upon rejecting the position of the Fourth International on the class nature of the Soviet State, Burnham passed, whether he willed it or not, to a general offensive against the very foundations of Marxism. Such an offensive suffers from old age, but Burnham in his article ‘Science and Style’ proposes to ‘modernize’ it with the aid of ‘science.’
It is not with pleasure that one undertakes discussing this article. The repugnance which must be overcome in order to read it, is soon replaced by boredom—these platitudes, chewed over so many times, do not improve with age. The article contains nothing which has not been said again and again by all the hecklers of Marxism, professionals and amateurs. The most hackneyed arguments, the most worn out comparisons, all these rags which are scattered throughout the small town newspapers even, are assembled here and presented as the latest conquest of science by a mind emancipated from all superstition. It is true that he has not yet dared to present a few tatters in all their filth; we see only their fringes. Many arguments stop short and do not yet present all that is in reserve. With vulgarity and conceit is mixed a strong dose of hypocrisy. Burnham declares for instance, in his attack against Trotsky, ‘I have been scrupulously fair in presenting here your central argument.’ This ‘scrupulous fairness’ as we shall see presently, has the same value as that of his predecessors—it strongly resembles unscrupulous unfairness.
One of the first propositions which the document attributes to Trotsky is the following: ‘From dialectical materialism it follows that Marxian sociology, in particular the Marxian theory of the state, is true.’ The expression ‘it follows that’ is emphasized by Burnham himself who does not wish to leave the least doubt about his affirmation. In order to justify the attribution of such an assertion to his opponent, there is indeed in the page from which the above sentence is taken, the little word ‘thus.’ It is rather thin. As for the ‘proofs’ announced with such grandiloquence by Burnham ("Evidence, argument, proof: these only are my weapons.") his ‘scruples’ have permitted him to dispense with them.
In truth, such a proposition is foreign to the spirit and the letter of Marxism. Did Marx deduce ‘Capital’ from a few logical or metaphysical principles pegged at the head of the first chapter? Did he begin his work with nothing more than an abstract exposition of his dialectical and materialist ‘principles’? If this were so, why then did he spend his time in research among thousands of economic publications of the entire world in order to amass a formidable erudition? Burnham attributes to Trotsky, just as gratuitously, a second analogous affirmation: ‘From the Marxian theory of the state, it follows that Russia is a workers’ state.’ If this were true, why did the Left Opposition lose its time in analyzing the social, economic, and political conditions of the U.S.S.R. beginning with 1923? We have produced, it seems to me, a rather large number of documents and books on this subject. If our method were that which Burnham imputes—so ‘scrupulously’—we should have been content to state our conclusions in a few lines, if necessary in the form of a polished syllogism.
But there is more. Marxism has already refuted expressly this interpretation of its method. Burnham has the right, if he wishes, to view Engels as an outmoded reactionary preacher (this sweeping accusation is launched, by the way, without the slightest evidence), but perhaps he will recognize him as a faithful interpreter of Marx’s thought. Yet, Engels, answering the Burnham of his day, one shaped in a grander style, Eugene Dühring, had occasion to examine, more than seventy years ago, precisely the accusation which the Dühring of today presents as a product of the most recent science. Engels quotes[1] a long passage from the writings of the German professor, which in the profoundness of its science and the beauty of its style as well as in its scrupulous fairness rivals Burnham’s document. Dühring accused Marx of having deduced the necessity of the expropriation of the expropriators from a logical law, the negation of the negation. Engels had no trouble in refuting this absurdity; he simply quoted the passage where Marx analyzes this problem.
Why does Burnham serve us this ancient warmed-up hash? It is because he and Dühring have the same conception of logic, and both of them in an identical manner attribute this conception to Marxism. Their thought does not extend beyond a very formal idea of the dialectic, and it is this dialectic which they annihilate! We present them with a living being, they kill it and then cry out: ‘We told you so, it’s nothing but a corpse!’
They conceive of logic as consisting above all of some principles outside of and prior to knowledge. From these principles follows knowledge. This is what Burnham develops when, in his document, he speaks about the function of logic. To him it is reduced to a form from which thought cannot escape. Separated from the content of knowledge, logic can play nothing but a negative role. Form becomes a simple barrier; principles, the hand-rail. Burnham tells us that logic is rather useless. We agree with him insofar as such logic is concerned, that is, his, not ours.
Dialectic logic is not the banks between which flows the river of knowledge. It penetrates knowledge itself in all its various depths. It cannot live except in this current, it does not exist except in it. If you force logic out of the current it negates itself and withers into a few limiting, abstract, and sterile principles. Far from dominating knowledge from the outside, it recreates itself incessantly in it. ‘The form of thought merits being revived more than any other form,’ Hegel once remarked. The Philistines often reduce Hegel’s method to the monotonous application of a three part schema: thesis, antithesis, synthesis. In this caricature they reveal nothing but the conception which they themselves are incapable of passing beyond: For Hegel, every sphere of reality gives a specifically determined character to the contradiction and to the synthesis. Under an often mystical form, he expresses here a profound materialist conception. The dialectic is not reducible to a few isolated laws; this happens to be not one of the least difficulties in its systematization.
Far from molding itself into a form imposed from the outside or from expressing its limits in such a form, thought has its mode of development conditioned by its content. The conception of something outside of and prior to knowledge is precisely scholasticism in its most essential feature. Burnham cannot free himself from this conception and in quest of the most recent modernism it is to this dust-laden bin that he turns when he advocates replacing Hegel by Russell and the dialectic by symbolic logic.
Symbolic logic is the generic name for a collection of works which have developed largely since the end of the first third of the last century.
I shall indicate here only the general conclusions of this school without entering into a detailed technical analysis, although I have at hand dozens upon dozens of quotations from the German, Anglo-Saxon, and French mathematicians and logicians beginning from the middle of the last century. As for Burnham himself he does nothing in describing this tendency but pronounce some very flattering but purely subjective adjectives.
The artisans of this movement are for the most part mathematicians and semi-mathematicians. Its essential features are the use of symbols analogous to those of algebra in order to represent the content of thought—concepts, or relations—and the deductive inter-linking of these symbols according to a few formal rules in order to determine all the possible, that is, not-contradictory affirmations. This logical calculus does nothing but push to the extreme a deep-rooted tendency of mathematics since their origin: the deductive form according to the laws of formal logic and the continuous reduction of the number of axioms which serve as the point of departure. That is why, precisely because this constitutes nothing but an exacerbation of one of its tendencies, mathematics would run a great risk in confining itself entirely to this road: the risk of losing its life. All the great mathematicians, including those who are addicted to symbolic logic, agree on this point, and many of them recognize even in their own domain nothing beyond a very restricted value in symbolic logic. It seems, however, that it has definitely acquired the right of existence in this field, and so far as mathematics is concerned, it represents a conquest, only relative, it is true, of science.
If we enter the field of logic, the situation changes completely. Here the role of symbolic logic becomes completely retrogressive.
All the logicians of this school start from the three ‘fundamental laws’ of thought[2] ‘from which we can no more depart than we can jump over our own shadow’—the principles of identity, of contradiction, and of the excluded middle. The adepts of symbolic logic do not hazard a discussion upon these principles, or even making precise their content. Often they adopt them in silence, under cover of defining an algebraic symbol. If they discuss their entrance into the system, it is only in order to paste up the label ‘obvious’ (Russell and Whitehead in particular). How poor, hidebound and reactionary such a conception appears in comparison with that of a Hegel! This can be seen merely by reading (Burnham need not recoil in fright, it is not him I offer this advice) those pages where Hegel, at the beginning of the second book of his Great Logic (Science of Logic) examines the famous principles, demonstrating their limits and their contradictions. In these ten or fifteen pages there is more science—real science and not fruitless formalism—than in the entire three thick volumes of Principia Mathematica.
Once the three ‘fundamental laws’ of thought are admitted as governing the game, nothing remains but to determine, through operative rules which have an algebraic form, all the not-contradictory combinations which follow. The objective of logical calculus could thus be defined in its entire generality: to establish all the affirmations compatible with the three fundamental principles of thought. Science finds itself reduced to a vast formalism. Nothing remains after this except a secondary task: to see whether all the combinations determined as possible also exist in nature. But if all the possibilities do not exist, existence never fails to find a pigeon-hole in the immense texture of possibilities.
Insofar as thought furnishes reality with frames constructed outside and independent of it, symbolic logic appears as a vast scholasticism. This does not constitute an increase in the power of reason, but its abasement and its humiliation. Russell’s science of combinations in particular, has in view rendering human intellect absolutely useless in everything concerning logic and mathematics. Before Russell another logician of the same type, Stanley Jevons, constructed a kind of piano equipped with twenty-one keys which classified, selected and rejected the various combinations of terms and finally indicated the not-contradictory propositions. Is it necessary to add that this neo-scholasticism heads in the opposite direction from that of the development of human thought? Science does not force nature into a system of previously established compartments. Knowledge is activity and struggle; not passive contemplation, but a passionate discourse between man and nature. Thus, where man declares unity and continuity, nature answers with plurality and discontinuity; where he says plurality, it replies with unity. Knowledge does not advance except by this unceasing dialectic. Thought, insofar as it is penetration, invention, and extension, appears essentially as action, movement, and a going beyond itself, and is in no wise reducible to the degrading automatism of a system of tabulated labels and levers.
The adepts of logical algebra frequently flaunt a revolutionary air through hurling anathema upon Aristotle’s logic. But even here their progress is quite relative. Aristotle’s logic consisted of the classification of a certain number of the forms of thought, exactly as he catalogued some hundreds of birds according to external observations. As for symbolic logic, it starts from a few principles and deduces from them all the not-contradictory combinations. But this does not lead it much further. Thus the German mathematician, Hilbert, rediscovered after arduous calculation, the fifteen forms of the syllogism which Aristotle had already enumerated. Through its blind adoption of the three principles of departure, symbolic logic remains a part of formal logic, the most developed and the most systematic it is true, but dated 2,300 years after Aristotle!
An illustration is in order. Let us consider the propositions of Aristotelian logic as bricks with regular and well-defined forms. The syllogism is the simplest possible construction with three bricks: two bricks juxtaposed and a third lying on top of them. Every perfect example of reasoning is extended by the repetition of this elementary arrangement in exactly the same way a mason erects a wall. Aristotle’s logic is a catalog of the various mosaics which appear in the human mind. Symbolic logic takes upon itself a different task, that of deducing by reasoning all the arrangements possible to a given shape of brick. In this sense it goes beyond Aristotle’s logic. But it retains the brickwork with its three relations, that is, the three ‘fundamental laws’ of thought. The dialectic abandons brickwork and follows the movement of a living reality. It does not take as its point of departure a form imposed a priori but much more fundamental properties of matter such as resistance, elasticity, cohesion. In passing, it shows that the form and the dimensions of the bricks themselves are in the last analysis determined by their essential properties, exactly as Hegel demonstrated that the ‘three laws’ of formal logic represent a certain stage in the development of thought.
Formal logic is above all the logic of definition and classification. Its importance in many domains is not to be denied, particularly in the beginnings of science. Its laws are valid for the immutable and distinct entities. Yet, all modern science directs human knowledge in another direction: the development and inter-connection of things. The Hegelian dialectic gave to these fundamental things their logical expression. That is why the name of Hegel will be preserved in the annals of science, whereas that of many others will be forgotten. Symbolic logic indeed systematizes Aristotelian logic, yet it rests absolutely upon the same basis: immobility and the absolute disconnection of categories. It remains thus considerably in the rear of problems which the dialectic posed and to which it has brought the first solutions. Every progressive work in logic must start from the Hegelian logic in order to cleanse it of its mysticism and to develop it. Because of profound social causes, this task is deeply repugnant to contemporary science. Hegel’s logic was an offspring of the French revolution. Socialism will lift the dialectic to new heights.
We have examined the problem of symbolic logic as the only point in which Burnham’s document presents any novelty. On all the other questions Marxist literature is already sufficiently rich.
The criticism which Burnham makes of the dialectic is indeed not new: it is the first exercise to which one must habituate himself in order to enter upon the career of a renegade from Marxism.[3] Feeling where the shoe pinches, Burnham attempts to deny this frequently made affirmation. He tries to demonstrate that the acceptance or the rejection of the dialectic does not in any way affect the validity of the revolutionary teachings of Marxism. Thus he invokes in support of this thesis the fact that the Stalinists ‘also believe’ in the dialectic. Transposed to the field of philosophy, this is the identification of Stalinism with Bolshevism. It is not less superficial and reactionary here than under its political form. Stalinism has remained attached to the dialectic verbally as it has to many formulas of Bolshevism. But in reality it has substituted for it a mercenary sophistry fit only for the justification of all their crimes. When Burnham, as a good Philistine identifies one with the other, he devotes himself to the same reactionary task as Norman Thomas. The fact alone that the Bonapartistic bureaucracy covers its gross empiricism with phrases wrenched from a doctrine which is radically opposed to it should be a supplementary reason for considering it as a caste and not as a class which expresses its culture in a completed form.
If he follows an old route, Burnham nevertheless has an innovation in what he proposes to substitute for the dialectic. The critics of Marxism have generally grasped at Kant—it is the safest stock in the philosophic stock exchange. Some of them have recently sought refuge in pragmatism. Burnham, the most modern and the most ‘scientific’ of them all, discovers symbolic logic. The choice is not any the happier; it clearly reveals a well-known fact: formal logic retains a power over petty-bourgeois thought which all its vicissitudes have been unable to touch. Insofar as it constitutes a new illustration of this fact, Burnham’s document possesses a scientific value which its author did not foresee. March 17, 1940
[1] Anti-Duhring, Part I, beginning of Chapter XIII. [2]A small unorthodox current during these last years has systematically developed the rejection of the principle of the excluded middle. We reserve for later examination this tendency which Burnham does not even mention. [3] See my article,‘The Algebra of Revolution.’ in the May issue of Fourth International.
 Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive


e Under the Iron Heel    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Europe Under the Iron Heel Fourth International, February 1942, pp.52-57, under the name “Marc Loris”. ( words) This article proposes primarily to provide information for the non-European reader on the situation now existing in the continent which was for centuries the guide of mankind. We reserve for another article an examination of our perspectives and of our political tasks. The information transmitted here is derived from bulletins and from special reviews,[1] from conversations of the author with individuals arrived from Europe and finally from private communications received from Europe through underground channels. If one leaves aside for the moment the USSR, Europe has about 380 million inhabitants. Germany, with Austria, has 77 million. Her allies (Italy, Hungary, Finland. Bulgaria) have 60 million. The neutral countries (Sweden, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal) have 42 million. The British Isles—51 million. Remaining are 150 million humans oppressed by Germany. Their countries are: Norway, Denmark, Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Albania, Greece. The most important part of France is occupied and the rest directly controlled. As for Rumania, half conquered, half allied, it is in the position of an occupied country through its internal situation. During the first imperialist war of 1914-1918, Germany also occupied several territories in Europe (Belgium, Northern France, central European countries). The quantitative difference between the two wars is evident. But there is another distinction. In World War I the occupied territories were almost completely emptied of men of military age. Old men, women and children remained. Moreover, the fronts in western and central Europe were constantly moving. Industrial and agricultural production practically ceased. The present occupation is not only much more extensive, but also includes the mass of the population (except for prisoners of war in Germany) and there are no fronts in western and central Europe. But these advantages of the Nazis have also evoked resistance from the conquered population far beyond that of World War I. All the forms of resistance which we are now witnessing existed in the previous war (in Belgium particularly), but they have now taken on enormously increased proportions. A Belgian newspaper published illegally in Brussels, La Libre Belgique, reported last August that more Belgians have been imprisoned in a year of occupation by the Germans than during the four years of 1914-1918. Violence and ExecutionsTo give an idea of the situation in occupied France we reproduce from France Speaks some passages from a letter written in November 1941:“The assassinations and sabotage now being committed in the occupied zone as well as the repressions that have followed, are creating a great stir in France, in all France. This wide official publicity is entirely new. The assassinations and the sabotage are an old story compared to it. Anyone who has lived in Paris and the occupied zone in 1940 and 1941 knows that if, in the capital, relations with the occupying force were peaceful, the same could not be said for the provinces. Beginning with the suburbs of Paris, there began to be signs of embittered relations. Many German soldiers were shoved into the canal near Saint-Denis. The farther away from Paris one went, the more those relations lacked that famous ‘correctness’ that was so emphasized in the official press. Dozens of large and small towns, villages and hamlets have seen on their walls the red posters announcing the executions of Frenchmen for ‘assassinations’ and ‘assaults’ perpetrated against the occupying force. Nearly all the towns of the occupied zone have had to pay fines as high as several million francs; have had to run the gamut of punishment, from earlier curfews to the closing of cafes, bans on going out on Sundays, etc. The acts for which they are punished range from individual assaults to destruction of telephone lines—a very frequent occurrence. The prison camps and jails are jammed. Those given light sentences of from two to three months have had to ‘wait their turn.’ They go to the camp or the jail upon being called there, when there is room for them. Once inside, they are in danger of incurring a ‘supplementary sentence,’ meted out under various pretexts. The most frequent is the perpetration of ‘an insult to Hitler,’ a crime of which the jailers alone are the judges. “It is only since July and August 1941, a few weeks after the opening of Russo-German hostilities, and especially since the demonstration of Russian resistance, that the assaults and acts of sabotage have received wide publicity and the repressive measures have progressively increased, up to the climactic point of the Nantes and Bordeaux mass executions of October, widely publicized throughout the world. Why? Have the sabotage and the assaults been much more numerous and grave than they had been previously? They have been more spectacular, certainly—the victims having included two high German officers (one of them, Hotz of Nantes, a man particularly odious to the populace). Thus they have a wider political and public meaning. The acts of sabotage, too, have multiplied. . . . A number have been detailed by the press and the radio, but the majority and the most important of them have received no publicity. “It appears that the violence of the repression has had as its primary aim the prevention of the generalization and aggravation of the hostile acts against the occupying force. Moreover, and perhaps above all, Paris and Vichy have been worried over the spread of that state of mind which has given rise to these troubles and has nurtured them. The first shot and the first train wreck brought into the public eye the hostility which previously had been hidden. Opinions began to be divided after the seizure of hostages and the first mass executions. But condemnation in principle of the saboteurs is seldom heard. Still less is credence given to the thesis that ‘sabotage isn’t French,’ set forth in some communiques and some big bill posters which show, behind the gunman, the sinister shadow of Stalin—the latest edition of the man with the knife between his teeth. “Despite all the rewards held out to informers, none has yet come forth to inform on the various assaults. If those who shot a German officer in the Paris subway were able to ‘vanish’ in the crowd, it was because the crowd wanted it that way.” What characterizes those assaults which are reported in the large newspapers is, above all, the extreme audacity with which they are executed, most often in broad daylight in the street. It should be noted also that they are very often crowned with success. Finally, their authors remain unpunished. For all the “serious” assaults committed in France against high officers of the German army not one guilty person has yet been caught. Numerous hostages have been arrested and shot but the authorities have been unable to lay their hands on any presumed malefactor. Efforts in that direction, however, have not been lacking: Pucheu, Petain’s Minister of the Interior, came to Paris personally to direct the investigations. So consistent a state of affairs can be explained only by the attitude of the population, the lukewarm enthusiasm of the ranks of the French police and the difficulties of the Gestapo in operating in a strange milieu, The assaults are in general the work not of an isolated individual but of a group. (An exception was the revolver attack upon Laval and Dat, the act of an isolated petty-bourgeois provincial.) Who are these groups? At least in France we must list in the first place the Stalinists. In their press and leaflets they advocate terrorist acts. A supplementary proof of their organized participation is the murder of Marcel Gitton and the wounding of Henri Soup, former Stalinist leaders who broke with the party at the time of the Hitler-Stalin pact, and who later became fascists. Besides the Stalinists there are in the European countries various secret patriotic groups, originating from the petty bourgeoisie, who systematically practice terrorism. As the letter quoted above reminds us, the assaults are by no means confined to the cases published in the press, which occur in the large cities. Immediately upon quitting the central sections of the big cities the Germans feel themselves less secure. Elementary hate spews forth upon the least occasion. In Northern France and Belgium rows often occur in saloons between German soldiers and the inhabitants (this region is predominantly working-class). If a German is killed, repression follows swiftly: usually ten young men, taken from the street where the incident occurred, pay with their lives. In the countries of western Europe, not to speak of countries like Poland or Yugoslavia, the victims of German firing squads are already counted in thousands. The various totals published in the press—the New York Times for instance spoke recently of two hundred in France—are the official figures, German in origin, and have absolutely no relation to the reality. Sabotage is one of the most widespread forms of resistance. It assumes the most diverse aspects and it is not always easy to say where it begins and where it ends. General statistics of production do not exist. From the few fragmentary figures made public it is difficult to measure the extent of sabotage, since one must make allowance for the lack of raw materials, for “ersatz,” and especially for the enfeeblement of the workers due to lack of nourishment. But the condemnations published in the German or the “collaborationist” papers of each occupied country prove that acts of sabotage are discovered daily. The most violent forms of sabotage, such as the cutting of telephone lines or derailment of trains, have perhaps a tendency to diminish, or at least not to increase, because of the immediate retribution levied on the hostages. In Belgium, for example, the Nazis place in the train itself hostages responsible for the success of its trip. The Germans also draw upon the local population to mount guard around depots and railroads, naturally under pain of death in case of accident. Burnings of crops and stores of grain have been frequent at the end of summer and in attempts to stop this the Germans have often prohibited the peasants from leaving their quarters at night. In the last two or three months one notes rather numerous explosions in power stations and conflagrations in factories, especially in Belgium. The most active centers of sabotage are Northern France, Belgium, Norway, Czechoslovakia. The Various Forms of SabotageIn the factories, the least we can say is that no zeal at all is shown for working. As a primary form of resistance the workers “play dumb.” Absolutely everything is utilized which can retard production without breaking the surface discipline. This state of mind has spread throughout all the occupied countries, independently of the propaganda of any party whatsoever. The Czech workers circulate this slogan: “Our production should be the poorest in the world.” Their emblem—they put it on walls, on their products, etc. is a tortoise with a P, first letter of the word “Pomalu” (slowly). Who organizes the sabotage and under what forms? That is naturally rather difficult to determine exactly, especially from the outside. Leaving aside strictly individual acts, spontaneous outbursts of anger and hate, it is probable that a large part of the sabotage is executed by local or regional groups, in every case of rather small size. There do not seem to be any national bourgeois organizations actually organized to undertake and direct sabotage on a national scale in each country. The only organizations working on a large scale are the Stalinist parties, and even there local initiative must be extremely important. Who are the saboteurs? We can say that large strata of the population are represented among them. Here for example are the professions of 11 Norwegians recently shot for sabotage in the small city of Stavanger: a doctor, a bookkeeper, an office worker, a sign painter, a business man, a customs officer, a watchman, a warehouse employee, a salesman, a manager, a smith. Within the factories there are naturally the workers themselves. But these participate also in other acts of sabotage such as arson, derailments, etc., particularly in Belgium or in Northern France. In what measure do these workers act on their own initiative or under the influence of the Stalinist party? That is difficult to determine. But it is beyond doubt that a certain part of the acts of violent sabotage, outside of the factories, are organized by independent groups of workers, with-out the direct influence of any party. With the suppression of the most elementary democratic rights have appeared all the forms of underground expression. One repeats to another, mouth to ear, innumerable and virulent anecdotes against the Germans. Chain letters are also very widespread, but naturally it is the illegal press which has most importance. In each country of Europe there is now in circulation a quantity of small underground newspapers. Even in Hungary, allied to Germany, an illegal anti-Hitler paper now regularly appears. These newspapers are put together by every imaginable method, but with time their technique improves. At present a rather large number are printed and certain of them are even printed quite well. The countries where they are most numerous are France, Belgium, Norway and Poland. The Illegal NewspapersIn France the Stalinist organ L’Humanite appears regularly each week in printed form and is reproduced locally by mimeograph when necessary. La Verite, published by the Trotskyists, appears in Paris, printed, every two weeks. These are the only two known working class papers; there is no socialist or syndicalist journal. All the other illegal papers have a national-bourgeois character. Here are some titles: La Voix de Paris (Voice of Paris), Le Feu (The Fire), Pantagruel, Liberte (Freedom), Le Peuple de France (The People of France), Les Petites Ailes (Little Wings), La France Continue (France Goes On), Valmy. This last seems to be edited by some right-wing trade unionists of the old C.G.T., but it declares itself purely national. It calls itself: “organ of resistance to oppression” and declares “Our motto: one single enemy—the invader.” The general attitude of the national-bourgeois journals is to declare themselves above the former political divisions and to unite all men of good will coming from all the former parties. They are extremely reticent on what will come after the “liberation.” All publish abundant facts on German looting, violently attack Darlan and the Paris collaborationists. Concerning Petain, opinion is somewhat divided. The majority attack him, but some evidence reserve tinged with a certain sympathy. Some articles do not lack political perspicacity, as one can judge by this quotation from La France Continue (June 1941): “Just as the regime of Blum sooner or later had to engender a dictatorship, so the regime of Vichy will inevitably engender the revolution.” And the journal opposes Petain precisely because his regime breeds revolution. Certain newspapers (Liberte, for example) pose as the organ of an organized group. They speak of their “cells” and call upon their members to hold themselves in readiness for the day when their “leaders” will give the signal for “action.” During the first months of the invasion (that is, well before the attack on the USSR) the Stalinist organ L’Humanite preserved the most ambiguous attitude toward the Germans, declaring itself against Vichy and denouncing the democrats of yesterday (Daladier, Blum, etc.) as agents of English imperialism. Naturally all that is changed now. Recently L’Humanite announced that in occupied France an illegal conference had been held of “Frenchmen and Frenchwomen of different points of view and beliefs, united by the will to struggle implacably and pitilessly for the liberation of France from the Hitlerian yoke.” This conference declared itself a constituent assembly of the “National Front for the Independence of France” and addressed an appeal to all organizations to adhere to it. In the illegal national-bourgeois press a great polemic is being waged on collaboration with the Stalinists. In this connection we quote some lines from a national journal entitled Verites (Truths): “Among us are no political sectarians, whether of the left or the right. When it came to defending our soil, Thorez deserted, and his propaganda was tied up with that of Goebbels in the attempt to demoralize France. That we don’t forget. Today his effort consists of exploiting the purest patriotism for the greater good of the Soviets. “Of course we admire the fierce resistance of the Russian soldier, but only to the extent that he is killing the Boche. He is defending his country against the foreigner. It is up to us to defend our country against the foreigner, be he German or Russian. “Let anti-German Frenchmen watch out. They are in danger of being odiously deceived. “Let them never join the ‘national front for the independence of France.’ “Frenchmen we are. Frenchmen we shall remain.” Other national groups declare themselves for collaboration with the Stalinists in order to use their wide experience in illegal work. One paper writes: “The communist organization brings today the help of a unique experience of illegal action.” In Belgium we note more than forty illegal papers appearing regularly. The best known is La Libre Belgique (Free Belgium), which also appeared during World War I. It has at present several local editions. There are also several socialist journals and not less than five regular Stalinist publications. In Norway these are the titles of some of the journals appearing regularly: We Want Our Own Country, The Royal Courier, The Courier of V, The Sign of the Times. Appearing in mimeographed form, The Sign of the Times (Tidens Tegn) is the continuation of the oldest of the Oslo newspapers which, after having appeared for more than a year under German occupation, voluntarily ceased publication in 1941, since its editors were not willing to submit to the growing pressure of German censorship. Frequently these papers publish blacklists of individuals associating with Quisling’s party. In Poland the illegal press flourishes abundantly. The struggle for the independence of Poland is mainly carried on by the workers’ movement and numerous journals are published by groups of left socialists, the Jewish Bundists, etc., often anti-Stalinist. Pamphlets and manifestoes are also rather frequently published. Sympathy for England and for all things English is widespread and is the immediate reaction to the oppression. English aviators who are forced to abandon their planes by parachute are often concealed by the local population. Their military apparel and their parachutes are immediately burned and by slow stages they come to safety after long months. The death penalty is the rule for whoever is connected in any way with affairs of this kind, but the frequency of executions on these grounds shows that the risk is cheerfully accepted. The funerals of English aviators killed in action are often the occasion of long processions and sometimes, as in Belgium, are transformed into anti-German demonstrations. The great number of convictions for espionage—most often followed by executions—show that espionage on behalf of England is widespread throughout the most diverse layers of the population. Naturally the Nazis justify many executions on the pretext of espionage, nevertheless it is clear that British agents get a great deal of help. The ChurchesIn Belgium and Holland the Catholic cardinals have refused collaboration and taken an attitude of opposition. In France the Catholic Church is somewhat divided. It seems that the opposition is sharpest where the Church has some base in the masses. That is the case in Belgium. That is also the case in Northern France and in Brittany and we see in these two regions instances of parish priests shot by the Germans. In Paris where the strata of population have long traditions of atheism, the church and especially its heads are “collaborationist.” In Norway the great majority of the Protestant Church has gone into opposition. This opposition manifests itself in pastoral letters, sermons, refusal of the sacraments to local fascists and, in Belgium for example, by the singing of the national anthem and the display of the national flag inside the churches. The general character of the hate for the Germans is shown in the attitude of children: Throughout all Europe one observes demonstrations of children against the oppression: in Czechoslovakia, in Norway, in Holland, in Belgium, in Luxemburg. They beat up the sons of fascists, they mock the German officers in the street, they refuse to participate in the collecting of bones or old rags, etc. Native Fascist GroupsIn all the invaded countries Hitler found, when he arrived, fascist parties whose program was subordination to Germany. The history of these groups since then is altogether one of stagnation and disintegration. The population surrounds them with hatred and contempt, perhaps even greater than the feeling toward the Germans. In fact, the fascists are treated as lepers: the people avoid any contact with them, boycott their stores if they are in business, circulate blacklists of their names and relatives and friends break with them. The papers of these fascist groups complain in the most ridiculous and puerile way about these persecutions. Many demonstrations against them by the population are reported through underground channels. Leaving for the Russian front, a detachment of Belgian fascists paraded in Brussels a few weeks ago. They marched between two lines of German soldiers, behind whom the population booed and insulted the pale and silent fascists. In Belgium also a group of Flemish fascists was recently attacked in a workers’ neighborhood; chairs, bottles, glassware were hurled at them and a good many of them had to be taken to the hospital. Such incidents are not infrequent not only in Belgium, but also in Holland and Norway. Generally speaking, the Nazis have little confidence in these groups, especially since they are frequently divided and have extremely violent internal fights. The Germans use them mainly for petty police tasks, for instance to stop cars on the main roads in search for smuggled foods. With the war against the USSR, the Nazis have made great efforts toward sending to the Russian front Norwegian, Danish, Dutch, Belgian and French contingents recruited through the native fascists. The success has not been very great; a few thousand men altogether, in spite of extremely high pay. Once arrived on the Russian front, difficulties between them and the German staff flared up. Generally, for the administrative tasks, the Germans prefer to use old functionaries who agree to fulfill their “technical” functions for the sake of preserving order. Thus they make use of secretaries of ministries, judges, policemen, mayors, etc., who formed a great part of the state apparatus of the “democracies.” Without the collaboration of these individuals, the Germans would find themselves in tremendous difficulties in the occupied countries, and here they find their principal help, rather than among the fascist groups. The Occupying TroopsThe main preoccupation of the German General Staff is to avoid too intimate contact between the German soldiers and the local populations. Naturally, officers are billeted in private houses. But simple soldiers live collectively in barracks, camps, etc. Persons who have been in contact with the German army report the lack of enthusiasm of the German soldiers, once the excitement over the victories of May-June 1940 had passed. Generally the soldiers manifest a great desire to return to civilian life, to see again their wives and their children. They show great fear of British bombings of their dear ones at home. Since the war in the USSR the occupying troops have greatly decreased in number and are completely changed in composition. The Germans now use older soldiers and even wounded ones. Acts of insubordination have been reported in the German army, but it is very difficult to verify the authenticity of such reports. The incidents are generally of the following type: a German soldier coming back from leave at home described to his comrades the conditions there. The officers proceeded to stop the discussion, the soldiers protested and expressed their weariness of the war. One or two were shot. Recently the news came, with a great deal of detail, of a rebellion in France where one hundred soldiers were shot, as well as four officers of the Paris garrison. But such reports must be taken very cautiously. Those in France or in Belgium who have seen German soldiers back from Russia report that they return completely terrorized by the savagery and bloodiness of the fight. They describe the front as hell. The Economic SituationWe will indicate here only the most apparent aspects of the situation. The Germans are guided by one rule: to draw the utmost from the occupied countries in order to prosecute the war. This factor determines the economic activity of the invaded countries and gives to it an extremely uneven character. The industries which are able to provide for the needs of the German war machine are working overtime. Those intended to satisfy the needs of the local population are in complete decay. This division corresponds more or less to the one between heavy industry and industry devoted to consumer needs. This fact is especially apparent in France and Belgium where the leaders of heavy industry are for collaboration. In France at least two ministers of Petain are representatives of big business: Pucheu, former manager of the big Japy metallurgical plants, and Lehideux, son-in-law of the big auto manufacturer, Renault. At the arrival of the Germans, the rate of exchange established between the mark and the various national currencies produced a kind of inflation: German soldiers felt rich with their marks and they bought everything they could send to Germany— stockings, perfumes, etc. For a few months a kind of prosperity rocked certain trades. But it ended soon. When their stocks were exhausted it was impossible to renew them, and the bonanza period ended. In spite of the general disorganization of the economy, unemployment, although existing, remains limited. The reasons are numerous. Germany still keeps many war prisoners, the strongest adults; there are still 1,400,000 French war prisoners in German camps. Numerous workers have gone to Germany to work: more than 2,000,000. Among them are 250,000 Belgian workers, or one-fifth of all the active workers of Belgium in ordinary times; 150,000 Dutch workers, etc. The recruiting of these workers takes every form, from mere violence to “free” contract. In Poland, the Germans resort to real man-hunts to get workers and send them to Germany, where they live in barracks. In western Europe the unemployed are threatened with the curtailment of their dole if they refuse to sign contracts for work in Germany. If the worker is really highly skilled he can get in Germany a standard of life almost equal to that of the German worker. But for the great mass, the standard is markedly lower and can go down to forced labor. One more reason for the apparently slight unemployment in the occupied countries is the fleeing of the workers to the countryside. An unemployed worker can simply not live in the city after a few months. He leaves then for a country village where he has some relatives or friends. Petain favors this decomposition of society and calls it a “return to the soil.” In the primitive conditions of present Europe, life in the country is relatively easier than in the cities. The peasant family can always conceal some food from the administrative control. He can find wood when coal is lacking. He can always sell some of his products on the black market. Of course this situation has its negative side as well. With the money he gets he is unable to buy in the city such small things as nails or cord. Requisitions are not infrequent; the Germans come and take his horse or his steer and they give him in exchange a wad of newly printed marks which he keeps because he cannot buy anything with it. In some cases the peasants resist requisitions and shooting starts. Several cases have been recorded in Belgium and Holland. Finally, the profits from the black market go mainly to the big farmers who can deal directly with the profiteers. The small farmer does not get much of it. The black market reigns all over Europe and is now a recognized institution. The German authorities of course know all the details of its functioning but tolerate it and even make abundant use of it. In most countries the legal food rations are quite insufficient and for the mass of the population do not amount to more than one-fourth or one-third of the food they need. So everybody has to resort to the illegal, or black, market. This business is highly centralized in the hands of big profiteers. A whole new caste of nouveaux riches is rising. Smuggling of butter, bootlegging of edible oil, counterfeiting of food tickets bring big money. Here we quote a letter from Paris in July 1941: “From the ‘wholesaler’ to the retail merchant, there is a wide range of clandestine vendors. Day after day the newspapers write about the fight against their activities against lawless skyrocketing of prices. But to no avail; collusion and favoritism go on. “’The reign of gold is over,’ according to the Nazis. But money floats in wide streams. Some people are having plenty of good times. Never before were there in Paris so many night clubs, bars, speakeasies, taverns and other places where money can be spent for amusement. Many liquidated places are re-opening and are decorated more luxuriously than ever. And new ones are constantly springing up all over the city. In these places the 50 franc maximum menu is not obligatory; rationing cards are unknown. Bands, gypsy or Russian, international singers and performers contribute to the excitement of the atmosphere which does not remind the Frenchmen of their national mourning, or the Nazis of their Spartan spirit, so much exalted by Hitler. Well after midnight, when the rest of Paris is asleep, the new Paris, made up of Germans and those few Frenchmen of both sexes who get along well with the Germans, comes to life and has a ‘good time.’ Leaving the night clubs, the revelers see the first queues being formed outside the stores, where the sale of potatoes will begin several hours later.” In most of the big cities such as Brussels, Antwerp and Oslo, the Germans have insisted upon the opening of new cabarets and night clubs. Everywhere prostitution has increased enormously. The small minority of the national population which has money enough can still find everywhere in Europe everything they want and have regal meals. But for the great mass of the population the situation is quite different. In France, which is not among the worst countries, one never ceases to be hungry. The queues for the rationed public start in the very early hours of the morning and last until eleven o’clock. Many women faint. Sometimes the stores close before the end because their stocks have been exhausted. The search for food is a constant strain, and takes a great part of everyone’s time. The prices on the black market are on the average four, five or six times higher than for rationed products. In France a goose sells for 1,200 francs. The weekly pay of a fairly well-paid worker is 300 francs, and the daily dole of unemployed workers is 12 francs. That means that a worker would need an entire month’s pay to buy a goose, and the unemployed worker would have to save his entire allotment for 100 days. Eggs are sold up to nine francs apiece. That means a worker could buy about five eggs with one day’s pay. Sugar sells at 50 francs and butter at 120 francs per kilo (2.2 pounds). A packet of 20 cigarettes, of such a quality that an American would never smoke them, can be bought from street vendors for 125 francs. And, we must not forget, France is still the most privileged part of all the occupied territory. There have been many reports of food riots, generally initiated by women, especially in the big cities of Belgium, such as Antwerp and Liege. Everywhere tuberculosis is making tremendous progress. Recently some Swiss medical authorities had the opportunity of examining French war prisoners. They reported that one-fourth of these men, the strongest section of the population, were tubercular. In southern France, that is, in a relatively privileged part, the rate of child mortality compared with pre-war times has tripled. The number of premature births has doubled. More than half the mothers are unable to give natural milk to their babies. Forty per cent of the children are, on the average, unable to attend school because of illness, debility or want of clothes. Recent TrendsSufficient news to give a general idea always takes a certain time to arrive in New York. But all indications from Europe in recent weeks—that is, since about December 15th—show an aggravation of the situation. The reasons are clear; the continuation of the war, the Russian successes and also winter, always harder than the summer for the masses. The paper of the Norwegian fascists wrote in the middle of January that a genuine “civil war” was reigning in Norway. Almost everywhere the executions for sabotage show a definite increase. During January, food riots were reported in several big cities of France. According to rumors, the Germans are looking for new devices of administration in the occupied countries. We can be sure that the new will be no more successful than the old in creating the “New Order.”	January 28th, 1942. [1]Among the publications utilized are: La France Libre, France Speaks, News from Belgium, Belgium, News of Norway, Vry Netherland, Poland Fights, Free World, The Inter-Allied Review, etc., etc. We give them here a general acknowledgment. Naturally I have taken nothing at face value from these propaganda organs. What I have taken I have checked with other information from other sources.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

 Africa: A Lesson in Democracy    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris North Africa: A Lesson in Democracy  “North Africa: A lesson in Democracy” Fourth International, December 1942, pp.359-362, under the name “Marc Loris”, (3,566 words).Basing themselves on an examination of the economic system and the social structure of the great modern nations, Marxists describe the present war as an imperialist war. Capitalist civilization has passed its apogee and the two great world wars represent imperialism’s desperate attempts to emerge from a situation which has no way out. The task of those who want to work for a higher development of humanity is not to collaborate in this hopeless and maniacal enterprise, but to open a way out by laying the foundations for a new social order. This fundamental truth is obscured for a time by superficial considerations such as the “defense of the nation,” the “struggle for democracy,” the “struggle against the plutocracies,” etc. Among the masses, these are rather ill-defined feelings, but the government propagandas take them, pervert them and use them to cover up the real aims of the war. However, the socialist explanation does not remain buried in the heads of a few revolutionists. In spite of all the artifices of propaganda, each important development of the war, whether on the military plane or on that of internal and external politics, confirms the socialist analysis. The most recent of these developments is the invasion of North Africa. It is important because it is the first large-scale offensive action undertaken by the most powerful of the belligerents. Precisely because of this importance, the event cannot fail to help us see the real character of this war. In breaking the news to the American public on November 7, Roosevelt announced that American forces had landed in Africa “in order to forestall an invasion of Africa by Germany and Italy.” Neither Roosevelt nor any other source has given any details about observed preparations of such an Axis invasion. Apparently even the conservative New York Times felt obliged to give the story the title “U. S. Meets ‘Threat’,” putting the word “threat” in quotation marks. Roosevelt had to repeat the formula of Hitler, who likewise invaded Norway “in order to forestall an invasion by England.” This is an old stratagem of warfare. But what price, then, all those resounding denunciations of Nazi “treachery"? Let us examine a little more closely the preparation of military operations in North Africa. The conciliatory attitude of the American government toward the Vichy clique was for a long time the object of criticism by liberals who were astonished by the “riddle of the State Department”. The day after the invasion of North Africa, Secretary Hull hurried to give the key to the mystery. Hull indicated the various objectives of the American policy toward Vichy, especially the purpose of maintaining diplomatic relations. The first purpose was: “Opportunity for the Government of the United States to get from week to week highly important information virtually from the inside of Germany-controlled territory and from North Africa regarding Axis subversive activities, and other important phases of the international situation.” And the last purpose was: “And last, but most important, to pave the way and prepare the background in the most effective manner possible for the planning and sending of the military expedition into the Western Mediterranean area, and to assist the movements supporting present British operations farther East.” Thus Secretary Hull gleefully boasted that the American diplomatic representatives were in Vichy territory to conduct fifth-column work. It was also revealed in London that groups of spies in Morocco had for a long time been “in touch with the British at Gibraltar through United States officials in Africa.[1] Of course, we would not dream of being indignant about all this. The means which Washington uses are imposed by the serious struggle which it wages against Berlin: the aim of this struggle is nothing less than the domination of world. But this is precisely why these means are exactly the same as those which Hitler uses. This very simple and very clear idea forces us to say: all “moral” considerations with which either of the two camps seeks to cover up its objectives are nothing but lies. The similarity of methods flows inevitably from the similarity of imperialist aims. Immediately after the invasion of North Africa a State Department spokesman declared:“United States food shipments from time to time to the natives of French North Africa have given us an opportunity to put into that area, in addition to consuls and officials already there, twenty Americans expert in the French language and skilled in promoting goodwill toward the United States.” For more than three years the American press and radio have thrown out pages and kilowatts of indignation about the methods of Nazi infiltration. This moral indignation must now look for other targets. If the Germans knew how to utilize “tourism,” the Americans were no less able in utilizing “philanthropy.” A little more cynicism on the one side, a little more hypocrisy on the other: this is the only difference between the “fascist methods” and the “democratic methods.” A few days before the American debarkment in Africa, the New York Times still recalled the “infamous” character of the Kurusu mission, which covered up Japan’s plans for the attack in the Pacific. Henceforth the Times and its confreres will have to be more reserved in their moral indignation, lest they suggest an impertinent comparison with the recent feats of the American diplomatic service in North Africa. Democratic Fascists or Fascist Democrats?When Secretary Hull finally revealed the secret of American policy toward Vichy, he emphasized that it was now evident that Washington had no inclination toward the Vichy clique and he took a rather disdainful attitude toward less intelligent Americans who had not been able to understand this from the beginning. The journalists present noted that: “it was apparent that the Secretary took a keen pleasure in replying to the many critics of Administration policy in this field over the last two years.” It was also disclosed by the State Department that: “The relations with Vichy were not maintained because of any fondness for the Vichy leaders, and the United States throughout has made clear its contempt for the Frenchmen who were playing the German game.” However, Mr. Hull’s “keen pleasure” in replying to the critics of the Administration had to be of short duration, for while Hull was speaking in Washington those who represented the United States in Algiers were showing anything but “contempt” for some of the Frenchmen who played the German game, namely Admiral Darlan and his clique. The “Vichy scandal” was succeeded by the “Darlan scandal, “ of incomparably greater scope. Darlan, as the reader will recall, was the head of the French navy appointed by Daladier. At the time of the military debacle in June 1940, this “democrat” thought only of a deal with Hitler, rallied to Petain, subsequently became “Chief of Government” in Vichy and Petain’s “heir. “ In order to find more easily a common language with Hitler, he subjected France to a reign of terror. Now, this ex-democrat turned fascist has become an ex-fascist democrat and he works, we were assured November 18 by Major Akers, one of the American military chiefs of North Africa, to “free” France. Although obliged to omit many instructive sidelights, we will try to follow this metamorphosis of Darlan from jailer into liberator. Truly, the story is fantastic for those who maintain illusions about bourgeois democracy. But facts are facts. During the first few days, information was confused and scarce. Monday, November 9, the day following the debarkment, while the fight was going on at Oran and in Morocco, it was reported that an armistice had been signed in Algiers and “approved” by Darlan, who was in Algiers when the American troops arrived. On Tuesday, November 10, it was reported by American sources that “Admiral Darlan, chief of Vichy’s armed forces, is now in Allied hands at Algiers, being entertained by one of our American generals in a style befitting his station.” In actual fact, on that very day the Berlin radio had already announced that “Darlan has given his allegiance to, the United Nations cause.” The official announcement by the American command in Africa did not come until four days later. On November 11, the German-controlled Vichy radio made known the text of an appeal by “prisoner” Darlan, saying: “I assume authority over North Africa in the name of the Marshal [Petain]. . . . Political and administrative organizations remain in force.” The American side did not confirm the news, which subsequently proved to be authentic. On Friday, November 13, Darlan broadcast a new proclamation announcing that he was in command in North Africa, and ending: “All governors and residents must stay at their posts and continue their administration in conformity with existing laws as in the past ..... Long live the Marshal!” (Our italics.) This news again came from Vichy, without any American comment. In fact, questioned about Darlan on November 10, General Eisenhower, American commander in North Africa, “implied that political developments had no place at present in important military developments.” Berlin and Vichy, as we saw, were very well informed of each of Darlan’s moves and the secrecy kept by the American command worked only against providing information to the American people. We admit that the news about Darlan was rather hard to break! On November 14 finally came the official announcement by the American command that Darlan and Eisenhower “would act in cooperation for the defense of North Africa.” It is not for nothing that the New York Times, which decidedly knows how to use quotation marks, called Eisenhower “Commander in Chief of the so-called ‘army of liberation’.” Meanwhile, Darlan was assuming more and more the functions of government. He had changed his master but not his methods: one of his aides declared that “he was ready to halt all demonstrations.” On November 16 Darlan, it was reported, “instituted a legislative body to assist him.” Hurrah for democracy! It was also reported that Gaston Bergery, Ambassador of the Vichy government to Turkey, was rallying to Darlan, as were Flandin and Pucheu. Flandin is a reactionary politician who had been for a short time Petain’s Foreign Minister. Pucheu, as Darlan’s Minister of Interior, had arrested and imprisoned thousands of Frenchmen opposed to Nazism and had helped the Germans in preparing lists of those to face Nazi firing squads. At this moment the scandal rose to proportions truly dangerous for the Anglo-American camp. The democratic myth, so necessary to the imperialists, was seriously discredited. Roosevelt had to intervene and on November 17 made a statement that changed nothing but consoled those who wished to be consoled. The gist of the statement was that the United States was making a “temporary arrangement” with Darlan. But the statement cautiously left doubt as to what “temporary” meant: whether only for the short time of actual fighting in North Africa or until the final conclusion of the world peace. In any case, the Darlan regime remains the lot of North Africa for an indefinite period. Liberals everywhere, frightened by the abyss opened by the Darlan scandal, are snatching at Roosevelt’s declaration, thinking of only one thing: closing their eyes, for reality brings too many disagreeable surprises. The final commentary on Roosevelt’s statement came in a dispatch from North Africa on November 18, announcing that “the local administration will, wherever possible, be entrusted to the same persons who handled it before the campaign.” Since the head of the central African administration is also the same as before, namely Darlan, everyone can see the great change brought about by the passage from the fascist to the democratic camp! We must note again how the American military chiefs explain their deal with Darlan. On November 15, General Clark, Eisenhower’s second in command, expressed his “pleasure” in dealing with Darlan and “disclaimed any purpose to interfere in French affairs.” Eisenhower himself had previously declared, in order to explain his arrangement with Darlan, that “political developments had no place at present.” Keeping Darlan in office is explained as “abstention from politics,” and especially from interference in French affairs! What a refinement of hypocrisy! A Bourgeoisie Without a PerspectiveThe invasion of North Africa and the American policy led to a new political division of the French bourgeoisie. It had already been split into two factions, the collaborationists—themselves divided between Paris and Vichy—and the Gaullists. A third has now appeared, the Darlanists. The question of the perspectives of the French bourgeoisie has thus been raised once more. To attempt to analyze this question we must go back a few steps. It is impossible to understand anything of the history of France during these last years without starting from the fundamental fact that in June 1936 the country was on the threshold of proletarian revolution. The revolutionary offensive was betrayed by the treacherous leaders of the workers (Jouhaux, Blum, Thorez) thanks to that instrument of perfidy, the Popular Front. But if the French bourgeoisie came out of that ordeal momentarily saved, it remained disabled, without perspective for the future, like a ship which has escaped the tempest but has lost its rudder. Thus the French bourgeoisie entered a war in which it had nothing to gain and much to lose. The military debacle only increased its confusion. Terrorized by Hitler’s quick victory, it had to abandon its traditional attitude of opposition to Germany. The Vichy government pledged itself to “collaboration. “ On the whole, the bourgeoisie followed it, but without enthusiasm. On the one side, a minority wanted more active collaboration with Germany. On the other, a less noisy minority, soon growing large, had its eye on England and America. The majority thought only of existing from day to day, compromising itself as little as possible and saving whatever could be saved. Economically the majority of the bourgeoisie went to work for Germany; but the economic poverty and the uncertainty of a final military victory of Germany prevented the Petainists from opening a long perspective in this direction, of creating a consistent policy capable of uniting the entire class and opening up a future for it. In such a situation of crisis and disintegration, with all its traditional values destroyed, when the class has no general unifying perspective but is adrift, momentary considerations come to the fore. Each individual interprets “national interest” in his own way and each change in the military situation brings with it somersaults from one camp to the other—"betrayals.” After the disappearance of the imperial dynasty of China in 1911, the Chinese generals became celebrated throughout the whole world for the ease with which they changed camps. Henceforth we will take the French generals, or rather the admirals, to illustrate this phenomenon. Darlan’s “crisis of conscience” appears to have lasted less than twelve hours. Sunday, November 8, in the morning, he sent French soldiers and sailors to be killed by the Americans, and in the evening he had made an “arrangement” with the Americans as formerly he had “collaborated” with the Germans. Pro-German and pro-fascist at breakfast, he went to bed in the evening pro-American and democrat. Three or four factions are now disputing the right to speak in the name of the “national interest.” But this is a dangerous game, for it clearly reveals to the French masses, to the deepest layers, the disintegration of the political consciousness of the French bourgeoisie, its inability to play a leading role, and thus prepares the consciousness of the masses for a total overthrow of capitalist society. According to the standards of the bourgeois “democrats,” the regime in North Africa should have been a Gaullist government. Some time ago an amateur politician wrote of “The Free French clique of monarchist de Gaulle, whose odor is so foul that Washington fears to give it full recognition lest sympathy of the French people be further alienated from the Allied cause."[2] Everybody can now witness Washington’s care for decency and its respect for the feelings of the French people! In fact, at the present stage of the political consciousness of the French masses, a de Gaulle regime would answer the needs of bourgeois democracy much more than a Darlan regime. But the installation of a de Gaulle government could take place in North Africa only by a political struggle against the Vichy heads, coupled with military action. This might have been an invitation to insubordination of the French troops against their pro-fascist superiors. Even if this revolt had taken place in the name of patriotism and democracy, it would have created a dangerous precedent. Moreover, the militant patriotism of the de Gaulle movement would risk entering into conflict at one time or another with American interests while the cynical servility of Darlan had already proved its docility in the experience with the Nazis. The general conclusion is that democracy, even bourgeois, is the last thing that counts in imperialist “arrangements.” Last but not least, we must not forget that all this happened, not in France but in North Africa, a colonial country where the French are a small minority among an Arab population of fifteen millions savagely exploited by French imperialism. The farthest thought from Roosevelt’s mind is the carrying of the “four freedoms” to the peoples of North Africa. A dispatch from Oran on November 15 tells us that the “French troops co-operating with the Americans raided a village near Oran today to take arms from the Arabs, who have been picking them up in the confusion around the recent battlefields. “ We can easily understand that the American command had nothing more urgent than to come to an understanding with the great imperialist pro-consuls it found there in office: Nogues, Esteva, Chatel. The deal with Darlan only crowned that operation. Moreover, it is possible that after Darlan will have given all he can give, the Americans will drop him. The liberals will write that at last democracy has triumphed. We need hardly add that even if Darlan goes, the whole French imperialist administration will remain in office. Everything Falls into PlaceThe American collaboration with Darlan must have tremendous political repercussions, not only in France but throughout all Europe. For years millions of men have known intolerable suffering under the Nazi iron heel. A great number of them imagined that their liberation will come through the Anglo-American troops. The first act of the commander of these troops after the first debarkment was to collaborate with a lackey of the Nazi executioners, who finds a few hours sufficient for passing from one camp to the other. The people who are now still suffering and struggling under their own Darlans will learn quickly and well—we can be sure of that—the political lesson that must be drawn from this ignoble event. A reformist trade unionist who has just escaped from France and arrived in London reported on November 19 that in a few days “President Roosevelt has lost about 75 per cent of his prestige with the French masses” as a result of his deal with Darlan, and that “the French people evinced consternation and indignation.” We can easily believe him. Anglo-American imperialism is, in a sense, caught in its own trap. To cover up its war aims it presents itself as a champion of freedom against the Nazis. The Hitlerian crimes have given this claim a semblance of reality in the eyes of the masses. But sooner or later, since the war is not conducted for freedom but for domination, the democratic myth must crack and the masses will see the imperialist reality. The “liberator” comes to offer to the peoples their jailer of yesterday. The real character of the war will thus be revealed little by little to the broad masses. Hopes change into consternation and indignation. The promises of either camp are shown to be lies. Everything will fall into place. As for us, we leave to others the task of being astonished and scandalized. Our only weapon against our powerfully armed adversaries is the truth. Our strength is that we base ourselves upon social reality. And so we can only congratulate ourselves when things appear in their true light. The indignation against the “democracies” will inevitably turn against the movements which have tied their political fate to Anglo-American imperialism. These include all the pro-Ally. democratic groups, including the Stalinists. In each country of Europe, American collaboration with Darlan, whether it is of long or short duration, is a blow to all these tendencies and it greatly facilitates the work of the consistent revolutionists who have never taught the masses to look to one imperialist camp or the other for their salvation. The warnings of the revolutionists are confirmed. Their authority cannot fail to grow among the masses. In spite of all the initial incidents, the two camps take more and more symmetrical positions on the historical scene. Darlan, utilized in turn by Hitler and by Roosevelt, symbolizes this symmetry. Hitler’s “new order” has already revealed its emptiness. Anglo-American “democracy” now begins to reveal its own falsity. On both sides of the scene the masks are falling off. This means we are approaching the final act, where a new figure enters the scene: the revolutionary proletariat. [1] All quotations unless otherwise indicated are from dispatches in the New York Times. [2] Henry Judd, The New International, August 1942.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

van Heijenoort-On Some Critics of Trotsky



Jean van Heijenoort
On Some Critics of Trotsky




Published: Fourth International, August 1942



Liberals have always distinguished themselves by lack of understanding of revolution. For them it is merely an "excess," an "accident" which interrupts the "normal" course of history. They have no key with which to penetrate the determinism of this accident. This is not surprising. The consciousness of the classes and of their spokesmen depends on their position in society: only those who stand firmly on the ground of revolution can grasp all the aspects of the social forces.
Liberal thought is no better equipped to understand the personalities of the great proletarian revolutionists. Its inability to enter into the dynamics of events leads it to a false conception of men. Everything that the liberals have written on Lenin is barren, revealing the limitations of their thinking rather than Lenin’s genius. An even more difficult object of study for them is Trotsky.
One of those who has attempted to explain Trotsky is Max Eastman. Better equipped than other liberals by his contact with the revolutionary milieu and his personal acquaintance with Trotsky, Eastman reveals only the more clearly the liberal’s organic inability to comprehend the personality and historic role of a great Marxist.
Trotsky ended the introduction to his autobiography with these words: "To understand the causal sequence of events and to find somewhere in the sequence one’s own place--that is the first duty of a revolutionary." This duty Trotsky fulfilled to the utmost. For him (or for Lenin) the task of the biographer, just as that of its hero, is to "understand the sequence of events." Only then can the man’s real place in history be found and his true role established.
Historical materialism does not deny the role of the individual in history nor the influence of the different aspects of his character. On the contrary, it reveals for the first time the mechanism of this process by recognizing the individual as the representative of a class or a layer of a class. It thus provides a rational explanation of his historical role and at the same time establishes the limits of his activity. All the idealistic jargon about "heroes" loses its mystical and mystifying character. The trajectory described by each historical personality is the result of the interaction of the different social groups, each of which demands different qualifications from its representatives. Of these delicate relationships between a social group and its leaders, liberal thought grasps nothing; history becomes a mere backdrop for the hero, the liberal observer delves more and more deeply into the individual in order to discover his "secret" and that of the events.
For years the liberals insistently explained Stalinism as the product of some original sin of Bolshevism, Lenin’s quasi-diabolic invention. As for the defeat of the Left Opposition, from where could it spring if not from some "defect or weakness," as Eastman puts it, in Trotsky’s character? He remained isolated, hence "he could not handle men." He was beaten, hence "poorer politician never lived."
Hegel once observed that common sense, when unable to give an explanation, often takes refuge in the type of metaphysics which "explains" that opium causes sleep because of its "dormitive quality." Having separated the party or the individual from the historical development of the class struggle, the doctors of liberalism then observe them through the metaphysical spectacles of common sense. Thus to give rise to Stalinism, Bolshevism must contain a "dictatorial quality" and the fall of Trotsky can be explained only--obviously--by his lack of "political quality." How simple!
A Bullet or Cup of Tea?


We are waiting to be told what this "political quality" is. Max Eastman merely points out to us two possible manifestations of this quality. The first would have been for Trotsky to "have gone into the factories with a few forthright speeches and raised every fighting revolutionist in Moscow and Leningrad against the Stalinist clique." In short, Trotsky should have made an insurrection. The second would have been to invite Kamenev, "who was his brother-in-law," to come take a cup of tea and "talk it over man to man." We leave it to Max Eastman’s common sense to reconcile the armed insurrection against the Stalin-Zinoviev-Kamenev troika and the cup of tea with the same Kamenev.
An insurrection does not fall from the sky, even when there is someone to lead it. What are the indications that, in 1923 or later, the Soviet working masses were ready to revolt against the rising bureaucracy? An appeal to the masses against the party could have led only to an immense Kronstadt and prepared the entrance of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. As for arousing the party against the bureaucratic tops, precisely this was the task undertaken by the opposition, but it had to begin with the work of educating and of gathering together cadres for this task. How can one speak of an armed insurrection when the opposition was in the minority even in the ranks of the party? How call on a party member to take gun in hand and fight in the street when in his party cell, under pressure of his superiors in the factory or office, through fatigue, through lack of confidence in the forces of the revolution, he voted for the apparatus?
But after all, didn’t Trotsky have unequalled popularity in the army? This is true and there is little doubt that in 1923 it would have been very easy, with the help of the military apparatus, to disperse the troika--a matter of only a few hours and very little blood, if any. Here common sense seems to triumph. With such a simple operation all the degradation of Stalinism would have been avoided--and it was not even tried! But history makes a fool of common sense.
One cannot use the army like a sword which one puts back in its sheath once the operation is done. Any army which enters the political arena and assures the victory of one of the fighting factions proceeds to pay itself well. The prices would have been, for the officers corps, more security and more privileges. Instead of spreading chiefly through the party apparatus, then, the Thermidorian reaction would have spread through the military apparatus. Undoubtedly the regime would have had a different coloration than that of Stalin, but the fundamental political reality would have been the same and the process of degeneration probably more rapid. Citing the revolutionary integrity of Trotsky changes none of this. He would have found himself, the day after the Bonapartist coup d’etat, faced with the demands of an officers corps become conscious of its power in the country. He would then have had to capitulate to the officers, or, in resisting them, fall victim to one of their plots.
Indeed, the army is always a stronghold of bureaucratism. The Red Army was no exception. The military apparatus was not separated from the state apparatus by an air-tight partition, but was part of it, following the same process of degeneration. In 1921 the war was over, and the heroic epoch of the revolution was succeeded by the hum-drum of daily existence. The difference between the two periods was even greater for the army than for the rest of the population, and could not fail to be reflected in its state of mind. Moreover, the army had been reduced from 5,300,000 men to 600,000 thus greatly increasing the specific weight of the remaining cadres. We must not forget that a not negligible fraction of these remaining cadres came from the Czarist army.
The demobilized part of the army was also a strong factor in the bureaucratization of the country. Many of the commanders, returning to their villages and provincial towns, found themselves placed, by their prestige and their experience, at the head of the local administration. There they often employed methods differing very little from the military command to which they were accustomed, and they integrated themselves very easily into the Stalinist apparatus. In face of these social realities the prestige of their former leader carried little weight.
Politics, Science of Perspectives


In July 1933 Trotsky was living near Royan; nearby lived a Communist worker, an old influential party member, dissatisfied with the Stalinist line. Lev Davidovitch desired to meet him. The enterprise was risky. His sojourn in France might have been compromised, but the desire to speak with a worker won out. So, one evening, with all possible precautions, this worker was brought into the workroom of Lev Davidovitch. The conversation soon turned to the defeat of the Russian Opposition. "How did you lose the power, comrade Trotsky?"--"Ah, you know, one does not lose power like one loses his pocket book." Then came an explanation which lasted long into the night.
Power is not a trophy presented to the most clever, but it is above all, through individuals, a relationship between the classes and their social layers. The leader, as a representative of a social group, defends the interests of that group more or less well. But if the position of the group changes, he loses his footing, is suspended in the air, powerless. Thus, on the 9th Thermidor, Robespierre, head of the government, appears before the Convention. The session is so tumultuous that he cannot speak and it is ended by a decree of arrest against him. The following day he is guillotined. Clearly, the forces which supported him were exhausted. Any explanation that would reduce the dynamics of the revolution to a comparison of the personal qualities of Robespierre and Barras would not get very far.
Never weary of accusing Trotsky of being a poor politician, the philistines rarely take the trouble to expound their own conception of politics. But their accusations show clearly that their lack of understanding of the relationship of the individual to the party, of the parties to the classes, reduces their conception to the most degraded form of politics, the an of personal combinations. Of course, this art is far from being unnecessary. But the first condition for its use is to know its limits. One can deceive men; one cannot deceive history. Stalin thought he could. In 1923 he was merely looking for a "surer" way for the revolution, thought he was avoiding danger by confining the revolution within the frontiers of the USSR and by building socialism in one country. This "ruse" led him to the terrible catastrophe of today. The "impractical" theory of the permanent revolution was, on the other hand, full of profound realism. Likewise, one could not, in 1923, skip over the wave of Thermidorian reaction by such a "ruse" as an insurrection, a military coup d’etat or a cup of tea with "brother-in-law" Kamenev.
In July 1935 Lev Davidovitch was speaking of the France he was leaving: "There is truth in what the French say: politics is the science of proportion. Oh, for them it is the science of small proportions." Thus he described in a single word a striking characteristic of the French bourgeoisie. Then he continued: "To be exact one must say that politics is the science of perspectives." If one accepts this definition of politics-and this is the only valid one for Marxists--Trotsky was a great, a very great politician.
Revolution and Reaction


The critics of Trotskyism like to repeat: when it is a question of explaining the defeat of the Left Opposition, you underline the importance of the objective factors, but when it is a matter of accusing Nin of having collaborated in the defeat of the Spanish revolution, you bring to the fore the subjective factor and you place the responsibility on the individual. Precisely! In the Spanish revolution the movement of the masses created the objective conditions of victory. Subjective initiative was lacking and our criticism of Nin rests on his definite acts, such as his entry into the Catalan government, which acted directly against the movement of the masses. Nin and his party did not provide an outlet for the revolutionary energy of the Spanish proletariat. One proof, among others, is the leaderless May 1937 insurrection of the Catalan workers in Barcelona. Was there some analogous insurrection in the USSR during the struggle of the Left Opposition or even some bold movement of the workers? A revolutionary leadership must not let an occasion pass, but it cannot create this occasion as it likes when objective conditions are not ripe.
Marxism gives great importance to the initiative and audacity of an individual or a small group in the carrying out of the insurrection, but at the same time it establishes precise rules for determining the moment of that insurrection, which does not just happen at any time but crowns the revolutionary rise of the masses. History demands so much from a revolutionary leadership precisely because the lost occasion cannot be recreated at will. The impossibility of acting when objective conditions are lacking and the obligation of resolutely intervening when they materialize--these are two sides of the same coin.
The defeat of the Left Opposition was too complete to allow us to attribute it to some tactical error of its leader. Naturally, this does not mean that events necessarily had to happen as they did. Numerous variants were possible, but the general trend leaves little doubt. Trotsky’s personal qualities have their importance in determining his place: it is not by chance that he led the opposition and that Stalin was the agent of the reaction.
In 1926, when she still felt fairly close to Lenin’s last ideas, Krupskaia declared: "If Ilyitch were alive, he would be in prison today." By these words she wished above all to denounce the lie of Stalin’s so-called "Leninism" and to show the reality of the struggle, that of the bureaucratic reaction against the revolutionary wing. However, Krupskaia’s words also seem to contain, in their own way, a reproach directed to the Left Opposition: if Lenin were alive, he would have led the struggle against the bureaucratization of the Soviet state with such vigor that he would already have been in prison, while the opposition was still in the party. Surely we have the right to discern this criticism in Krupskaia’s words, but in this case we must not forget the conclusion: Lenin himself could not have overcome the bureaucracy, "he would be in prison today."
To place the problem on the level of personal qualities alone leads, willy nilly, to a great exaggeration of the stature of Trotsky’s adversaries. Thus, it is characteristic of liberal thought to confer some demoniacal power on Stalin when in reality Stalin’s motivations were very simple and very narrow: the fear of revolutionary risk, the absence of perspectives, envy of a more brilliant rival, mediocrity and provincial grossness. But it was precisely these qualities that the apparatus required of its leader.
Does this mean that the struggle of the Left Opposition was futile~ This mechanical and abstract way of posing the question betrays a fatalism foreign to Marxism. History does not give its verdict like an oracle. The relationship of forces can be determined only by the struggle itself. No one can measure in advance the depth and the duration of the reaction. A proletarian victory outside the USSR could have reopened the question. Above all there was the duty of assuring the revolutionary future. Where would we be without the struggle of the Left Opposition?
"The Tribe of Philistines"


While Max Eastman’s lack of comprehension holds a good deal of naivete, amusingly simple, that of J. R. Johnsons is mixed with a large dose of hypocrisy. His failure to understand "the causal sequence of events" leads him directly to conscious falsification, which is not amusing. Johnson broke from the Fourth International after a bitter factional struggle in which Trotsky actively participated--not on Johnson’s side, as everyone knows--and Johnson tries to take revenge.
In Eastmanian terms he depicts Trotsky as a "very defective politician," who "in the hands of Kamenev and Stalin was a child." His entire criticism, superficial and impressionistic, without serious discussion of facts and texts, is sterile from a historical and political point of view. But Johnson quickly arrives at the raison d’etre of his article. If he tries so hard to prove that Trotsky was a "child in Stalin’s hands," it is to show that he was also a child in Cannon’s hands at the time the Burnham-Shachtman group, to which Johnson belonged, left the Fourth International:

 "Despite his unwillingness he (Trotsky) was cunningly maneuvered into a position in which his authority and energy were unscrupulously used for an aim he did not have in mind. When he recognized what was happening, it was too late."

What baseness in this last sentence? What is Johnson hinting at in this hypocritical innuendo? He is careful not to be too precise. Yes indeed, Trotsky "recognized what was happening" and called it by its name: "a petty-bourgeois opposition opening a struggle against Marxism with ideological charlatanism." All this is well known. As for the split, Trotsky wrote:

 "The discussion in the Socialist Workers Party of the United States was thorough and democratic. The preparations for the convention were carried out with absolute loyalty. The minority participated in the convention, recognizing thereby its legality and authoritativeness. The majority offered the minority all the necessary guarantees permitting it to conduct a struggle for its own views after the convention. The minority demanded a license to appeal to the masses over the head of the party. The majority naturally rejected this monstrous pretension."

And again:

 "We have the fact that the minority spilt away from us, in spite of all the measures taken by the majority not to split. This signifies that their inner social feeling was such that it is impossible for them to go together with us. It is a petty-bourgeois tendency, not a proletarian."

 No, Mr. Johnson, it is not so easy to make Trotsky out as a political simpleton whom Cannon leads around by the nose.
To support his fable of Trotsky, the "very defective politician," incapable of judging men, Johnson has one last argument: his assassination. Here is what he writes:

 "Not the least significant was the tragic circumstances of his death. He had been warned against his murderer, but this GPU agent earned his favor by an exaggerated devotion to Trotsky’s political position. For six months he discussed politics with the greatest living master of politics and Trotsky never detected a false note, apparently set no trap for him. We can be certain that whoever else might have been deceived by an imposter, Mr. Joseph Stalin would not have been. In the end the idea expressed was more important and interesting to Trotsky than the person expressing it. It was his strength, the cause of some of his greatest triumphs. but It was his weakness, the cause of some of his greatest failures."

 Natalia Trotsky has already had occasion to indicate the direct and factual lies in these few lines: there was no warning, no favor earned by an exaggerated devotion, no six months of political discussion.* None of that existed. But we must ask ourselves why Johnson had to use such means.
Let us glance back and we will find a historical precedent which will enlighten us. In his old age Kautsky wrote of Marx and Engels: "Neither of them were great judges of men." Just like Johnson, Kautsky had a very precise object in making such a judgment. It was both self-defense and revenge. After Kautsky’s first visit with Marx, the latter wrote to his daughter Jenny:

 "He is a mediocrity with a small-minded outlook, superwise (only 26), very conceited, Industrious in a certain sort of way, he busies himself a lot with statistics but does not read anything very clever out of them, belongs by nature to the tribe of the philistines, but is otherwise a decent fellow In his own way."

 These lines were written in 1881 and rereading them now, with Kautsky’s whole life before our eyes, we can only marvel at the power of insight which had penetrated so deeply into the young man of 26 years. We can easily understand why Kautsky could not let himself acknowledge Marx as a "great judge of men."
To justify this appraisal of Marx, Kautsky wrote:

 "In 1852 Marx gave his fullest confidence to the Hungarian Journalist Bangya, even turning over to him a manuscript in which various ’great men of the emigration’ were portrayed. And then it turned out that this Herr Bangya was a spy In the service of the Prussian government into whose hands he delivered Marx’s manuscript."

 To try to save themselves personally, Kautsky and Johnson must build up a Marx and a Trotsky incapable of judging men. But, as there is no material for such a construction, both must have recourse to a completely artificial case, that of a spy-provocateur, a case which has no bearing on the understanding of men by men, but rather on the art of divination. What a striking parallel!
 
Trotsky’s Methods


It is on such foundations of sand that Johnson tries to build a judgment of Trotsky and to establish "his place in history." After having presented Trotsky as "cunningly maneuvered" and "unscrupulously used" by Cannon, having described him as unable to "detect a false note" in his murderer, Johnson does not hesitate to conclude:

 "To the end he remained what he was, a man incapable of leaving his main work and concentrating his powerful intellect on the tricks and dodges which are Inseparable from politics. Unscrupulous men not fit to clean his pen could gain his confidence and get the better of him."
While Johnson believes he has discovered a deep characteristic of Trotsky, of important political consequence, he in reality just repeats an old and despicable calumny. Since the appearance of the Left Opposition on the international arena, Trotsky has had to break with a number of groups and individuals after attempts at collaboration. Not surprising: the Fourth International was born in a period of general retreat of the labor movement. Independently of each other, most of those from whom Trotsky had to separate repeated the same accusations: Trotsky’s ideas are excellent, but he understands nothing of organization, he does not know how to judge men, he allows himself to be maneuvered; immersed in his theoretical work, he lets himself be misled by the false information and the intrigues of those who follow him, etc. ... Not once, but dozens and dozens of times these same recriminations came from the different countries of Europe. Souvarine, whom Johnson knows well, is especially brilliant in this kind of rhetoric. For a long time Leon Sedoff was the target of these accusations. Rudolph Klement also suffered from them--in fact, all those who were close to Trotsky. For many deserters it was the only explanation of their break with the Fourth International. The thinness of this explanation betrays their lack of understanding of political reality as well as their resentment: it is not possible that Trotsky is really against me!
Whoever is even slightly familiar with Trotsky’s methods of work can only shrug his shoulders at such accusations. Trotsky applied the same scientific conscientiousness in all that he did, whether it was writing the history of the revolution or intervening in an impassioned faction fight within a group of ten persons. In his office he studied the letters received like a scientist in his laboratory observing his test-tubes. He knew how to collate evidence and to hold back until he had been able to form a clear picture of the situation. But once he had formed an opinion, he entered the fight with firmness and decision. Personal relations counted for little then and became entirely subordinated to political judgment. Numerous adversaries were disconcerted by this attitude. Incapable of penetrating to the bottom of political reality and its requirements, they tended invariably to slip over to another plane; they appealed to personal relations in order to reestablish an understanding which had become impossible. Or, as Trotsky expressed it in referring to one of them, they were like a child who shakes the watch whose spring he has broken in order to make it go again. Then in spite, they placed the responsibility for the break on the maneuvers and false information of which Trotsky had been the victim.
Johnson tries to raise this gossip to a theoretical and historical level, and present a Trotsky clever in the world of ideas but incapable of reading men. The facts decisively contradict such a fabrication. Among the great Marxists, Trotsky is incontestably the one who was the most interested in following the course of men through events. The correspondence of Marx and Engels does not lack penetrating estimates of the men of their epoch, in spite of what Kautsky might have thought. But Trotsky was able to draw much more rounded portraits. Before 1917 there were already numerous silhouettes among his writings: Victor Adler and Bebel, Ebert and David, Jaures and Vaillant, Plekhanov and Martov, Ledebour and Rakovsky--practically all the figures of the international movement. But it is in the writings of his third exile that Trotsky becomes master of the art of integrating the individual into the "causal sequence of events." His History of the Russian Revolution contains portraits of practically all the actors in the drama, from Nicholas to Kerensky, from Miliukov to Martov. With no artificiality! The men are in their places, with their words, their gestures, their intonations. The complex mechanism whereby each historical task chooses its men is revealed to us. Trotsky’s other writings of the same period--his criticism of the program of the Communist International, his autobiography, etc.--reveal the same power of perception through his study of other individuals--the epigones of Leninism. The death of the old Bolsheviks, the Moscow Trials, furnished him with the occasion to paint portraits which history will record as definitive; among others, those of Lunacharsky, Krupskaia, Kamenev, Zinoviev, Smirnov. Finally, the last two great works, unfinished, were the portraits of Lenin and Stalin. The future historian will have to pause long over Trotsky’s pile of manuscripts on these men before hoping to be able to say something new.
From the time he left Moscow to his murder in the sunny office at Coyoacan, from the end of 1927 to August 1940, Lev Davidovitch carried on an active political correspondence. At first, during the year spent at Alma Ata, this consisted of the hundreds of letters to the oppositionists deported throughout Siberia. Then in the 11 years of his last exile, there were thousands of letters to his co-thinkers in some 30 countries. New contacts, polemics, splits--all were present during this period and all that correspondence is full of his estimates of men. Although written for the immediate occasion, when reread after a lapse of several years they are often astonishing in their depth and their keenness. In a few strokes, an individual’s fundamental characteristics are painted with profound verity. More than once Lev Davidovitch predicted the road which an individual was going to follow when less perspicacious eyes were still far from discerning it. Certainly there were errors, but in the main they were astonishingly rare and the greater part of his judgments was confirmed by future developments.
Lev Davidovitch had an extraordinary capacity for drawing out people. By the questions he asked, by the discussion he started, he knew how to make his visitor reveal his background, his prejudices, his manner of approaching problems.
In explaining the defeat of the Left Opposition, Eastman always says that Trotsky did not know the art of personal relations and he adduces his own experience, that sometimes "you feel that he was not present in reality at all." Certainly Lev Davidovitch did not have much taste for sitting around over a cup of tea speaking of little nothings and eternal problems. Any conversation without a precise purpose greatly irritated him. When he grew weary of it, he developed, it is true, an air which might be termed "absent"; his politeness then became somewhat mechanical and affected as though he had to force himself. But he was very much present when contact was established with his visitor. Above all, the conversation had to have an object: comrades discussing political problems, young people whom he felt a desire to teach or, finally, someone having a branch of knowledge from which he wished to profit. Faced with visitors from whom he could learn nothing and whom he could teach nothing, he was somehow disarmed.
The great gift of Trotsky in dealing with men was that he knew how to mobilize them. He knew how to paint the grandeur of an aim, to inspire enthusiasm, to fortify the will. Lenin marveled at Trotsky’s ability to rally many technicians to the Soviet power, to inspire them with confidence and to win them over to work in defense of the country. In his last exile, in problems small or big, he knew how to gain the cooperation and the devotion of people who were not directly tied to him by ideas and who could expect no recompense of any kind. His secret, if one wishes to use the word, was always to demand of an individual the best in him. Trotsky addressed himself to the best in men, for on the rest, he knew, one can build nothing durable.
* "Natalia Trotsky Answers a Foul Slander," Socialist Appeal, October 26, 1940.




Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



ritish ILP    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris The British ILP “The British ILP” Fourth International, (International Notes) February 1943, p.63, under the name “Marc Loris”, (765 words).The following letter was addressed to the editor of Left, a British monthly sponsored by the ILP but of which George Padmore, who is not an ILP member, is now an editor. Editor:In the October 1942 issue of Left you reproduced in part my article, “The ILP—Words and Reality,” from the June 1942 Fourth International, and I cannot but thank you for that. But, in so doing, you involved me in a discussion with Walter Padley, who answered my article in your December issue. I do not intend to reply to Padley’s arguments one by one; the delays caused by distance would make such a controversy of extremely little interest to your readers. I must only say that neither Padley’s answer nor- what is more important— the Independent Labour Party’s policy and activities in the months after my article have been able to make me change my estimate of this party. In this short letter my sole intention is to try to show the main defects of Padley’s method of argument. First, Padley—like every true centrist—could not fail to accuse the Fourth International of maintaining a dictatorial regime; he cannot forgive the British followers of the Fourth International, “who allow an international centre thousands of miles away to dictate their political thinking.” Very fortunately, the British Fourth Internationalists did not wait for my article to criticise the ILP. They have done it for a long time, very often with much more powerful and direct arguments than mine. Nobody had to “dictate” this to them. They only had to observe the political reality. As a matter of fact, how could the Fourth International “dictate” anything to anybody? It has no fat posts to offer, no well-lined cash-box, no GPU. What else could bind its followers together but the common recognition of a certain number of objective truths? The characterization of the ILP as a centrist party is one of these truths. Since centrism is not for us a subjective appreciation, some kind of insult, but an objective political reality, with very definite features, its existence can be established by different people, even “thousands of miles” apart, without anybody having to “dictate” anything to anybody else. In my article I gave a few examples of the opportunist character of the ILP’s parliamentary work. My criticism was based on facts and quotations—including the minutes of parliament. Padley does not try to disprove these, but to refute me, he simply quotes abundantly the ILP’s basic statement on parliament. It is well known that every opportunist party has in its archives some fine resolutions that it takes out on holidays. (Incidentally, even the ceremonial “basic statement” is not so fine and could be criticized on many points.) The day by-day practice, however, is quite different. The inconsistency, for a revolutionary viewpoint, of the work of the ILP’s parliamentary representatives is traditional and can be verified by everybody (from Maxton’s thanks to Chamberlain after Munich for having saved the peace, to Maxton’s recent proposition that the African colonies pass under the yoke of American imperialism). I must also mention the disproportionate role played by the parliamentary group in the internal life of the ILP where it is the bulwark of the right wing; indeed, the party as a whole is its prisoner. I must make one final comment on Padley’s remark that revolutionary parties “do not grow on trees” and that perfection does not exist in this world. Padley uses a very old sophism: perfection is impossible, there will always be defects, therefore—this is the implicit conclusion— why criticise them? An argument on the same pattern is used by every supporter of the status quo. “Man is not perfect,” answers the philistine to the socialist criticism of bourgeois civilisation. “The ILP does not pretend to perfection,” answers Padley to our criticism. Certainly perfection does not belong to this world. But what does it mean to repeat such a platitude? It means only to justify passivity No, indeed, the ILP is not perfect and, in our opinion, it can go forward only through a sharp struggle against a large part of its present leadership. The coming wave of revolutions will require from revolutionary parties clarity, firmness, consistency and resolution. These qualities are those in which the present leaders of the ILP are most lacking. The duty of the members of the party is to push aside those who prattle about “impossible perfection” and to proceed to adapt their organization to the revolutionary requirements of our epoch.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

lgebra of Revolution    Jean van Heijenoort writing as J. Gerland The Algebra of Revolution “Algebra of Revolution” Fourth International, May 1940, pp.18-21, under the name “J Gerland” (2,812 words)  A receding wave drops the heaviest stones first, the pebbles next, and carries the sand a little farther. To deserters from Marxism, the heaviest stone is the heart of the doctrine itself—its method, the dialectic. That is what they abandon first. The list is long of tired revolutionaries, who, for nearly three-quarters of a century now, have denounced the hated dialectic while they still continued for a time to recognize “economic determinism” in history or even the “historic necessity” of socialism. In an opposite rush of the current, the same phenomenon is observable. The incoming tide washes the sand along before budging the stones. A person who comes to Marxism—especially if he has passed his intellectual youth—grasps successively the different isolated and abstract aspects of it before he penetrates to its method in its entirety—not rarely stopping short of this. Marxism is thus subjected to incessant attempts at dismemberment. The dialectic is the point of concentration of the resistance which petty-bourgeois thought opposes to Marxism. This resistance assumes various social, political, or philosophical shadings, but expresses itself through arguments which remain within a fairly narrow scope: “Marx took over the dialectic from Hegel the idealist. It retains the mysticism of its origin and sullies Marxist thought.” To the severest critics, it is the basic defect of the edifice, a “metaphysics” which led Marx into making unfounded assertions, exaggerated affirmations, specious paradoxes, all of which obscure his “economic” work and threaten to ruin its “scientific” conclusions. To the more amiable critics, if the dialectic is not quite that detrimental it is nonetheless useless; it is claptrap inherited from the past which must be eliminated—in another century Marx would have linked his doctrine to another philosophy (pragmatism?) and the problem of the dialectic would not have arisen. The dialectic in Marxism is nothing but a historic accident. It is in accordance with the “true” spirit of the doctrine to remove this vestige of another epoch. Do not hesitate, let us cut out this useless appendix which may at any time become the seat of a new infection of mysticism. This accusation of mysticism—the most widely propagated of all—launched against the Marxist dialectic is not encumbered with numerous proofs. It is not very easy, in fact, to produce any. To refute them it would be enough to point to all the passages where Marx counterposes his rational method to the mystical method of idealism. By uncovering the social roots of all the mystic baggage which philosophy carted for centuries, has not Marxism placed a cross over mysticism forever? Lacking even the smallest particle of a quotation from Marx, our critics remind those who have supposedly forgotten it that Marx as a youth passed through the school of Hegelian idealism and that this “could not fail” to leave its imprint upon his mind. All that remains necessary is an explanation as to why Marx developed the most fundamental negation of idealism that mankind has yet formulated. Mysticism demands essentially that the mind set itself free from logical categories. Impelled by the wish, the unification of subject with object is immediately accomplished, with the “fusion” taking place outside all logical discourse. The dialectic does not reject these categories but reveals their interconnections and their development. It does not deny logic but gives it in this way, with new tools, a new power. Its increased power broadens its domain and consequently narrows that of the mystic. Formal logic, only too often obliged to capitulate before reality, leaves the field open to mysticism. The dialectic is revealed as the mortal—and victorious—enemy of mysticism in the unfolding of all the power of human reason. Before Marx, the social sciences consisted of nothing but platitudes, testifying to the impotence of contemporary logic to master a complex reality—an impotence which reflected the existing social conditions. This “science” was not rational knowledge, but the projection of desires and aspirations, that is, in great part a tendency toward mysticism. The dialectic puts an end to all this. Another illustration. The deep-rooted aversion of the Anglo-Saxon mind for the dialectic is well known; its source lies in the historical development of English society. Empiricism and agnosticism, so well suited to this mind, led it towards the middle of the last century into profound contradictions which could be resolved only by dialectical materialism. How far from understanding this were the British professors! They swerved from the rut of empiricism by heading toward the absolute. They appropriated in particular the system of Hegel, that is, its husk, without even noticing the living kernel, and for several decades the British and American universities indulged in orgies of absolute idealism. Pragmatism was in part a reaction against these waves of mysticism but in no way a solution of the difficulties, which only the dialectic could surmount. Among the “defects” of the dialectic, the charge that it is metaphysics alternates with the accusation that it is mysticism. The contention itself is not easy to formulate. Metaphysics originally was the search for “First Causes.” Hegel used the term in a different and well-defined sense to characterize the anti-dialectical thought of the 18th century, above all, French rationalism. It is in this sense that the founders of scientific socialism introduced it into the Marxist vocabulary. In commonly accepted thought the term “metaphysical” depreciated throughout the 19th century and to each critic it seemed sufficient merely to hurl it at his adversary. Finally, following the positivism of Comte, the scientists labelled as metaphysical everything that went beyond their thinly sliced morsel of science and in particular anything that brought up the obligation, so distasteful to bourgeois scientists, of choosing between materialism and idealism. The critics of the dialectic apply the sufficiently compromised label of metaphysical upon it without so much as taking the trouble to indicate what they mean by it. Why bother over a mere relic! The Marxist dialectic, we confess, is “metaphysical,” in the sense that it participates boldly in the struggle of materialism against idealism. In this respect materialism itself is metaphysical in the sense that it transcends one or more immediate experiences and that it is impossible to demonstrate it like a simple theorem of geometry. It is hardly correct to say even that materialism is proved by the state of science in a given epoch. It finds its truth in the general development of science, in the movement which unceasingly increases the power of reason, in the ever-broadening possibility of going beyond the hypothesis of a god. It would be far too compromising for the critics to reject materialism as metaphysical. They have not as a rule yet reached this stage when we occupy ourselves with them. Hence, they limit themselves to the dialectic and their principal argument in qualifying it as metaphysical consists in the fact that they can live very well and act without it and that the dialectic, moreover, is not subject to verification. In its most outspoken form, the argument is converted into a denial, pure and simple, of the dialectic: “It is nothing but a myth, a fiction—nobody knows exactly what it is.” Or some view it as a mere literary ornament with which Marx decorated his too arid dissertations and from which he extracted brilliant metaphors. “But all this has nothing to do with science. Moreover, no Marxist has ever systematically formulated the laws of the dialectic.” That, it appears, is what the critics mean by metaphysics. Marxism, it must be recognized, lacks a perfected treatise on the dialectic. Marx on various occasions indicated (in letters to Engels, Kugelmann, Dietzgen) his intention of writing a brief theoretical exposition of his method. He died while still working on “Capital.” Engels, after his “Anti-Dhring,” undertook systematic research on the dialectic, especially in relation to the natural sciences. He soon had to abandon it in order to take up the arduous task of deciphering and publishing the second and third volumes of “Capital.” Lenin, in the isolation of the first months of the war, annotated Hegel and Aristotle preliminary to a study upon the dialectic, but the whirlwind of events decided otherwise. It is doubtful that Marxism will ever have, before the advent of socialism, a manual of the dialectic. The more the workers’ movement develops, all the more do political, strategic, and tactical questions take first place. And that is fortunate—it is the sign that problems are reaching a solution in deeds. To those who may lament this, we can only say that one no more chooses his epoch than he does his parents. The methodological study of the dialectic, which will also be the preparation for its replacement by still more powerful methods of thought, is one of the tasks for the socialist society. This study will be part of the general inventory which the new society will take of the heritage received from the preceding generations. The situation as regards the dialectic is not so very different from that of culture in general. Just as it is not possible to envisage a “proletarian” culture, so it is impossible to envisage a systematically developed proletarian philosophy. The truth is that the dialectic does not pretend to be more than a method, the expression of the movement of thought that seeks to transcend immediate experience. With Marx it found its practical application in the domain to which scientific knowledge was most foreign: sociology. In any society divided into classes, the “sciences of man” lag considerably behind the natural sciences—the possessing class has no interest whatever in revealing the mechanism of its domination. The bourgeois epoch constitutes the most striking illustration of this fact. But a method is an instrument for arriving at the truth, and where the social brakes are the tightest, a method far more powerful than the relativism of the natural sciences is required. The dialectic coincides with the revolutionary role of Marxism: the object imposed its method and, at the same time, could not be realized through anything else. The most authentic product so far of the dialectic method, consciously applied, is “Capital.” The great themes of Hegelian logic are there directly transposed—the mode of exposition itself with its movement from the abstract to the concrete, the development of the categories, the opposition of profound reality to immediate existence, the notion of concrete totality, etc., ideas all of them foreign equally to Cartesian rationalism and Anglo-Saxon empiricism. To those who clamor for a manual of the dialectic, we can boldly reply: Take “Capital” by Karl Marx. But this book is not solely a treatise on logic. It reveals the movement of a reality singularly difficult to penetrate—modern capitalist society—and does so with astonishing accuracy. Here the method is judged by its own results. We had to wait for the Anglo-Saxon critics to hear this surprising demand: that the Marxists say what test[1] can be made to verify the dialectic. This is nothing but a “modern” version of the accusation of metaphysics. To these also the answer must be made: Take “Capital.” If one can speak of a “test” in such a domain, here is a real and crucial test. Can our critics cite a single book-I shall not say in sociology alone, it would be no risk, but in any science—which has for seventy-five years retained equal timeliness and validity? Does the method mean nothing in this respect? It would be crediting “mysticism” and “metaphysics” with strange power to believe them capable of such prowess. The first question to pose to those who deny the scientific character of the dialectic is to ask them what they mean by scientific method. They generally forget to define this detail. What the manuals repeat on this subject is more often ethical rules rather than methodological principles. The scientists themselves do not begin dissertating on their methods until they hope to depreciate the value of science by showing its relativity. This movement has been observable for some forty years. If the work of these same scientists is examined, one can say that it is compounded of a melange of common sense, that is, formal logic converted into small change, and the dialectic in a fragmentary and unconscious form. The practice of the dialectic begins precisely where thought truly progresses, and imposes itself more each time the mind goes beyond the immediate data. The great unifying theories—the electro-magnetic theory of light, to take one example—are beautiful works of the dialectic. But the act of eating is far removed from the formulation of the laws of digestion. As an epigraph on all the works of Marx, one could well inscribe: “More consciousness!” The dialectic is situated precisely in this movement. It enunciates and seeks to systematize the modes of thinking that follow intelligence at its various levels from the time intelligence begins to exercise its rights, that is, to transcend what is presented immediately before it, and in those cases where the mind does not turn upon itself (as in formal logic) but moves forward. A particularly resistant reality, the development of society, required the conscious use of the most powerful processes of thought; hence the appearance of precisely the materialist dialectic. Thus sociology at once acquired, under penalty of extinction, the most highly perfected method so far developed for the human intelligence, and in this sense it blazes the way for the other sciences. Need it be added that the latter, making conscious use of the dialectic, will sharpen and enrich it? Carried by the whole current of human knowledge, the dialectic itself will be surpassed. But that, as we have seen, is the task of the coming epoch. *	*	* The physicist Henri Poincar once observed that you cannot experiment with war. This is still more true of the politics of the proletariat. Just as medicine is based on physiology, Marxist politics rests on sociology. But the latter, unfortunately, has no laboratories at its disposal. The Marxist party can carry out experiments only on an extremely restricted scale: to “test” such and such a partial slogan in a factory, a city, before launching it on a national scale. In the decisive questions, it does not have the right to enter into experimentation. Because of this, observation becomes of singularly important value. Marxists scrupulously study the past, above all the traditions of their class and its struggles. It is from this that the accusation of conservatism is derived, often repeated by the innovators of the hour against the doctrine of scientific socialism. Hundreds and thousands of artistic, literary, philosophic, and sometimes political parlor-pink circles flourish unceasingly among the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia. They grasp in flight this or that idea, build a “theory” out of it and live off it for a few years or months. The Marxists have nothing in common with these “adventurers of thought.” The revolutionary Socialists are at the apex of an entire historic class, the proletariat. They know the value of a dearly won tradition. So far as the dialectic is concerned, this tradition speaks with a voice singularly clear and strong. To the extent that they gave theoretical expression to their headlong plunge—one obviously cannot speak of the Millerands and Briands—virtually all the renegades from the revolution preluded their denial of the social and economic and political tenets of socialism by rejecting the dialectic. At the beginning of this century, the German social democrat Bernstein published a book against Marxism which can be regarded as the classic expression of reformism. The same chapter in which the author attempts to demolish the dialectic as mystic and anti-scientific ends with the affirmation that the politics of Marx is nothing but Blanquism.... These are the lessons that no revolutionary socialist dare forget. The Russian revolutionist Hertzen called the dialectic the “algebra of revolution.” It is really much more than that and its value extends to all of human knowledge, of society, of nature. But it is at least that. All of scientific socialism demands it. If Marx had not found in Hegel the essential forms of the dialectic, he would have produced them, more or less completely, just as the working class movement, if Marx had not lived, would have produced a scientific socialism basically identical with Marxism, although undoubtedly much inferior to it in form. To try now to disconnect the dialectic from Marxism is a task as reactionary as to want to “purify” the working class movement of Marxism. In attempting one or the other, the critics will break their necks and succeed only in bringing judgment upon themselves.February 18, 1940. [1] James Burnham, “A Belated Dialectician,” Partisan Review, Spring 1939  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

I.L.P. - Words and Reality



Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris
The I.L.P.—Words and Reality
Fourth International, June 1942, pp.181-186, under the name“Marc Loris”. (5,420 words)
The English bourgeoisie must now defend itself on several fronts: against German and Japanese imperialism, against American imperialism, against the colonial peoples of the Empire, and finally, against the English proletariat. Whatever the outcome of the war, British imperialism can only continue to decline. Its problem is not to gain something from the war, but to lose as little as possible. Inevitably the disintegration of the Empire leads to a revolutionary crisis in England.
The discontent of the masses of Britain is growing. The workers, the women and adolescents are chained to exhausting labor for wages which are lessened every day by the rising cost of living. The soldiers receive absurdly low pay. The capitalists are amassing greater profits than on the eve of the war. The Black Market rages. The leaders of the Labour Party and the Stalinists are intoxicated with chauvinism. But in the depths of the masses the war and its miseries are ripening a revolt against the regime.
Under these conditions, the Independent Labour Party last November began“A Socialist Britain Now” campaign. The program of this campaign, remodeled several times, now has five points: (1) Social Equality, (2) Social Ownership, (3) Liberate the Empire, (4) Help Soviet Russia, (5) Socialist Peace Offensive. These five points are not unattractive, especially compared to the betrayals of the Labourite and Stalinist leaders. However, the best program is worth only the worth of the party which is trying to achieve it. That is why we must engage in a close examination of the present policy of the ILP.
When we read the ILP press and the speeches of its leaders, we soon see that they are permitting a great number of variations on the five points of the program. Thus the first two points are often replaced by the formula“end injustice,” which is merely an empty phrase of pre-Marxist socialism. The third point, on the liberation of the Empire, is sometimes used in a revolutionary sense, but it is also sometimes transformed into the reformist formula“Democracy in the Empire” (New Leader, February 14, 1942). Finally, the party permits equivocal expressions on the war itself. Thus, Brockway contrasts the ILP’s program to“the purely military method” and presents it as“a political contribution to the end of the war” (New Leader, April 18, 1942). The irreducible opposition of two aims, that of the bourgeoisie and that of the proletariat, is obliterated and becomes a choice between two methods for a common aim, the end of the war. The same defect is present in the speech of Campbell Stephen, representing the ILP in Parliament, on April 15th. Here is his conclusion:
“If in framing his budget the Chancellor had shown vision and imagination and had sought to bring the economy of this country in line with the economy of Soviet Russia, he would have given hope to the working people who have been called to make all the sacrifices, as well as to the workers in the various parts of the Empire. He would have struck a tremendous blow at the tyranny of Hitlerism in Germany.”
What confusion! Stephen asks from the Chancellor“vision and imagination” in the conduct of the war. It is an appeal to the reason of the exploiters, not a call to revolt of the oppressed.
All the ILP’s propaganda is permeated with an incurable confusion which manifests itself in all questions, large and small. Each page of their paper contains several examples. We take another one at random. On March 7th the New Leader published an article on Sir Stafford Cripps in the form of an open letter. This letter to the colleague of Churchill begins“Dear Comrade” and ends“Fraternally yours.” Without irony! As for the contents of the article, one sentence suffices:“You delivered a trenchant speech [in 1935] on which I beg you to reflect.”
The fundamental fault of the ILP’s propaganda is that one finds everything in it: from the revolt of the colonies to“dear comrade” Cripps. In this jumble the opportunist declarations dominate, the revolutionary formulas lose all real content and are transformed into empty phrases. In all its propaganda and activity, the ILP is incapable of distinguishing between reform and revolution.
How Achieve“A Socialist Britain Now”?
The ILP leaders insist that their program should be achieved in the very near future. On all occasions they underline the word“Now.” Ridley writes on February 21st:“The time for a Socialist Britain now and the accession to power of a revolutionary party may be nearer than even the most optimistic imagine.” On April 11th the New Leader even gives a precise date in writing:“Socialist victory in 1942 is the correct slogan.” The real meaning behind these quixotic phrases can be seen from the rest of the same statement of Ridley: he speaks of the“accession to power of a revolutionary party” without daring to name the party, knowing too well how far the words are from reality.
The ILP is still a small party. Naturally, no one would blame it for that. But every worker attracted by the slogan“A Socialist Britain Now” and by the promises of the ILP has the right to ask the question: How fulfill such a program in such a short time? Unfortunately the ILP leaders, eloquent in praising socialism as against capitalism, have no breath left with which to enunciate concrete ways of reaching the aim.
When its campaign was opened last November, the inaugural appeal of the party defined the campaign thus:“The object of the campaign will be the mobilization of all the elements in Britain which are in favor of the creation of a Socialist Government.” In order to accomplish this“mobilization” the party announced:“Regional conferences will be held throughout the country, to which delegates from all sections of the Labour movement and left organizations will be invited.” Four or five of these conferences took place in different towns last March, the most important in London at which a resolution was presented by Brockway, according to which“there was a growing realization that the present system was doomed and that a better one must be born. The change would have to come, from below and the Socialist Britain Campaign gave a lead in the organization of the workers for the task.” Will Morris, who seconded,“said it was clear that the Labour Party had lost faith in Socialism as a practicable possibility, and the broad movement aimed at by the campaign had become an absolute necessity.” These few sentences suffice to recall to us other“movements” and“mobilizations” of the same type: the“congresses” and the“fronts” of the Comintern several years ago. The analogy can be pursued on the organizational plane. At these conferences“delegates from all working-class, Socialist and kindred organizations are invited.” At the London conference, the most successful, 154“delegates”“represented” 80 organizations: unions, cooperatives, various clubs, and ILP branches. But the public demonstration which followed gathered 800 people, that is, an average of ten persons per organization. As for the character of the“representation” and of the“delegates,” a small note in the New Leader informs us: that“speakers who are cited as members of Trade Unions, the Co-operative Party, the Labour Party, and National Council of Labour Colleges, are participating in the campaign, of course, in their individual capacity, and not as representatives.” We have here the return of the ill-famed Stalinist masquerades.
Since March, the ILP apparently has abandoned the“conference” method. What then are the ILP’s other methods for attaining“a Socialist Britain now”? After having read and reread the ILP press, the question remains without an answer. Certainly, there is no lack of grand phrases:“Our task is to carry on the struggle against the Vansittarts and the other enemies of Socialism in Britain, to press on with the building of a Movement here which will be capable of ‘making Britain socialist.” Writing“Movement” with a capital letter does not, however, bring us an inch nearer the solution of the problem.“We must inspire the people.”“We launch our Spring offensive, an offensive which will not die with the Spring, but gather momentum as it rolls forward to the new dawn of international Socialism.” Strange as it seems, these are the least vague phrases we find on the question of how to realize a Socialist Britain now. And don’t forget that“Socialist victory in 1942 is the correct slogan”!
This confusion in methods only reflects the uncertainty of the goal to be attained. At the initiative of the rank and file and against the opposition of the leadership, the recent ILP national conference undertook to examine the character of“Socialist Britain.”“Conference carried by a large majority an amendment which declared that Socialists `should co-operate in the creation of a Socialist Britain in which the working class will achieve power through its own organizations, industrial unions and workers’ councils which will organize at one and the same time the economic and political might of the working class.’ This was designed to expand a statement in the original resolution that Socialists should `combine in an effort for the establishment of a Socialist government.’” It is clear: the leadership proposed an extremely vague resolution and the rank and file members felt the necessity of giving it indispensable preciseness. Then what happened? Two members of the leadership“strongly opposed the amendment on the ground that it put undue importance on industrial organization and, by implication, played down the importance of Parliamentary work.” This opposition shows how far these“leaders” are from revolutionary methods:“the importance of Parliamentary work” is opposed to the soviet form of socialist power! But listen to the end:“James Maxton wound up the debate on behalf of the National Committee and declared that the point at issue was not important.”“Socialist Victory in 1942 is the correct slogan,” but a fundamental problem of the revolution is deemed by the leadership to be“not important”! Underneath their grand radical phrases the ILP leaders have no serious perspective of revolution.
Two Enlightening Episodes
Richard Acland is a liberal who“in middle age has come forward as an apostle of Socialism” and has undertaken to preach it in a“more genteel way.” This is what the New Leader announces to us under the heading“Richard Acland Marches On.” The editors go so far in their admiration that they give him nearly an entire page of their paper to present his views to the workers. We note in passing that the New Leader complains bitterly of the lack of paper because of rationing. And here are the revelations of Sir Richard Acland:
“Now I do not believe a people, particularly the British people, would ever make a revolution except in a mood of desperation .... They might be driven to such a mood by adversity in war; but in such circumstances, I cannot see how the revolution could be other than Hitler’s opportunity. And Britain is too small to afford a ‘Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.’ Therefore, apart from my sincere belief that a revolution would set in motion many forces which would lead to undesirable ends, apart from my perhaps purely bourgeois dislike of revolutions as such, I do not believe a revolution is a practicable possibility. If this is correct we have to think in terms of majorities in the House of Commons.”
And Sir Richard concludes his article by calling for complete support of the war.
Fenner Brockway answered Acland. The first part of his reply was a eulogy of Sir Richard’s discoveries. He begins:
“I welcome the article by Richard Acland. He is doing a service for Socialism which we must not underestimate.” And he continues:“The socialist movement needs an intensification of its moral fervour .... Richard Acland has brought a simple freshness . . . the inspiration of a moral crusade.”
In the second part of the article Brockway undertakes to point out to Sir Richard that Parliament cannot be converted to socialism. However, he concludes:“We have no doubt on which side Richard Acland will be when the crisis comes” and he ends by speaking of“our common hope.”
A liberal feels the need of expressing his dislike of revolution, of treating revolutionists as agents of the enemy, of slandering the Russian revolution. All that is most normal. But why open to him the columns of the organ of a party which calls itself revolutionary? Why welcome his“contributions” and his“services” to socialism? What does this nonsense teach the workers? The elementary duty of an honest revolutionist is to teach workingmen to have contempt for such a gentleman. After the New Leader’s indecent acclaim of Acland, won’t a worker have the right to say to himself:
I am sure that Acland will never be in the camp of the revolution. He says so himself: Now, Brockway announces that they will both find themselves in the same camp“when the crisis comes.” Brockway“has no doubt” about that. Would I be wrong in concluding that Brockway will not be in the camp of the revolution?
At the national conference of the party in April a resolution was presented for free education from nursery schools to universities and for other democratic demands in that field. The conference included in the resolution an amendment demanding that education should be secular.
Whereupon James Maxton took the floor and declared that the amendment“made the resolution thoroughly impracticable and that an attempt on the part of the Government to satisfy the demand would arouse the bitterest controversy; the Government, therefore, would not even consider the proposals.” Who is speaking? Mr. Churchill or the leader of a party which wants a“Socialist Britain now”? For Maxton the thing that counts is the present parliamentary mechanism and he must carefully restrict his demands to that which it can give. After Maxton’s intervention, the conference voted down the resolution together with the amendment. Then what to think of the program“a Socialist Britain now”? According to Maxton’s criteria it is highly“impracticable,” for, no doubt, it“would arouse the bitterest controversy”! Marceau Pivert recently called the ILP the“Social-revolutionary vanguard not only of the British working class, but of all the other countries” (Analisis, February-March 1942). How does this free-thinker (is he still a Free Mason?) explain the refusal of the ILP leadership to fight for secular education because“the government would not even consider the proposals”?
The Problem of the Labour Party
The Labourite leaders cynically collaborate with the Tories in order to bring the imperialist war to a successful conclusion The English workers feel more and more ill at ease, but are still organized in the Labour Party. How get out of this impasse? How take a step forward?
To this fundamental question, point of departure of all the problems of the English revolution, the leaders of the ILP bring no answer. By this they betray the purely abstract character of their propaganda. How would a Leninist leadership approach this task? It would address itself to the members of the Labour Party saying:“End the political truce! Break with the representatives of Capitalism! Labour to power! Here is the program we propose for a Labour government.” And the revolutionary leadership would present a series of fundamental demands.
That is the policy which our English comrades propose. The leaders of the ILP lost no time attacking them. In the February 21st New Leader, F. A. Ridley writes:
“In fact, everything indicates that this war will mark the end of the Labour Party just as the last one did that of its liberal predecessor, despite the valiant efforts of the Trotskyists to revive the fast putrefying corpse. The spirit died in it long ago. After all, even Christ gave up the dead as hopeless after three days!”
That supercilious conceit! And at the same time, what lack of comprehension of revolutionary tasks!
What does Ridley mean when he characterizes the Labour Party as a“fast putrefying corpse”? Does he mean that the workers are rapidly abandoning this party, to come, for example, to the ILP? Unfortunately, this is not so. Ridley himself recognizes this fact; in the April 4th New Leader he writes:“The British masses are only in the earliest stages of mental emancipation from the mists of reformist illusions.” Only in the earliest stages of mental emancipation, not even yet of organizational emancipation! Then what is meant by the“fast putrefying corpse”?
In the same article Ridley explains that“the official Labour and Trade Union Movement must surely be a proletarian `Bourbon’” for it can learn nothing from experience. And he concludes:
“In view of this, we notice with astonishment that the (`Trotskyist’) `Socialist Appeal’ is still appealing for a third Labour Government. It will appeal in vain. If anything could drive the disillusioned masses into apathy and/or Fascism it would be a third Labour Government fiasco. We fear that the demand is merely another instance of ‘revolutionary conservatism’: what Lenin said in 1920 under quite other historical circumstances.”
There are so many errors and falsifications in these few lines that we must examine them carefully. Firstly, the comrades of the Socialist Appeal have never spoken of a“third Labour Government. “Instead, they have explicitly rejected this formula to better show that a Labour Government must not be permitted to be a repetition of the unfortunate experiences of the past, but must be a stage in the development of the English revolution. This cheap falsification shows that Ridley is not conducting an honest discussion.
Ridley then affirms that those appealing for a Labour Government“will appeal in vain.” Naturally the course of the English revolution is still unknown. But if one can be sure of anything, it is that this course will pass through a Labourite stage and that this stage will be marked by an enormous enrichment of the political experience of the masses and will prepare them to undertake higher tasks. Without doubt, Labourite leaders are“Bourbons.” But can the English workers learn nothing from experience? To answer in the negative is to abandon all perspective of revolution. And isn’t the first task of a revolutionary party to facilitate the experience of the masses in order then to lead them farther? The present internal situation of the Labour Party only confirms the correctness of the policy of our English comrades. At the recent convention of the Labour Party, an attempt to halt the political truce with other parties was defeated by the very close vote of 1,275,000 to 1,209,000. One can easily imagine what pressure there was from the leadership in favor of maintaining the truce, and one can affirm with assurance that the great majority of the rank and file workers are clearly for the end of that truce.
Ridley scoffs at our English comrades for their“revolutionary conservatism.” However, his irony is very much out of place. He acknowledges himself that the policy of our comrades was that of Lenin in 1920, but he rejects this policy for we are now, it seems,“under quite other historical circumstances.” Lenin’s 1920 policy had three fundamental premises: first, the English bourgeoisie finds itself in a difficult situation and is becoming more and more incapable of governing as in the past; second, the majority of the working class is organized in the Labour Party; third, the revolutionary vanguard is still a very weak minority. Naturally, we are no longer in 1920, but which of the three premises has changed? Precisely why would the Leninist policy not be valid today? What are the“quite other historical circumstances”? Ridley doesn’t even try to answer these fundamental questions.
For years one of the ILP’s most frequent objections to the Comintern was its“sectarianism.” In fact, it complained even more bitterly of the“sectarianism” than of the opportunism. But the ILP’s present attitude towards the Labour Party shows that it understood nothing of the“sectarian” errors of the Comintern. Towards the Labour Party the ILP takes an ultimatistic attitude which resembles that of the Comintern towards the German Social-Democracy. As everyone now knows, that policy was the principal reason for Hitler’s sucess. Does Ridley hope to win the English workers to the revolution by repeating the ill-famed words of Thaelmann and Remmelle?
Under the grand ultimatistic phrases, however, the deep-seated opportunism of these people becomes evident. The clearest example is the electoral policy of the ILP. There is a Liberal-Labour-Tory electoral truce in the by-elections. The ILP has put up some candidates against Tories and made important successes (from 15 to 29 per cent of the votes). But the ILP does not oppose Labour candidates. Why? Since Labour candidates run without Tory or Liberal opposition, no one can argue than an ILP candidate would help reaction. Therefore a Marxist party could, in general, oppose its candidates to the Labourite candidates in these by-elections. Naturally, the rule is not obligatory in all cases and often such a party could answer yes or no to the question, according to local circumstances. But for the ILP it should be logically necessary to run candidates. It proclaims that the Labour Party is a“fast putrefying corpse” and that it is reactionary to call on this party to take power. Hence for the ILP it would be obligatory to have everywhere and always its own candidate against the Labourite candidate. But here the opportunist appears under the sectarian mask. The recent national conference of the ILP discussed the electoral problem. Under the pressure of the leadership“a resolution expressing the view that the time was now opportune for the ILP to make a stand against the Labour Party at by-elections was rejected.” Listen to the arguments of the leadership:“Maxton declared the Party should only fight by-elections in which there was a chance of a vote which would impress the public that the ILP was a serious political party.” The Labour Party is a“fast putrefying corpse,” but the ILP leadership refuses to oppose it in the elections in order not to risk its reputation as a“serious” party... Reality has cruel revenges.
In spite of Ridley’s twaddle on the“quite other historical circumstances,” the majority of the rank and file of the ILP is in favor of the Leninist policy toward the Labour Party.“Conference accepted a resolution ... [declaring that] the ILP should call upon the Labour, Trade Union and Communist leaders to break their anti-working-class alliance with the National Government, and to wage a campaign for power on the basis of nationalization and workers’ control of production.” Naturally, the ILP leadership was opposed to this resolution, which was adopted in spite of this opposition. (Unfortunately, the report does not give the number of votes for and against.) But to the lack of comprehension of revolutionary tasks the leaders of the ILP add hypocrisy: the spokesman for the leadership“said the leadership opposed because the resolution was redundant and all its points were already covered in official policy.”
This vote against the leadership now explains Ridley’s articles against the Trotskyists ..... In actual fact his articles were directed against the fraction of the ILP which supports the Leninist policy and which obtained a majority vote on this question at the conference. The ILP leadership knew very well of the existence of this opposition to its policy. What would have been the duty of an honest leadership? To open a discussion on this important question, above all since it was the eve of the national conference. What did the ILP leadership do? It had Ridley attack the opposition by attacking a Trotskyist group outside the party. Instead of a serious discussion, the result was some journalistic notes, superficial and rather venomous, clarifying nothing. We have already seen that the ILP policy is not without resemblance to that of the Comintern some years ago. Does the ILP leadership also wish to imitate the Stalinists in its internal methods?
The ILP Attitude Towards Stalinism
In England as elsewhere the Stalinists are jingoes. In the by-elections they mobilized all their forces to support the Tory candidates against the ILP. At Cardiff, in the by-elections in which the ILP put up Brockway against a Tory, the slogan of the Stalinists was:“A vote for Brockway is a vote for Hitler!” On many occasions the distributors of the New Leaders have been attacked by Stalinist hoodlums. Yet the ILP still lacks a clear position on Stalinism. The national conference rejected, at the request of the leadership, a resolution which gave a precise analysis of Stalinism and which concluded:“The Soviet regime and workers’ democracy can only be restored by the overthrow of the bureaucratic clique in the Kremlin.” What then does the leadership of the ILP offer the Soviet workers? Nothing.
Instead the ILP leaders still find the occasion to praise Stalin. In his February 23rd Order of the Day, Stalin declared:“It would be ridiculous to identify Hitler’s clique with the German people and the German state. The experience of history shows that Hitlers come and go whereas the German people and the German state remain.” The declaration does not contain a drop of internationalism. Translated into clear terms it simply signifies that Hitler can be eliminated without social upheaval. The“German state,” that is the capitalist state, will still exist. The English and American imperialists, as well as the German bourgeoisie, are not to fear proletarian revolution; Stalin will look after that, if need be. That is the meaning of Stalin’s declaration. Nevertheless, James Maxton availed himself of that despicable declaration to exclaim to Parliament some days later:“The speech made by Premier Stalin is an infinitely more statesman-like utterance than anything that has come from the Government of this country.” That reveals the ILP’s profound opportunism not only towards Stalin, but also towards the British government. What criterion has Maxton for judging“statesmanship”? Is he reproaching Churchill for inadequately defending English imperialism, or for inadequately preparing the proletarian revolution? How can a revolutionist reproach Churchill for his lack of“statesmanship”? A criticism of this type implies common interest, the defense of the Empire. As for Stalin, he must be delighted with Maxton’s compliment: he knows now that he speaks better than Vansittart!
On March 21 the New Leader informs its readers that a plaque on the house in Holford Square where Lenin lived forty years ago“was unveiled by Mrs. Maisky.” The editors added no commentary. On the 25th of April the paper described a new ceremony:
“A memorial bust of Lenin in Holford Square was unveiled by the Soviet Ambassador Mr. Maisky ..... The bust is a cast of the official bust at the Soviet Embassy. Natural light is directed on it, with a crimson background which casts a permanent red glow. A few broken links of chain are set into the base of the memorial to represent the workers have nothing to lose but their chains’. ...John McNair, General Secretary, represented the ILP at the ceremony.”
The Stalino-chauvinists, personified by the ex-Menshevik Maisky, try to conceal their betrayal behind a bust of Lenin. The New Leader hasn’t a word of criticism on this disgusting ceremony; instead the ILP is represented at this obscene act by its general secretary.
At the ILP national conference an amendment was presented asking for“the advocacy of the production and transport of war materials to the Soviet Union under workers’ control.” The idea of tying the defense of the Soviet Union to the class struggle of the English workers is excellent. The slogan has an offensive character, as much against the English bourgeoisie as against its agents, the Labourite and Stalinist leaders. But the leadership of the ILP hastened to oppose this proposition. The arguments of its spokesmen were, taken as a whole, that“the proposals are impracticable.” Thus, the ILP leaders reveal once more their total incomprehension of the dynamics of revolutionary action. How render“practicable” tomorrow that which is“impracticable” today? They have no idea. They find it very“practicable” to praise the“statesmanship” of Stalin, to insult Lenin by attending fraudulent ceremonies; but to call on the English workers to demand an accounting from the capitalists on the aid to the Soviet Union, that is“impracticable”! How can a worker take seriously the internationalist phrases of the ILP leaders when they at the same time hold such a capitulatory attitude towards Stalino-chauvinism?
The Task of the Vanguard
The ILP’s present position remains entirely in line with its former policy. And this policy, for years and years, has been the policy of equivocation. The ILP remains, in the full sense of the word, a centrist party. To give precise answers to the problems of the revolution is beyond the powers of the party leadership. Incapable of dispelling the confusion, the leadership tries to cover it by radical phrases—;which lead it to new errors, for example its attitude towards the Labour Party. Trotsky’s remark that a sectarian is only an opportunist frightened by his own opportunism has never been more true than for the ILP.
Doesn’t the party’s campaign for“a Socialist Britain now” represent a step to the left? Let us examine this question a little. The ILP is the only traditional party in England which recognizes the imperialist character of the war and proclaims the necessity of socialism. Of course in the mouths of the ILP leaders that recognition retains an abstract character. But against the background of complete betrayal by the Labourite and Stalinist leaders, the party acquires a revolutionary glitter. The ILP leaders remain where they were before, but the war has, for the present, lengthened the distance which separates them from the social-patriots.
This fact, although not sufficient to give a revolutionary temper to the ILP leaders, has provoked important changes inside the party. Even for an observer who writes at a distance, it is clear that the party has recruited new elements which take seriously the revolutionary talk of the leadership. The last national conference clearly showed this. The preceding conference, a little more than a year ago, had been a debate between the present leadership and the social-patriotic wing (C. A. Smith). The April 1942 conference revealed a new situation. The leadership proposed a confused revolutionary program and the whole conference consisted of the efforts of the members to elucidate and to correct the policy of the leaders. In all the debates a notable minority (29 per cent against 71) held a much more revolutionary position than the leadership. On several extremely important questions (workers’ councils, the attitude towards the Labour Party) this minority was able to rally a majority of the members against the leadership. The picture is clear: the rank and file members are trying to“lead” the leaders. The conference revealed two important facts: the party is moving to the left, but in this movement the base is inevitably coming into collision with the inertia of the leadership.
The left wing of the party, we are sure, will follow up the work of clarification undertaken at the national conference. To dispel the confusion, to denounce the inconsistencies, to patiently explain the Leninist policy—such are the tasks of the hour. But all these tasks merge into a single one: to expose to all the incapacity of the leadership. The present leaders are not political novices. For many years they have shown their inability to assimilate the Leninist policy. To expect them to change is to hope for a miracle. The members of the ILP must always remember the tragic example of the POUM in Spain. That was, like the ILP, a centrist party but incontestibly very much more to the left. As a proletarian leader, Nin was a hundred times superior to Maxton. But when the difficult hours of the revolution came, the POUM knew only how to float on the surface of events, incapable of directing them. For this task it is necessary to have a party which has broken all ties with the dominant class and its appendages, a party which knows how to inculcate the oppressed with a fierce hatred of bourgeois society, at the same time a party which does not become befuddled by phrases but which is imbued with a profound revolutionary realism. It is such a party that the English workers must have for the severe ordeals which are coming.
New York, May 31, 1942.

Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive



ational Question in Europe    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris The National Question in Europe  “National Question in Europe” Fourth International, September 1942, pp.264-268, under the name “Marc Loris”, (5,051 words)With the American Civil War, the Italian wars of unification, Prussia’s wars against Austria and France, the third quarter of the Nineteenth Century marks the end of the epoch of the formation of the great bourgeois states. This does not mean that national questions ceased to preoccupy humanity. Far from it. The uneven development of capitalism appears in this realm as in others. A Glance into the PastThe national problem was sharply posed then for a number of peoples in central and south-eastern Europe. Leaving aside the Irish struggle, the Alsatian problem of Germany, the Catalan and Basque questions in Spain, there were the oppressed nationalities of the two great semi-feudal empires, Austria-Hungary and Russia, as well as those that came out of the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire. The national problem in Europe thus appeared essentially as a vestige of the great historical task of emancipation which had been created by the transition from feudalism to capitalism but which the latter had been unable to resolve completely. The development of imperialism soon raised the national question in another group of countries, the colonial countries (or semi-colonial such as China and Persia). While liberals of all kinds were able to comfort themselves by thinking that the national problem in Europe was merely a historical lag which would catch up more or less quickly, the formation of the colonial empires soon demonstrated that the national question arose inevitably from the most modern phase of capitalism, finance imperialism. However, the colonial developments could also be interpreted as part of the historical lag, representing a historical rise toward the national state, evoked by the development of the productive forces in the colonies under the impact of capitalism. Shaking the great multi-national empires, crushing the small nations between the large, the first imperialist world war revived the national problem in Europe, giving it a new acuteness in the countries where it had not been settled (Austria-Hungary, Russia), or reviving it in the countries where history had long ago disposed of it (occupied Belgium). Against those who, under various pretexts, denied or minimized the importance of the national questions in our epoch (Luxemburg, Radek, Bukharin, Piatakov), Lenin wrote many times during the last war: “Imperialism is the epoch of the oppression of nations on a new historical basis .... Imperialism renews the old slogan of self-determination.” Lenin’s basic idea was that, contrary to the expectations of the liberals, capitalist development exacerbated national oppression. In the revolutionary ranks there were many people who tried to ignore the problems of national freedom, at least in Europe, under the pretext that imperialism made all national freedoms a Utopia and an illusion. To Bukharin, who denied the possibility of European national movements, Lenin replied that, as far as the national question is concerned, Bukharin “has not proved and will not prove the distinction between colonies and oppressed nations in Europe.” Of course, Lenin, better than anyone else, knew how to show the opposition between imperialist Europe and the oppressed colonial world. But he denied the absolute character of that opposition. He showed that the imperialist epoch not only revived the unresolved national problems in Europe, but was even able to give birth to new ones. For example, in a polemic against the Polish partisans of Rosa Luxemburg, Lenin mentioned hypothetically, in 1916, the possibility of occupied Belgium rising against Germany for its emancipation. At the same time Trotsky wrote: “The independence of the Belgians, Serbians, Poles, Armenians and others . . . belongs to the program of the fight of the international proletariat against imperialism.” He did not hesitate to place a crushed imperialist nation of western Europe on the same plane as the colonial peoples of the Orient. For Lenin, the intensification of the national problem in Europe proper was not the fortuitous result of some military accident such as the superiority of the German armies. It had a much deeper cause. It sprang from the very nature of imperialism. Kautsky had attempted to explain imperialism by the need of industrial countries to combine with agrarian countries—a theory which obscured the violent and reactionary character of imperialism by presenting it as some sort of international division of labor. Lenin, refuting. Kautsky, wrote in his book on Imperialism: “The characteristic feature of imperialism is precisely that it strives to annex not only agricultural regions, but even highly industrialized regions (German appetite for Belgium, French appetite for Lorraine), because (1) the fact that the world is already divided up obliges those contemplating a new division to reach out for any kind of territory, and (2) because an essential feature of imperialism is the rivalry between a number of great powers In the striving for hegemony, i.e., for the conquest of territory, not so much directly for themselves as to weaken the adversary and undermine his hegemony (Belgium is chiefly necessary to Germany as a base for operations against England; England needs Bagdad as a base for operations against Germany, etc.).” (Lenin’s italics.) These lines are profoundly true, perhaps even more today than when they were written: 1. They explain the special features of colony-starved German imperialism: “The fact that the world is already divided up obliges those contemplating a new division to reach out for any kind of territory.” 2. They also show that at present all conquest has a strategical-military and economic character at the same time and that it is impossible to establish a clear distinction between the two. 3. Moreover, Lenin did not hesitate to place the occupation of a crushed small imperialist country (Belgium) and the conquest of a colony (Bagdad) on the same plane by showing that they both have the same deep cause, which is “the characteristic feature of imperialism.” These three points are all equally important for the understanding of the epoch through which we are passing. The National Problem in Europe TodayTo destroy the absolute character of the assertions of the sectarians, Lenin, in his polemics on the national question, often had to indicate possibilities of historical development. These possibilities have today become realities. If during the last war the national problem in Europe had a fragmentary character, today it embraces the whole continent. The second imperialist war is the continuation of the first, but on a much larger scale. Notwithstanding the participation of America and Japan on the side of the Allies, the war of 1914-18 remained essentially a European war. The present war is world-wide in the full sense of the word. Just as for the Kaiser the occupation of Belgium was merely a preparatory operation for the serious struggle against France, so for Hitler the occupation of the European continent was only the prelude to the struggle against the British Empire, against the USSR and especially against America. Now all Europe is an invaded Belgium. Germany’s sensational victories caused all land fronts in western or southeastern Europe to disappear. Not counting some of Germany’s allies whose situation is not very different from that of a conquered territory, nearly 250 million non-Germans are now under the Nazi boot. An enormous quantitative difference from the last war! But there is also a qualitative difference: In the last war occupied Belgium was emptied of the most active part of her population, who went to France. Few remained in the country but aged men, women and children. Today the entire population of a dozen countries must live, work and suffer under the Hitlerian satraps. The Europe of 1939 was no longer the Europe of 1914. It had been considerably impoverished. In the impasse of bourgeois society, all the social and national antagonisms had become exacerbated to an unprecedented degree. On the other hand, the war is now conducted on a world-wide scale. The absence of a historical way out on a capitalist basis, the sharpness of a struggle whose stakes are all or nothing, the reactionary political nature of Nazism—all this has led German imperialism to subject the invaded countries to a brutal exploitation and a barbarous oppression never before seen in the history of modern Europe. And this has also driven the peoples onto the road of resistance and revolt. It is no longer a question of theoretically deducing the possibility of a national problem in Europe which had re-solved the greater part of this problem long ago. One has only to open one’s eyes to ascertain the existence of national movements, moreover on a scale never before equalled in Europe. Fascism, “imperialism in its chemically pure form,” concentrates and combines all forms of national oppression which have been observed up to the present in the colonies: forced labor, huge transfers of workers and farmers, mass evictions, privileges for members of the dominating nation (special courts, more abundant food rations, etc.), villages razed by punitive expeditions, etc. In the face of this reality, only an incurable pedant could deny the possibility of the existence of a national movement in Europe under the pretense that we are now in the epoch of imperialism. Actually, such reasoning reveals only a total lack of comprehension of imperialism, of its violent, reactionary and self-destructive character. Under a mask of radicalism, this argument betrays an inertia of thought inherited from liberalism. Similar reasoning, current among all types of liberals, denied some years ago the possibility of fascism in Germany: A highly industrialized country, just imagine! Fascist reaction is only possible in peripheral countries, little developed, semi-agrarian, . . . Such mentality betrays a complete lack of under-standing of our epoch. In reality, we are no longer in the period of the rise, nor even at the apogee of the capitalist system, but in its decline. All bourgeois society is decomposing, putrefying, and this disintegration brings us many new things, “even in Europe.” Fascism came. Now it is the national oppression of 250 millions in countries where history had, for most of them, long ago solved this problem. The problem raised today by German imperialism can tomorrow be raised by American imperialism. In case of a German defeat, and delay of the proletarian revolution, American domination over Europe, as it deepens, will take new forms. Instead of the previous method of financial preponderance, it will seek political supremacy supported by military means. The “second front” can become the prelude to the occupation of the continent by American troops. Blackmail by means of food and credits will be completed by the establishment of a Yankee police power. If the proletarian revolution does not conquer shortly, the national problem will be installed in a ruined Europe for many years to come. Thus the national movement in Europe is not merely the product of an accidental military episode, but flows from the whole imperialist decline. And it assumes great historical significance. If Hitler had been able to unify Europe, the proletarian revolution would have appeared much more remote. The abolition of the frontiers would have opened the way, on the basis of capitalism, to a new development of the productive forces on the European continent. But Hitler could not accomplish for Europe what Bismarck once accomplished for Germany. It is precisely this present movement of resistance that clearly shows the historical impasse in which Nazism, the most advanced political form of imperialism, finds itself. Thus in a certain sense, the movement of resistance of the oppressed peoples represents the historical interests of the development of mankind. It is the harbinger and the guarantee of a new march forward. To confirm the existence of a European national movement does not mean to identify in every respect this present national problem with the national questions of the past in Europe or even of the present in the colonies. Germany’s occupation of Europe has raised a national problem sui generis, it is the movement of resistance of the peoples in those imperialist nations crushed by a more powerful imperialism in the epoch of the death agony of capitalism. We must note here, in order to try to understand what is going on in Europe, that the Nazi administration in the conquered countries greatly differs from a traditional military occupation (for example, the Prussians in France in 1871). Certain territories have been incorporated formally into Germany; others (General Gouvernement of Poland, Protectorate of Bohemia-Moravia) have a colonial status, with no promise of future liberation. But even in the countries which are formally merely under military administration (Belgium, Occupied France), the Nazis have taken a great number of economic, political and social measures which surpass by far the requirements of a simple military occupation (for instance the measures against the Jews). The Slogan of National FreedomAny national struggle is also, to varying degrees, a social struggle. This is particularly true of the present movement of resistance in Europe. Under the weight of oppression, the hatred, the rage and the despair accumulated in the conquered countries have poured out in the most diverse forms of revolt, and representatives of the most varied social circles are swept along in the movement. But if one considers the whole, it appears clearly that the focus of the resistance is in the laboring masses, the workers and, in central and south-eastern Europe, the peasants. The Nazis have, in general, easily found a common language with the big industrial and financial bourgeoisie, which is terrorized by its fear of communism and is looking for a way to save what it can of its profits and privileges. The most typical case is France. With the middle and petty bourgeoisie of the towns the Nazis have had much less success; they have, however, found political collaborators, fascist adventurers and, above all, functionaries of the former regime who stay at the side of the representatives of “order.” Around the Nazis also have gravitated a certain number of go-betweens, profiteers, black market speculators and nouveaux riches. But the more deeply one penetrates the popular masses, the more one feels the fierce hatred for the invader, the more universal is the opposition to Nazism. It is interesting to note, in this connection, the recent statement of Andr Philip, former French Deputy who escaped from Lyons some weeks ago and who, upon his arrival in London, was appointed by De Gaulle a member of the Fighting French National Committee. Philip’s testimony is important first because he is a Gaullist, thus our political adversary, also because he just recently left France where he was in close contact with the resistance movement, and finally because he is, in general, an honest observer. On his arrival in London he declared: “The great mass of resistance is constituted by the workers. The peasants are hostile to Vichy but they are still dispersed. Traitors and collaborators have been recruited only among big businessmen and the wealthier class. The middle class and the representatives of the small and medium industries are generally favorable to us: they do what they can, at grips with tremendous difficulties.” The last sentence sounds like an excuse for the lack of activity on the part of these middle class circles. Are we witnessing a struggle of the bourgeoisie in the midst of the indifference of the masses? No, it is exactly the contrary. Even the workers’ opposition to the native bourgeoisie, which does not hesitate to collaborate when it sees some profit in it, is part of the national struggle. National sentiment, long monopolized by the ruling class to better assure its domination and extend its rapine, is now a revolutionary ferment which is stirring up the masses against the existing order. The social character of the movement is also particularly clear in Poland. There, in the towns at least, resistance to the German oppression is led by socialist workers’ groups who have only hate for the pre-war regime and only contempt for the government-in-exile at London. This feature of the movement does not prevent it, however, from unfolding under the slogan of independence of the country. And with reason! In all the invaded countries all the political and even the economic questions gravitate around the central problem: the presence of a foreign master. All the democratic tasks, so important at the present moment, take on an abstract and unreal character if they are not crowned with the demand for national freedom. The economic struggles likewise raise the problem of the independence of the country even in unoccupied France the population well knows that the lack of food is due to German plundering. The elementary duty of Marxists is to write into their program the demand for national freedom which, although it had long lost all content for most of the European countries, has now been given a new reality by the catastrophes of the death agony of capitalism. For us it is not merely a question of a “trick” in order to “take advantage” of the present aspirations of the masses, but of sincerely and honestly recognizing an elementary principle of democratic rights. The Marxist proposes to fight for its realization in the same way that he solves all tasks, by revolutionary methods, and not by allying himself with one of the imperialist camps. To have a negative attitude toward the independence of a country is to abandon the working masses and the laboring people in general to the dangers of reactionary nationalist demagogy. Europe is not on the eve of a new wave of national bourgeois revolutions, but of socialist proletarian revolutions. But such is the dialectic of history that the capitalist system is revealing its bankruptcy to a number of peoples in the form of a new national oppression. Toward the present movement of resistance three attitudes are possible. The first is to see in it a sort of reactionary Vende, menacing the Nazi work of “unification” of Europe. Only Hitler’s lackeys take such a position which amounts to according fascism some progressive features. The second attitude is indifference—the present situation is “temporary” and besides, very complex; let’s wait for better times. Needless to say, this has nothing in common with Bolshevism. The third is to recognize the explosive character of a popular national movement in the present-day Europe. Independently of the present consciousness of the movement, objectively, it opens the way to the proletarian revolution. “The dialectics of history is such,” wrote Lenin in 1916, “that small nations, powerless as an independent factor in the struggle against imperialism, play a part as one of the ferments, one of the bacilli, which help the real power against imperialism to come on the scene, namely, the socialist proletariat.” And, certain people may object, the imperialist war? Can we support the demand for national freedom in Europe while the present war is going on? Doesn’t this mean adhering to one of the imperialist camps? If, after the conclusion of the peace, the state of oppression would continue for some European countries then, doubtless, we would have to inscribe on our flag national freedom for those peoples. But can we do it now without participating ipso facto in the imperialist war? The situation certainly would be much more simple if there were national oppression in Europe without imperialist war. But unfortunately our epoch is far from being simple and it is precisely the imperialist war that revives national oppression. The reasoning that would make us wait for the end of the war suffers from a fatal formalism. This is clearly shown if we take the example of Czechoslovakia. The non-German territories of Bohemia and Moravia became a German “protectorate” before the present war broke out. We would then have had to stand for the national freedom, of the Czechs, to abandon this demand at the moment of the declaration of war and to take it up again at the conclusion of the peace. But that is not all. An imperialist peace would be hardly distinguishable from the war. We are in an epoch of convulsion where the line between war and peace will become more and more faint. The present war can be and doubtless will be succeeded by other military operations: intra-European, colonial, among the former allies, against new proletarian powers, etc. Exactly when will the formalists “authorize” us to take up again the demand for national freedom? All this formalism comes from a lack of understanding of the nature of the present national movements and of our support. In spite of its great importance at this hour, national independence remains a democratic demand. As such, we fight for its realization, but with our own methods, and we integrate it into our program of socialist revolution. If tomorrow Hitler attacks Sweden or Switzerland, we would give no supported the Norwegian, Yugoslav or Greek governments, for such .support can gain absolutely nothing for socialism or even for democracy. But if, in case of military defeat, when the bourgeois state is crushed, a popular national movement of resistance to German oppression springs up, we would support it, for such a movement, objectively, clears the road to the revolution. Our support does not depend upon the formal question of the moment—during or after the imperialist war—but on the political and social nature of the movement. As long as it is a real movement of revolt of the masses against oppression, it is our elementary duty to support it and, of course, this support can in no way signify political participation in the imperialist war. The “second front” may be adduced against our slogan. It is quite likely that some day or other the United Nations will land in Europe. In this case, as long as a country is divided by a military front, the slogan of national freedom loses all revolutionary content. But to confuse the reality of today with the possibility of tomorrow is a serious fault in revolutionary tactics. But, after all, cannot the cry of national freedom be used as an instrument in the hands of Anglo-American imperialism and its satellites to chain the peoples to the imperialist war? Undoubtedly! But is there one democratic demand that has never been utilized by the bourgeoisie to camouflage its aims and deceive the masses? Not a single one! The task of Marxists is not to abandon the democratic demands because the bourgeoisie tries to hide its foul face behind them, but to defend them by revolutionary means and to integrate them into the socialist reconstruction of society, as long as these demands correspond to the aspirations and the revolutionary interests of the great mass of people. To reveal the falsity of the argument, one merely has to turn it around if the demand for national freedom plays into the hands of Anglo-American imperialism, then, inversely, ignoring or underestimating the national problem in Europe plays into the hands of German imperialism. All across Europe the Nazis and their lackeys console the starved and terrorized people with the picture of a unified Europe. Hurry to integrate yourself into this unity in order to receive all its benefits! An end to these puerile reactions of reactionary nationalism, today outmoded by the necessities of modern economy! This propaganda has not been without effect on quite a large number of pacifists, socialists and communists, who now greet Nazism as the realization of the socialist unification of Europe. But isn’t “national freedom” the return to the status quo ante, that is, to the bourgeois regime? Lenin long ago ridiculed this argument when he answered those partisans of Rosa Luxemburg who opposed, according to his own words, a “national rebellion in annexed Belgium, Serbia, Galicia, Armenia": “.. our Polish comrades are opposed to such a rebellion on the ground that there is also a bourgeoisie in the annexed countries, and this bourgeoisie also oppresses other nations, or rather, it may oppress them, since the only point under discussion is ‘right to oppress.’ It appears, then, that the criterion of a given war, or a given rebellion, is not its real social content (the struggle of an oppressed nation against the oppressor for liberation), but the possibility of the now oppressed bourgeoisie exercising its ‘right’ to oppress.” (Lenin’s italics.) But doesn’t the slogan of national liberation destroy proletarian internationalism? In particular, doesn’t it hinder all fraternization of workers in conquered territories with the German soldiers and workers, without whose action any revolution in Europe is unthinkable? The cry of freedom of the peoples has nothing in common with the thirst for imperialist revenge. How can a German soldier free himself from the ideological hold of Nazism if he has not recognized honestly and without equivocation the right of the oppressed peoples to their freedom? The most elementary duty, not only of a German socialist worker or soldier, but of a sincere democrat (if this variety still exists) is to desire, to hail and to help the revolt of the oppressed peoples. National Freedom and SocialismThe slogan of national liberation in no way implies a program of restoration of a divided Europe. It means purely and simply that each people must be free to determine its own destiny and that the revolutionary party supports the struggle for this elementary freedom. The oppression of the peoples of Europe by German imperialism is a barbarous and reactionary undertaking. Resistance to the enslavement of the nations is at present a great progressive factor which, objectively, opens the way to the proletarian revolution. The revolutionary party must support and guide the painful efforts of the European peoples to tear themselves free from German domination. Such is the content of the slogan of national liberation. It is the simple expression of the struggle against oppression. But, after the collapse of the Hitlerian empire, Europe must unite if it wishes to live. If this fundamental task is not accomplished, there will be new wars and new oppressions. Europe’s only hope is the economic unification of the continent, combined with freedom of national development for each people. And only the proletariat is capable of undertaking such a task. The proletariat will accomplish this by establishing the Socialist United States of Europe. However, only free peoples can unite. The first condition of a federation of European nations is their independence from the foreign yoke. If the national problems of Europe can only be resolved in a socialist federation, then inversely, this federation can only be achieved among free and equal nations. Far from being in opposition to each other, the two slogans, National Liberation and Socialist United States of Europe, are closely connected. At the present time, when the Nazis are trying to justify their crimes in the name of “European unity,” it is especially important not to counterpose the federation against the nation, but to present it for what it really will be, a form of organization and of guarantee of national freedom. Those who oppose to the slogan of national liberation the “purely socialist” formula of United States of Europe fail to notice that this formula is itself a compromise, a compromise between the centralizing necessities of a planned economy and the centrifugal tendencies inherited from past centuries, which cannot be erased in a few months or a few years. The United States implies states. The complete economic and political unification of the continent will not be made in a day, but will be the product of a whole historical epoch and will largely depend, moreover, on what happens in the rest of the world. At what tempo and in what precise forms will this development be effected? Experience will tell. The slogan of Socialist United States of Europe merely gives the general algebraic formula. Moreover, let us note in passing, the disappearance of the borders between the different states will go hand in hand with the withering away of each state. The clearest example of federation which led to an almost complete unity is the United States of America. But the building up of the federal power was a long process and it took a rather serious civil war to consolidate it definitively. Of course, socialism will have other methods than capitalism. However, the example of the United States shows us how artificial would have been any opposition between the slogans of the liberation of the thirteen colonies and the United States of America! Whatever the transitional forms of organization, the realization of the socialist United States of Europe implies the freedom of each nation which enters the federation. But the only real guarantee of its freedom is the right to say yes or no. Any “guarantee” of free cultural development, etc., is an illusion if the nation does not have the right to withdraw from the union. After the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, we do not wish to march to socialism by violence, but by patiently convincing the peoples of the superiority of centralization. Just as, in the agrarian problem, we are not partisans of “forced collectivization,” but we want to demonstrate to the peasant, by his own experience, the advantages of large collective enterprise over small property, so in the national question we are against any “forced unification” and the only real, not fictitious, guarantee is the right of secession. Where is the assurance that the historical evolution will lead to complete unification? Not in violence, but in the development of the productive forces. Why was the rising bourgeoisie able to dissolve the feudal provinces in the unity of the great modern nations? Because its rise corresponded to a prodigious increase of the productive forces. Why cannot Hitler, who does not spare violence, unify the European “provinces"? Because he represents the decline of capitalism. A socialist federation, European or world-wide, by no means excludes, but implies the right of each nationality to determine its own destiny. However, we are still far from the socialist federation. Today’s reality is the general oppression of the peoples of Europe by German imperialism. If under socialism it would be theoretically false to counterpose national freedom to the principle of federation, how absurd, pedantic and empty is such opposition in face of the present condition of Europe! (In the next issue a second article will examine the question of our relations with the various underground groups, the nature of the war in Serbia, the slogan of a Constituent Assembly, and the problems of terrorism and sabotage.)  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 


utionary Tasks Under the Nazi Boot    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Revolutionary Tasks Under the Nazi Boot “Revolutionary Tasks Under the Nazi Boot” Fourth International, November 1942, pp.333-338, under the name “Marc Loris”, (5,589 words). This is part of a debate or discussion. See the previous article by “Marc Loris”/Van Heijenoort in September 1942 and the reply by Felix Morrow in December 1942. EDITOR’S NOTE: Fourth International has opened its pages to a discussion on the national question in Europe. The first discussion article, “The National Question in Europe,” by Marc Loris, was published in our September issue. The fact that it was a discussion article was inadvertently omitted. Marc Loris’ present article is a continuation of his first. Other discussion articles by various contributors will be published in succeeding issues. The official position of the Socialist Workers Party on the national question in Europe, adopted unanimously at Its Tenth Convention in October, appeared in our October issue under the heading “The National Question in Europe.” ************** Nazi oppression passed over Europe like a steam-roller. Throughout the continent there now remains, between the Nazi power and the population, no legal organization in which the masses can take shelter and regroup themselves. After the political parties and the trade unions, the work of destruction has been extended even to the most neutral and most insignificant organizations, for the Nazis feared—and with good reason—that even the slightest of them might become a crystallization-point of resistance. Into the tiniest groups the Nazis introduced their own men, who proposed adherence to the “New Order"; even stamp-collectors’ organizations were gleichgeschaltet. What remains of the workers’ organizations had to pass over into illegality and to new methods. The traditional bourgeois and petty-bourgeois organizations have given way to underground groups, of a new character, not directly stemming from the old parties. Small illegal groups which often do not extend beyond the limits of a city or of a region are appearing everywhere, only a few can maintain contacts—and even those very irregularly—on a national scale. Innumerable little newspapers spring up and disappear. Liaisons are established and broken again. On the whole, there is to be observed, with the passing months, a certain progress toward centralization, but very slowly, and often interrupted as a result of the severe conditions of illegality. Even that political movement which was best adapted to underground work, Stalinism, is suffering greatly: in spite of a powerful apparatus and abundant resources, relations between the center and the regional organizations are often broken—a situation which cannot fail to create favorable occasions for discussion and united action between the Communist Party members and the Trotskyists. Of all the working-class organizations, however, the Stalinist parties remain the most powerful and the most active—and by a large margin. The Stalinist propaganda is, of course, completely chauvinist in character, and is very careful not to speak of socialism. Apart from the Stalinists, the two most noteworthy centers of resistance of the working-class movement are formed by the Left Socialist groups in Poland (some of them close to Trotskyism and all hostile to the Government-in-Exile) and by what remains of the Norwegian trade union movement, which the Nazis have been unable to wipe out entirely. Of the Second International but little remains. Lately there could be noted a certain renewal of activity by the official Socialist groups in Belgium and in the north of France; but it retains an extremely fragmentary character. The Petty-Bourgeois MovementsBroad layers of the petty bourgeoisie have lost their economic and social balance. The German occupation has caused, on the whole, an enormous pauperization and even, to a certain degree, proletarianization, of the petty bourgeoisie. This social crisis finds its political expression in the formation of the innumerable groups and movements which reflect all the rainbow colorations of the petty bourgeoisie. At the reactionary end of this spectrum are to be found the traditional chauvinist groups, such as the Gaullist organization in France. One must carefully distinguish between the masses’ very widespread but rather vague sympathies for the “democratic” camp, including De Gaulle, and the Gaullist organization itself. The latter is made up above all of former military men and functionaries. They have no feeling for activity by the masses to whom, for that matter, they are incapable of speaking. Most of them are nearly as terrified of a movement of the masses as of the German occupation. Their principal activity in the military field is espionage on behalf of England and, in the political field, waiting for an Anglo-American debarkment. At the other extreme of this rainbow are to be found some organizations which are honestly looking for a way out of the intolerable situation of the lower strata of the petty bourgeoisie. The elements most suited to become the spokesmen of these lawyers are the youth and the intellectuals. Thus among their leaders are often to be found students, teachers and writers. Violently repelled by fascism, these social strata are turning toward socialism in search of a solution for their misfortunes. They willingly concede that the bourgeois system is coming to its end, and accept the program of the federation of peoples, but they have not yet overcome all their distrust of the workers. Their leaders often keep hunting for a rosier path than that of the “dictatorship of the proletariat,” and accuse Marxism of being “narrow.” Between these extreme types of groupings are to be found, of course, all intermediary forms. In the terrible conditions of illegality, there are inevitably, among the various underground groups, frequent practical agreements: for printing newspapers, for transporting literature and people, etc.—even finding paper is a serious problem. Without such contacts, it would be simply impossible to exist; and they involve, needless to say, no compromise in program. Even now in the occupied countries, especially in western Europe, occasions for public demonstrations are not infrequent: housewives’ demonstrations against the lack of foodstuffs, demonstrations against those restaurants which serve food to the rich without ration cards, demonstrations against the “collaborationists,” public demonstrations on various national holidays (Bastille Day, etc.). These demonstrations are organized by illegal groups of every kind, and the question of our participation arises. It is difficult to give a general answer. The important point for determining whether we participate is not so much the nature of the occasion or of the initiators of the demonstration, but the political situation and the possibilities of the given moment. If certain demonstrations are repeatedly held, mobilizing an increasing number of demonstrators, it is the duty of the revolutionary party to call on the workers to participate in them, even though organized by petty-bourgeois national groups. Of course, it is also the task of the party to appear in them with its own slogans. After the crushing of all organizations, the disappearance of all organized political life, every manifestation which restores the feeling of collective action however modest or confused its objectives may be, is extremely progressive, and the task of the revolutionary party is to aid, and if possible, to broaden it. Obviously, while taking advantage of every possible step forward, we cannot limit our freedom to criticize reactionary and utopian programs. Now as always, the Marxists carry on their work of explaining and clarifying. They must especially denounce the falsity and the hypocrisy of all the chauvinist groups who desire nothing but revenge and who, although demanding the freedom of their own nation, do not hesitate and will not hesitate to participate in the oppression of other nations. Thus, all movements which find their inspiration in London and Washington (governments-in-exile, General De Gaulle, etc.) must be characterized not as national movements, but as imperialist movements by their aims as well as by their methods (alliance with Anglo-American imperialism, exploitation of Belgian colonies, of a part of the French, Dutch colonies, etc.). These groups attempt to chain the popular national revolt to one of the imperialist camps. In new circumstances they fill the traditional role of the bourgeois parties that have their base in the petty bourgeoisie. One such party was the defunct Radical-Socialist Party of France which rested on the democratic aspirations of the French peasant the better to chain him to big business. Now the Gaullist movement exploits for imperialist aims the aroused national sentiment. Its program and those of like groups can bring only new catastrophes to Europe. As for the various petty-bourgeois groupings which are turning in the direction of socialism, we must have a much more patient and pedagogical attitude toward them. These groups, rebelling against the present oppression, go so far as to blame the system of imperialist trusts and monopolies, but they always retain, as we have indicated, some apprehension toward the workers’ program. Their general program, vaguely speaking, is the most consistent formal democracy. In discussions with these groups the main task is to show the reality behind the forms of pure democracy, and patiently but firmly point out to them that a choice is inevitable, for there is no “third way.” In the present situation all democratic demands are charged with an enormous revolutionary potentiality; for in the epoch of the disintegration of the capitalist regime only the proletarian revolution can bring reality to democratic principles. Therefore the Marxist parties must be the most resolute champions of these demands, knowing well that their fulfillment leads society to the threshold of socialism. But this is also the reason that democratic demands become a lie when separated from the socialist program, for without this program they cannot materialize. Not only is bourgeois democracy merely a formal democracy covering up the real inequality between capitalist and proletarian; but in our epoch even this formal democracy can exist only at brief intervals, in anemic form and will soon give way to Bonapartist and fascist dictatorships or to socialism. To speak of freedom now, and to remain silent about the only means of attaining it, by the proletarian revolution, is to repeat an empty phrase, is to deceive the masses. Joint action with democratic petty-bourgeois groups, often unavoidable and moreover desirable, can never stop us from criticizing their programs before the masses and from trying to win the best part of their organization. The programs of nearly all the underground groupings, Stalinists included, contain the demand for a Single National Assembly, elected by universal suffrage. For some of these groups, that is their only program for the day following the fall of the Hitlerian empire. In the French section of the Fourth International, especially in the occupied zone, a discussion has been taking place on this slogan of a National (or Constituent) Assembly. The arguments in favor of its adoption are reduced, in general, to this: If we are ready to fight for democratic liberties how can we fail to write into our program the demand which crowns all these freedoms, the National Assembly? This reasoning is not correct. We fight with the masses for even the smallest democratic liberties precisely because this fight opens the road to the proletarian revolution; at the same time we explain that this revolution is the only assurance against the return of oppression, of dictatorship, of fascism. The National Assembly is by no means the crowning of democratic demands. The real meat of these demands can come into existence only through the development of workers’ and peasants’ committees. When separated from the question of power—bourgeois or proletarian—the slogan of a National Assembly at the present moment in Europe is nothing but an empty form, a shell without revolutionary content. Under today’s conditions of illegality, the slogan does not correspond to any real experience of the masses, while every group covers different political programs with this formula; the slogan thus takes on a ritual character and becomes a piece of democratic charlatanism. Will we not pass through a “democratic” stage after the collapse of Nazi power? This is very likely. But it is also very likely that in this period we will already be seeing the formation of workers’ committees, embryo soviets, transforming the “democratic stage” into a more or less long dual power. It is possible that at that time the slogan of a National Assembly may become filled with a certain revolutionary content. General De Gaulle’s movement officially declared, some months ago, that at the downfall of Nazism, the power will come into the hands of a single Assembly elected by all the French in the most democratic manner; but in articles and conversations Gaullist representatives are already explaining that between the collapse of the Nazi tyranny and the convoking of the National Assembly there will elapse an interregnum necessary to save the country from chaos and to re-establish order, and that during this time democracy will be quite limited. We can easily imagine what this means. It is possible that at that time the cry for immediate convoking of the Assembly will correspond to the real experience of the masses and will have an offensive character against the provisional government. However, that is the music of tomorrow. Terrorism and SabotageThe criticism of the petty-bourgeois and Stalinist programs should be followed, of course, by a critique of their methods. Nazi oppression has already aroused in Europe multiple forms of resistance: passive demonstrations of all kinds, attempts on the lives of German officers, wiping out “collaborationists,” explosions, train wrecks, fires, production slow-downs in the factories, damaging of machines, strikes, street demonstrations, hunger riots, guerrilla activity—the last of these becoming almost full-fledged war in the Balkans. The very variety of these activities reveals the diversity of the social strata that have been drawn into the movement. The difficulties of the present moment, the participation of petty-bourgeois layers therein, and the deliberate policy of Stalinism, have aroused a wave of adventurism. Individual terrorism has become common throughout the entire continent. The Stalinists in particular have combined a vulgarly chauvinist opportunism in their program with a stupid and criminal adventurism in action. The revolutionary party can only repeat all the classic arguments of Marxism against individual terrorism; they still retain today all their original validity. In discussions with workers under Stalinist influence, we must in particular point out the connection between terrorism and bureaucratism. The terrorist hero and the bureaucrat both want to act for the masses, apart from them. Both terrorism and bureaucratism reflect contempt for the incompetent masses who must be pulled out of their difficulties by the individual. We repeat: Nothing can be gained by individual attempts; they merely sacrifice precious devotion uselessly and delay the action of the masses. Of course, cur criticism of terrorism does not arise from any moral indignation. We must constantly emphasize that we are on the side of the terrorists in their struggle against the oppressors, but that as against terrorism we are for more efficacious methods. Certain forms of sabotage which are the action of individuals or of tiny isolated groups are scarcely to be distinguished from terrorism and are often nothing more than explosions of rage and despair, without any real efficacy. But, ever since the occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1939, the Czech workers have undertaken to sabotage production inside the factories. Their example is now followed throughout all Europe. Sabotage was a means of struggle of the youth of the labor movement, at a time when capitalism had to impose the discipline of the modern factory on the handicraft or peasant masses. It was then that there appeared the Scotch “ca’canny,” anarcho-syndicalism in France, the I.W.W. in America. These movements represented only a brief passing tendency of the class struggle. The workers found in the strike a weapon which was both more effective and less costly. Nazi oppression has rendered strikes extremely difficult in the Europe of today. Hence the workers have been obliged to have recourse to sabotage, which bears the relation to the strike that guerrilla warfare does to regular warfare. There is no doubt that throughout the entire continent the workers have often undertaken to slow down production and lower its quality on their own initiative, without awaiting the summons of illegal organizations, thus demonstrating that this method has at present nothing artificial about it and that its “abnormal” character simply corresponds to “abnormal” conditions. The revolutionary party must of course work to extend sabotage inside the factories in the occupied countries. The task is, above all, to interest in this the bulk of the workers of the plant and not to consider this work a technical job reserved to a few isolated “experts.” This is equally important from the practical as well as the political point of view. Repression is rendered infinitely more difficult, and the collective nature of the struggle helps to overcome the atomization of the working class brought about by the crushing of its organizations. The first months of the German occupation were, in general, characterized by a disappearance of collective consciousness, each thinking only of saving himself, in his own way. This state of mind has already been overcome at least partially, precisely by the movement of national resistance. The revolutionaries must always endeavor to restore to the workers the consciousness of their collective power. The collective forms which can be taken by sabotage within the factories are: the slowing down of production, the lowering of its quality, the rapid wearing out of the machines. Everywhere that they can, revolutionaries must bring about the formation of a committee inside the factory—illegal, obviously—which organizes and supervises the work of sabotage and protection against stool-pigeons. It is this collective sabotage, which regroups the workers around a common goal and against which repression can only with difficulty operate, which represents the greatest danger for Hitler. Sabotage, when conceived of as a direct aid to the Soviet Union, does not exclude isolated acts against particularly sensitive points in the economic and military apparatus (power plants, tunnels and railroad bridges, etc.). But all that can be done in this field will always remain relatively limited. Only by taking on a mass character can sabotage really threaten the German military machine, and it can acquire this character only at the center of the collective strength of the workers, in their places of work. “But,” a Stalinist might say, “do not the interests of the defense of the USSR not justify individual terrorism? Aren’t you yourselves for the defense of the Soviet Union? The European masses are engaged in a war against the Nazis behind the front—and in war all methods are good! Of course, Marxists are right in opposing terrorism considered as a means of ‘exciting’ the masses to struggle, but now the killing of German officers by revolvers or bombs is a simple war measure.” This reasoning, which reflects the present policy of the Stalinists in the occupied countries, betrays an ignorance of military art as well as of revolutionary policy. It is precisely in a serious struggle that all methods are not good. The task of the military chief or of the revolutionary militant consists in choosing the means which lead to the end and putting aside those which are sterile or even harmful. Terrorism, by its very nature, always retains an individual character. “Mass terrorism” would be—the revolution. All the terrorism today is, when all is said and done, scarcely a pin-prick for Hitler. But, on the other side of the ledger, the liabilities are enormous. The best working-class blood is shed without counting. The disproportion between the sacrifices and the results obtained can engender nothing but discouragement and passivity. It is not easy to judge from afar, but it seems that the movement of resistance suffered a serious setback in Czechoslovakia after the assassination of Heydrich. We have always maintained that the defense of the USSR is indissolubly linked with the class struggle of the international proletariat. This principle has direct consequences for the defense of the workers’ state. Stalin sacrificed the revolutionary interests of the international proletariat for alliances with the imperialist bourgeoisies. After the successive defeats of the European proletariat, engendered by Stalinism, the catastrophe was inevitable. Today, Stalin tries to jump over the consequences of his fatal policy by hurling the workers of occupied Europe into the adventure of terrorism. He thus not only blocks their revolutionary future, but also does a disservice to the military interests of the USSR. The sabotage of production within the factories can produce infinitely greater results than can the murder of a few hundred or even a few thousand German officers or collaborationists. Awakening the collective initiative of the working class instead of paralyzing it, sabotage of production can attain a scope which no wave of terrorism can ever reach. At the same time it accelerates the regroupment of the working class, recreates its collective consciousness, and prepares it to enter its revolutionary future. The last few months have revealed that Hitler is struggling desperately to keep up his armament production. Sabotage in the factories represents for him a mortal danger. But one of the most important conditions for its spread is turning our back on individual terrorism and all forms of adventurism. Even in the Europe of today the USSR’s immediate military requirements and the interests of the European proletariat’s revolutionary future completely coincide. We must further note that individual terrorism is an obstacle to fraternization with the German soldiers. It tightens the bonds between soldiers and officers instead of breaking them. The German military authorities take the greatest precautions to prevent contact between troops and inhabitants. Every attempt to spread propaganda among the German soldiers is punished with extreme severity, for this is a mortal danger to the Nazi generals. This is also why the task of fraternization can never be abandoned by revolutionists. The GuerrillasIn central and south-eastern Europe geographic and social conditions have permitted the appearance of guerrillas. They have sprung up especially in regions where the population is spread out, where railroads are scarce, where communication is difficult. They are principally peasant movements. But not entirely. Whenever they were able, groups of workers have joined the bands. It has even been noticed that in Czechoslovakia guerrilla bands have been formed directly by workers. It is reported that “densely wooded areas are furnishing a place of safety to the hundreds of saboteurs from the mines and the iron and steel plants of Kladno, to organizers of passive resistance, and leaders of strikers. After a recent clash which occurred between the Nazi police and Czech miners who were found to be in possession of dynamite, the Germans undertook to drive the refugees from this territory; but the fugitives, having full support of the population, successfully eluded the members of the Gestapo.” In various parts of Poland the peasants have formed guerrilla bands, which are now aided by Soviet partisans who have succeeded in filtering through the Nazi lines. Guerrilla bands are also very active in Ruthenia. But it is in the Balkans that the movement has taken on the greatest proportions, and especially in what was yesterday Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was a product of Versailles, financially supported by France as a bastion of her hegemony in Europe. The fact that the Belgrade government ruled over at least five different nationalities was one of the reasons for the quick German victory. The country was occupied by the Germans and Italians. The Yugoslav state was destroyed. Under the weight of unprecedented oppression, the peasants have started to gather together in the mountains to resist. The imperialist war was succeeded by a national struggle, half revolt, half war, against the German and Italian oppressors, as well as against the governments they set up in Belgrade and Zagreb. This struggle is going through many vicissitudes. Bands are entirely dispersed only to form again later on. Villages revolting prematurely are crushed. Officially, several hundred villages have already been reported razed by the Germans and Italians. Moreover, the movement is widely divided. Information is scarce and often rather dubious, nevertheless it is clear that various bands operate separately. They are separated by national differences: Serbians, Slovenes, Bosnians, Montenegrins, etc.; they are also separated politically and socially. The Chetniks, a Serbian organization under the direct control of Mikhailovich, seems to be the most reactionary. It opposes any social change and thinks only of re-establishing the previous regime. Other bands have set up “Communist” or “Soviet” regimes. What is the reality behind these words? It is rather, difficult to tell. These bands are composed, it seems, of peasants; mine workers have joined many of them and now form a substantial proportion of some bands. At any rate, the differences are great enough to have provoked armed conflicts among the various hands, and Mikhailovich has under-taken repressions against the “Communists.” Thus, as soon as the weight of oppression is somewhat lightened, the national struggle immediately raises the social question. The example of Yugoslavia shows, although on a limited scale, the extremely unstable character of the movement of national resistance in Europe today and how it leads immediately to the class struggle. Of course, we are entirely on the side of the bands of poor peasants and workers in their conflicts with the reactionary elements. But that does not mean abandoning the ground of national independence. Criticism of Mikhailovich and other conservative groups should proceed on the basis of liberating the country: Mikhailovich’s repressions sabotage the resistance; in order to arouse the peasants we have to open up a social perspective for them, etc. However, temporary military agreements between the revolutionary groups and Mikhailovich are still entirely possible in the future. Cannot the movement of resistance completely merge with the imperialist war? This is possible and would be nothing new. Many national wars have ended up as imperialist wars. If the Anglo-American camp should open a new front in the Balkans, the national character of the struggle would disappear immediately. But this is tomorrow’s possibility, not today’s reality. At the present time, the struggle in the Balkans is a link in the whole movement of resistance of the European peoples to Nazism, and it thus takes on great importance. The guerrillas, being principally a peasant movement, create the greatest danger for the states where quasi-feudal relations still prevail in the countryside (especially Hungary, but also Rumania, Bulgaria and Slovakia). Revolution in central and south-eastern Europe, where the agrarian problem has never been resolved even in the bourgeois manner, will kindle large peasant revolts, and the present movement of resistance is their direct preparation. Four months ago the Hungarian government officially announced the arrest of three hundred officers and non-commissioned officers of the Hungarian army for having helped guerrilla bands in Yugoslavia, Poland and the USSR by transmitting arms and information to them. We can measure the importance of this incident if we recall that Hungary is one of the countries where the landlords’ rule over the peasants is most brutal. The resistance in Yugoslavia has called forth revolt in all the neighboring countries. Guerrillas have appeared in Greece, Macedonia, Rumania and Bulgaria. Even in Croatia, to which Hitler gave formal independence, the peasants are starting to form guerrilla bands against the Italians. It would be imprudent to exaggerate the present political consciousness of these movements or to build too great hopes on them as long as they have not found a leadership in the urban proletariat. But to deny their importance for the revolution and to remain indifferent toward them would be blind passivity. From National Resistance to the Proletarian RevolutionExactly what role will the demand for national liberation play in the preparation and development of the European revolution? Only the historian of the future will be able to answer this question precisely and to him will fall the lot of definitively measuring the place occupied by national revolt in the great torrent of hatred, of anger, of despair and of hope, which carries the peoples of occupied Europe toward the revolution. To us falls the lot of giving an answer for action. This answer is: The slogan of national liberation has played up to the present, and will continue to play for some time, an important role in regrouping the masses, overcoming their atomization and drawing them into the political struggle. This is more than enough for it to appear on our banner. Through what concrete forms of struggle will the movement of resistance in the various European countries pass? How will it connect with the proletarian revolution? The answer to these questions depends on the relationship of the contending forces, in particular the unfolding of the imperialist war. If Germany should maintain a firm grip on the European continent for many years, it would be difficult for the movement to raise itself above its present political level, which is still primitive, and would threaten to take an increasingly narrow national character. But the perspective of a long German domination over Europe must now appear to he more and more illusory even to Hitler himself. The resistance of the Soviet workers and kolkhozniki shows more and more clearly the limits of the German military machine. The progressive weakening of German imperialism will bring with it not only a quantitative multiplication of revolutionary actions throughout the continent, but will give a new character to the struggle. Terrorist attempts will he superseded by the action of the masses. During recent weeks the first signs of this transformation have appeared. Athens has seen a general transport workers’ strike lasting several days. The workers of the Renault factories, heart of the Parisian proletariat, have threatened to go out on strike several times. The Belgian miners of the Borinage have recently unleashed several strike movements, and even, it is reported, obtained the liberation of hostages from the German authorities by threatening a general strike of miners. Above all, the present movement of the French workers of the unoccupied zone has aroused great masses. These are the first signs of profound changes in the situation. Its principal causes are the weakening of the German oppressor and the rebirth of the collective consciousness of the masses. The renewal of activity of the masses will cause the wave of individual terrorism to recede by giving more reality each day to the perspective of the revolution.. Mutinies have already broken out, it appears, among the German soldiers in Norway and among the Italian troops. It is hard to determine the amount of truth in this information. However, it is at least plausible and, if premature, the future will give it truth. The mutinies will lead directly to the fraternization of German soldiers with the oppressed peoples. The common struggle against common oppression will unite the masses around the program of the Socialist United States of Europe. The demand for national liberation and participation in the present movement of resistance do not in any way imply that we must expect new bourgeois national revolutions or some revolution of a special character which would be neither bourgeois nor proletarian, but “national,” “popular” or “democratic.” Any large revolution is “national” in the sense that it carries along the great majority of the nation, and the “popular” and “democratic” character of any revolution worthy of the name is apparent at first glance. But we cannot transform this sociological description, essentially superficial, into a political program without turning our backs on the realities of the social classes, that is, abandoning Marxist ground. Both the French revolution of 1789 and the Russian revolution of 1917 were national, popular and democratic, but the first consolidated the reign of private property while the other ended it. That is why one was bourgeois and the other proletarian. As for the coming European revolution, its proletarian character will be apparent from its very first steps. But will we not pass through a transition period after the fall of the Hitlerian empire? To those who pose this question, we must reply with another question: Of what transition are you speaking? A transition from what to what? A transition from the bourgeois revolution to the proletarian revolution? Or a transition between the Nazi dictatorship and the dictatorship of the proletariat? These are two very different things. Naturally, the proletarian revolution will pass through many vicissitudes; pauses, even temporary retreats. But the first thing to understand, if one does not wish to commit error after error, is that it will be a proletarian revolution struggling with the bourgeois counter-revolution. Is a “democratic” stage, that is a renewal of bourgeois parliamentarism, possible after the collapse of Nazism? Such an eventuality is not excluded. But such a regime would not be at all the fruit of a bourgeois revolution or of a non-class “democratic revolution"; it would be the temporary and unstable product of a proletarian revolution which has not yet been completed and still has to settle accounts with the bourgeois counter-revolution. He who has not completely penetrated this dialectic has nothing to offer to the European masses. The present situation in the occupied countries is still profoundly reactionary. The task of the revolutionary socialists is still propaganda work, the gathering together and the formation of cadres. It is our duty to show, everywhere and always, the necessity of organized action of the masses. To all forms of adventurism flourishing at present, we must counterpose the organization of revolutionary violence. In the face of every carefully organized action, on a large or small scale, the Nazis will be disconcerted. They have no “secret weapon” against revolution. They were victorious in Germany only thanks to the incapacity of the workers’ leaders and never have had to face real actions of the masses. When these multiply, the Nazis will know how to answer them only with that combination of violence and imbecility which characterizes all regimes condemned by history.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

n and the Liberals    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Darlan and the Liberals “Darlan and the Liberals” Fourth International, January 1943, pp.4-6, under the name “Marc Loris”, (2,537 words). EDITOR’S NOTE: The following article was written prior to the assassination of Darlan and the subsequent developments. The correctness of its analysis of the Darlan deal and the politics of the liberals remains unaffected by the later events, which will be dealt with in the next issue of Fourth International. Washington’s deal with Admiral Darlan in North Africa dealt a sharp blow to the democratic myth which covered the real aims of this war. Now Darlan-the-Jailer is working, along with Eisenhower and Roosevelt, to “free” France. Everyone can now see how dirty are the hands that bring “freedom” to the peoples of Europe. All the democratic ideals suddenly have become prostituted to a degree which seemed impossible to many just a few weeks ago. And so the Darlan affair has provoked great anxiety within the caste of high priests who are the professional guardians of the democratic myth: the American liberals. Until recently they had an easy time of it. The United Nations were on the defensive. Hitler’s crimes and conquests allowed them to concoct the legend of an “anti-fascist” war. Who would dare speak of imperialist struggle in face of this crusade of humanity versus fascist barbarism? No, this was clearly a “people’s war.” And even an “international civil war,” a “revolution.” Less than a year ago—last February—George Soule, one of the editors of the New Republic assured us: “The Second World War is already a revolution.” A curious revolution whose first act on the offensive was to place Darlan-the-Jailer in power! The ignoble agreement at Algiers tore a big hole in the sacred veil of democracy with which the high priests of liberalism attempted to clothe the not too agreeable realities of imperialism. They were taken unawares. The November 16 New Republic commented on the debarkment, which had just been effected, under the title “We Begin!":“The Petain-Laval-Darlan clique at Vichy will do its best to play the game of its Nazi masters.... What is essential to-day is that ... we prove to the French people as a whole that the world we are fighting for includes their liberation.” Unfortunately for this unsolicited advice, Eisenhower and Roosevelt had a different idea of what was “essential.” The next week, still calling for a good democratic attitude in North Africa, the New Republic warned: “We are now drawing the image of the future on the blackboard of history.” Right. Washington is now drawing the image of the future that it wants, but that image differs perceptibly from the purple dream of democracy painted by the New Republic. Washington’s picture of the future already includes such silhouettes as Darlan, Otto von Hapsburg, Franco, Mannerheim and some “good” Italian general or prince. Confronted with such a difference between the myth which they have diligently built up and the reality as it was revealed in the person of Darlan, the liberals have gone in search of an explanation. Alas, the arsenal of liberalism is rather empty when it comes to explaining the mechanism of imperialism. The only bit of explanation they can find is that it was all a “mistake.” As early as November 14 the Nation declares: “The exclusion of the Fighting French from the North African expedition was a mistake.” A week later, editor Freda Kirchwey calls the whole affair a “costly political blunder” and discovers no less than three successive “mistakes.” On December 14, an editorial in the New Republic gives us the final explanation of the deal with Darlan by revealing that President Roosevelt “sometimes makes mistakes.” Without doubt. One day he puts on the wrong pair of socks; the next day he puts the wrong man in power in Algiers. But this explanation is a bit too hollow even for the Nation. So, to explain the mistake, this oracle of liberalism reveals that “the appeasers have never been in a majority even in the State Department, but from 1935 until this hour they have been able to force the long series of concessions and bargains which bit by bit weakened the force of democratic resistance.” Who are these mysterious appeasers? Why have they been “able to force” their will? What are the great democrats in our government doing? Why . . . —but why ask questions to which the Nation has no answer? Trying to deepen their superficial explanation, the liberals would have us separate the military plan from the political. “What doubtless appeared a reasonable military expedient is proving a costly political blunder,” declares editor Freda Kirchwey in the Nation of November 21. The same distinction is made again and again by the liberals in their criticism of the Darlan deal. However, repetition does not make it a bit more clever. If war is the continuation of politics by other means, so the politics which are conducted during a war correspond to the character of the military struggle, to the class which wages this fight, to its war aims, etc. Washington’s deal with Darlan is not a “mistake,” that is, an accident, but corresponds to the imperialist character of the present war. Since the war is not waged for democracy, it is easy for Washington to take Darlan as its first Quisling, and there is no mistake in that. In a polemic with the New Republic over the Darlan deal, the newspaper PM, in somewhat crude but quite clear language, showed the emptiness of the theory of the “political mistake.” On December 3, PM wrote: “Hitler and Hirohito are this nation’s major enemies. We must destroy them first. And, in fighting them, we cannot always be too finicky about the politics of the other United Nations. (Nor can they be too finicky about ours.) We cannot turn our backs on the Poles because their government was tyrannical, brutal, virtually as anti-Semitic as the Germans, and participated in the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. We cannot refuse to march with the soldiers of the Netherlands because of the way that nation exploited the East Indies and the East Indians. We sup at the same table as Stalin, much though we disapprove of Communism and his aggressions in the Baltic; we rub elbows with Churchill, though we detest his attitude toward India.” Of the war frankly described by PM, the Darlan deal is a true part, and no “mistake” at all. A Dark Future—For the LiberalsWith such an artificial and empty distinction between the right military move and the political “mistake,” the liberals can reassure no one, not even themselves, about the strength of the democratic myth. Every line they have written in the last weeks betrays their disquiet. Michael Straight, in the November 30 New Republic, asks: “In whose mind is not the remembrance of 1919 like a dry wind stirring up uneasy fear?” On December 14, he complains once more: “Our line is under heavy attack.” On November 28, Freda Kirchwey discovers that the present epoch does not lack “ill omens for the future of democracy.” And all together lament: What kind of peace will we get? In the November 30 New Republic, Michael Straight, under the title “The Warning,” recalls the experience of the last war. A very instructive experience indeed and worth being recalled now! He tells us of Woodrow Wilson’s promises to eliminate the “very causes” of war, of how the New Republic (yes, the same) greeted the nationalization of the railroads in 1917 as the beginning of a new social order. He quotes American and English liberals, especially Sidney Webb, who assured the masses that the old world would never come back, that peace would bring abundance and security for all! We might think we were reading, almost word for word, the recent promises of their present-day successors. The only difference is that this democratic vision of the future was more audacious, fresher, brighter in 1917-18 than now. This is easy to understand. The epoch between the two world wars brought forth rather hard realities, and the liberals of today have the thankless task of reheating a dish long grown cold. After performing the useful task of recalling this piece of history, Michael Straight has nothing more to say. Like a frightened animal that sees danger but cannot act, he keeps silent. Not a single liberal proposes a better remedy. Freda Kirchwey tells us in the Nation of November 28 that, to avoid the Darlan “mistake,” there should have been an Inter-Allied Political Council. If such a council “were now in existence, the Darlan blunder would not have been made.” Who should have appointed this Council? Apparently the statesmen who decided the deal with Darlan, jointly with the smaller statesmen who passively submit to their will. Everyone can see the value of the remedy. The same Freda Kirchwey tries to put Roosevelt back on the right road of democracy. “Mr. Roosevelt faces the necessity of regaining the ground he has lost. He must take the risks of a counter-offensive against the reactionaries who have forced him into retreat.” But what if Mr. Roosevelt does not mind being “forced” by the “reactionaries” too much? No, there must be a radical solution. The New Republic brings it to us. On November 30 an editorial flung out the battle cry: “Liberals, be strong!” Two weeks later a new call: “Liberals, unite and act!” Alas, who does not know that a “strong” liberal is, in our epoch, a contradictio in adiecto, something like a square circle? The New Republic calls on the liberals to “act,” but is at a loss to say just what this action could be. The Real Content of the QuarrelThe embarrassment of the liberals is easy to understand if we simply remember their position on the war. They are for the war, but want a “clean” war followed by a “good” peace. But if the war is not so “clean” and the future peace, already today, does not look so “good,” they have to swallow willy-nilly all that goes with it because they cannot abandon their support of the war. The impotence of the liberals flows from their acceptance of the war, and they come to an impasse each time they undertake to criticize some particularly undemocratic action. This is especially clear in the Darlan affair. In the Nation of November 21, Freda Kirchwey writes: “There was reason to use Darlan. No other French official knows as much as he about military and naval installation in Africa from Dakar to Bizerte, and his services were worth a good sum.” In exactly the same sense, an editorial in the New Republic on November 30 affirms: “The temporary acceptance of Admiral Darlan was probably a wise move.” This last sentence sounds almost like Roosevelt’s statement, according to which the Darlan deal is a “temporary agreement.” Then what is the exact difference of the liberals with the government? What frightens them so? Their writings during the past weeks give us a precise answer to this question. Michael Straight writes in PM on December 3: “Our liberal government is again in danger of sacrificing so much of its essential spirit that it is losing the rank and tile of its best supporters: the workers, the progressive farmers, the Negroes and other groups.” And he continues: “If the heart goes out of the liberal movement because of too much discouragement, then the rank and file though they may prefer the President, will not give him the enthusiastic support that alone can save the New Deal.” It is rather doubtful what remains of the New Deal, but Michael Straight’s reasoning is clear: If Roosevelt goes on with many Darlan deals, the “rank and file” will look for other ways. But since this deal was “probably a wise move,” what can “we” do except ask the President to respect the democratic forms a little more in the future, in order not to “discourage” the “rank and file” too much? On November 30 the New Republic breaks through to the real reason for its uneasiness when it writes: “It is argued that now we can win the conflict without recourse to all the ‘slush about a people’s war.’” As the very raison d’etre of the liberals is to make slush, their anxiety is easily understandable. In the distribution of war roles, the liberals were awarded the department of camouflage and they valiantly applied themselves to painting motley canvases called “war for democracy,” “people’s war,” etc. But if an army camouflages itself while making preparations, it must inevitably to some extent break the camouflage when it attacks. Thus in the first offensive action of great scope on the part of the United States, it was necessary to discard some of the democratic camouflage in order to install Darlan. The camouflage specialists are fluttering, disturbed, and are asking themselves: Could it be possible that now they have no more need of us? We have worked so hard. One of these camouflagists even gives a warning to his masters: Look here, camouflage is very useful and it is dangerous to completely discard it so soon. His name is Alvarez del Vayo, former Republican Spanish leader, and he writes in the Nation of December 5: “The war is not yet finished. The Allied troops are not yet nearing the German border. The moment has not been reached when the diplomatic technicians and professional politicians can risk a cynical shrug as their only answer to the disappointment of the people. Difficult crises lie ahead of us in which the people will be needed quite as much as all the war materials that all the United Nations can produce. And for the people it will not be a Darlan, even as an occasional guest of the democracies, that will keep alive their enthusiasm and restore their confidence.” Here is the position of the liberals in all its ugly servility: Be careful of the war material called the people, Messrs. Statesmen, and don’t make our task of keeping it ready for your use too difficult. The moment has not yet come when you can disappoint it too much! Washington is now demonstrating to us—not, surely, by Vice President Henry Wallace’s speeches, but by plain, simple and clear facts—that this war is an imperialist war. Not only this war, but the peace that follows it will be an imperialist peace—if Washington has its way. The liberals have tried to present this war as a “war for freedom and democracy,” even as an “international civil war” against Nazism. In fact, according to them, it was the continuation and development of the struggle against fascism which had started with the Spanish Civil War. We Marxists answered this sophism very simply. The Spanish war was essentially the struggle of different classes inside one nation, while the contenders in the present war belong to one class, the imperialist bourgeoisie. Their fight is not conducted for freedom but for domination of the world. With the development of the war, this simple truth appears more and more clearly. The slush of the liberals cannot hide it any more. This is the reason for their despair. It is the reason for our hope.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 


ism and Its Future    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris Centrism and Its Future “Centrism and it Future” Fourth International, November 1941, pp.273-275, under the name“Marc Loris”. (1,923 words) For Marceau Pivert the anniversary of the assassination of Leon Trotsky provided the occasion for an attack on Trotskyism. In an article called“Has Trotskyism a Future?” he gives a negative answer to the question he asks. It is not without interest to observe that Pivert published his article in“The Socialist Call,” the organ of Norman Thomas, that provincial conservative who through some misunderstanding considers himself a socialist. When it is a question of attacking the“sectarian fanaticism” of the Trotskyists it is obvious that anything goes, and Pivert’s generous views easily allow him to use the organ of the American section of the Second International. Down with partisan narrow-mindedness! We shall not examine all the reproaches Pivert throws up to Trotskyism and to Bolshevism. Many of them are as old as Bolshevism itself and are taken straight from the reformist and bourgeois arsenal. As we scarcely have any intention of convincing Pivert himself we shall not repeat things already said a thousand times and shall pause only at points whose discussion may contribute to a revolutionary education. Pivert’s“Internationalism”Pivert begins by making a distinction between the U.S.S.R. and the capitalist countries. In the Soviet Union“Trotsky’s concepts may revive,—to the extent that they correspond to certain historical necessities.” What are these“certain historical necessities"? Pivert takes great care not to tell us. But let us go on, we shall come to them later. Outside the U.S.S.R., on the other hand,“Trotskyism was already dying a natural death” long before Trotsky was assassinated and at present is doomed to disappear. This division of the world indicates how little Pivert has assimilated proletarian internationalism. The struggle of the Left Opposition against the bureaucratization of the Soviet state was by no means a national struggle. The rise of the bureaucracy had a profound international source: the revolutionary wave brought about by the war of 1914-1918 was broken. This defeat was provoked by the treachery of the social-democracy, the bankruptcy of the centrist parties, and the absence of a revolutionary leadership. The first workers’ state found itself isolated and this led to degeneration. The international character of the roots of the bureaucratic system also determines the international character of the struggle against this system. The accession of the proletariat to power in any advanced country of the world whatever— we have often repeated— would immediately change the relationship of forces within the U.S.S.R. The Soviet workers would cease passively tolerating the parasitic bureaucrats on their backs. Stalin has understood all this much better than Pivert, and that is why he has done everything to crush the proletarian revolution in Spain and in so many other countries ! In aiding the workers in capitalist countries to liberate themselves from reformist and Stalinist leaderships which impede their march forward, we are by this very token working for a revolutionary regeneration of the U.S.S.R. The struggle against Stalinism has a profound international character. Who can fail to see this in 1941? From its very beginning the Left Opposition in the U.S.S.R. conducted its struggle against the Stalinist leadership just as much on the problems of the world revolution as on the“Russian” question: the policy of the Communist International in Germany in 1923, the Chinese revolution, the Anglo-Russian Committee, the program of the Communist International, etc., etc. Was the Left Opposition right or wrong on these questions? Pivert would feel quite embarrassed at formulating an answer with his notion of a Trotskyism which is good within the U.S.S.R. and bad outside. Pivert says that Trotskyism“may revive in the U.S.S.R. to the extent that it corresponds to certain historical necessities.” These“historical necessities” can be nothing but the interests of the Soviet proletariat which are opposed to the conservative tendencies of the parasitic oligarchy. But there is an indissoluble relation between the interests of the Soviet proletariat and those of the world proletariat. If the Soviet workers throw off their bureaucrats it will be not only the immediate ruin of Stalinism, but also an evidence of the strength of the proletarian revolution, and so will give a powerful thrust forward to the revolutionary proletarian movement in all the capitalist countries. If, on the other hand, the workers of a capitalist country seize the power it will mean the rebirth of all the hopes of the Soviet workers and the foundering of the Kremlin oligarchy within a short time. Therefore, if Trotskyism represents the interests of the Soviet proletariat, as Pivert admits, it thereby represents the interests of the world proletariat, which Pivert does not wish to admit. Inversely, if Trotskyism is playing a reactionary role in the international field, it is also harmful to the Soviet workers. Pivert has no desire to admit this either, for it would mean risking a descent into the Stalinist abyss. Consequently, he is compelled, in order to mask the unavoidable contradictions of his thought, to halt in mid-passage, to satisfy himself with half-ideas and quarter-ideas, to use expressions as vague as“certain historical necessities.” All this is in the very nature of centrism. The revolutionary interests of the proletariat are indivisible. In criticizing Stalinism we have often repeated this principle. The theory of“socialism in one country” pretended that the workers’ state could develop independently of the successes or failures of the international revolution. What has happened? A series of proletarian revolutions was crushed, not without the assistance of Stalinists acting in the name of the so-called defense of the U.S.S.R.; the black stain of fascism spread itself throughout Europe; the Soviet Union became more isolated than ever and was ultimately hurled into the catastrophe itself. The Stalinist theory which separated the interests of the U.S.S.R. from those of the international proletariat meant the direct abandonment of proletarian internationalism. Pivert is going in the same direction. He is now constructing the theory of“Trotskyism in one country": Trotskyism is good for the U.S.S.R., but bad for other countries. By this alone he shows that in spite of his pompous declarations and bellowing phrases his thought has remained completely alien to Marxist internationalism. Neither opportunism, nor centrism, nor Trotskyism are good in certain countries and bad in others. In the last analysis their international character flows from the nature of capitalist production. All this is as old as the Communist Manifesto. And when Pivert acknowledges that Trotskyism has a national value while denying it any possibility of existence in examination of the real problems but is merely expressing the subjective discomfort of the petty bourgeois faced by the fundamental problems of the revolution, that is, the most burning question of our age. Pivert gives us his solution. Reformism and Bolshevism“have now been passed by.”“They must now step aside and yield to something more revolutionary than reformism and more democratic than Trotskyism.” What a prodigious synthesis, and how simple! Make reformism more revolutionary and Trotskyism more democratic! But first of all, how is reformism to be made more revolutionary? Here is a very important question which anyone reflecting on the problems of the revolution will ask himself and concerning which Pivert doesn’t breathe a word. For years Pivert considered Blum not a class enemy on the other side of the barricades who should have been denounced as such, but an ideological adversary who should be persuaded. For years he attempted to instruct Blum how to make the proletarian revolution. This is Pivert’s way to make reformism more revolutionary! The result is known. Let us go on to the second part of the“synthesis.” What is this“democracy” Pivert wants to inoculate the Trotskyists with in order to rescue them from the“germs of monopolism” handed down by Bolshevism? Marxists distinguish between bourgeois democracy and proletarian democracy. Is it a question of persuading us that bourgeois democracy has not exhausted its possibilities? This would be a bad moment to choose, just when democracy is yielding to dictatorship everywhere in the world. As for proletarian democracy, it can exist in the party, or in the state. According to the Bolshevik conception, the party regime is based on democratic centralism. It is the regime we are attempting to set up and maintain in the Trotskyist parties. Does Pivert wish to say that we are doing it badly or that it is the system itself which is defective? Essentially democratic centralism means freedom of discussion for all the party members, then unity of action after a decision is taken. Does Pivert think that a revolutionary party can operate without any centralism whatever, in our age of extreme political and economic centralization? What other system is he proposing? If he has some precious recipe in his pocket why doesn’t he pull it out? As for proletarian democracy in the state, Lenin has written a little book about that, which is quite well known. It is still with us today at the base of our program. At bottom the whole struggle of the Left Opposition against bureaucratic reaction was nothing but a development of Lenin’s ideas. To convince oneself it is enough to compare“State and Revolution” with the“Revolution Betrayed,” which takes up Trotsky’s struggle against the Stalinist Thermidor. Once again, what is the democracy Pivert wants to inject into us, and just what illness is it he wants to cure us of? Pivert hardly bothers himself with all these complications. We need democracy! Bolshevism is against democracy! Down with Bolshevism! Down with Trotskyism! In reality, what Pivert is defending is freedom to shun the demands of the revolution. Freedom for Pivert to enter Leon Blum’s secretariat in 1936! Freedom for Pivert to flirt with General de Gaulle in 1940! Freedom for Nin to enter a bourgeois cabinet during a revolution! Freedom to veil over the fundamental conflict of society! Freedom to learn nothing from history! Freedom to sneer at Marxism! Freedom not to think things through! Freedom to live in the midst of confusion and spread it all around yourself! Bolshevism’s outstanding merit is its profound analysis of all the problems of the revolution. This labor was imposed on it by the difficult conditions in which it developed. If it was possible in Western Europe to rock oneself to sleep with democratic illusions, Czarist oppression compelled the best of the revolutionaries to ponder every revolutionary question through to its core and find a solution for it. Pivert attempts to present Bolshevism as a product of barbaric Russia, unworthy of Western Europe. What a threadbare banality! He simply reveals by that his vanity, the vanity of a French petty bourgeois,“enlightened,” democratic and Freemason. The second imperialist war has plunged Europe into such a state that Czarist reaction appears to us only a timid prelude. An entire continent has sunk to the level of Czarist Russia, and even far below. All the lessons of Bolshevism have been placed on the order of the day with tenfold force. Pivert does not wish to see this. He persists in repeating against Bolshevism and Trotskyism complaints which are nothing but an echo of the cries of horror with which reformists greeted the October Revolution. He is not preparing to solve the tasks of our age, but is shutting himself up in the shell of his petty prejudices. If he keeps his back turned to history, the latter will get along extremely well without him. The epoch of grandiose overturns which is approaching will be the epoch of Bolshevism. It will be the epoch of Trotskyism.September 24, 1941.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 

e: First Signs of the Storm    Jean van Heijenoort writing as Marc Loris France: First Signs of the Storm “France: First Signs of the Storm” Fourth International, October 1941, pp.235-6, under the name “Marc Loris”. (1,311 words) The political life of France has obviously entered a new phase. The Petain Government has abandoned the hope of rallying the country around itself by its benevolent paternalism; it now tries, with trembling hand, to crack the whip. The Bonapartist character of the Government has been markedly accentuated in the past period. In his speech on August 12, Petain acknowleged that the whole country is against him and that, in addition to the German bayonets, the sole support of his regime is the police. His regime rests upon so narrow a base that it is shaken by incessant alterations. When he took power, Petain boasted that he would put an end to the traditional instability of the French parliamentary regime. In actual fact the Government apparatus has never been more subject than today to constant jolts. The whole administration, including the police, is periodically purged. “Whoever is not with me is against me,” Petain has proclaimed. Simple abstention becomes an offense, the least doubt an attack. To consolidate the crumbling structure of his regime, Petain demands an oath of loyalty from his collaborators” He is now trying to create some mass base with the French Legion. He had already tried some months ago to solve the same task with the National Assembly. The organizing of this enterprise has now been stopped. The new effort will doubtless meet with the same success. The more Petain is isolated from the country by distrust and hate, the more he is obliged to yoke himself by new bonds to the chariot of the conqueror. He promises Hitler “loyal collaboration” and the main part of his collaboration is the crushing of his own people by even heavier repressions. The Role of Individual TerrorIt is in this atmosphere that the revolver shot against Laval rang out. The attempt is obviously not an accidental occurrence and the motives of the assassin have rarely been clearer. It is the whole French petty-bourgeoisie, overwhelmed by misery, stifled by repression, its patriotism offended, which pulled the trigger to assuage its anger. The attempt against Laval enables us to measure the growing tension of antagonisms which are accumulating in France (and in all Europe). In the duel between the oppressors and the terrorists we are, of course, on the side of those who do not hesitate to sacrifice their lives for liberty, but that does not mean that we approve their methods. Far from that. Individual terror is the specific weapon of the petty-bourgeoisie when pushed to the wall. It is no novelty. It has already had a long experience in numerous countries. Marxists have often had the occasion to criticize the tactics of individual terror- not of course in the name of morality, but from the standpoint of revolutionary effectiveness. It is not a question of “revenging” oneself; but of finding the best methods of struggle. For one Laval assassinated ten other zealous “collaborators” will present themselves. For a single French officer killed there will come a hundred others, more haughty and more brutal. As for the effect of the individual attempts upon the masses, if it has any effect it can only be to drive them into passivity. If salvation can come from a few heroes who will avenge our miseries and liberate us from the oppressor by means of a revolver shot, what’s the use of organizing and preparing the struggle? If one can rely on a “savior,” why lose time forming a revolutionary party? If they are sterile in themselves, the individual attempts are nevertheless manifest signs of the profound crisis which is maturing in France and in all Europe. Hitler’s “New Order” can bring the peoples only misery and oppression. In their slang, the German soldiers use the word “organized” with the meaning of plunder. If they have stolen a chicken or a roll of butter, they say that they have “organized” them. They have grasped very well what all the grandiose phrases on the “organization” of Europe by Hitler means: the concentration of all resources in the hands of German imperialism for the prosecution of its work of conquest. The oppressed and despoiled people grumble with revolt. The Effect of the Soviet StruggleTo this general cause of the crisis is now added the war against the USSR. It is there that one must see the source of the wave of sabotage which has suddenly swept over France. In what measure are the acts of sabotage the product of concerted organizational action? That is difficult to say. It appears that the Stalinists have preserved a fairly considerable organizational ability; but at the same time the amplitude of the sabotage movement and the variety of its forms shows that it has manifestly surpassed the organized nuclei of an illegal party. In this wave of sabotage which seeks to paralyze the German military machine, we fully support the initiative of the masses which serve the interests of the defense of the USSR as well as their own liberation.Are the Stalinists participating in the individual assassination attempts with their responsible cadres? That is difficult to say, but it seems that they are not alien to that. The American press has announced that in a leaflet the Stalinists threaten to exterminate 10 Germans for each one of themselves condemned and executed. The attempt upon Marcel Gitton, an old Stalinist leader, who turned Fascist at the outbreak of the war between France and Germany, reinforces the hypothesis of the Stalinists’ participation in the terrorist struggle. It is evidently not excluded that Gitton was assassinated as a result of internal quarrels in the Fascist camp, but in the present conditions the other possibility, that of an action by the Stalinists, is much more probable. There is, moreover, nothing to astonish us in this. The Stalinists are not restrained by any Marxist principle; for a long time such things have not mattered one bit to them. On the other hand, bureaucratism and individual terrorism go hand in hand. Both have their origin in distrust of the supposedly “incapable” masses, which the individual has to extricate from their difficulties. We repeat: nothing can be accomplished by means of individual attempts. These uselessly sacrifice the precious devotion of the masses and fetter their action. The Storm Is ApproachingGerman imperialism has still, of course, great reserves of strength, and it would be illusory to hope for its early fall. But its situation has manifestly worsened in these last weeks. Hitler, it seems, cannot terminate his adventure in the East before winter. This means enormous expenditures of forces in the coming months, the loss of prestige in Germany itself. The German generals are going to sack the conquered countries with still more fury. But if the first real protests—attempts at assassination and sabotage—are repressed in blood and crushed for a certain time, they will soon revive with redoubled force and in more effective forms. The resistance of the adversary will have been lessened. After many assaults the outburst is inevitable. A mighty storm is gathering over Europe. What we now feel are the first gusts in the air. All the nations are shaking to their very foundations. The ruling classes are discredited. To be sure, purely nationalist eddies are not lacking amongst the petty-bourgeois masses who have lost their equilibrium, but the power will go to those who know clearly what they want. And we know what that is: the end of the whole capitalist system, power to the workers, the socialist revolution. Our weapon is a bold revolutionary party. All our efforts, all our constant care should be devoted to preparing this weapon. All our will ought to be ceaselessly concentrated upon this role: to prepare the organization which tomorrow will be able to lead the struggle to the end.  Jean van Heijenoort Archive | Marxists Internet Archive 







Note by the transcriber:
This article, written on the occasion of the hundredth anniversary of the publication of the Communist Manifesto, marks Jean van Heijenoort’s break with Marxism. It was written in the aftermath of the defeat of the Morrow-Heijenhoort-Goldman faction in the SWP by the majority faction led by James Cannon: Albert Goldman left the SWP in May 1946 and Felix Morrow was expelled in November 1946. See also Jean van Heijenoort’s memoirs of his years as Trotsky’s secretary and bodyguard: With Trotsky in Exile: From Prinkipo to Coyoacán, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978.
 







Schuldig müssen wir werden, wenn wir wachsen wollen.
“We must grow in guilt if we are to grow at all.” (Sudermann)



A hundred years ago a London press struck off a slender green-covered pamphlet of twenty-three pages, which was not even to be put on sale. Its authors were two young German émigrés, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels; its title, Manifesto of the Communist Party.
The pamphlet proclaimed a new era, that of the struggle of the proletariat for communism. The bourgeoisie, so it ran, brings together the population in large cities, centralizes production, and concentrates the wealth. It creates a new class, the industrial proletariat, whose ranks it incessantly swells. This modern proletariat, having no property it can call its own, sets in motion means of production that demand collective work. This social character of production makes it impossible for the proletariat – unlike other oppressed classes – to insist on a share of the wealth for each individual member. It cannot but want communism the abolition of private property; while in emancipating itself, it automatically emancipates all society, whose class divisions it is destined to abolish. From the Utopia it was, communism becomes the scientifically predictable goal toward which the proletarian movement is heading.
In 1925, Leon Trotsky compared this conception of the authors of the Communist Manifesto to Leverrier’s discovery of Neptune, for from his study of the disturbances on Uranus, the French astronomer had deduced the existence of a new planet and determined its orbit. From their study of the disturbances of bourgeois society, Marx and Engels had deduced the existence, of a new class, the proletariat, and traced its orbit: a line that pointed to communism.
Now this is a point that the commentators have never failed to emphasize; for most of them the Manifesto has in it all the certitude of natural science. Its fundamental hypothesis – that the proletariat can and must take the fate of society into its hands, snatch it from the catastrophe into which the bourgeoisie is leading it, and guide it toward communism – seems to them as solidly based, or nearly so, as the laws of motion governing the heavenly bodies. Without pausing to examine just what the modern physicist considers as truth in this domain, it is enough to observe that Neptune still follows the orbit marked out for it by Leverrier, whereas, unhappily, the course of the proletariat has, for more than a third of a century, been increasingly erratic. So much so that it is impossible today to shrug off the necessity of a systematic scrutiny of Marx’s fundamental hypothesis.
The proletariat is no longer what it was in 1848: a new star just emerging into sight over the horizon. For a hundred years now, its course has shown what it is capable of, but also, unfortunately, what it has been unable to accomplish.
It has shown itself capable of outbursts of heroism, during which it sacrifices itself without a thought, and develops a power so strong as to shake society to its very foundations. It can rid itself in an instant of the most inveterate prejudices, while there seems to be no limit to its audacity. But by and by, whatever the consequences of its action, whether victory or defeat, it is finally caught up in the sluggish, quotidian flow of things.
The fetid backwaters of the past seep back; the proletariat sinks into indolence and cynicism. And even in its triumphant moments, it exhibits a want of consciousness in the choice of its leaders. The “instinctive sense of reality” attributed to it by Auguste Comte, which it so readily reflects in many a circumstance, abandons it at such moments. Its courage and self-sacrifice are not enough to give it what, precisely, is needed in order to act out the role assigned to it by Marx: political capacity. What the proletariat is incapable of achieving is a leadership which will be faithful to its interests, will understand and defend them boldly, imaginatively, and tenaciously. Such is the task which, for these last one hundred years, it has proved itself incapable of carrying out.
The crisis of our age is in a sense, then, that of the leadership of the proletariat. But if a political analysis of our age ought necessarily to undertake a criticism of those who claim today to represent the interests of the proletariat, it cannot stop there. Unless we are prepared to say that the whole evil lies in the fact that nature has not produced the germs from which upright, farseeing leaders can emerge, we are constrained to examine the social situation and political history of the working class in order to seek out the causes of its century-old political incapacity. [“The fact that we repeatedly fail in some venture, merely through chance is perhaps the best proof that chance is not the cause of our failure.” (Gournot)]
On more than one occasion Marx and Engels compared the future triumph of the proletariat to the earlier triumph of the bourgeoisie. In their wake, socialists have all too often repeated that the modern proletariat is in some sense to play the role that the bourgeoisie took in the past. At this point, however, the differences rather than the similarities must be emphasized.
The bourgeoisie was a propertied class, growing richer and richer, sure of itself, educated, and cultivated. As a whole, it understood very well how to take hold of society and, in the eyes of almost all the nation, to act as the representative of general welfare, thereby inculcating its own social system and assuring its political supremacy. This, precisely, is the task that the proletariat has until now shown itself incapable of undertaking.
Occasionally the authors of the Manifesto compared the modern proletarian to the slave of antiquity, but they hastened to underscore the differences. Capitalism concentrates more and more proletarians in the big cities and develops a technology which should make an abundance for all possible in the future. Whereas the slave of antiquity could do nothing to retrieve society from its fallen state, the modern proletarian, concentrated in the cities with the technical apparatus in his hands, cannot long fail to recognize his own strength, and then to seize political power and advance mankind toward communism.
These arguments had some weight in 1848, and the fundamental hypothesis of the authors of the Manifesto was then perfectly legitimate – in fact, the whole development of society since 1789 pointed to it. But, legitimate as it was, the hypothesis was only an hypothesis. Marx and Engels had no dynamometer available in 1848 for measuring the future force of the proletariat in order to conclusively settle the question of its coming victory. The answer to such a question could only come from experience itself – the political capacity of the proletariat could only be measured in the reality of class conflict.
A century now lies behind us, and experience has turned in its verdict. The political capacity of the working classes has revealed itself as a never-ending capacity for being “betrayed.” It may be claimed that we must wait a little while longer. In actuality, however, can we really look forward to a change for the better?
In 1850 Marx was addressing European workingmen in these terms: “You will have to go through fifteen, twenty, fifty years of civil wars and international conflicts, not only in order to transform your circumstances but to transform yourselves and make yourselves fit for political power.” Is this process of political education still going on today? Are European workingmen now more “fit for political power” than they were at the conclusion of the First World War? The answer is no. There, as elsewhere, the social and economic conditions of present-day Europe hardly permit us to hope for improvement. Marx’s fundamental hypothesis would only regain a measure of reality if some notable development in Europe’s productive forces made the proletariat once more a cohesive body with a capacity for struggle and with faith in the future. These qualities would, in fact, have to be raised to an even higher level than that which prevailed in the past, for, even in its best days, the proletariat was not yet “fit for political power.” But such a possibility is extremely chimerical: European economy will not emerge from its quagmire for a long time to come.
But, it may be urged, though it is foolish to expect a radical change in European economy, the political capacity of the proletariat may rise to the necessary level in response to other, more “subjective,” factors. And certainly, many existing evils can be traced to a well-defined center: Stalinism. And since it is permissible to expect an internal crisis of the Stalinist regime in the years to come, may we not look forward to a renaissance of the working-class movement at such a time?
To be sure, Stalinism may well find itself in a critical position sooner than many imagine. A new situation might take shape overnight in the working-class movement. Stalinism, however, is not the single and final cause of the stagnation. Before it, we had Social Democracy. And now, the degeneration of the Trotskyite Fourth International, although without practical importance, is still an extremely bad sign. Stalinism is, after all, only the most monstrous link in a chain of bankruptcies. Finally, it is as much an effect as a cause, or it is a disease which attacks an already feeble organism to make it still more feeble.
The crisis of Stalinism would mean the rebirth of many hopes. This does not mean, however, that it would be possible to forget all past ignominies like some vanishing nightmare. In the first place, the after-effects of Stalinism would still be felt for years to come. And then, one could never think of it as having been “unreal.” It is no good trying to explain the continuance and even extension of Stalinism in and across the international working-class movement on the grounds that the workers mistook Stalin’s Russia for the October Revolution. The causes lie much deeper and are precisely such as to call the political capacity of the proletariat into question. But even if one wanted to think of the whole business as little more than a fraud, a fraud that has been successfully engaged in for the last twenty years – and what a twenty years – that still presupposes a capacity on the part of somebody for being tricked for twenty years. And if the trickster were finally unmasked, would that mean that his victims were then and there “fit for political power”? To turn a deaf ear to such a question would be both foolish and dangerous.
But the further objection may be made that the strength of the proletariat can only be measured against that of the bourgeoisie; that it is purely relative. Since the bourgeoisie continues to reveal its increasingly hopeless bankruptcy, may we not expect one day to see the political triumph of the proletariat, even if we assume that it has already passed the zenith of its absolute strength? The bankruptcy of the European ruling classes is as complete as one could have imagined a hundred years ago. But if this fact is a necessary condition to the seizure of power by the proletariat, it is by no means a sufficient condition. The question is not merely one of relative strength. To seize and hold power the proletariat would have- to demonstrate a minimum, a rather high minimum at that, of political capacity; more exactly, it would have to show a capacity to “secrete” a devoted and perspicacious leadership, to control that leadership, to change it with speed if the need arose – not thirty or forty years after a “betrayal.” A capacity for handling such problems is precisely what being “fit for political power” means after all. Without that aptitude, the fundamental hypothesis cannot hold.
Yet, it may finally be conceded, if all that is true for the European proletariat, we must not forget the American proletariat, the most powerful in the world; it has not yet given an accounting of itself. This is true enough. We do have an unknown quantity here. But it would not be very sensible to fasten upon the American proletariat now a century-old hypothesis that has proved invalid on a continent with which America, after all, has many points in common.
The end of the Second World War, out of which no movement emerged to indicate that the proletariat was yet fit for power, has, I believe, conclusively invalidated the fundamental hypothesis of Marx, at least as far as Europe is concerned. What we have witnessed is the end of an era. Between 1848 to 1914 it was still possible to say that the political potential of the proletariat would continue to grow with time. From 1914 to the end of the Second World War, the answer to this question lay in the balance. But now the matter is clear. It is no longer permissible to expect a future complex of economic, social, and political conditions to be more favorable to the political ripening of the proletariat than any such complex was in the past. The whole inter-war period has now become a part of our history, and the present political impotence of the working class has finally given it meaning. Beyond all circumstantial explanations, this impotence, confronting us daily, enables us to grasp the political history of Europe since 1914.
But why blame the workingmen? some will exclaim, throwing in a few strong words. There is no question here of blame or moral responsibility. The political incapacity of the proletariat springs from its status as an exploited and oppressed class, from nationalism, wars, and misery. If responsibility must be dragged into the matter, it is bourgeois society as a whole which is responsible for, not having given birth to a new class ready to take political power directly into its hands.
Does the collapse of Marx’s central hypothesis imply the collapse of his whole doctrine? On the plane of political action – and it is the one which interests us here- Man’s hypothesis on the exercise of political power by the proletariat acting as a class is fundamental and, compared to it, all other aspects of his doctrine are secondary. In the final analysis it is the main factor in any judgment that can be made of the Marxist system. But if we admit that the hypothesis is no longer valid, what becomes of the rest of the doctrine?
There is no necessary logical connection between Marx’s fundamental hypothesis and his economic doctrine. All that Marx could claim to demonstrate in his economic studies was that capitalism is not an eternal but an historical mode of production, the functioning of which becomes, by the very laws of its development, more and more unstable. This conclusion served to confirm Marx in his fundamental hypothesis, but the former was by no means logically implied in the latter. What remains of Marx’s economic doctrine must be determined by utterly different criteria. The same may be concluded of the historical, sociological, or philosophic aspects of his doctrine.
What is actually destroyed by the collapse of the fundamental hypothesis is the validity of an esoteric Marxist system standing in opposition to the totality of profane (read: bourgeois) knowledge. But that system was a construction of the Marxist epigoni rather than of Marx himself. Marx’s contribution should be considered in relation to our present body of scientific knowledge, and the value of any of its parts should then be determined by scientific criteria.
The problem of the fundamental hypothesis has provoked two opposed yet complementary attitudes. One attitude is to shun politics and to have no further aim than to forget as speedily and as completely as possible the years spent in the Marxist movement. The other is to take the fundamental hypothesis as an axiom and to refuse categorically to examine it. The two attitudes, one as false as the other, finally reinforce each other. It is the task of our reason, if this dilemma is ever to be resolved, to discover such possibilities of action as may exist, along with the most suitable means of realizing them. If, as seems only too clear, the proletariat has shown itself to be incapable of filling the political role originally assigned to it by the authors of the Manifesto, that does not mean it is condemned to remain a purely passive factor in the historical process. Quite the contrary; the belief in a steady decline is as ill-founded as that of continuous progress.
Describing the intellectual climate of Russia at the end of the nineteenth century, Trotsky wrote: “Protestantism and democracy, under the aegis of which the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century revolutions of the West were accomplished, had long since become conservative doctrines ... Intellectuals needed a new doctrine for the struggles that lay ahead, one which nothing had compromised.” That would also seem to be what is needed today. Bolshevism, which thirty years ago had kindled unbounded hopes, has been compromised by Stalin no less than Jacobinism was by Napoleon. If the fine phrases of the French Revolution led to the rule of the bourgeoisie, the Bolshevik experiment has bogged down in the mire of the Stalinist universe, with its slave labor running into the millions, its omnipresent police, its pitiless exploitation of workingmen, its inflexible caste distinctions, its stifling of art, thought, and human feeling. Doubtless this is not what the old Bolsheviks bargained for. But in the eyes of millions of men, of the younger generations, Bolshevism – and this is the decisive point – is no longer anew doctrine which nothing has yet compromised. Marx and Bolshevism belong henceforth to history no less than Rousseau and Jacobinism.
The most to be hoped for by groups who claim to belong to the Marxist succession (I am not speaking of Stalinists, naturally) is for them to serve as a hyphen between past and future; to take in a way such a role as Buonarotti played between Babeuf and Marx.
Nothing is gained by saying: let us hold fast to the fundamental hypothesis as long as nothing better is proposed. To receive answers to questions, one must first raise them. It is only by openly facing the difficulties of the fundamental hypothesis that a step to their solution can be taken. It would be as idle to shut one’s eyes on them as to turn one’s back on politics. In either case, the problem is still there. Only by a rational and methodical scrutiny of the lessons of the past and of present possibilities will we be enabled to work effectively toward preparing for a future. Whoever is content at this late date to go on repeating the basic hypothesis without advancing some new and decisive argument in its favor scarcely merits a hearing. Proposed solutions may well be widely divergent; only mutual criticism will make possible an intelligent choice. But in such an endeavor nothing can be held sacred – even-thing is called into question. Only after having been put through such a crucible could socialism conceivably re-emerge as a viable doctrine and plan of action.
 

 van Heijenoort-Friedrich Engels and Mathematics 1948


Heijenoort Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Jan Van Heijenoort
Friedrich Engels and Mathematics
(1948)

Source: Van Heijenoort, Jean, Friedrich Engels and Mathematics, in Selected Essays (Napoli: Bibliopolis, 1985), pp. 123–151, article written in 1948.
Note: The list of references for the whole book as well as this article, not reproduced here, is given on pp. 153–166.

Friedrich Engels has passed judgment on many points in mathematics and its philosophy. What are his opinions worth? Important in itself, this question has a more general interest, for Engels’ views on mathematics are part of his ‘dialectical materialism’, and their examination gives a valuable insight into this doctrine.
 
Engels’ mathematical knowledge
Mathematics is such a special branch of intellectual life that a preliminary question must be asked of anyone who ventures, as a philosopher, to investigate its nature and its methods: exactly what does he know in mathematics? Although the answer to this question does not forthwith determine the value of the solutions offered by the philosopher, it is nevertheless and indispensable preparation for examining them.
The programs of the German schools in the 1830s as well as his own inclinations lead young Engels toward an education that was more literary than scientific. True enough, at the Elberfeld high school, which he leaves before he is seventeen, he attends classes in mathematics and physics, even with a satisfactory record, but they remain quite elementary, and the young student does not seem to take any special interest in them. What attracts him most is literature, languages and poetry. After the study of law has held his attention for a moment, he is soon learning how to become a business man, which does not prevent him from devoting his spare time – and he has plenty of it – to writing poetry, composing choral pieces, drawing caricatures. As an unsalaried clerk in the export business of Consul Heinrich Leopold in Bremen, no doubt he knows the elementary rules of arithmetic, but no document of that period – and Engels is going through years that are critical in the molding of a young man – shows that he has any interest in sciences in general and mathematics in particular. Engels soon passes from poetry to that half-literary, half-social criticism that the censorship is then trying to keep within well defined bounds. His great man at the time is Ludwig Börne.
A new impulse to the intellectual development of the young man comes from reading Strauss’ book, Das Leben Jesu, whose first volume came out in 1835. Engels soon abandons religion definitively. However, unlike the eighteenth-century French philosophes, who, in their fight against religion, leaned directly on natural sciences and knew them rather well, Strauss takes as his point of departure the contradictions in the Scriptures, and young Engels’ break with religion does not immerse him in the great stream of sciences, as so often happens.
Through Strauss Engels comes into contact with Hegel, who immediately enthralls him. He is nineteen years old. Unlike Marx, who had studied Greek philosophers, Descartes, Spinoza, Kant, Leibniz, Fichte before tackling Hegel, Engels plunges into the latter’s books with hardly any philosophical background. With the encyclopedic character of Hegel’s works, where there is an answer to everything, the result is that Engels soon sees many a problem through the spectacles of the master sorcerer. Many years later, when examining a question, he will first read what’the old man’ has written on the subject.
 In 1869, at forty-nine years of age, Engels retires from business and goes to live in London. Then, he writes
I went through, to the extent it was possible for me, a complete’moulting’ in mathematics and the natural sciences, and spent the best part of eight years on it [1935, page 10].
 A few lines below, he speaks of
my recapitulation of mathematics and the natural sciences [1935, page 11].
What is Engels’ mathematical knowledge on the eve of this ‘moulting’? No positive document exists that would establish what his interest in mathematics has been between his school years and 1869. A clear picture, however, springs out of the mass of biographical documents. Names of mathematicians and titles of mathematical works are absent from writings and letters where hundreds of names and titles belonging to many spheres of intellectual activity can be found. The correspondence between Marx and Engels is especially valuable in this respect, for it enables us to follow the activities of the two friends, their readings, the fluctuations of their interests, from week to week, at times from day to day. Now, here no more than in the other writings of Engels that precede the’moulting’ of 1869 is there any trace of special interest, or simply of any interest at all, in mathematics on Engels’ part. When Marx touches a mathematical point, as for instance in his letter of May 31, 1873, where he speaks of his project of
mathematically determining the main laws of crises [Marx and Engels 1931, page 398],
Engels does not react.
The only scrap of information that we can glean on the subject is that, in 1864, Engels read Louis Benjamin Francœur’s Traité d’arithmétique, published in Paris in 1845. This is an elementary arithmetic book, for the use of bank clerks and tradesmen. The very fact that Engels studies such a book and comments on it in a letter to Marx (on May 30, 1864; Engels’ comments are trifling [Marx and Engels 1930, page 173]), while he does not mention any other mathematical work during some thirty years, is enough to gauge the level of his interest and knowledge in mathematics prior to 1869.
It seems therefore established that, until the’moulting’ of 1869, Engels hardly possesses more than the rudiments of elementary arithmetic. As for this’moulting’ itself, of what does it consist? In sciences other than mathematics, for example in chemistry, physics or astronomy, the list of books that Engels mentions is abundant enough to permit us to follow his progress in these domains with satisfactory accuracy. But, in mathematics, the list is rather poor. Engels reads much more, for example, in astronomy, a rather special science at that time, than in the whole field of pure mathematics. In fact, only one work of pure mathematics, as far as we can ascertain, was ever studied by Engels, that of Bossut (see Engels 1935, pages 392 and 636).
Charles Bossut published his Traité de calcul différentiel et de calcul intégral in the year VI (1798). It is clearly a minor work of a minor mathematician. The book was never reprinted. Neither Larousse’s Grand dictionnaire universel du XIXe siècle, nor La grande encyclopédie, nor Maximilien Marie’s Histoire des sciences mathématiques et physiques mention it in the rather lengthy list of Bossut’s works. Marie adds:
We shall say nothing of Bossut’s didactic works: they have lived the length of time that works of that kind live, twenty or thirty years, after which, methods having changed, students must have recourse to new guides [1886, page 24].
This rather severe judgment was still too lenient in that case, for Bossut had followed Newton in his presentation of the principles of the infinitesimal calculus, and the treatise was published at the very time when Lagrange was introducing a new rigor in this field, so that Bossut had to add to the end of his introduction the following paragraph:
Citizen Lagrange has presented the metaphysics of the calculus under a new light, in his Théorie des fonctions algébriques; but I have obtained knowledge of this excellent work only after mine was completed and even largely printed [1798, page lxxx].
How, eighty years later, can Engels take as his guide in a fundamental question a work already out-of-date while in press, and follow this guide precisely in the domain where it had become most obsolete? The only possible answer to this question is that Engels did not know nineteenth-century mathematics and was not interested in it, that he found Bossut’s book by chance and that he had no qualms about using it because the out-of-date ideas of the author seemed, to his mind, to confirm his own conception of the infinitesimal calculus, inherited from Hegel.
Let us note that Engels’ conception of the calculus is, as we shall. see, one of the keystones of his philosophical edifice, for there lies the’dialectic’ of mathematics. The importance of this question for his philosophical conceptions makes it still less justifiable for him to have followed in this domain so obsolete a guide as Bossut.
Engels appears to be as unfamiliar with the history of the infinitesimal calculus as with its principles. In a manuscript entitled Dialektik und Naturwissenschaft (Dialectic and natural science) and written between 1873 and 1876, Engels mentions Leibniz as
the founder of the mathematics of the infinite, in face of whom the induction-loving ass [Induktionsesel] Newton appears as a plagiarist and a corrupter [1935, page 603]. [1]
By the’mathematics of the infinite’ Engels understands, according to an eighteenth-century expression, the infinitesimal calculus. His denunciation of Newton is, in a coarsier [sic] language, a mere repetition of what can be found in Hegel, for whom the invention of the calculus, falsely attributed to Newton by the English, was exclusively due to Leibniz (see, for instance, Hegel 1836, page 451).
A few years later, in 1880, hence after more than ten years of’moulting’, Engels wrote in the preface to Dialektik der Natur that the infinitesimal calculus had been established
by Leibniz and perhaps Newton. [1935, page 484]
We are still quite far from the truth.
Precisely on that question Engels could have used Bossut’s work. The’Discours préliminaire’ in the first volume contains a history of the invention of the calculus which is one of the few good points of the book. Started at the beginning of the eighteenth century, the controversy about the priority of the invention was well-nigh settled when Bossut was writing in the last years of the century, so that he could conclude:
These two great men [Newton and Leibniz] have reached, by the strength of their geniuses, the same goal through different paths. [1798, page li]
If the respective merits of Newton and Leibniz were clear to Bossut, the more so should they have been to Engels, writing eighty years later. But no, he has to repeat Hegel, on a point on which the philosopher is obviously wrong.
Let us consider the complex numbers, whose theory was completed in the nineteenth century. It is an easy and, it seems, interesting subject for a man like Engels, without training in mathematics. Three brief remarks are all we can find in his writings. They show that, although Engels knows of the existence of the complex numbers, he has never grasped their significance. In his book against Dühring he sets complex numbers, ‘the free creations and imaginations of the mind’ (1935, page 43), apart from other mathematical notions, which are abstracted from the ‘real world’. The same book contains a few sentences on the square root of minus one, which is, according to Engels,
not only a contradiction, but even an absurd contradiction, a real absurdity. [1935, page 125] [2]
Finally, in an unpublished article, probably written in 1878 and entitled Die Naturforschung in der Geisterwelt (Natural science in the world of spirits), he writes:
The ordinary metaphysical mathematicians boast with huge pride of the absolute irrefutability of the results of their science. Among these results, however, are the imaginary magnitudes, to which is thereby attributed a certain reality. When one has once become accustomed to ascribe to the [square root of] -1 or to the fourth dimension some kind of reality outside of our own heads, it is not a matter of much importance if one goes a step further and also accepts the spirit world of the mediums. [1935, page 716]
These brief remarks reveal how little Engels understands what a complex number is, although these numbers were no longer a novelty at the time when he was writing. After a few precursors, Gauss had given in 1831 a geometric representation of complex numbers that removed from them the last trace of mystery. This representation had rapidly become current toward the middle of the century and, in 1855 for example, a quite elementary book could state:
It will probably be found, on a proper analysis, that the subject of imaginary expressions present no more difficulties than that of negative quantities, which is now so thoroughly settled as to leave nothing to be desired. [Davies and Peck 1855, page 301]
Twenty years later, Engels is still stumbling over these’thoroughly settled’ difficulties.
Let us take another important development of mathematics in the nineteenth century, non-Euclidean and n-dimensional geometries. After many a futile attempt to prove Euclid’s parallel postulate, mathematicians began in the eighteenth century to wonder what its rejection would imply. Lobachevskii presented the principles of a new geometry rejecting the postulate before the departement of mathematics and physics of the Kazan University in February 1826. But his lecture was not published and left no trace. In 1829–30, he presented his new conceptions in a magazine printed by the same university, but they did not immediately penetrate into the mathematical world, owing to the remoteness and the language of the publication. In 1832 János Bolyai, which had conceived a new geometry a few years earlier, independently of Lobachevskii, published his famous Appendix. It then became known that Gauss had been in possession of similar, but unpublished, results for quite a few years.
Lobachevskii soon started publishing his works in French and German, so that they were more easily read in Western Europe. The new ideas, however, made slow headway until the middle of the century. Then comes Riemann’s probationary lecture,’Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen’ (On the hypotheses that lie at the basis of geometry), on June 10, 1854. Lobachevskii’s Pangéometrie, published in French in Kazan in 1856, is translated into German in 1858 and into Italian in 1867. Bolyai’s Appendix is translated into French in 1872. Riemann’s fundamental work, printed in 1868, is translated into French in 1870 and, in 1873, published in English in Nature, a magazine which, most likely, Engels is reading regularly at that time. Gauss’ unpublished manuscripts and private letters are becoming known; some of his letters on non-Euclidean geometry are translated into French in 1866. Helmholtz gives two lectures, in 1868 and 1870, on the foundations of geometry. Beltrami’s important work, showing for the first time that non-Euclidean geometry has the same logical consistency as Euclidean geometry, is published in 1868 and translated into French in 1869.
Riemann’s probationary lecture of 1854 also marks a great step forward for n-dimensional geometries. Grassmann’s Ausdehnungslehre, whose first edition dates from 1844, and Cayley’s works beginning the same year have already laid the foundations of the new theories. From then on, progress is rapid. Cayley’s epoch-making A sixth memoir upon quantics is published in 1860 and an enlarged edition of the Ausdehnungslehre in 1862.
All these dates show that the year 1870 marks the time at which the mathematical world becomes familiar with non-Euclidean and n-dimensional geometries. At that date far-sighted pioneers have already begun to use the new mathematical conceptions in other fields of science. As early as 1854 Riemann suggests that some regions of our space might be non-Euclidean and that only experience can decide. In 1870 Clifford develops the idea that Euclid’s axioms are not valid in small portions of our space and that
this variation of the curvature of space is what really happens in that phenomenon which we call the motion of matter [1870, page 158].
From 1863 on, Mach attempts to apply the new geometries in physics and chemistry. After 1867 Helmholtz tries to connect the new ideas on the foundations of geometry to his researches in physiology.
The years [sic] 1870 also sees the beginning of the popularization of the new conceptions. Helmholtz presents them before a group of non-mathematicians in Heidelberg (in Helmholtz’ works this lecture is always dated 1870; however, in his 1876, Helmholtz himself says that the lecture was given in 1869). In order to make himself understood he uses an illustration which will be repeated in the innumerable works of popularization that are soon coming to light, that of two-dimensional intelligent beings living and moving on a curved surface and incapable of perceiving anything outside of this surface; their geometry would be non-Euclidean. Let us notice that a slightly abridged version of this popular exposition is published on February 12, 1870, in The Academy, a magazine published in London, hence easily accessible to Engels. In 1876 Helmholtz published an enlarged version of his lecture under the title Ueber den Ursprung und die Bedeutung der geometrischen Axiome (On the origin and significance of geometrical axioms) in the third part of his Populäre wissenschaftliche Vorträge, a book that a man like Engels, right in the middle of his ‘moulting’, can hardly ignore. Engels repeatedly quotes the second part of Helmholtz’ book in his writings of that period, hence he must have seen the third part.
From 1870 on, non-Euclidean and n-dimensional geometries elicit general curiosity, somewhat like the theory of relativity at the end of the First World War and nuclear fission at the end of the Second. The German philosopher Hermann Lotze, by no means a mathematician, writing during these very years, speaks of
the much talked about fourth dimension of space [...], which is now mooted on all sides. [1879, pages 254–255]
Precisely at that time Engels is going through his scientific ‘moulting’. However, he does not pay any attention to these developments. This is the more surprising since, firstly, the new mathematical conceptions have extremely important philosophical implications and, secondly, their study does not require very deep mathematical knowledge or technique. Helmholtz had already noted these two points in 1870:
It is a question which, as I think, may be made generally interesting to all who have studied even the elements of mathematics, and which, at the same time, is immediately connected with the highest problems regarding the nature of the human understanding. [1870, page 128]
In brief, it is precisely the kind of question which, it seems, should enthrall a man like Engels, at that period of his intellectual life. His only mention of the subject, however, is in the article already quoted, Die Naturforschung in der Geisterwelt.
Modern spiritualism, born in the United States toward the middle of the nineteenth century, bloomed in Europe shortly afterwards. In the 1870s interest in it was great and polemics about it numerous. Precisely the same years saw a widespread diffusion of the new mathematical theories. Zöllner, an astrophysicist in Leipzig, not without scientific talent, became converted to spiritualism and tried to explain spiritualistic phenomena by the fourth dimension. In his article Engels jeers at Zöllner, but, as much as at Zöllner, he jeers at the fourth dimension; he even jeers at established mathematical results. The article does not show the slightest effort at understanding the new mathematical developments and produces a very painful impression.
This article at least tells us that Engels knows of the existence of the new geometries. But all he does is practically to put them on the same plane as spiritualism. These upsetting and exciting ideas, destined to a great future, rich in philosophical implications, discussed at the time by everyone showing any interest in science, do not retain at all the attention of Engels, who simply scoffs at them. Such a strong resistance on his part to the new ideas can by no means be due to episodical causes. It has its roots in his own conception of mathematics. We shall soon understand why Engels’ mind is closed to these questions. In the meantime, let us take note of the fact.
Let us sound out once more Engels’ mathematical knowledge. In notes for his Dialektik der Natur, commenting on the change of base in the writing of numbers, he states that
All laws of numbers depend on, and are determined by, the system used. [1935, page 671]
This is not true. Passing from one base to another merely changes the symbols representing the number, but by no means its arithmetical properties. For this false statement Engels gives an equally false example:
In every system with an odd base, the difference between even and odd numbers disappears. [1935, page 671]
A number remains even or odd independently of the base used. It would not be without interest to show how Engels was led by his’dialectic’ to such a senseless affirmation, but suffice it to note here, in this study of Engels’ mathematical knowledge, that all this is quite elementary arithmetic and would not puzzle an average sixteen years old student.
The picture emerging from this research is too dark and somewhat distorted, one may perhaps object. Truly enough, the argument would run, Engels does not pay much attention to pure mathematics during his’moulting’, but he reads quite a few books on astronomy and physics, where mathematics is used on every page, and he has an opportunity to become familiar with mathematical methods. This objection contains a grain of truth, but no more than a very tiny grain. Engels learned most of whatever he knew in mathematics from books on physics. This is clear, for example, from his oft-repeated assertion that the rules of the infinitesimal calculus are false from the viewpoint of physics; he never studied the mathematical theory that logically justifies the physicist’s apparent approximation. But no more than the quality should the quantity of Engels’ mathematical knowledge thus acquired be overestimated. A small incident will permit us to gauge it.
In the second preface to the Anti-Dühring, written in September 1885, hence after many years of ‘moulting’, Engels states:
[...] Hegel emphasized that Kepler, whom Germany let starve, is the real founder of modern mechanics of heavenly bodies and that Newton’s law of gravitation is already contained in all three Kepler’s laws, even explicitly in the third one. What Hegel shows with a few simple equations in his Naturphilosophie, § 270 and additions (Hegel’s Werke, 1842, volume VII, pages 98 and 113–115), appears again as a result of modern mathematical mechanics in Gustav Kirchhoff’s Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik, 2nd edition, Leipzig, 1877, page 10, and in a mathematical form which is essentially the same as the simple one first developed by Hegel. [1935, pages 11–12]
Let us open the two books mentioned by Engels at the pages he indicates. In Kirchhoff’s book we do find the derivation of Newton’s law of attraction from Kepler’s three laws, as it can still be found in any elementary textbook of mechanics. It requires two or three pages and makes use of the integral calculus and elementary differential equations. Now, in Hegel we read something much shorter:
In Kepler’s third law, A3/T2 is the constant. Let us write it A.A.2/T2 and, following Newton, let us call A/T2 the universal gravitation; then the expression of the action of this so-called attraction is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. [1842, pages 98–99]
In these puerile lines, Hegel does not see, among other things, that the variable distance between the planet and the sun is not the semimajor axis of the eliptic orbit. On page 115, also mentioned by Engels, the same error, with a few others added for good measure, is repeated. Hegel’s greatness rests on other achievements than these absurdities dictated by a deep-rooted and violent prejudice against the Englishman Newton as well as by an inveterate lack of understanding of mathematical methods.
Half a century later, after many years of personal ‘moulting’, with the correct derivation under his eyes in Kirchhoff s book, Engels does not see Hegel’s mistakes. Much worse, he states that the two derivations are ‘essentially the same’. No, indeed, we cannot say that Engels learned much more mathematics from physics books than from mathematical treatises.
What should we retain from all this? Engels does not show the slightest aptitude for mathematics; he does not know any of its developments in the nineteenth century; his judgments in the philosophy of mathematics are based on conceptions prevalent ninety or a hundred years before the time he was writing, while this interval had seen tumultuous and far-reaching progress; even so far as eighteenth century mathematics is concerned, he never comes into intimate contact with it; he only knows its problems through Hegel, a rather poor guide in that domain. Nevertheless, as we shall see now, Engels does not hesitate to pronounce sweeping judgments on mathematics and its philosophy.
 
The nature of mathematics
Engels’ conception of mathematics matches well his epistemology, the copy theory of truth, and even forms its crudest part. As, in general, ideas are for him nothing but ‘mirror images’ [3] of material things, mathematical concepts in particular are nothing but ‘imprints of reality’. (1935, page 608)
The first consequence of such a theory is to confuse what is mathematical and what is physical; mathematics is no longer anything more than a branch of physics. That Engels does not shrink from such an implication is shown beyond question by his writings.
In order to give examples of undoubtedly true propositions, he mentions those which state
that 2 × 2 = 4 or that the attraction of matter increases and decreases according to the square of the distance. [1935, page 496]
Engels does not hesitate to put on the same plane a mathematical theorem and a physical law. History has come to deride his conception: experience has compelled us to abandon Newton’s law and adopt another theory, while we cannot see how experience could force us to question a numerical statement. This clearly shows the difference in nature between the two propositions mentioned.
As examples of
eternal truths, definitive, ultimate truths [1935, page 91]
 Engels mentions that two times two makes four, that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, that Paris is in France, that a man left without food dies of hunger. [1935, page 91]
Here again mathematical theorems are intermingled with empirical observations. For Engels the proposition that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles has the same kind of truth as the empirical statement that Paris is in France. He writes this in 1877, when it is already widely recognized that the first proposition follows from a certain set of axioms, namely those of Euclidean geometry, and will perhaps not follow from some other set of axioms. But we have seen how obstinately Engels keeps his eyes closed to non-Euclidean geometries. They are too great a threat to his identification of mathematics with physics.
According to Engels, mathematical concepts are
taken from nowhere else than from the real world. [1935, page 43]
They are
exclusively borrowed from the outside world, not sprung from pure thought in the head. [1935, page 93]
Let us note the word ‘exclusively’. That experience has elicited certain mathematical notions is indisputable. But it has by no means directly imprinted them on a passive human brain. Looking at a spider’s thread or at a stretch of still water, never will a man conceive the mathematical straight line or plane without an intellectual activity irreducible to mere observation, to mere ‘mirroring’. As for more complex mathematical concepts, it is soon impossible to tell from which natural objects they would be the ‘mirror images’. Yes, the mathematician receives many suggestions from experience; but the quid proprium of mathematics is to pass to the limit, to deal with perfect objects, lines without breath, surfaces without thickness, and to deal with them not by means of observation, but of logical reasoning.
To take an example, let us consider the number π, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter. If π were simply given by experience, we would have to build a wheel of metal and measure with the greatest possible accuracy its circumference and its diameter. Their ratio would give π, or rather an approximation of π. However, the mathematician can, by pure reasoning, compute a mathematical π with an unlimited precision. He can make statements about this mathematical π – for example, that it is an irrational, transcendental number – that would be meaningless for the physical π. In Engels’ writings there is no indication that he would draw any distinction between the two concepts; more accurately, for him, the mathematical π would disappear behind the physical π.
For Engels the share of experience in the formation of mathematical concepts is much more than mere suggesting. He writes:
Pure mathematics has for its object the spatial forms and quantitative relations of the actual world, hence a very real stuff. [1935, page 43]
Mathematics, as a human creation, is obviously part of ‘reality’. If Engels wanted to say nothing more than that, it would be a platitude. However, what he understands by ‘actual world’ is nature, the physical, material world, and his statement is false, for it is by no means accurate to say that mathematics has for its object only the relations of the physical world. The same false conception is repeated again and again:
The results of geometry are nothing but the natural properties of the different lines, surfaces and bodies, or of their combinations, that in great part already appeared in nature long before men existed (radiolaria, insects, crystals, and so on). [1935, page 393]
That a shell has the shape of a certain mathematical curve may be of great interest to the biologist and suggest, for example, an exponential growth, but it is of no great consequence for the mathematician. Firstly, the mathematical curve is not an ‘imprint’ of the shell upon the mathematician’s brain; it is defined in mathematical terms. Secondly, the mathematician will never prove theorems about the curve by measuring the shell. What he could at most expect is to receive some suggestion from experience; his real task would then only begin, and he could fulfill it only by axiomatically deriving new propositions about the curve from its definition and already known theorems. The mathematician may even decide to take as his point of departure assumptions that are not ‘relations of the actual world’, that are not ‘natural properties’ of insects or crystals, and build geometries that transcend our experience. In a study of Engels’ philosophy, Sidney Hook has already noted (1937, page 261)
the curious reluctance on the part of orthodox Hegelians and dialectical materialists to admit that hypotheticals contrary to fact, i.e., judgments which take the form ‘if a thing or event had been different from what it was’, are meaningful assumptions in science or history.
Nowhere is this tendency more apparent than in Engels’ attitude toward mathematics, and nowhere is it more dangerous. It does away with the if–then aspect of mathematics.
One of Engels’ most surprising writings is a note written in 1877 or 1878 and entitled Ueber die Urbilder des mathematischen ‘Unendlichen’ in der wirklichen Welt (On the prototypes of the mathematical ‘infinite’ in the real world). It would be a tedious and not too rewarding task to unravel the skein of exaggerations, misunderstandings and plain mistakes contained in these few pages. The core of it is that Engels undertakes to show that every mathematical operation is ‘performed by nature’; nature differentiates, integrates, solves differential equations exactly like the mathematician. Both sets of operations are ‘literally’ (1935, page 467) the same, except that
the one is consciously carried out by the human brain, while the other is unconsciously carried out by nature. [1935, page 467]
For instance, the molecule is a differential, and
nature operates with these differentials, the molecules, in exactly the same way and according to the same laws as mathematics does with its abstract differentials. [1935, page 466]
Let us not tarry in investigating what this nature operating with human laws is, let us see how Engels justifies this animistic view. He offers the example of a cube of sulphur immersed in an atmosphere of sulphur vapor in such a way that a layer of sulphur, the thickness of a single molecule (the differential!), is deposited in three adjacent faces of the cube. But even with this artificial example, custom-built to prove (!) a universal law, Engels entangles himself and must finally note the discrepancy between the physical process and the mathematical reasoning. He tries to explain it away in a short sentence, saying that,
as everyone knows, lines without thickness or breath do not occur by themselves in nature, hence also the mathematical abstractions have unrestricted validity only in pure mathematics. [1935, page, 467]
This is precisely the point at issue, which Engels refuses to confront openly, but must surreptitiously concede. Now, where is the’literal’ identity of a physical process with a mathematical reasoning?
According to Engels, mathematics makes use of only two axioms:
Mathematical axioms are expressions of the most indigent thought content, which mathematics is obliged to borrow from logic. They can be reduced to two:

1. The whole is greater than the part. This proposition is a pure tautology [...]. This tautology can even in a way be proved by saying: a whole is that which consists of many parts; a part is that of which many make a whole; therefore the part is less than the whole [...].
2. If two magnitudes are equal to a third, then they are equal to one another. This proposition, as Hegel has already shown, is an inference, the correctness of which is guaranteed by logic, and which is therefore proved, although outside of pure mathematics. The other axioms about equality and inequality are merely logical extensions of this conclusion.

These meager propositions could not cut much ice, either in mathematics or anywhere else. In order to get any further, we are obliged to introduce real relations, relations and spatial forms which are taken from real bodies. The notions of lines, surfaces, angles, polygons, cubes, spheres, and so on, are all taken from reality. [1935, page 44–45]
This passage shows that, by an axiom, Engels does not at all understand the same thing as mathematicians do. Firstly, he undertakes to’prove’ his two axioms (one of which, by the way, is a’tautology’!). Secondly, these two arbitrarily selected propositions are insufficient as points of departure for mathematics. [4] Mathematicians need quite a few more assumptions on sets, numbers, points, lines, and so on. Engels would not deny this. In fact, these are the’relations’ that he mentions in the last paragraph of the passage quoted above. These propositions are, for him, directly taken from physical reality and are, therefore, ‘materially’ true. The idea that mathematicians can successively adopt contradictory sets of axioms and ascertain what each set implies is thoroughly alien to him.
Engels’ conception of mathematical axioms as immediately given by the physical world leads him to reject the deductive method of proof used in mathematics. In a note written during the preparation of his book against Dühring we find the following lines:
Comical confusion of the mathematical operations, which are susceptible of material demonstration, susceptible of being tested, because they rest on immediate material, although abstract, observation, with the purely logical operations, which are only susceptible of a deductive demonstration, hence incapable of having the positive certitude that the mathematical operations have, – and how many of these [logical operations] are even false! [1935, pages 394–395]
It is all topsy-turvy. Engels draws a vaguely correct distinction between factual observation and logical deduction; but, then, he puts mathematical proof on the side of material observation. His statements those quoted and quite a few others of the same sort – are nothing less than a negation of mathematics, a destruction of the structure started with Greek geometry and raised to such heights in the last two hundred years. Without the cement of logical deduction, mathematics would be reduced to a kind of land surveying, made up of empirical recipes, haphazard observations and strange coincidences. The position seems indeed untenable. But Engels’ words are clear, and they do not lack self-assurance.
In the discussion on the part of physical experience in mathematics, three points are involded: the nature of axioms, the deductive method, the origin of fundamental concepts.
The nature of mathematical axioms, whether they are a priori truths or generalizations from observations, was a live subject of discussion up to the middle of the nineteenth century. After the appearance of non-Euclidean geometries and other mathematical developments, the question became fairly settled for everybody well enough informed. Axioms are assumptions, whose ‘truth’ is irrelevant and, in a sense, meaningless in the field of mathematics. It is up to the physicist to decide which set of axioms should be used in the study of nature, but this choice is not a mathematical question anymore. There are perhaps limits to the if–then conception of mathematics. One could claim that the sequence of natural numbers is directly given to us by an intuition that is prior to, and independent of, the selection of any axiom system, and, besides, that the very notion of axiom system already involves that of natural number. Beyond the various set theories, there is perhaps an ‘absolute’ universe of sets. And, finally, the logic that takes us from ‘if’ to ‘then’ cannot itself be relativized. On each of these points there are arguments and counterarguments.
We do not intend to enter this controversy here. Our aim is simply to delimit the area of discussion and to show that Engels’ opinions are well outside the range of those of competent workers in the field since the middle of nineteenth century. In mathematics there is simply no question of proofs based on physical measurements, of definitions directly’imprinted’ by the physical world, of axioms that are nothing but physical laws.
Engels’ conception of mathematics is a crude form of empiricism. It bears a certain resemblance to the conceptions of two of its contemporaries, Herbert Spencer and John Stuart Mill. These two philosophers, however, are much more aware of the difficulties of their positions, make painstaking efforts to answer all possible objections and carefully qualify their statements. Engels makes sweeping assertions and jeers at those who do not think like him. On one point only does he try to strengthen his theses. His conception of ready-made mathematical notions directly taken from the physical world is so contrary to the actual development of knowledge that he has to mitigate it by an idea avowedly borrowed from Spencer, the acquisition of mathematical axioms through heredity (Engels’ epigones prefer not to mention this influence):
By recognizing the inheritance of acquired characters, it [modern science] extends the subject of experience from the individual to the genus; the single individual that must have experienced is no longer necessary, its individual experience can be replaced to a certain extent by the results of the experiences of a series of its ancestors. If, for instance, among us the mathematical axioms seem self-evident to every eight years old child, and in no need of proof from experience, this is solely the result of’accumulated inheritance’. It would be difficult to inculcate them by proof upon a Bushman or Australian Negro. [1935, pages 464–465]
The same idea is repeated elsewhere in almost identical terms:
Self-evidence, for instance, of the mathematical axioms for Europeans, certainly not for Bushmen and Australian Negroes. [1935, page 385]
We finally learn the source of the idea:
Spencer is right inasmuch as what thus appears to us to be the self-evidence of these axioms is inherited. [1935, page 608]
It is sufficient to try to state precisely Engels’ conception to see how empty it is. What experience is inherited? Is it our familiarity with solid objects, our ‘converse with things’, to use Spencer’s expression? In this respect, however, non-whites are not inferior to whites, unless we assume that they have not existed as men as long a time, that is, that they are much closer to the ape; but this is a vulgar assumption lacking any scientific basis. Or shall we accept, as the other possible interpretation, that mathematical axioms have become obvious to white children by heredity during the few centuries that they have been regularly going to school? Certainly no difference between white and non-white children has yet been ascertained in grasping the evidence of mathematical axioms. And certainly this unobserved difference cannot be invoked in order to explain the ‘proof through experience’ (‘Erfahrungsbeweis’) of mathematical axioms. Let us say no more on that. [5]
 
Logic and mathematics
Engels divides mathematics into two parts, ‘elementary mathematics, the mathematics ‘of constant magnitudes’, and ‘higher mathematics’, ‘the mathematics of variables, whose most important part is the infinitesimal calculus’.
The two realms use different methods of thought:’elementary mathematics [...] moves within the confines of formal logic, at least on the whole’, while ‘higher mathematics’ is ‘in essence nothing else but the application of dialectic to mathematical relations’. (1935, page 138) The dichotomy of mathematics parallels the division of thought into ‘metaphysical’ and ‘dialectical’:
The relation that the mathematics of variable magnitudes has to the mathematics of constant magnitudes is on the whole the relation of dialectical to metaphysical thought. [1935, pages 125–126]
The two domains in which mathematics are split are logically irreconcilable. What is true in one is false in the other:
 With the introduction of variable magnitudes and the extension of their variability to the infinitely small and the infinitely large, mathematics, otherwise so austere, has committed the original sin; it ate of the tree of knowledge, which opened up to it the career of the most gigantic achievements, but also of errors. [1935, pages 91–92]
Or:
[...] higher mathematics, which [...] often [ ...] puts forward propositions which appear sheer nonsense to the lower mathematician. [1935, page 602]
Or:
Almost all the proofs of higher mathematics, from the first proofs of the differential calculus on, are false, strictly speaking, from the standpoint of elementary mathematics. [1935, page 138]
Not only are the proofs false, they simply do not exist:
Most people differentiate and integrate not because they understand what they are doing, but by pure faith, because up to now it has always come out right. [1935, page 92]
Engels himself dimly feels how rash his statement is and tries to mitigate it with the words ‘most people’. But what does he mean by that? Do the theorems of the infinitesimal calculus have proofs or not? If they do, then Engels’ whole structure collapses, and he merely says that some people who use the calculus do not know or do not remember the derivation of the rules they use; such a situation is, of course, not confined to the calculus or even to mathematics; whether the people ignorant of the proofs of the rules are few or many, this has nothing to do with the point at issue, so long as the proofs exist. Or do the proofs perhaps not exist? In which case Engels should not speak of ‘most people’, but of everybody using the calculus without proofs. He was apparently ill at ease about making such a statement, and, by speaking of ‘most people’, he tried to cover its silliness with a fog of ambiguity.
The idea that emerges from this confusion is that the mathematician or the physicist, when using the calculus, does not follow the rules of logic, elementary geometry and arithmetic. Engels apparently has in mind the replacing of the increment of a function by its differential. When establishing a differential equation, the physicist often reasons as if a small segment of the curve were straight, that is, as if a function were linear in a small interval; but he knows that the step is perfectly justified by passing to the limit. He could obtain the same result in a strictly logical way by using the law of the mean; the procedure would be somewhat longer; he used it a few times when he learned the calculus, and convinced himself that he could use a method of approximation, which is a timesaving device, but does not in any way shake the logical foundations of the calculus.
True enough, when the infinitesimal calculus came into general use, in the eighteenth century, confusion reigned on that point, and many mathematicians were more concerned with obtaining new results than with strictly justifying their proofs. Such a situation, however, was very unsatisfactory and great efforts were soon spent to establish the calculus on a logically firm basis. Between 1820 and 1830, fifty years before the time Engels was writing, Cauchy gave a definition of the derivative as a limit, and the difficulty against which Engels is stumbling, namely the definition of differentials, disappeared:
In the mathematical analysis of the seventeenth and most of the eighteenth centuries, the Greek ideal of clear and rigorous reasoning seemed to have been discarded. ‘Intuition’ and ‘instinct’ replaced reason in many important instances. This only encouraged an uncritical belief in the superhuman power of the new methods. It was generally thought that a clear presentation of the results of the calculus was not only unnecessary but impossible. Had not the new science been in the hands of a small group of extremely competent men, serious errors and even debacle might have resulted. These pioneers were guided by a strong instinctive feeling that kept them from going far astray. But when the French revolution opened the way to an immense extension of higher learning, when increasingly large numbers of men wished to participate in scientific activity, the critical revision of the new analysis could no longer be postponed. This challenge was successfully met in the nineteenth century, and today the calculus can be taught without a trace of mystery and with complete rigor. [Courant and Robbins 1948, page 399]
For Engels, the history of mathematics followed exactly the opposite direction. Speaking of the derivative, he writes:
I mention only in passing that this ratio [the derivative] between two vanished quantities [...] is a contradiction; but that cannot disturb us any more than it has disturbed mathematics in general for almost two hundred years. [1935, page 141]
Mathematics has indeed been disturbed by the ‘contradiction’, had spent great efforts in order to overcome it and had, by Engels’ time, succeeded. But Engels paints a truly fantastic picture of the development of science. For him, the eighteenth century had known a ‘metaphysical’ science, meaning that scientists were then following logic, operating with ‘fixed categories’ and ignoring change. In the nineteenth century science had become ‘dialectical’, that is, had accepted contradictions as a token of truth. He presents this picture many times in his writings, and it is interesting to see what part mathematics plays in it. According to Engels, ‘higher mathematics’, that is, chiefly the infinitesimal calculus, is full of ‘contradictions’; mathematicians have been forced to accept these contradictions, and their science is pure absurdity from the standpoint of logic. Then, this science has induced other sciences also to accept contradictions and had led them from the ‘metaphysical’ era of the eighteenth century to the ‘dialectical’ era of the nineteenth century:
Until the end of the last century, even until 1830, natural scientists were quite satisfied with the old metaphysics, because the real science did not go beyond mechanics, terrestrial and cosmical. Nevertheless, confusion was already introduced by the higher mathematics, which considers the eternal truth of the lower mathematics as a superseded standpoint, often affirms the contrary [of what lower mathematics does] and establishes propositions that appear to the lower mathematician as sheer nonsense. The fixed categories were here dissolving themselves, mathematics had entered upon a ground where even such simple questions as those of the mere abstract quantity, the bad infinite, were taking on a completely dialectical shape and forcing the mathematicians, against their will and without their knowledge, to become dialectical. Nothing more comical than the wriggles, the foul tricks and the makeshifts used by the mathematicians for solving that contradiction, for reconciling higher and lower mathematics, for making clear to their mind that that which appeared to them as an incontrovertible result was not pure idiocy, and in general for rationally explaining the point of departure, the method and the result of the mathematics of the infinite. [1935, page 602]
By the ‘mathematics of the infinite’ Engels means, as we have seen, the infinitesimal calculus, and his conception can hardly be more incorrect. In the eighteenth century mathematics had acquired a great wealth of new results, without always bothering too much about strict proofs. In the nineteenth century, on the contrary, the accent was on rigor, and very strict standards of logic were followed. Great progress was made in that direction, and among what Engels calls ‘the wriggles, the foul tricks and the makeshifts’ of the mathematicians are some of greatest achievements of the human mind. The very year 1830, which he gives as the line of demarcation between ‘metaphysics’ and ‘dialectic’ in science, marks, with Cauchy, the introduction of a new rigor in mathematics. Engels’ picture is the exact opposite of the actual historical development.
If Engels still considers the calculus to be irreducible to logic, it is because, one might say, he does not know the nineteenth century developments in that field. True enough. We have seen that his source of information on the subject was Bossut’s treatise, which belongs, not only by the date of its publication, but also by its spirit, to the eighteenth century. However, lack of information cannot absolve Engels. Firstly, in any case ignorantia non est argumentum and, secondly, in the present case we must ask the question: why did Engels not study these nineteenth-century developments? After all, he presented his wrong conception of the calculus in his book against Dühring, which was published in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Could he not have paid attention to what mathematicians had done in the first three quarters of that century?
A complete answer to this question would lead us into an examination of Engels’ ways of thinking, writing and polemizing. We would have to show by many other examples how he often disregards facts when they do not suit him, how he fads to mention and refute possible objections to his blunt statements, how he answers an opponent by a joke or by calling him names. Suffice it to say here that Engels believed he had found in the conceptions of the calculus temporarily prevalent in the eighteenth century a confirmation of the ideas remaining in his own mind since he had read Hegel, and he simply did not bother to investigate any further.
Even if Engels had not followed the mathematical developments that occurred in the thirty or fifty years before the time he was writing on mathematics, he could have found a better guide than Bossut; he could have used, for instance, Lacroix’s treatises, the complete one published in 1797 or the elementary one published in 1802; these works are far superior to Bossut’s; they became standard textbooks and ran into numerous editions up to the very end of the nineteenth century. Although Lacroix was writing before Cauchy’s decisive contribution and had not yet a strict definition of the limit of a function, his treatment is modern in spirit and, at the turn of the century, he already defined the differential as the linear part of the increment of the function, which is the present definition and could have dispelled many of Engels’ dark clouds of confusion. For that matter, Engels could also have read d’Alembert’s article Differentiel in the Encyclopédie, dating from the middle of the eighteenth century; d’Alembert still uses the intuitive notion of limit, but his concise, clear and sagacious notice is a torch whose light could have been most helpful to Engels more than hundred and twenty years later.
Engels, however, kept his eyes closed to the actual development of mathematics. His eyes are still closed when he undertakes to show how mathematics is full of contradictions. He does not hesitate to write that
one of the main principles of higher mathematics is the contradiction that in certain circumstances straight lines and curves are the same. [1935, page 125]
This is apparently a reference to the calculus, and we have already seen what this ‘contradiction’ really is. The next one is simply whimsical:
[Higher mathematics] also establishes this other contradiction that lines which intersect each other before our eyes nevertheless, only five or six centimeters from their point of intersection, should be taken as parallel, as if they would never meet even if extended to infinity. [1935, page 125]
It is not easy to see what Engels means here. Is it again the question of approximation in calculus? Is it an allusion to the fact that mathematicians can use a badly drawn figure for a correct proof? Anyway, these five or six centimeters have nothing to do with mathematics, and there is no contradiction here either. Engels finds that even ‘elementary mathematics’ is ‘teeming with contradictions’ (1935, page 125):
It is for example a contradiction that a root of A may be a power of A, and yet A½ = [square root of] A. [1935, page 125]
Whoever has studied the question of fractional exponents will have difficulty in finding a contradiction here. The proof given to young students consists precisely in showing that there is no contradiction in treating radicals as powers with fractional exponents and that it is, therefore, legitimate to extend the concept of power. This generalized power subsumes the power in the elementary sense of the word as well as the radical. Using an analogy, we could reconstruct Engels’ thought thus: ‘A cat is a feline; a tiger is a feline; hence a cat is a tiger. Here is a contradiction!’ Old sophism. Why does Engels make this mistake? Probably because he considers contradictions to be the highest product of thought, mirroring ‘motion’, ‘life’ (see, for instance, 1935, page 124). Non-contradictory thought is for him hardly possible. Hence he has to discover contradictions everywhere. And he does! After roots come complex numbers:
It is a contradiction that a negative magnitude should be the square of anything, for every negative magnitude multiplied by itself gives a positive square. [1935, page 125]
If one carefully rereads this sentence, it is simply impossible to find in it the contradiction imagined by Engels. The square of a negative number is a positive number; hence a negative number is not the square of a negative number. But why can it not be the square of some other kind of number? Where is the contradiction?
‘Dialectic’ manifests itself in mathematics not only by contradictions, but also by the law of the negation of the negation, whose validity Engels undertakes to prove by exhibiting examples. Here is the first:
Let us take an arbitrary algebraic magnitude, namely a. Let us negate it , then we have −a (minus a). Let us negate this negation by multiplying −a by −a, then we have +a, that is the original positive magnitude, but to a higher degree, namely to the second power. [1935, pages 388–389]
Now comes a second example:
Still more strikingly does the negation of the negation appear in higher analysis, [...] in the differential and integral calculus. How are these operations performed? In a given problem, for example, I have the variable magnitudes x and y [ ...]. I differentiate x and y [ ...]. What have I done but negate x and y [...]? In place of x and y, therefore, I have their negation, dx and dy, in the formulas or equations before me. I continue then to operate with these formulas and, at a certain point, I negate the negation, that is, I integrate the differential formula [1935, pages 140–141; see also page 392 and the footnote on page 388].
In these two examples’to negate’ means four different operations: (1) to multiply by −1, (2) to square a negative number, (3) to differentiate, (4) to integrate. What is the common feature of these operations that would allow Engels to subsume them under the concept of negation? A few pages later he tells us that ‘in the infinitesimal calculus it is negated otherwise than in the formation of positive powers from negative roots’. (1935, page 145) But he never gives us the slightest hint as to what distinguishes the four ‘negating’ operations from other mathematical operations. Or can any mathematical operation be considered as a ‘negation’? Then, what does the ‘negation of the negation’ mean? It is both impossible and useless to criticize Engels’ use of this formless notion in the field of mathematics. Quod gratis asseritur gratis negatur. Let us simply note that there is no mathematical rule or principle that could possibly be, even by the farthest stretch of the imagination, identified with Engels’ negation of the negation.
After having witnessed the contempt with which Engels treats logic, we would never expect to read in his book against Dühring the following lines:
[...] formal logic is above all a method of arriving at new results, of advancing from the known to the unknown. [1935, page 138]
Let us notice the words ‘above all’. Formal logic is now for Engels an ars inveniendi, a conception hardly dreamed of in the heyday of Scholasticism. In fact, formal logic hardly is a method of discovery in mathematics; imagination and intuition fulfill that role. In other sciences it is still, if possible, more sterile for discovery. Why did Engels allow himself such a blunder? The end of the sentence gives the answer:
[...] and dialectic is the same, only in a much more eminent sense. [1935, page 138]
Engels bestows such an extraordinary worth upon formal logic (which, poor soul, had never asked for anything like it!) only in order to ascribe it the more easily to his ‘dialectic’, to a much higher degree.
If we leave aside this last sleight of hand, Engels’ main idea is that mathematics is divided into two incompatible domains and that the results of ‘higher’ mathematics, mainly the infinitesimal calculus, cannot be justified before the instance of ‘lower’ mathematics and formal logic. As we soon learn that ‘lower’ mathematics itself ‘teems with contradictions’, the whole edifice becomes quite shaky and, once we have seen what the ‘contradictions’ or the ‘negation of the negation’ actually are, not much remains.
These ideas have been inspired, of course, by Hegel. The second section of the first book of his Wissenschaft der Logik is devoted to Quantity and contains long passages on number, infinity and the infinitesimal calculus. Hegels’ remarks on this last subject are often interesting, especially if we do not forget that they were written before 1812, at a time when the question was not yet settled for mathematicians. Hegel, moreover, has up-to-date information; for example, he mentions Carnot and extensively deals with Lagrange’s work. Hegel’s remarks also show an effort to understand, which is absent from Engels’ writings. Finally, these remarks are embedded in a broad philosophical conception that gives them scope and depth. In Engels everything is reduced to two or three dry formulas on ‘contradiction’ or ‘negation of the negation’, which he hopelessly tries to apply here and there.
It is true that behind some of Engels’ contradictions there are real problems, like the arithmetization of the continuum or the relation between potential and actual infinite. These problems have preoccupied many thinkers, from the Greeks to Kant, from Kant to the modern mathematicians. They are at the bottom of still unsettled differences in the foundations of mathematics. Engels sets himself to deal with Kant’s antinomies, soon announces that
the thing itself can be solved very simply [1935, page 54],
and gives a few pages of explanations. Engels’ solution is not too clear, but, so far as one can make out, coincides with what we have already seen above about the existence and role of contradictions in mathematics: the more, the better. According to Engels,
The infinite is a contradiction, and is full of contradictions. It is already a contradiction that an infinity should be made up of mere finite parts, and that is the case nevertheless [...]. Every attempt to overcome these contradictions leads [...] to new and worse contradictions. Precisely because the infinite is a contradiction, it is an infinite process, unwinding itself without end in time and space. The overcoming of the contradiction would be the end of the infinite. [1935, page 56]
In these lines the words ‘contradiction’ and ‘infinite’ alternate without producing much light. Meanwhile, nineteenth-century mathematicians, men like Bolzano and Cantor, had attacked the problem and were making great progress. The only thing that can be said for Engels is that he occupies himself with an important problem, but nothing more; it cannot be said that he brings any appreciable contribution to its clarification. On the contrary, exactly as in the case of the infinitesimal calculus, Engels looks for a solution in a direction opposite to the actual development of science.
 
Conclusion
If we cannot claim to have dealt with every statement of Engels on mathematics, an examination of those left out would not change, but rather confirm, the conclusions emerging from our study of Engels’ writings. [6] Some, however, may challenge these conclusions on the ground that some of the quotations we have used come from manuscripts that Engels left unpublished. It does not seem possible to defer to this objection. Engels has expressed himself at length on mathematics in his published works and there are no discrepancies between his published works and unpublished manuscripts (more precisely, there are no deeper discrepancies between the two parts than within the published part itself). We may add that the Russian government published Engels’ manuscripts a long time ago and has used them just as much as the works published during his lifetime to foster its official dogma.
The picture we have obtained consists of two parts, rather loosely joined. On the one hand, there is Engels’ ‘materialism’, which reduces mathematics to physics, or rather to ‘material observation’, entirely ignores its if-then character and sees in it a kind of land surveying. On the other hand, there is the ‘dialectic’, which proclaims that mathematics breaks the rules of logic at every step and swarms with ‘contradictions’. The ‘materialism’ is a very crude form of empiricism; the ‘dialectic’ is a degenerated offshoot of Hegel’s philosophy. The only bond, it seems, that ties these two heterogenous parts together is a common ignoring of the real development of science.
Mathematics is undoubtedly the field in which Engels is at his weakest. His views on mathematics, however, are too deeply ingrained in his general conceptions to be dismissed lightly. They form a frame of reference that can never be forgotten in a general examination of his ideas.
In order to be complete the present study would require an examination of what Engels’ conceptions have become when inherited by his epigones and commentators, as well as an examination of Marx’ attitude toward mathematics.
The first task is too thankless to tempt us now. Suffice it to say that the fate of Engels’ writings has been determined by social considerations rather than by a rational examination of their contents; only socio-political events, not its intrinsic value, can explain why so mediocre a book as the Anti-Dühring could become the philosophical Bible (if we may use these two words together) of so many men. This is indeed an important social phenomenon (with which we are not concerned here), but it does not in any way increase the intrinsic value of the book.
The second task is full of interest and would require a special study; we simply give here a few conclusions. Marx left about 900 pages of mathematical manuscripts. A sizable part of these manuscripts were published in Moscow in 1968. Many pages are no more than abstracts from textbooks read by Marx. Some of his notes, however, consist of commentaries and deal with the definition of the derivative. Marx devised a method which he opposes to those of Newton, Leibniz, d’Alembert and Lagrange (he ignores Cauchy). His aim was, it seems, to decide whether a function ‘reaches’ its limit or not, a question long debated until the middle of the nineteenth century. As far as one can judge from the published manuscripts, Marx’ method of obtaining the derivative involves no more than a change of notation, concealing the difficulty rather than solving it. By giving independent value to this procedure Marx only reveals that he has not yet fully grasped the notion of a limit; moreover, the method is applicable to polynomials only, not to all functions, and its use would make a general theory of the derivative impossible.
Marx’ efforts are those of an alert student of the calculus, who tries to think a delicate point through by himself, but cannot yet undertake original creative work in mathematics because he lacks training and information. Still the mathematical level of these efforts is well above that of Engels’ writings and, unlike Engels, Marx did not publish anything on mathematics.
Marx did, however, send some of his mathematical manuscripts on the definition of the derivative to Engels, who commented in a letter dated August 18, 1881:
I compliment you on your work. The matter is so perfectly clear that we cannot be amazed enough how the mathematicians insist with such stubbornness upon mystifying it. But that comes from the one-sided way of thinking of these gentlemen. [Marx and Engels 1931, page 513]
How well these lines show their writer’s cast of mind! Engels did not know anything of the development of mathematics during the fifty years (at least!) preceding the time he was writing. From all evidence, he would have been unable to even name the mathematicians of his time. Nevertheless, he does not hesitate to accuse them of incompetence. Marx’ manuscript becomes ‘a new foundation of the differential calculus’ (Marx and Engels 1967, page 46) by a ‘profound mathematician’ (Engels 1935, page 10), while mathematicians, because of their ignorance of the dialectic, only muddle the problem.
This puts the finishing touch to our picture. Engels now stands as a man full of prejudices, unable to freely enter the competition of ideas. He would like to have his own ’dialectical’ science aside from what he calls the ‘ordinary metaphysical’ science, that is, purely and simply science.
* * *
Notes
1. At this place there is in the English translation of Dialektik der Natur (Engels 1940, page 155) the following footnote: ‘It is impossible to render Engels’ word “Induktionsesel” into English. A donkey in German idiom may mean a fool, a hard worker, or both. It can thus imply praise and blame at the same time. Probably, the implication is that Newton did great work with induction, but was unduly afraid of hypotheses. The phrase might be freely rendered “Newton, who staggered under a burden of inductions”.’ Of six persons with good knowledge of colloquial German whom I have consulted, none has confirmed this version.
2. After the publication of the Anti-Dühring, H.W. Fabian, a socialist and a mathematician, wrote a very pertinent letter to Marx clarifying the point. (Engels 1935, page 719) Engels’ only answer was a sneering remark in his preface to next edition of the book. (1935, page 10)
3. ‘Abbilder’, ‘Spiegelbilder’, ‘Widerspiegelung’; Engels repeats these expressions time and again. See, for example, 1935, pages 24–26.
4. We leave aside the fact that the first proposition is no axiom at all; it is false for infinite sets (with a certain sense of ‘greater’). The second statement expresses the transitivity of equality, one axiomatic property among several. Curiously enough, the two ‘axioms’ cited by Engels are the two examples of ‘identical propositions’ given by Kant in 1787, page 38. Such ill-digested fragments abound in Engels’ writings.
5.> It would not be without interest to study Engels’ ideas on heredity and his general attitude toward science in the light of the Lysenko affair.
6. Similar conclusions, although perhaps less complete, have been reached by other students of Engels’ attitude toward mathematics; see Bataille and Queneau 1932, Hook 1937, Walter 1938 and 1948. In his 1934 Gustav Meyer says only a few words on the subject (pages 314–315), but they are very much to the point; see also Appendix B in Wilson 1940.
 

Jean van Heijenoort Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 26 February 2010




The events in Algiers are worth watching closely. We are witnessing there an attempt at the political regroupment of the French bourgeoisie. The difficulties that are arising in the process tell us much about the future of Europe.
Crushed militarily in June 1940, the French bourgeoisie went, under the leadership of the Petain government, along the road of “collaboration.” But with Germany’s military difficulties this road has led to an impasse and the Vichy government has no perspective to offer for the future. The atomized French bourgeoisie has to regroup itself around a new political center.
An important step in this political rebirth of the French bourgeoisie was the formation at Algiers on June 3, after lengthy negotiations between Giraud and De Gaulle, of the French National Committee of Liberation. It is true that this new regime did not appear in France proper, but in the very special conditions of a colonial milieu. Nevertheless, the history of its formation offers us, to a certain degree, important indications for forecasting what will happen in the countries of Europe after the collapse of Nazi rule. Although distorted by the colonial conditions, the picture, if we know how to read it, is of great help for determining our political perspectives.
In December, Giraud succeeded the assassinated Darlan, to whom Washington had entrusted the job of “freeing” France. Darlan had done everything to remain faithful to the legality of Vichy. Under his regime the entire administration installed by Vichy remained. His replacement by Giraud brought no change.
 
Giraud’s Weakness
Giraud’s program was ostensibly of a purely military character: to collaborate with the Allies for the defeat of Germany. His sole political slogan was a negative one: “an end to factional fights.” The reasons for this were obvious. Aside from Washington, Giraud’s principal support was, and still is, the upper and middle cadres of the French army in North Africa. These cadres had actively supported or passively tolerated the Vichy government. They had nothing to offer the people of France for the future except a government as reactionary as that of Petain. They could scarcely shout about this program. In addition, their greatest desire was to have everyone forget the recent past of “collaboration” in which they had been more or less implicated. Hence their care to avoid the slightest political discussion. Giraud expressed this belated modesty in the slogan “One aim – victory.”
How far the Vichy influence had remained in the Giraud administration can be judged by a few lines, buried without comment in the pages of the New York Times on June 7. It reported from Casablanca that “The Bank of Morocco attempted to send almost $75,000,000 worth of gold to German-occupied France last February.” This was four months after the American debarkment, and we must not forget that the Bank of Morocco is an official institution in the hands of the French administration.
Washington’s deal with Darlan had alienated much of the sympathy for the Allies: the North African population had fallen into apathy, distrust and cynicism. Seeking popular support, Giraud was forced to sacrifice some of the most compromised administrators and to make a few speeches on “democracy” and the “Republic.” This did not change much of anything, as we see in the case of the Algerian Jews, whom Giraud deprived of French citizenship. However, these gestures did give Washington some kind of answer to the critics of the American policy toward Darlan. Indeed, Giraud was presented as a great “democrat.”
However, Giraud, a newcomer in politics, could not do this too well. The “democratic” mask could not hide his aspiration to play the Bonaparte. In a speech at Constantine on April 15 Giraud said:
“At that time [after Germany’s defeat] 40,000,000 Frenchmen will say what they desire, but I have no wish to revive the follies that led to the catastrophe in 1940.”
The “follies” are the revolutionary upsurge of the French workers. The very construction of the phrase smells of Bonapartism: “but I have no wish to ...”!
Giraud’s regime in North Africa remained extremely precarious. His staunch supporters were compromised by their past; their only program was to keep quiet. The timid renewal of political life led to the growth of the Gaullist movement. The information which comes to us from North Africa, outside of reports of the official gestures, still remains very scarce. Nevertheless the case of Tunisia permits one to judge the situation fairly well. When the Allied troops entered the Tunisian cities, the press dispatches were of one accord in reporting that popular sentiment was very much in favor of De Gaulle, while the prestige of the Giraud regime was nil. When De Gaulle arrived in Algiers on May 30, all his factional emblems were abundantly displayed by the populace, even though expressly forbidden by Giraud in a decree a few days before. “Even soldiers and policemen displayed the Fighting French emblem,” the Associated Press reported.
Gaullism represents extremely diverse and vague aspirations. [1] Beginning as a purely national-military opposition to Vichy, it has developed, especially through its ties to the underground movement, toward a left-democratic program. For as long as possible Washington and London insisted on Giraud’s exclusive control of Algeria. But to avert an ever increasing political cleavage, Giraud, and behind him Washington and London, found it expedient to look for a compromise to bring De Gaulle into the North African government.
 
The Issues In Dispute
The discussions between the two generals began with the very nature of the new power. Giraud had named his regime “Civil and Military High Command,” thus revealing its essentially military character. De Gaulle demanded the creation of a political power independent of the military command. In the present condition of the French bourgeoisie, the specific weight of such a political power in face of the army can be only very weak. Even this, however, was enough to worry Giraud. He rejected all idea of a political power distinct from the military command and hastened to announce that De Gaulle meant to impose a ready-made government on the people of France. Washington and the American press echoed this accusation. That De Gaulle’s aims in the France of tomorrow will be far from pure democracy is very likely. But it was comical to see democracy suddenly become the principal care of the Bonaparte-apprentice Giraud.
The discussions between Giraud and De Gaulle, from March to the end of May, were centered around whether the new regime would be simply a “High Command” or if it would be a political body. To De Gaulle’s program of restoration of republican legality Giraud could counterpose only a negative program of remaining silent over a past too compromising for the majority of his supporters. Therefore he found himself in an extremely difficult position in the discussions and had to take up the fight on points where he was beaten in advance.
Thus a small episode illumines the unfolding of the negotiations. At the end of April, Giraud proposed to De Gaulle a meeting at a “lonely place” outside Algiers, obviously for fear of popular demonstrations. De Gaulle insisted on a meeting in Algiers and, in the middle of May, in an insulting answer to Giraud, declared that De Gaulle was well able to assure order in Giraud’s capital. At the end of May, De Gaulle, in the midst of mass ovations, made his entrance into Algiers.
The result of the negotiations was a great defeat for Giraud. A central political power was formed on June 3rd, in essentials according to the original plan of De Gaulle. The situation of the most compromised supporters of Giraud became untenable. Peyrouton, former Petain minister, brutal persecutor of the opposition in France, brought by the Allies from his Vichy Embassy in Argentina on the advice of Darlan to rule Algeria, had to resign. Bergeret, former Vichy minister, Giraud’s close assistant, was dismissed. Nogues, governor of Morocco, strong supporter of Petain, resigned June 5th and even left North Africa. Boisson, whom Washington insisted on keeping as an “able administrator,” finally had to resign at the end of June.
Giraud was left so isolated that the British, hunting for figures to give his faction prestige, brought out of France the old and decrepit reactionary General Georges. Giraud’s other assistants in the new Committee are direct representatives of big business: the railroad magnate René Meyer, and the financiers Couve de Murville and Jean Monnet.
De Gaulle’s victory, though important, soon revealed its limitations when the question of control of the army came up. De Gaulle had insisted successfully on the formation of a political power; but then arose the question of subordination of the military power to the political power.
Doubtless Giraud had not abandoned Peyrouton and Nogues with a light heart, but that was, after all, an inevitable concession. Of entirely different scope, however, was the question of control of the army. Here the very source of Giraud’s power was at stake. Thus a crisis broke out as soon as De Gaulle posed the question.
Rumors of a Gaullist coup de force spread through Algiers. A dispatch from there in the June 3rd New York Times informs us that:
“... the factional strife in the twenty-four hours before the committee met today was strong enough for General Giraud to redouble the guards around his radio station. Late last night, a French tank rumbled into the grounds of his residence.”
On June 4th, the Office of War Information issued a statement in the name of its head, Elmer Davis, denouncing “the cheap political maneuverings” of the Gaullists and even going so far as to say they were no better than the Vichy men, “Nogues, Peyrouton, and so on.” This official declaration was undoubtedly only a small public sign of less public but more substantial actions by Washington’s representatives in Algiers.
For weeks the crisis continued in the Committee, with threats of resignation by De Gaulle. He did not have enough military forces to attempt a coup, and moreover would immediately encounter Anglo-American opposition. On the other hand, Giraud cannot break with the Gaullist movement without seriously discrediting his regime and dealing a great blow to the prestige of the Allies in the underground movement in France. Thus the new regime leads and will likely lead for some time a chaotic existence of unstable compromises.
The first of the compromises was the division of command of the French armies, decided by the National Committee on June 22. Giraud kept command of the troops in strategically-important North Africa and the Dakar region. The far less numerous and extremely dispersed forces in the other colonies are under the command of De Gaulle. It was not concealed that Washington would not have permitted any interference with Giraud’s command of the French forces in North Africa and Dakar.
 
The Allies and the French Problem
It has often been said that the conflict between De Gaulle and Darlan-Giraud reflected Anglo-American friction. There is only a very small grain of truth in this interpretation. Before the debarkment in North Africa, London, unlike Washington, had entered into military conflict with Vichy (Mers-el-Kebir, Madagascar, Syria) and was thus led to direct support of the Gaullist movement. But after the Anglo-American Occupation of North Africa, and once Darlan was eliminated, there appeared to be a close understanding between Washington and London to utilize Giraud. Thus at the Casablanca conference between Roosevelt and Churchill at the end of January, it became clear that they had decided to shelve De Gaulle for an indefinite period and that the support of Washington and London was entirely behind Giraud.
Peyrouton was brought to Algiers while Roosevelt arid Churchill were still there.
Thus Giraud’s defeat, when he finally had to receive De Gaulle in Algiers and accept the formation of a joint political body, was also a defeat for Anglo-American diplomacy. A particularly clear sign of this was the resentful ridicule which the administration and the American press tried to throw on the negotiations throughout their course. The tone was set by art unnamed Washington official who was quoted in the press as characterizing the whole affair as a “farce.”
There is an important political lesson in this situation. The United States now militarily dominates North Africa more completely than it can ever hope to dominate Europe. Nevertheless, its inability to give political stability to this domination has been made obvious by the events in Algiers. The weakness of the Giraud regime in the face of De Gaulle is Washington’s weakness, and the Algiers events, on a small scale, help us to foresee how unstable a world pax americana will be even though backed up by thousands of airplanes.
In the December 1942 Fourth International, I wrote: “The militant patriotism of the De Gaulle movement would risk entering into conflict at one time or another with American interests.” At the time this was merely a hypothesis, based on the nature of the Gaullist movement. The latest events have verified it.
The Anglo-American forces in North Africa, even though “friendly,” are occupying forces. They enjoy, among other things, the right of requisition, full use of harbors and control of communications. They billet their soldiers in the homes, etc., and we can easily imagine that there are many daily incidents. During the first period of the fight in Tunisia, the French troops were hastily sent against the Germans without up-to-date arms; of a total of less than 65,000 French troops, 10,000 were killed, and about 30,000 taken prisoners or wounded – these are Giraud’s official figures. Such facts easily stir up anger against the “friends.” Finally, behind” all the incidents is the fundamental question of the future of France, of her power in Europe, of her place in the peace negotiations, and of the fate of her colonial empire.
In contrast to the docile servility of Giraud, De Gaulle has made political capital out of this situation, and is already drawing interest in increasing influence. As early as the 1st of June, the day after De Gaulle’s arrival in Algiers, the New York Times correspondent was cabling:
“The point emphasized by General De Gaulle is the reassertion of French sovereignty throughout the empire, a procedure that would have many difficult results for the Allies.”
On June 4th the Washington correspondent of the same paper described the condescending “indulgence” with which the official milieu of the American capital regarded the Algiers events, and added:
“It was noted that General Charles De Gaulle, according to dispatches from Algiers, apparently desired to assert complete French sovereignty by taking over communications and ports now in the hands of the Allies, and it was indicated that this suggestion would not be taken seriously, since it would go beyond the bounds of the indulgence mentioned, as General De Gaulle well knew.”
On June 21, the New York Times correspondent in Washington indicated in some detail the reasons for Washington’s alarm:
“Meanwhile reports from more than one source say that, in the opinion of recent visitors to Algiers, the Fighting French leader has acquired a substantial following in North Africa, especially among the youth, whose intense nationalism shows more than a trace of xenophobia. One Frenchman reported that all the army officers below the rank of major were De Gaulllsts.
“General De Gaulle ... [has won] the ardent support of many younger men.
“He appeals to their nationalism, which is all the keener because of the defeat and humiliation of France, it is said here. He tells them that General Giraud and his aides are puppets of the Allies, that France is treated worse than Luxembourg because, although her army fights with the Allies, there is no French flag among those of the United Nations, no French government represented in their councils, not even full French sovereignty in North Africa. The implication is that France is being humiliated by the Allies as well as by the Germans.”
The following day, June 22, the same correspondent returned to the same subject, extremely important not only so far as France is concerned, but also for the whole post-war policy of the United States. He wrote:
“Six months ago the French political controversy was to a great extent an Anglo-American one, since London and Washington were in effect backing different French candidates for leadership. It tends today toward another alignment – the British and Americans on the one side and a resurgent French nationalism on the other.
“Nobody represents that nationalism quite so definitely as General De Gaulle. He has taken a very independent stand toward the British in spite of the fact that they largely (financed his organization and fighting forces. Lately he has appeared in the role of a champion of French rights against both the British and the Americans. That revived nationalism, according to all the evidence here, has also permeated the ranks of General Giraud’s followers, some having been much impressed by General De Gaulle since meeting him in Algiers and hearing him speak.
“This nationalism inspires particularly the youth ... It represents a reaction to the renewed hope of liberation of France and resentment toward her liberators for appearing to interfere in French affairs. Of this feeling the Allies must take account in North Africa and in France, in the opinion of some observers who know France well.”
In the light of these facts, the question can be raised in which of the two camps is to be found that section of the French bourgeoisie which has abandoned the perspective of “collaboration” with Hitler. Shouldn’t it be with De Gaulle, who represents the most intransigent bourgeois nationalism? Apparently not, if one is to judge by the character of Giraud’s three principal assistants: René Meyer, Couve de Murville and Jean Monnet, all representing big capital. This indicates that the big bourgeoisie still tends to regroup itself politically around Giraud, that is, to lean completely on Washington and London. Economically debilitated by the military defeat of June 1940 and politically discredited by the period of “collaboration” with Hitler, the French bourgeoisie, at any rate the men who speak for it in Algiers, still feel extremely weak. Their present collaboration has the same reasons as that with Hitler. They feel no confidence in their ability to restore by themselves their rule over the masses of France.
Giraud’s surest support is the top ranks of the army, discredited by their old-school military incompetence and compromised by their Vichy period. They have nothing but hostility for De Gaulle, who as a young colonel had dared to oppose to their senile ideas his modern theory of mechanized warfare, who broke the discipline of the army to flee to London and attack Vichy. These cadres are relatively numerous – the press reports 108 generals and admirals In North Africa which implies several thousand higher officers. This group is Giraud’s surest bastion.
The Gaullist movement in North Africa is much more variegated and undoubtedly includes various tendencies which will rapidly diverge once political life becomes more active. On the basis of an intransigent patriotism, De Gaulle gathers together the lower cadres of the army, the youth, the students, the “left” petty bourgeoisie. It is difficult to say whether his influence extends among the workers, but he has the support of the Stalinists.
The quarrel between Giraud and De Gaulle shows us how difficult it is for a ruling class which has been crushed militarily to re-create its political unity. The policy of “collaboration” broke the traditional national axis of the French bourgeoisie and created divisions which will not easily be erased. Finally, the new “collaboration” with Washington produces new conflicts. The Giraud group, too servile toward Washington, is rapidly losing ground to the benefit of De Gaulle, who is thereby encouraged to come forward to defend French bourgeois interests against Washington and London. This is the most important political lesson of the events in Algiers. No, Hitler’s defeat does not give much promise of bringing cohesion and stability to the ruling classes.
 
Footnote
1. On the character of the Gaullist Movement, see my article in the March 1943 Fourth International.

Loris: The German Revolution (March 1943)






Heijenoort Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Marc Loris
The German Revolution
in the Leninist Period
(March 1943)

From Fourth International, Vol. 4 No. 3, March 1943, pp. 76–79.
Copied from What Next?, No. 2.

By kind permission of the editor Bob Pitt (email wh@tnext.freeserve.co.uk), who introduces the article.




This article, published under the pseudonym Marc Loris in the March 1943 of Fourth International, is a reply to Walter Held’s analysis of the failure of the German revolution which we reprinted in What Next? No. 1. Born in 1912, Jean Van Heijenoort joined the Trotskyist movement in France. He served as Trotsky’s secretary for several years in the 1930s and at the time this article appeared was based in New York where he held the post of secretary of the Fourth International. After the end of the Second World War, Van Heijenoort was to renounce Trotskyism, abandon political activity and pursue an academic career as a mathematician. He died in 1985.





It is not without some embarrassment that I undertake a criticism of our comrade Walter Held’s article Why the German Revolution Failed. The terrible conditions of the reactionary period which we are going through prevent Held himself from participating in the discussion. [1] In spite of Held’s enforced silence, however, I feel forced to criticise his article, because it contains a number of errors on questions of prime importance for the revolutionary education of proletarian militants. For the very reason that his article contains excellent truths, very useful to recall, it is so much the more necessary to criticise it: nothing, indeed, is more dangerous than an error which takes refuge behind a great truth.
Held strongly emphasises, and rightly so, that without a tested party with a firm leadership it is impossible to lead a proletarian revolution to a successful conclusion. This great truth was certainly demonstrated positively in October 1917, in Russia, and negatively in Germany in 1918–19. Held, however, gives to this truth an abstract character.
Apropos of the various events of 1919–23 in Germany or Italy, Held incessantly uses the same expressions: ‘the conception [of the party] was not adequate from the very beginning’, ‘the attempt to [build a party] was too late’, ‘such an attempt [to build a party] was doomed to failure because there was a vacuum’, etc. Held thus turns in a vicious circle: the party cannot be formed because it does not yet exist. But there was a time when the one real party that he recognises, the party of the October Revolution, also did not exist. How did Lenin and his co-workers pass from the non-existence to the existence of a fully-formed and tested party? Held is under the illusion that he has analysed this important question and that he applies what he has thus learned to the events of 1917-23. In reality, however, he simply reiterates, over and over again, that such a party was not created in Germany. As he must get out of this vicious circle one way or another he ends up by breaking through it haphazardly and arbitrarily. As the non-existence of the party is his sole explanation for everything, so he fetishises one incident in the party’s history into the sole explanation for its non-existence. He stumbles, in the history of the German movement, upon the Levi case, and is obliged to exaggerate and distort it in order to construct out of it a cause for the defeat of the revolutionary wave of 1917-23, and thereby for the degeneration of the Communist International and the Soviet state. Held has thus been led to a veritable revision of the history of the Comintern and the origins of our movement.
To clarify all the points raised by Held would mean to write a history of the Communist International. I will limit myself here to trying to correct his evaluation of a number of important facts. I will try to show how he was led to such inexact evaluations through a false method. It is to be hoped that this discussion will inspire many young members of our party to become much more familiar with the rich history of the first years of the Communist International.
The Second World War once more brings forward to our generation, under broadly analogous conditions, the tasks which were not resolved at the end of the First World War. The history of the Leninist period of the Communist International is of more burning significance today than ever before.
 
Paul Levi
In order to explain his criticism of the leadership of the German and Russian Communist parties, Held bestows the greatest eulogies on the pamphlet that Paul Levi wrote after the March Action of 1921 in Germany. He writes: ‘Immediately after the close of the event, he [Levi] published a brilliantly written pamphlet, Unser Weg: Wider den Putschismus (Our Road: Against Putschism). Outside of Rosa Luxemburg’s Spartacus Programme, this is one of the most noteworthy contributions to be found in the whole history of the German Communist Party.’ Held does not dwell long on the circumstances of the publication of this pamphlet. Only indirectly does it appear in his article that Levi’s criticism of the leadership of which he was a member was made outside the party.
After the defeat of the March Action in Central Germany, the Communist Party underwent the most severe blows. In addition to the military and police repression there was the activity of armed reactionary bands such as the Orgesch. The courts unhesitatingly handed out long sentences to the Communist workers. Leaders were hunted down and arrested. One of them, Sylt, was killed ‘while attempting to escape’. The bourgeois and Social-Democratic press was waging a violent campaign against the Communists, accusing them of sabotage, arson and murder. The entire bourgeois rabble and its Social-Democratic lackeys were crying incessantly about ‘the putsch’. It was under these conditions that Paul Levi, on 3 April 1921, sent his pamphlet to press without the knowledge, much less the consent, of the party. [2] Naturally, Levi understood the term ‘putsch’ differently from the anti-Communist hounds, who so described any revolutionary action. Later we shall discuss whether Levi was justified in calling the March Action a ‘putsch’ in the Marxist sense of the word. But if we admit for the moment that he was entirely right on the political plane, the irresponsible manner in which he presented his critique could not and did not fail to furnish a weapon against the party.
The pamphlet was distinguished above all by its complete lack of solidarity with the party. It threw the grossest insults publicly at the party leaders. It used unsparingly the cheapest demagogy. The following is one example among many others: ’You orphans and widows of the fallen proletarians! Do not hate capitalism; do not hate the Social-Democratic lackeys and hangmen, do not hate the Independent Socialist rascals who have stabbed the fighters in the back. Do hate the leaders of the Communist Party! And you workers who, maltreated in the jails, still raise high your bloody heads, convinced that you have fallen into the hands of the enemy in a gallant right for the interests of the proletariat – you are mistaken. You have no right to be proud of your wounds, you are victims of new Ludendorffs who cynically and, frivolously sent you to your death!’ [3]
The leaders of the party are thus compared publicly, by a member of the leadership, to Ludendorff. Any honest member of the party could do no more than remain impervious to Levi’s arguments. By his irresponsible conduct Levi discredited his political critique of the leadership’s errors, and thus helped the leadership to avoid its political responsibility. As Lenin noted: ‘Levi behaved like an “anarchist intellectual” (if I am not mistaken, the German term is Edelanarchist), instead of behaving like an organised member of the proletarian Communist International. Levi committed a breach of discipline. By this series of incredibly stupid blunders Levi made it difficult to concentrate attention on the essence of the matter.’ [4]
Held passes very lightly over this whole problem of Levi’s conduct. Dealing with the criticisms of Levi that Lenin made in his conversations with Clara Zetkin, Held writes that, according to Lenin, ‘Levi’s critique lacked the feeling of solidarity with the party, and had embittered the comrades by its tone, rather than by its content.’ [5] And Held comments: ‘This argument sounds surprising, coming from a politician who had always used the sharpest tone in his polemics, and had ridiculed every criticism of sharp tone as evidence of political weakness.’ Thus Held reduces the whole question to ‘tone’, without quoting Lenin’s further declaration to Zetkin: ’[Levi] tore the party to pieces. He did not criticise, but was one-sided, exaggerated, even malicious; he gave nothing to which the Party could usefully turn. He lacks the spirit of solidarity with the party.’
Indeed, Lenin knew how to employ the sharpest tone in his polemics. But one must note that either this ‘tone’ was directed against the enemies of the party, and not against his own party or, in polemicising against another party member, evenwhere he used a sharp tone, Lenin always made clear that they both stood together within the borders of the same party. Levi did not understand how to discern these borders. He publicly ‘tore’ his own party ‘to pieces’.
Having reduced the affair to a question of tone, Held evidently cannot comprehend the attitude of Lenin and Trotsky. He writes: ‘It remains difficult to understand how Lenin and Trotsky could follow the Third World Congress in placing the form above the content’ [of Levi’s criticism]. But the question was by no means one of ’tone’ or ‘form’; the principles of democratic centralism, the very conception of a party, were at stake. By passing so lightly over this whole aspect of the problem, Held betrays a real blindness to organisational problems.
Under the given conditions the first duty of the German party was to cut immediately all ties with Levi, independently of any further political discussion. To act otherwise would have been to erase all party boundaries; indeed, for the party it would have been suicide. On April 29, 1921, the Executive Committee of the Communist International adopted a resolution approving Levi’s expulsion: ‘Having read Paul Levi’s pamphlet Unser Weg wider den Putschismus, the ECCI ratifies the decision to expel Paul Levi from the United Communist Party of Germany and, consequently, from the Third International. Even if Paul Levi were nine-tenths right in his view of the March offensive, he would still be liable to expulsion from the party because of his unprecedented violation of discipline and because, by his action, in the given circumstances, he dealt the party a blow in the back.’ [6] Today, with the entire experience of the last 22 years that separates us from this declaration, I do not see a single word which could be changed.
Certainly Levi’s conduct hardly tallies with the flattering picture which Held paints of him. Let us try to construct a more balanced portrait. Levi was a lawyer, the son of a rich banker. He came into contact with the Social-Democratic movement before 1914 in the course of defending party members in court. However, he did not become really integrated in the labour movement. During the war he became an internationalist in his views, but did not join in the underground work of the Spartacists. The war over, it was above all his abilities as writer and orator, in view of the lack of cadres, that carried him to the first rank. Those who worked at his side from 1919 to 1921 report that in the difficult periods he sometimes spoke of retiring into private life, that he was not made for the struggle, etc. Zetkin, while defending Levi to Lenin, nevertheless said: ‘After the murder of Rosa [Luxemburg], Karl [Liebknecht] and Leo [Jogiches] he had to take over the leadership; he has regretted it often enough.’ [7]
He never gave up, it is said, collecting antiques. The dilettante and the aesthete were always present in him. Lenin told Zetkin that already during the war he ‘was aware of a certain coldness in his [Levi’s] attitude to the workers’. Something of a ‘please keep your distance’. [8] Extremely interesting for the light it throws on Levi’s personality is the letter which he addressed to Lenin on 29 March 1921. [9] In this letter he was already condemning the March Action, just ended, as a ‘fatal putsch’, and explained what his conduct was going to be: ‘I will also now go no further than to write something like a pamphlet in which I will set down my conceptions; I will neither bring the case before the authorities who are now considering meeting in Germany, nor before the International Executive Committee. The comrades who bear the responsibility should not feel hindered by me.’ [10]
These lines might have been written by anyone but a revolutionist. Intellectual smugness, lack of solidarity with his organisation, condescension and even a certain contempt, and some fatalism – all these can be seen in his words. But even more is involved. This letter was written four days before he sent his pamphlet to press! Either he was guilty of duplicity in reassuring Lenin or, more likely, he reveals here his personal and political instability.
 
The March Action
We, must now ask ourselves: Was Levi’s estimate of the March Action entirely right politically? In his pamphlet he denounced the party’s adventurism, and qualified the March Action as a ‘putsch’; it was even for him ‘the biggest Bakuninist putsch in all history.’ Held, without saying so specifically, seems to adopt Levi’s version completely. He speaks of ‘putschist riots’ and of ’putschists’. [11] He gives a highly coloured description of the March Action with the help of tragicomic episodes borrowed from Levi’s pamphlet. He neglects, however, to place it exactly in the trajectory of the German revolution.
This tacit adoption of Levi’s appraisal, and this absence of precise political analysis are all the more astonishing since Lenin and Trotsky were far from agreeing with Levi even on the political plane. Held, who could not fail to know the documents, did not undertake to discuss this point. He did not even note it. Lenin wrote: ’Of course, Levi was not right in asserting that this action was a “putsch”; this assertion of Paul Levi is nonsense.’ [12]
The most complete and precise political analysis of the March Action is found in one of Trotsky’s speeches before a membership meeting of the Moscow section of the Russian Communist Party at the end of July 1921, immediately after the Third Congress of the Comintern:
‘What was the content of the March events? The proletarians of Central Germany, the workers in the mining regions, represented in recent times, even during the war, one of the most retarded sections of the German working class. In their majority they followed not the Social Democrats but the patriotic, bourgeois and clerical cliques, remained devoted to the Emperor, and so on and so forth. Their living and working conditions were exceptionally harsh. In relation to the workers of Berlin they occupied the same place, as say, did the backward Ural provinces in our country in relation to the Petersburg workers. During a revolutionary epoch it happens not infrequently that a most oppressed and backward section of the working class, awakened for the first time by the thunder of events, swings into the struggle with the greatest energy and evinces a readiness to fight under any and all conditions, far from always taking into consideration the circumstances and the chances of victory, that is, the requirements of revolutionary strategy. For example, at a time when the workers of Berlin or Saxony had become, after the experience of 1919–20, far more cautious – which has its minuses and its pluses too – the workers of Central Germany continued to engage in stormy actions, strikes and demonstrations, carting out their foremen on wheelbarrows, holding meetings during working hours, and so on. Naturally, this is incompatible with the sacred tasks of Ebert’s Republic. It is hardly surprising that this conservative police Republic, in the person of its police agent, the Social Democrat Horsing, should have decided to do a little “purging” there, i.e., drive out the most revolutionary elements, arrest several Communists, etc.
‘Precisely during this period (the middle of March), the Central Committee of the German Communist Party arrived firmly at the idea that there was need of conducting a more actively revolutionary policy. The German Party, you will recall, had been created a short while before by the merger of the old Spartacus League and the majority of the Independent Party and thereby became confronted in practice with the question of mass actions. The idea that it was necessary to pass over to a more active policy was absolutely correct. But how did this express itself in practice? When the Social-Democratic policeman Horsing issued his order, demanding of the workers what Kerensky’s government had more than once vainly demanded in our country, namely: that no meetings be held during working hours, that factory property be treated as a sacred trust, etc. – at this moment the Central Committee of the Communist Party issued a call for a general strike in order to aid the workers of Central Germany. A general strike is not something to which the working class responds easily, at the party’s very first call – especially if the workers have recently suffered a number of defeats, and, all the less so in a country where alongside the Communist Party there exist two mass Social-Democratic parties and where the trade-union apparatus is opposed to us. Yet, if we examine the issues of Rote Fahne, central publication of the Communist. Party, throughout this period, day by day, we will see that the call for the general strike came completely unprepared. During the period of revolution there were not a few bloodlettings in Germany and the police offensive against Central Germany could not in and of itself have immediately raised the entire working class to its feet. Every serious mass action must obviously be preceded by large-scale energetic agitation, centring around action slogans, all hitting on one and the same point. Such agitation can lead to more decisive calls for action only if it reveals, after probing, that the masses have already been touched to the quick and are ready to march forward on the path of revolutionary action. This is the ABC of revolutionary strategy, but precisely this ABC was completely violated during the March events. Before the police battalions had even succeeded in reaching the factories and mines of Central Germany, a general strike did actually break out there. I already said that in Central Germany there existed the readiness to engage in immediate struggle, and the call of the Central Committee met with an immediate response. But an entirely different situation prevailed in the rest of the country. There was nothing either in the international or the domestic situation of Germany to justify such a sudden transition to activity. The masses simply failed to understand the summons.
‘Nevertheless, certain very influential theoreticians of the German Communist Party instead of acknowledging that this summons was a mistake, proceeded to explain it away by propounding a theory that in a revolutionary epoch we are obliged to conduct exclusively an aggressive policy, that is, the policy of revolutionary offensive. The March action is thus served up to the masses in the guise of an offensive. You can now evaluate the situation as a whole. The offensive was in reality launched by the Social-Democratic policeman Horsing. This should have been utilised in order to unite all the workers for defence, for self-protection, even if, to begin with, a very modest resistance. Had the soil proved favourable, had the agitation met with a favourable response, it would then have been possible to pass over to the general strike. If the events continue to unfold further, if the masses rise, if the ties among the workers grow stronger, if their temper lifts, while indecision and demoralisation seize the camp of the foe – then comes the time for issuing the slogan to pass over to the offensive. But should the soil prove unfavourable, should the conditions and the moods of the masses fail to correspond with the more resolute slogans, then it is necessary to sound a retreat, and to fall back to previously prepared positions in as orderly a manner as possible. Therewith we have gained this, that we proved our ability to probe the working masses, we strengthened their internal ties and, what is most important, we have raised the party’s authority for giving wise leadership under all circumstances.
‘But what does the leading body of the German Party do? It gives the appearance of pouncing upon the very first pretext: and even before this pretext has become known to workers or assimilated by them, the Central Committee hurls the slogan of the general strike. And before the party had a chance to rally the workers of Berlin, Dresden and Munich to the aid of the workers of Central Germany – and this could perhaps have been accomplished in the space of a few days, provided there was no leaping over the events, and the masses were led forward systematically and firmly – before the party succeeded in accomplishing this work, it is proclaimed that our action is an offensive. This was already tantamount to ruining everything and paralysing the movement in advance. It is quite self-evident that at this stage the offensive came exclusively from the enemy side. It was necessary to utilise the moral element of defence, it was necessary to summon the proletariat of the whole country to hasten to the aid of the workers of Central Germany. In the initial stages this support might have assumed varied forms, until the party found itself in a position to issue a generalised slogan of action. The task of agitation consisted in raising the masses to their feet, focusing their attention upon the events in Central Germany, smashing politically the resistance of the labour bureaucracy and thus assuring a genuinely general character of the strike action as a possible base for the further development of the revolutionary struggle. But what happened instead? The revolutionary and dynamic minority of the proletariat found itself counter-posed in action to the majority of the proletariat, before this majority had a chance to grasp the meaning of events. When the party ran up against the passivity and dilatoriness of the working class, the impatient Communist elements sought here and there to drive the majority of the workers into the streets, no longer by means of agitation, but by mechanical measures. If the majority of workers favour a strike, they can of course always compel the minority by forcibly shutting down the factories and thus achieving the general strike in action. This has happened more than once, it will happen in the future and only simpletons can raise objections to it. But when the crushing majority of the working class has no clear conception of the movement, or is unsympathetic to it, or does not believe it can succeed, but a minority rushes ahead and seeks to drive workers to strike by mechanical measures, then such an impatient minority can, in the person of the party, come into a hostile clash with the working class and break its own neck.’ [13]
As we see, Trotsky does not speak, and could not speak of a ‘putsch.’ [14] classic examples of the putsch are: the attempted insurrection of Blanqui in Paris on 14 August 1870, the insurrection of 1 December 1924 organised by the Estonian Communist Party in Reval or, on a reactionary plane, Hitler’s attempt at Munich on 8 November 1923. The March Action is far from this type. It embraced hundreds of thousands of workers. The slogan of political power never went beyond a propagandist character, and played only an episodic role. The question of the arming of the workers was connected with the struggle against the fascist bands and not to a direct struggle for power. [15] Thus, the call for a general strike at Mansfeld declared: ‘The workers should secure arms where they can, and smash the Orgesch [armed reactionaries] wherever possible.’
The character of the movement in Central Germany in its early stages is typified by a resolution adopted by the several thousand workers of the Leunawerke factory on March 21: ‘An action committee was elected which was put in charge of drawing up the following demands and taking the necessary measures to realise them. The following demands were formulated: 1. Immediate withdrawal of the armed police and of the military occupation forces from Central Germany. 2. Disarming of the Orgesch and its accomplices. 3. Arming of the workers for defence against counterrevolutionary coups. 4. If the factories are occupied [by the armed forces] all work is to be stopped immediately.’ [16]
On 24 March, the Central Committee of the party threw itself into the adventure of the general strike, which was a complete failure. The March Action is an example of a partial struggle where a minority is ready to go much further than the class as a whole. Such a situation always raises very difficult tactical problems for the revolutionary party. It is very possible that even with the most prudent policy an experienced party might not have been able to come out of that situation without having received serious blows. The Bolshevik Party was not able to avoid them in July 1917 and, as Trotsky notes, the March Action is related much more to a situation of this type than to a putsch. [17]
 
The Third World Congress
On the political plane, Levi was of course much closer to the truth than the majority of the German party leadership. Nevertheless, our examination of the question of the ‘putsch’ enables us to evaluate Held’s criticism of the Third Congress of the Communist International. To Held, who adopted Levi’s theory of the ’putsch’, any mention of the fact that the German Communist Party in spite of everything had participated in a great proletarian struggle is a ‘concession to the general rhetoric of the Congress’. As neither Lenin nor Trotsky refrained from often mentioning this important fact, Held saw in this a part of the ‘compromise’ that Lenin refers to with the majority of the German delegation. The remainder of the compromise, according to him, is the attitude of the Congress toward Levi. Held writes that the main theses on tactics adopted by the Congress ‘anathematised the critics of the ultra-leftists’. On this point, however, the theses stated,
‘In making a thorough examination of the possibilities of struggle, the VKPI) must carefully note the circumstances and opinions which indicate difficulties, and subject the reasons advanced against an action to searching inquiry, but once action has been decided on by the party authorities all comrades must obey the decisions of the party and carry the action through. Criticism of the action should begin only after the action itself is ended, it should be made only in party organisations and bodies, and must take account of the situation of the party in relation to the class enemy. Since Levi disregarded these obvious requirements of party discipline and the conditions of party criticism, the congress confirms his expulsion from the party and considers it impermissible for any member of the Communist International to collaborate with him.’ [18]
This is the ‘anathema’ of which Held speaks. In reality, the resolution simply recalls the most elementary principles of revolutionary discipline. But we have already seen that Held has a real blindness toward the demands of democratic centralism. For him, the decision of the Third Congress is bureaucratism. Even worse, it is bureaucratism that caused the bankruptcy of the International and the degeneration of the Soviet state. Held writes: ‘The delegates must have gained the impression that it would always be better to make mistakes following orders of the Comintern than to act correctly while violating discipline. In this way the foundation stone was laid for the development which was to change the Communist International in the course of a few years into a society of Mamelukes, in slavish dependency upon the ruling faction in Moscow, and finally into the mere instrument of Stalin’s opportunist nationalistic foreign policy.’ And at the end of the article he mentions, among the causes of the failure of Lenin and Trotsky: ‘the treatment of it [the German March Action] by the Third World Congress, where form was placed above content, and a bureaucratic conception of discipline was sanctioned.’
Held’s somewhat vulgar contrast between ‘to make mistakes following the order of the Comintern’, and ‘to act correctly while violating discipline’ is not correct, for there were not, as we shall see, any ‘orders of the Comintern’ in the March Action. With this criticism, which is certainly the weakest point of his article, Held comes dangerously close to the petty-bourgeois critics of Bolshevism, who also discovered that the ‘foundation stone’ of Stalinism was laid by the Bolsheviks themselves. For them this stone is the discipline of the party, the prohibition of factions in the Bolshevik Party, or the repression of Kronstadt. For Held it is the ‘bureaucratic conception of discipline’ of the International. We will return later to this method of interpretation. Let us now cite still more facts to elucidate the problem of Paul Levi.
Did Lenin and Trotsky give Levi’s head to the leadership of the German party as their part of the ‘compromise’ which Lenin mentioned at the Congress? Not at all. Lenin’s attitude toward Levi is well known through his conversations with Clara Zetkin, as well as through his speeches at the Congress: ‘Levi committed a serious breach of discipline, he attacked the party in an irresponsible and disloyal manner, and the Congress could not retract his expulsion; however, Levi has great abilities, and if he disciplines himself, and wishes to collaborate, Lenin would intervene in a few months for his reinstatement.’ Trotsky’s position was essentially the same:
‘The decision concerning Levi adopted by the Congress at Moscow is perfectly clear and requires no extended commentaries. By the decision of the Congress, Levi was placed outside the Communist International. This decision was not at all adopted against the wishes of the Russian delegation, but on the contrary with its rather conspicuous participation, inasmuch as it was none other than the Russian delegation that drafted the resolution on tactics. The Russian delegation acted, as usual, under the direction of our party’s Central Committee. And as a member of the Central Committee and member of the Russian delegation, I voted for the, resolution confirming Levi’s expulsion from the International. Together with our Central Committee I could see no other course. By virtue of his egocentric attitude, Levi had invested his struggle against the crude theoretical and practical mistakes connected with the March events with a character so pernicious that nothing was left for the slanderers among the Independents to do except to support him and chime in with him. Levi opposed himself not only to the March mistakes but also to the German party and the workers who had committed these mistakes ...
‘I do not mean to say by this that I considered Levi irretrievably lost to the Communist International as far back as the Congress. I was too little acquainted with him to draw any categorical conclusions one way or the other. I did, however, entertain the hope that a cruel lesson wouldn’t pass for nought and Levi would sooner or later find his way back to the party ... But when I learned – and this happened two or three weeks after the Congress – that Levi instead of patiently climbing up the embankment began noisily proclaiming that the track of the party and the entire International must be switched over to the precise place where he, Paul Levi, had tumbled, and that therewith Levi began building a whole “party” on the basis of this egocentric philosophy of history, I was obliged to say to myself that the Communist movement had no other recourse – deplorable as it may be – except to definitely place a cross over Levi.’
Zetkin herself, Levi’s close political companion, had to state to the Congress: ‘My personal opinion is that Paul Levi himself will say the last word about this, when he, as I hope, in spite of everything, will work and fight with us again in the future as a Communist on a principled basis and on the line of the Communist Party.’ Indeed Levi said the last word. He soon attacked the October Revolution, and took refuge in the Social Democracy, so that Lenin was able to write a few months later: ‘Levi and Serrati are not characteristic in themselves; they are characteristic of the modern type of the extreme left wing of petty-bourgeois democracy, of the camp of the “other side”, the camp of the international capitalists, the camp that is against us.’ [19]
Then exactly what was the ‘compromise’ of which Lenin spoke at the Congress? The compromise had very precise limits: Lenin and Trotsky so formulated the resolution on tactics [20], written largely by Lenin, that the German delegates could join in a common vote on it. Had they desired, Lenin and Trotsky could have worded it in a way that would have made it impossible for the Germans to vote for it, thus necessitating a separate vote on the tactic of the March Action. One can recognise that there was a question whether to have a common resolution with the Germans, and that it could be answered by yes or no without unleashing by that the degeneration of the International and the USSR. The possibility of a separate vote was mentioned by Trotsky, who added that the Russian delegation would probably be in the minority, for the Germans had the support of the Austrian and Italian delegations, the majority of the Hungarian delegation, etc. Naturally, it was not the fear of being in the minority which held back Lenin and Trotsky from demanding a separate vote, although this fact was not without importance.
The main reason for their attitude was the immaturity of the German leadership. The German party, and moreover the whole International except the Russian party, was still in the process of formation. It must be added that the struggle against centrism in the International was far from being ended. It well seems that for all these reasons Lenin and Trotsky were right, after their sharp political attack on the March Action, in seeking a common vote. However, in a certain sense the question on this particular point remains open. But this by no means signifies that one could, like Held, derive such disproportionate consequences from such a narrowly-limited ’compromise’.
To appraise Held’s criticism of the Third Congress, we must examine one further point: the responsibility of the International in the March events. Held attributes the direct responsibility for the March Action to the Secretariat of the Executive Committee of the Communist International. He writes: ‘Lenin and Trotsky shook their heads at all this folly. They were unaware that the March Action was contrived by the Secretariat of the ECCI.’ And further: ‘Since Lenin and Trotsky based the necessity for the introduction of the New Economic Policy on the failure of the international revolution to materialise, Zinoviev and his associates in the Secretariat thought they could provide a speedy remedy. This was precisely their chief motive for unleashing the infantile March Action.’
For an accusation of such gravity, we must demand serious proof from Held. Held explains lengthily that, in view of their opposition to the New Economic Policy, Zinoviev and Bukharin could not but have desired the March Action. That is possible, but even if it were certain, it would be no proof that they ‘contrived’ and ‘unleashed’ the March Action, i.e., an accusation of direct responsibility. Held was only repeating one of Levi’s accusations, which he too had advanced without proof. In reality, it seems demonstrable, at least indirectly, that such responsibility did not exist. Indeed, the Third Congress was the scene of the most violent discussions; letters and telegrams until then unknown were pulled out of pockets; the leaders of the German party were under fire from Lenin and Trotsky and even from Zinoviev, who was then under pressure from Lenin. If there actually had been some telegram or order, written or verbal, from Moscow about the unleashing of the March Action, it is extremely unlikely that such a bomb would not have burst at the Congress, or even before it. Shortly after the Congress Trotsky had occasion to write on this subject: ‘the German bourgeois and Social-Democratic newspapers, and in their wake the press throughout the world began howling that the March uprising had been provoked by orders from Moscow; that the Soviet power, in difficult straits at that time (peasant mutinies, Kronstadt, etc.), had issued, to save itself, you see, an order to stage uprisings regardless of the situation in every given country. It is impossible to invent anything sillier than this!’ [21]
Further along, Held explains, on the basis of Radek’s later revelations that, in the period immediately preceding the March Action, ‘Zinoviev and Bukharin had continued their machinations against Levi’s policies and, as a result, the March Action had taken place!’ Here Held abandons his main thesis, that of direct responsibility, devoid of proof, as we have seen, for a new thesis of indirect responsibility, difficult to define with precision: Zinoviev and Bukharin had favoured the leadership which had set out on the adventure of March 1921. In this diluted sense responsibility can be extended indefinitely.
Lenin and Trotsky may in this sense be held responsible for not having more closely controlled the work of the Secretariat. And historically there is some truth in this: Lenin and Trotsky were occupied with the building of the Soviet state, they were not always able to prevent Zinoviev and Bukharin from making errors. This general responsibility Trotsky willingly recognised when he wrote: ‘If we were to blame for the March mistakes – insofar as it is possible to speak here of blame – then it was only in the sense that the International as a whole, including our own party, has up to now failed to carry on enough educational work in the sphere of revolutionary tactics, and for this reason failed to eliminate the possibility of such mistaken actions and methods. But to dream of completely eliminating mistakes would be the height of innocence.’ [22]
In this realm it is necessary above all not to lose a sense of proportion. In the concrete case of the German leadership, if one wishes to go to the point of explaining why Levi did not have enough authority to prevent the March Action, one must look – as much as to Zinoviev’s machinations – to the personal traits of Levi himself.
 
Held’s Method
Summarising his criticism of the Third Congress, Held writes: ‘the Third World Congress already contained the diseased germs which were a few years later to precipitate the degeneration of the Communist International and, along with it, the Soviet state.’ We have already seen how unjustifiable are the historical points of Held’s criticism. We must now dwell upon his method. With his ‘germ’ theory, Held follows a method long practised by the critics of Bolshevism. Trotsky had occasion to reveal the emptiness of this explanation in his pamphlet Stalinism and Bolshevism, in which he showed, specifically, how Souvarine ‘seeks the inner flaws of Bolshevism’ to ‘explain all subsequent historical mishaps.’ [23]
Why was Held carried along this beaten track of the causal continuity of Bolshevism and Stalinism? He recognised, with good reason, the absolute necessity of the party for the success of the revolution. But this in no ways means that the subjective factor – the party – is all-powerful. It operates in a given milieu. If in a historical analysis this factor is artificially separated from the milieu, its development, and its transformations are then assumed to be found within itself, that is to say, it must contain its whole future within itself. This leads to explanation by ‘germs’. Held’s way of explaining thus unfolds from an abstract and super-historic interpretation of the role of the party. In a word, Held errs in an excess of subjectivism.
We are forced to the same conclusion when we examine Held’s attitude toward two very important problems, the founding of the Third International, and that of the Fourth International. For Held, one of the reasons for the defeat of the world revolution after the First World War is ‘the all-too-late unmasking of Kautskyism [and] the consequently delayed founding of the Communist International!’ That Lenin held, until 1914, illusions about the character of the German Social Democracy is a well known fact. We should not, however, exaggerate the depth of these illusions. Through them, Held tries to detect a delay in the founding of the Third International, and so he places himself on the ground, unstable enough, of historical hypothesis. Let us try to follow him.
We must first ask ourselves the question: if Lenin had not had these illusions about Kautsky, should he have proceeded with the founding of the Third International in 1903, in 1910 or in 1914? (For this question to make sense, we must suppose that the revolutionary consciousness of the masses would not have been very different from what it was in reality. For if we were to assume that not only Lenin but also large layers of the proletariat had lost confidence in the German Social Democracy, the founding of the Third International would have been possible and necessary well before 1914. But psychologically this is a pious wish, and logically a tautology: if the movement had been in an advanced stage, it would have formed an advanced organisation.) Let us suppose that Lenin alone, or one of the small groups around him, had been fully conscious before 1914 of the role of Kautsky. Should Lenin then have made a split on an international scale? This question raises a large number of hypotheses, but even in this extremely abstract and artificial form, I am ready to answer no.
Held writes: ‘With so much bitterness did Lenin turn against Kautsky, when he realised his mistake in 1914, that his opinion of Kautsky had been mistaken. From this point on, Lenin propagandises unhesitatingly for the foundation of a Third International!’ Thus Held connects the recognition of the necessity of a new International with Lenin’s loss of illusions about Kautsky. But – separating the subjective factor its milieu – Held does not mention the fundamental fact behind this: the war, i.e., the entry into a new historical epoch, which brought changes in the consciousness of the masses
However, these questions on the founding of the Third International become a little more concrete if we consider the creation of the Fourth International. Until 1933, that is, after the Communist International had committed even more dreadful crimes against the international proletariat than had the Social Democracy before 1914, the Left Opposition considered itself a faction of the Comintern. And this after the whole historical experience of the betrayals and splits of the war and its aftermath. The Left Opposition waited to proclaim the necessity of a new International until the Comintern had its own ‘August 4th’ – until the shameful capitulation of the German Communist Party before Hitler in March 1933. Was this because Trotsky had illusions about Stalin as Lenin had about Kautsky? Obviously not. And it is here that we see the emptiness of Held’s appraisal of the founding of the Third International.
But perhaps Held, after all, does not agree with the politics of the Left Opposition? Indeed, this soon becomes apparent. Like many others he opens fire against the policy of the Left Opposition in the USSR. ‘If Trotsky had publicly stepped forward in the spring of 1923’, everything would have been better. This question has been discussed so many times that I do not feel much can be added here. The only new note which Held has introduced is a letter from Engels to Bebel on the end of the First International. Alas, Held does not say a word about the differences between the two epochs. The comparison thus holds a purely literary, and I must say, superficial, character. But it is important to note that this conception of Held’s again reveals in him a certain intellectual subjectivism.
Held poses the following question: ‘Why had not Lenin and Trotsky succeeded in building a serious Marxist International during the period from 1917 to 1923?’ One can only reply that as yet the old society proved too resistant, this resistance having several aspects, such as reformism, the slowness and the difficulty of the formation of revolutionary cadres, etc. Held wants to go further, to find a cause for the defeat of the International in the International itself.
These problems of historical causality can easily turn into casuistry, if one does not state precisely what one is speaking about. In clear terms the question is this: Was there, in the Leninist period of the Communist International, a specific error perpetrated without which there would have been a good probability that the degeneration would not have been produced? Held cites the Levi affair. Until now, it was the method of the petty-bourgeois critics of all shades – the ultra-lefts like Gorter, the anarchists, Souvarine, etc., etc. – to place the cause of the defeat of Bolshevism in Bolshevism itself. We willingly relinquish to them this barren method.
 



The military defeat in France was followed by a political development notably different from that of the other European countries invaded by German imperialism. While the Dutch and Norwegian governments simply transported their household gods from The Hague and Oslo to London, the French government collapsed; its attempt to move to North Africa in order to continue the struggle failed, and it was succeeded by a new regime.
 
The Vichy Government
In the other German-occupied countries the places left by the governments emigrated to London were either occupied by Hitlerian satraps or by native political adventurers – Quislings or Musserts. Around the latter gathered all those who hoped to profit from the German victory. However, the Quislings could never pretend to represent more than a minority of the possessing classes and soon became simply Gauleiters.
In France in July 1940, the deputies and senators, sacred guardians of the Third Republic, delivered the power to the hands of Petain-Weygand-Laval in Vichy. The new gang was the political instrument not of the minority but of the great majority of the possessing classes of France. Having lost all hope of an English victory and thinking no more than to save what it could through “collaboration,” the bourgeoisie abandoned the struggle against German imperialism. The instrument of this policy was the Vichy government. Fascist adventurers such as Doriot and others did not receive the power, as Quisling did, but were reduced to a secondary role: in the hands of the German chiefs they became an auxiliary means of pressure on Vichy.
The cause of this special development in France must be sought above all in the country’s political history during the years immediately preceding the war. February 1934 had disclosed the break in France’s political stability, marked the polarization of the country into two opposing camps and heralded the end of the democratic regime. The revolutionary offensive of 1936 was unable to attain a victorious conclusion because of the failure of the working-class leadership (Blum, Jouhaux, Thorez). After the defeat of the drive to the left, the political center of gravity started to move gradually to the right. Daladier, the day before still a hero of the Popular Front, was governing more and more by decree-laws. The revolutionary crisis had been averted, but none of the fundamental problems had been resolved. Each class in society remained discontented with the others.
Explained in great part by these political developments, the military debacle shook the French bourgeoisie, which was still trembling from its fear of the revolutionary crisis, and was solely preoccupied with consolidating once more its rule over the country. It now clearly appears that from the point of view of French imperialism the correct decision would have been to continue the struggle against Germany in July 1940 from Algiers or from London, with all the resources of its colonies and its intact navy. However, the error committed by the Vichy people was not merely a technical error of appraisal of the various contending military forces, but was determined by a much more profound political necessity.
For it to continue the struggle the French bourgeoisie would have needed a self-confidence, a faith in the future and a political cohesion which was actually far beyond its command. Scarcely out of the revolutionary crisis, politically divided, without perspectives for tomorrow, it saw an understanding with Hitler as the safest decision for the present. As for the future, it would see later. Thus was born the Vichy regime, which is not to be accounted for either by an error of calculation or by “treason,” as many would like us to believe.
Vichy itself understood this determinism better than all the garrulous Left, Stalinists included, who cried treason. A governmental appeal in July 1940 explained the political evolution of the Daladier government from parliamentary democracy to semi-Bonapartism:
“Everything cried out the impotence of the regime which could maintain itself only by disavowing itself through the use of decree-laws. Thus it was making its way, at each step. towards a political revolution which war and defeat only hastened.” (Our italics.)
After the defeat of the revolutionary offensive the impotence of the democrats led inevitably to Bonapartism. The military defeat speeded up this process and gave, of course, some special features to the new regime.
 
Gaullism
When all seemed lost on the battlefield, a young general, Charles de Gaulle, until then unknown outside of military circles, broadcast an appeal from London for the continuation of the war. The appeal met no response within the ruling circles, either Right or Left, and at the beginning, it seems, made little impression on the broad strata of the population. Around De Gaulle rallied a few professional military men, generally belonging to the middle cadres, and colonial administrators, generally from the poorest colonies, farthest from the metropolis. The poor reception which De Gaulle received in the beginning alone would suffice to refute the thesis that Vichy was the result of a plot of a few “traitors” and not the product of profound political currents.
The Gaullist movement at first pretended indifference to politics, its sole aim being to carry on the war on England’s side. De Gaulle had royalist sympathies, it is said, but this fact played no role in the development of the movement, all the less so since the French royalist leaders rallied to the policy of collaboration with Germany. The Gaullist chiefs were above all military men, with the scorn for “politics” customary to their caste. That was their only political coloration at the origin of the Gaullist movement.
But a change soon came. Vichy was not only a government of collaboration with Germany, but also one of political reaction. Democratic liberties were suppressed. As often happens in a struggle, the position taken by the adversary often determines that which the other must take. Vichy combined pro-German collaboration with a dictatorial policy. The Gaullist movement, champion of the patriotic anti-German struggle, soon had to oppose itself to Vichy on the grounds of internal politics as well.
This evolution was greatly accelerated by the movement of resistance inside France proper, to which the weight of the Nazi oppression gave birth after the first months of discouragement and apathy. This movement, in view of the difficult circumstances, and also the deliberate policy of the Stalinists, remained at rather a low political level, for the fact that the oppression had its source in a foreign power made it easy for the Stalinists and petty-bourgeois groups to direct the movement into the channel of nationalism. Nevertheless, the part of the population which supported the resistance movement was, in general, the working masses of the nation, and much more those of the cities than of the countryside. One can say that the bulk of the forces which support the resistance is the same which supported the Popular Front, with the addition of certain circles of the bourgeois youth and the middle military cadres. Strictly speaking, the Gaullist organization is rather circumscribed, but the popularity of the movement extends well beyond this limit. Here for example, is the story of the demonstration at Lorient on October 24, 1942 at the time of the forced departure of the workers to Germany:
“Came train time. The workers formed a procession and came to the station escorted by an immense crowd. A big detail of French and German police forces were guarding the approaches at the station. Outside the station the angry, turbulent crowd swarmed so thickly that the police themselves estimated the number present to be about 15,000. Fist-fights broke out on the station platform where Doriotists and local collaborationists had gathered. The workers were singing the ‘Marseillaise’ and the ‘International,’ with the crowd outside joining in chorus. They were shouting ‘Long Live De Gaulle!,’ ‘Down with Petain!’, ‘Hang Laval!’”
There is no doubt that this crowd, with a few additions, is the same as that of the 1934–36 demonstrations. This combination of the national and social aspects of the resistance movement, which has both negative and positive sides for future revolutionary development, is strengthened by the economic collaboration of the big bourgeoisie with Germany. One can measure the extent of this collaboration by a figure that the German press published at the end of 1942: the orders placed by Germany with the French industrialists reached at that date more than 10 billion marks or 200 billion francs. Last but very important, we must not forget the traditional division of French political life into Right and Left. The origin of this division dates back to the great French revolution which, although a bourgeois revolution, was in reality led to victory by the poorest layers of artisans in spite of the hesitations of the rich, timorous bourgeoisie. Naturally, the appearance of an industrial proletariat and of workers’ parties reduced the importance of this division. Nevertheless, it continues as a tradition in French political life and plays its role, within certain limits. By opposing Vichy, De Gaulle became, in a certain sense independently of his will, a figure of the “Left.” In the territories which he controls, he maintains the laws of the Republic and he accords Syria and Libya a formal independence which Blum himself was unable to achieve.
 
Washington’s Deal With Darlan
When the American troops debarked in North Africa, Washington placed in power one of the most compromised representatives of Vichy, Petain’s heir, Admiral Darlan. We have already had occasion to discuss the reasons for this action in this magazine. [1] It revealed the emptiness of all the democratic phrases with which Anglo-American imperialism tries to cover itself, and it gave a heavy blow to all those whose function is to disguise the present war as a struggle for liberty.
On the day after the American debarkment in North Africa, Secretary Hull hastened to answer the numerous criticisms of the American policy of conciliation toward Vichy. He explained that this policy had not been motivated by “any fondness for the Vichy leaders,” but solely as a means to obtain information and thus to prepare the occupation of North Africa. To answer his critics Hull made the American policy look more Machiavellian than it was in reality. Indeed, the American diplomatic service did not abstain, no more than any other diplomatic service, from recording all possible military information. Nevertheless, if Roosevelt sent Admiral Leahy to Vichy, it was not only for spying, but because of more profound political reasons: he knew that Petain represented the French bourgeoisie much more than did De Gaulle.
The deal with Darlan followed the same line. Darlan assured the continuity of political power of the bourgeoisie better than the “rebel” De Gaulle who had broken the discipline of the army. The collaboration of the Gaullists in France with the Stalinists could only add to Washington’s apprehensions.
All information coming from Europe since November indicates that the repercussions of the deal with Darlan were profound throughout the continent and that the illusions about the “United Nations,” especially the United States, were badly shattered. One of the most recent indications is a statement made in London on February 1 by Rene Massigli, a former functionary of the Third Republic, who had just escaped from France to join De Gaulle:
“The French people at first regarded the Admiral’s rise to power as a farce, but later showed anxiety as his influence grew and now viewed his ‘disappearance’ with immense relief.”
His “disappearance” was his assassination, which Roosevelt was quick to condemn as “first degree murder.” We can easily imagine that the French people had a different opinion about the end of one of their hangmen.
The circumstances of the assassination are now sufficiently clear, through the little information which the censor has allowed to pass and, equally, through the points that he has suppressed. In the turmoil of the first hours after the assassination, Washington – as could be expected – launched the theory that it was a Nazi deed, but this proved so untenable that Washington had to abandon it without more ado. With the present available information we can now reconstruct the drama. The Americans were aided in the preparation and the execution of the debarkment by some Frenchmen in North Africa. They belonged in general to the patriotic and democratic petty-bourgeois circles: lower ranking officers, students, etc. There was a group among them, it appears, that seized Admiral Darlan in Algiers on November 8 and turned him over to the Americans who had just landed. The Americans lost no time in restoring Darlan to all his former powers, investing him with the sacred mission of “freeing” France. We can imagine the anger of the men who had risked their lives believing they were overthrowing Darlan. The angry petty bourgeois readily grabs a revolver. Darlan was killed by such a young Frenchman who, without revolutionary perspectives, saw no other solution to the Darlan deal than an individual attempt to get out of the impasse.
 
Perspectives
Darlan’s place was taken by Giraud, a general until then outside of politics but known for his Rightist sentiments. Darlan’s advice was followed even after his death. Thus Peyrouton, former Vichy Minister of the Interior who introduced the Nazi police system in France, has just been named the new governor of Algeria. As we learn from the January 31 New York Times, “early in December Darlan proposed that Peyrouton be sent for,” and, at Casablanca, Roosevelt approved the choice of the defunct admiral.
The consequences of such a policy are easy to imagine. The North African dispatches have informed us of the political apathy reigning among the population. A cable dated January 27 declared:
“As far as the mass of Frenchmen is concerned, the honeymoon is over in dealing with the Americans. Those who retain a lingering faith in America as a champion of the oppressed pray that the United States will retrieve the political situation ‘before it is too late.’ Distrust springs mainly from the ‘new collaboration’ of French officials who were lately pro-Vichy and pro-German with American officers.”
Washington’s principal argument to justify its policy was that in Algeria the population was 90 per cent for Petain. This is no doubt true for the milieu in which Mr. Murphy and General Eisenhower circulate. The answer to this impudent claim is very simple: “We dare you to call for an immediate general election. If you are right you have nothing to lose.” Of course, such an answer would demand a political firmness far beyond the power of the Gaullist movement. Its fundamental solidarity with Washington and London on the question of the war absolutely prohibits it from having enough courage and initiative to undertake such a campaign.
It is interesting to examine De Gaulle’s arguments in his controversy with Washington. They will enable us to better understand the character of the movement. In a December 6 radio appeal, De Gaulle declared in speaking of Darlan and his confederates:
“The nation will not permit that these men, having failed in foreign war and feeling themselves condemned, should save themselves by creating conditions from which would spring civil war.” (Our italics.)
Thus, according to the general, the deal with Darlan is dangerous because it revives class antagonisms. Since then, several spokesmen of the Gaullist movement have underlined the fact that Washington’s policy in North Africa increases the danger of communism in France, against which the Gaullist movement is a much better guarantee than Darlan or Giraud.
These declarations show us that De Gaulle, yesterday still ignorant of politics, has quickly appropriated all the old arguments of the democratic conciliators who always present themselves as a better protection against the revolution than the reactionaries., We must recognize that in the present case there is a great deal of truth in the declarations of De Gaulle and his friends. If De Gaulle had joined Darlan or even Giraud, the resistance movement in France proper would have undergone a great shift to the left. By his refusal of reconciliation De Gaulle retains a popularity which can be worth much more for the bourgeois order in the future.
Concrete political estimates are so much the more difficult now that France is muzzled. The French in North Africa constitute only a weak minority amid a large Arab population. The Gaullists are a few thousand emigrés. In such circumstances the role of individuals may be especially important. Thus the division of the two movements unquestionably reflects, to a certain degree, the rivalry between the two generals; De Gaulle made a difficult decision when the military situation was more grave than now and he firmly intends not to leave the fruits of it to the eleventh hour penitents. However, it would be light-minded to see in this merely a personal feud.
De Gaulle does not want to cut himself off from the resistance movement in France proper, and in a way he leans on this movement. One of his aims in doing so is, of course, to prevent the movement from going further to the left. Giraud, and behind him Washington, dread this illegal movement and prefer to have no contact with it. They intend to resolve the military problem without worrying about anything else. Thus it is interesting to note that Giraud has not yet addressed a single appeal to the French people. Probably he does not yet know whether he should address himself to the Vichy gang or to those whom it persecutes!
The American invasion of North Africa marks the end of the regime which was born at Vichy in July 1940. This regime could maintain a precarious existence in face of Germany only because it controlled colonies beyond the reach of Hitler. Naturally, the limits of maneuver were very narrow. But with the American debarkment they have been reduced to nothing. Laval is now little more than a clerk for the German administration.
The military developments lead, at a more or less rapid tempo, to the defeat of Germany. Once more the bourgeoisie in France itself is going to turn toward America. Giraud represents, much more than De Gaulle, the axis around which the political regrouping of the French bourgeoisie will take place. Notwithstanding Roosevelt’s declaration that the French people will themselves decide their future, Washington could not have failed to give guarantees for the future to Giraud and to the proconsuls who surround him. A troubled epoch approaches and it is wise to make arrangements in advance!
If De Gaulle is now left to one side, this does not mean that he has ended his political role. After the collapse of the Hitlerian empire, Anglo-American imperialism will find the masses in France embittered by poverty and oppression and not at all disposed to knuckle down to the old rulers. If a Giraud does not work, then imperialism must try a De Gaulle. But it is a question whether any cover, even the most left, can save this rotten order.
* * *
Footnote
1. North Africa: A Lesson in Democracy, December 1942, and Darlan and the Liberals, January 1943.
 



Every breed of bourgeois likes to constantly preach morals to the workers. The collapse of France furnishes these gentlemen an excellent subject for sermons.
“You see,” say some of them, “national defense was compromised by strikes, by the class struggle ...”
Others, of lesser stature, but no less dangerous because of that, strike another tune: “The French army was swarming with Fascist officers ...” – and conclude by calling upon the workers to save bourgeois democracy.
Yes, the collapse of France and the advance of Fascism over the face of all of Europe contain terrible lessons and menacing warnings for the workers. But the latter must look upon this tremendous experience from the point of view of their class and know how to draw from it lessons for their coming struggles against the bourgeoisie and its lackies.
We Near the End of Bourgeois Democracy
The biggest loser of the war is bourgeois democracy. In the years preceding the war, it underwent one defeat after another in the field of diplomacy. With Hitler holding the whip hand, the entire policy of democratic capitalism consisted of making concessions and waiting for a better future which never came. In September 1939, England and France could not retreat any further and Hitler allowed himself the supreme luxury of forcing them to declare war on him, under conditions which he chose.
This war was, on both sides, merely the continuation of the policy carried on until its outbreak. The great secret of Gamelin and the British General Staff was to temporize. By 1941, they figured, they would have more aviation’ facilities. By 1942, the factories would have turned out enough artillery to make possible an attack on the Siegfried Line. The purchase of material from the United States was apportioned over a number of years ... All these fine projects needed was Hitler’s consent.
While, in the course of the Winter of 1939-1940, the Anglo-French troops were softened up by inaction, the German army was being trained in a new and terrible strategy by means of which it was soon to unleash its torrents of lead and fire upon its astonished adversaries.
Bourgeois democracy thus proved to be just as impotent in international war as in the preceding “peaceful” struggles. Its methods, its parties and its men belonged to another epoch. The very fact that Hitler was able to find conniving support within France is not a matter of chance, but one of the clearest symptoms of the decomposition of democracy.
Inside each country Fascism cannot be combated victoriously now except by means of proletarian arms: workers’ militia, the arming of the working class, active defense which prepares to go over to the offensive, with the seizure of power by the working class as the aim. Likewise, on the international arena, the war cannot be prevented, nor the positions of Fascism shaken, except by means of the proletarian revolution.
 
Who Is Responsible for France’s Defeat
Since 1934, under the pressure of the Fascist menace, of the economic crisis and of the general decline of the French empire, a revolutionary crisis was maturing in France. In June 1936, the French workers occupied large numbers of factories. The frightened bourgeoisie remained silent and went into hiding. At the gates of the occupied factories, the policemen would arrive to inquire the number of strikers inside “for statistical purposes” – that was what their role was reduced to! The slightest attempt at suppression would have provoked a gigantic explosion. In waves, the burning breath of the revolution could be sensed passing over the great industrial cities.
But the workers were soon to witness a strange spectacle. While the bosses right on the spot conceded all demands, the workers’ “own” leaders, who they themselves ha’d brought to power. Were placing restraints on the workers. Leon Blum and the Socialist parliamentarians, Leon Jouhaux and the trade union officialdom and, gesticulating wildly right behind them, Maurice Thorez and the other Stalinist satellites – all formed one big chorus calling for calmness from the workers and for social peace. Before the working Class could overcome its astonishment, it found tied around its neck the rope of agreements signed by the bosses, the trade union leaders and the government. In the course of the months that followed the bourgeoisie took back in parcels what it had been forced to grant in bulk, at first quite patiently and later oft more brutally.
The revolution was possible in France in 1936 – and one of the most bloodless revolutions at that. The Spanish workers were to take up arms somewhat later, in July. With a Soviet France, their triumph in Spain, would have been assured. A Workers’ France plus, a Workers’ Spain would have changed the face of Europe.
If Europe is now covered with the black stains of Fascism, those responsible are Blum, Jouhaux, Thorez, and all their colleagues, all those who infected the French Working class with false hopes in democracy. The workers of the United States, the workers of the entire world will easily be able to recognize in their own countries the counter-parts of these same gentry who, under different names, spread the same paralyzing poison. Learn to liberate yourselves from these traitors in time, that’s what the experience of the French workers cries out to their brothers elsewhere.
 
The Government of Marshal Petain
Hitler left a piece of France to lead an independent existence. Not that he has any more love for the French than for the Poles or the Norwegians. He secured for himself all the necessary strategic positions for his struggle against England, the North of France with its mineral riches and all its coastline. The rest of France is of no immediate strategic or economic interest to him. His armies swept before them millions of refugees. He left the care of regulating their fate to the first clique of politicians that came along. Every day he grants or withdraws from the Vichy crowd whatever he pleases. Petain is nothing more than the Gauleiter of meridional France. Only he has to bear a certain amount of shame with his job.
If the struggle with England should be prolonged, Hitler’s needs will grow from day to day. That is the course which developments seem to be taking these last few weeks. The project of moving the government to Paris appears to have been abandoned. Couriers can no longer pass over the border to the other side of France. French prisoners of war are sent to Germany as factory hands. Tomorrow, if strategic or economic necessities should require it, Hitler will occupy all of France and replace Petain with a German general. How pitiful are the speeches of the French bourgeois who patter “national” reconstruction and prostrate themselves before Hitler and try to get into his good graces by imitating him! For more than three months they have been receiving nothing but kicks in the pants from him.
 
Perspectives of the Coming Months
The fate of France, of the workers’ France, is that of all the peoples of Europe, reduced by Hitler to common servitude. The war is still going on and the armistice will not preserve France from new military involvements.
To all appearances Hitler has given up the plan of invading England before the coming of Winter. The two adversaries are exhausting each other with aviation duels. But aviation in itself does not decide anything, if it cannot be accompanied with territorial advance. The Polish and French campaigns revealed that the terrible weapon of the new strategy consisted of the combination of the airplane and the tank. But to transport thousands of tanks across the seas, with their essential supplies and munitions is not an easy task.
In the Fall, the North Sea and the Channel are the worst waters to navigate in the entire world. Fog, which is particularly heavy and frequent in these parts will pretty soon paralyze aviation. It looks like a second year of War! That means, for England, the possibility of mobilizing the resources of her empire, and of receiving a constantly more abundant helping hand from the United States. The war can continue for a long time.
In that case, it would mean growing misery and despair in Europe, with famine immediately in view. Everywhere national passion will ally itself With revolutionary aspirations in the struggle against Hitler. Revolts are inevitable. In the coming struggles the workers will appear as the most resolute elements and they will give the fighting a class content. Hitler has wiped out the boundaries. From the Northernmost point of Scandinavia to the Pyrenees, from Brittany to the  
Vistula, the sabre of the German colonel rules supreme. Whether it is lit up in Prague or in Rotterdam or in Paris, any revolutionary explosion will immediately be echoed in the other countries far more directly than was ever the case before the war.
 
Our Comrades Will Lead France Against Fascism
In France the military catastrophe immediately marks the downfall of the traditional party of democracy, the Radical-Socialist Party. On the Right, all sorts of Fascist adventurers are raising their heads. But the best they can hope for is to become agents of the German command. On the Left, the Socialist Party has abandoned every pretense to an independent existence. The trade union leaders have rallied to Petain or disappeared into the void, like Jouhaux. These people belong to other times. They grew up with bourgeois democracy and they have fallen with it. A new epoch has arrived and it requires men in accord with its spirit, fighters who know how to conduct a bitter and difficult struggle to its very end.
The French Bolshevik-Leninists can lay claim to that role. The struggle which they have led for more than ten years against reformism and Stalinism has found complete justification in the most recent events. Our French comrades raised their voice against the alliance of’ the workers’ organizations with the Radical-Socialist Party, the party of decaying democracy. And it was the support of these bankrupt bourgeois politicians by the workers’ leaders which led up to the present catastrophe. The Trotskyists have had to undergo ignoble insults and incessant persecution at the hands of the bourgeoisie, the social democrats and the Stalinists. But today, they alone remain to present to the workers an unsullied banner.
Confusion is not lacking in the ranks of the working class at the present moment. The first task of the Bolshevik-Leninists is to explain patiently what has happened. Just as the imperialist war was not our war, so this defeat is not our defeat. It is a defeat of bourgeois democracy, to whose fate the treacherous leaders wanted to link the proletariat. It is a defeat of a political system of oppression which no longer corresponds to the requirements of our epoch. The proletariat has another aim and other methods. Its aim is the overthrow of the system of capitalist exploitation. Its methods are the methods of revolutionary class struggle. It is but necessary to apply them tirelessly and implacably and victory is assured.
Sept. 2, 1940
 



On June 25, Marceau Pivert, emigré leader of the French “Socialist Party of Workers and Peasants” (PSOP) wrote a letter to General De Gaulle, chief of “free” France in London. After hearing the voice of the General on the radio, Pivert could not resist the call, and offered to enroll in the troops of De Gaulle, his only stipulation being to be assigned to a special mission: “revolutionary” propaganda addressed to the German proletariat.
In order to justify his enlistment, Pivert cites the case of a French monarchist who offered his technical knowledge to Lenin to carry on the struggle against the Germans. That a bourgeois forgets for a minute the class borders in view of what he considers his national interest, is indeed an exception rare enough to be worth while mentioning. Fortified by this episodic, exceptional example, Pivert offers General De Gaulle the particles of “revolutionary dynamite” that he thinks he possesses. To make himself more convincing, he declares while presenting his merchandise: “Perhaps it won’t leave you indifferent.” Pivert only forgets that revolutionary “dynamite,” the genuine kind, and not its centrist counterfeit, cannot be peddled retail, from door to door, yesterday to Leon Blum, today to De Gaulle.
Pivert tells us that his aim is to “make an attempt of a political character against the totalitarian powers.” And as Churchill and De Gaulle “have not the slightest authority to take charge of this propaganda,” he comes to their help, he Pivert, who knows how these things are done, and brings them his “revolutionary dynamite”. Here, clearly, is the cynical blueprint of the social-patriots, always ready to consider the revolutionary energy of the workers as a subsidiary force which has to be chained to the chariot of either of the imperialist bandits.
 
The Stalinists Tried This Too
Perhaps Pivert, with his so “acute sense of reality,” hopes to “use” De Gaulle as a temporary instrument of revolutionary propaganda. We know the outcome of the mode, so dear to the Stalinist rascals in the last years, to “use” some broken reeds of imperialism. As for De Gaulle, Pivert asks him to spread the manifesto of the centrist agency, the International (!) Workers (?) Front, by all the means at the disposal of the General.
What can these means be? Leaflets thrown from British bombing planes, appeals in German over the English radio. It is assured beforehand that the German workers will remain deaf to this propaganda. Revolutionary “dynamite,” that is to say proletarian propaganda, is a formidably powerful explosive mat* ter, but a fragile one. If one drop of chauvinist poison dampens it, this dynamite immediately loses all of its explosive force. One nationalism cannot be disintegrated by opposing to it an adulterated internationalism which bears the mark of another nationalism. If Pivert should obtain some “practical” possibilities from De Gaulle, he would bring to the German workers nothing but an ersatz (substitute) of internationalism, that is to say, the most malignant form of chauvinist poison. Pivert’s appeals, spread with the help of De Gaulle-Churchill, would be an excellent weapon in Hitler’s hands to denounce the collusion of the revolutionary forces and foreign imperialism. Pivert would place the greatest obstacle in the way of the genuine German proletarian propaganda.
Finally, Pivert patiently explains to De Gaulle, probably in order that he repeat it to his friend Churchill, what the real policy of British imperialism should be in order to win the war. It should grant a few democratic reforms to its colonial slaves, and these would support it heartily in its struggle against Hitler and Mussolini. And he who preaches such twaddle calls himself a “revolutionary militant”! Better that he take the title of King’s counsellor in colonial affairs. However, he is so embarrassed playing this role that he declares that his communication “runs the risk of being misunderstood.” It’s really a great pity that Churchill cannot attain an “understanding” of Pivert’s views.
 
De Gaulle’s “Free” Colonies
The character of General De Gaulle’s organization appears most clearly in the question of the colonies. Before the defeat, France had a colonial empire of sixty million men, that is to say, that for every two Frenchmen there were three colonial slaves submitted to the most rapacious economic exploitation and to the most brutal political oppression. This was the basis of the imperialist “democracy.”
Since the military collapse some colonies have rallied to De Gaulle, leader of “free” France. Exactly what does this “rebellion” mean? Would it be the emancipation of the natives? Cables published in the bourgeois press soon give us the key to the mystery. The British fleet is blockading the coasts of French colonies, commercial relations with the metropole become impossible, thus the imperialist clique in each colony finds itself obliged to look for another “motherland, and turns its eyes towards London, tomorrow towards New York. This emancipation is but a change of address in the mail of the white slave-holders.
A still luminous star attracts to its orbit fragments of extinguished stars. So De Gaulle’s organization, debris of French imperialism, has come to gravitate around London and may gravitate tomorrow around Washington. This is a very clear phenomenon of the mechanics of imperialism. But what can we think of the “revolutionary militant”, wanting to do “what Lenin did in 1917,” partisan of the “revolutionary fraternization,” etc., etc., which comes to teach this debris of French imperialism how he can draw from the colonies “his real reserves of political projectiles”? What an infamous role!
The centrist is always ready to intoxicate himself with radical phrases: proletarian revolution, revolutionary defeatism, etc. That does not cost him very much. But at the first occasion he sinks up to his knees in the swamp of social-patriotism. For many years Pivert tried to teach Leon Blum how to make the proletarian revolution, until Blum finally bored by this chattering, showed him the door. Today Pivert, in quest of another would-be pupil, finds De Gaulle and prepares to give him a few lessons in the method of emancipating colonies and succeeding thus in beating Hitler.
September 13, 1940
 



Dear Comrades,
The international leadership is attentively following discussion now taking place among you. This discussion of revolutionary problems of your country is extremely important for future of our movement, not only in Argentine but in whole of Latin America. In last analysis it is of interest to all colonial and semi-colonial countries, that is to three-quarters of our planet. International will be unable to make a useful intervention until time when more detailed documents are presented by both groups. Thus, though the author of this letter is a member of International Executive Committee, following lines have a personal character and only author is, of course, responsible for them.
I have just finished reading two pamphlets: Argentine and World War II (La Argentine frente a la guerra mundial), published by Revolutionary Workers’ Group (Grupo Obrero Revolucionario), and Fourth International and Struggle against Imperialism (La IV Internacional y la lucha contra el imperialismo), by Comrade Jorge Lagos. two documents are quite different. One of them is a collection of articles published over a period of six months, and other is a draft theses. You may be certain that when reading them I never lost sight of this difference in nature. However, two documents outline political perspectives, propose slogans and so are both justifiably subject to criticism.
I shall begin with central question, concerning national emancipation. In pamphlet of G.O.R., national emancipation appears as a slogan abstracted from any concrete reality and consequently empty. The tone of entire pamphlet is indicated by following lines: “Argentine, like all colonial and semi-colonial countries must not go into a struggle at side of and in service of its conquerors, but must become a free country. This is the question.” (Argentina, como todos los países coloniales y semicoloniales, no debe ir a luchar al lado y al servicio de sus dominadores, sino llegar a ser un país libre. De eso es lo que se trata.). But what does a “free country” mean? The author of pamphlet attempts to explain it in following lines: “Let us agitate on behalf of Argentine itself, so that our people can take control of all foreign industrial enterprises, great public utility companies, agricultural societies and banks which are now dominating us and sucking us dry.” (Hagamos agitación en favor de la propia Argentina, para que pasen a poder de nuestro pueblo todas las grandes compañías de servicios públicos, empresas industriales, sociedades agrícolas y bancos extranjeros que actualmente nos esquilman y dominan.) I am assuming that adjective “foreign” refers to all nouns following it — public utilities, industrial enterprises, agricultural societies and banks. And national bourgeoisie? What is meant by formula “our people can take control”? This is part of considerably out-of-date and worn-out arsenal of all petty-bourgeois demagogues. Does the author imagine that proletarian revolution can be recognized beneath this catch-penny phraseology? The pamphlet also speaks of Argentinian economy which is “distorted by imperialist oppression.” Would it be a question of “restoring” Argentinian economy, of making it “normal”? Within framework of imperialist capitalism is it possible to hope for it to follow a harmonious course of development? Even in his own time Marx ridiculed the petty-bourgeois dreamers like Sismondi, who wished to eliminate “bad parts” of capitalism. Today it is even less possible to correct “excesses” of imperialism. The author of G.C.R. pamphlet never explicitly expresses such a perspective, but all his formulas inevitably suggest it to reader. And this is, in full sense of word, a reformist perspective.
The quotation I have given above begins with words: “Let us agitate on behalf of Argentine itself, so that our people can take control”, etc. I shall ignore chauvinist character of expression. What is meant by formula “let us agitate”? This formula, – and this is essential defect of pamphlet – faces two ways. “Agitation” may mean exercise of pressure, which is a purely reformist solution. Or again it may be revolution, and necessarily a proletarian revolution. But in that case, why not say so clearly? Would we be deceiving national bourgeoisie, or our petty- bourgeois, allies? Alas, all past experience shows that such methods deceive no one but proletariat. Towards end of pamphlet following phrase is found: “achieve national emancipation by way of expropriation without indemnification and nationalization of banks, business enterprises, etc.” (lograr la liberación nacional a través de la expropiación sin indemnización y nacionalización de los bancos, empresas, etc.). Here all real relationships are turned upside-down. The last part of phrase refers to proletarian revolution (once again, why not call it by its name?), and this proletarian revolution is presented as instrument, means of national emancipation! Many years ago Lenin once wrote: “We must subordinate demand for national self-determination to interests of proletarian struggle. It is precisely in this that difference is found between our manner of posing national question and bourgeois-democratic manner.” Here are a few lines that must be seriously reflected on: “All petty-bourgeois movements (Pilsudski, Masaryk, etc.: they are innumerable) seek, or did seek, to subordinate class struggle to national movement.” Lenin wants to utilize national oppression as an auxiliary instrument of proletarian revolution. We must choose between Masaryk’s ways and Lenin’s way! The author of G.O.R. pamphlet, alas, is embarking on former rather than on latter. For him national emancipation becomes an omnipresent and omnipotent entity which subordinates everything to itself, inciting proletarian revolution. A small detail is rather significant: throughout thirty-nine pages of pamphlet I did not once encounter words “socialism” or “socialist” (except for names of parties). No – all this is far away, very far away from Marxism.
As to means of action of working-class pamphlet says only a few words which, unfortunately, reveal greatest confusion. According to pamphlet proletariat must “demand formation of a United Proletarian Front” (exigir la formación de un Frente Único Proletario). Between whom and whom? A united front is a temporary agreement between two or more parties, to attain certain specific objectives. Which are these parties? What are the objectives? Nothing is known about it. In reality the brochure presents united front (once again: between whom and whom?) as a substitute for revolutionary party.
Not only in national question, but even on all the problems it touches the pamphlet of G.O.R. skirts reformism incessantly. I shall take a last example. The pamphlet states: “government has sent to congress a draft of a neutrality law with object of controlling the activities of the ‘fifth column.’ There would be nothing to object to if this law really did have such an object for its purpose, and if ... etc.” (El gobierno ha enviado al congreso un Project de ley de neutralidad con el fin de controlar las actividades do la “quinta columna.” Nada tendría quo objetarse si esa ley tuviera por fin realmente tal propósito y si ... etc.) No – there is no revolutionary language here. The bourgeois state can never “really have such an object” and we do not require it to have it, because we know its class nature too well. To put a stop to the fascist rabble we have our own weapons, the workers’ militia, and the arming of proletariat.
On the question of national emancipation and the relationships between imperialism and the national bourgeoisie, Jorge Lagos’ draft theses says many correct things which complete and quite often correct G.O.R.’s pamphlet. But – but too much of the best may be bad, Comrade Lagos falls into a series of errors which may be classified under general heading of sectarianism.
Thus he states: “We Trotskyites have always denied existence of feudalism or of feudal survivals in Argentine countryside” (Los Trotskistas hemos negado siempre la existencia de feudalismo o de supervivencias feudales en el campo argentino). No, Comrade Lagos, this isn’t correct. Trotskyists may have denied that, but in that case they were wrong and it is not an action that makes them deserve name of Trotskyites. Even in great capitalist countries there is no lack of feudal survivals. Revolution in England will have to smash monarchy. This doesn’t mean that a bourgeois revolution is on order of day in England. It simply means that even in most “advanced” great imperialist countries bourgeoisie is incapable of realizing its own democracy. There is no lack of feudal survivals in countryside even in most basically capitalist country, United States. Without ever having been in Argentine I am certain that your statement is incorrect, Comrade Lagos. Of course, law of transformation of quantity into quality retains its full value here. It is not a question of replacing proletarian revolution with bourgeois revolution. But it is up to proletarian revolution to solve bourgeois-democratic tasks which the most advanced bourgeoisie has been unable and is unable to solve. This is an extremely important point for our propaganda and our agitation.
The same sectarian tendency is shown on question of war. Comrade Lagos writes: “War between one of our countries (by this he means countries of Latin America) and one of Imperialist sectors would be an imperialist war” (La guerra entre uno de nuestros países y uno de los sectores imperialistas será una guerra imperialista). This formula is theoretically false and politically dangerous. If United States enters into a war against Germany tomorrow and forces Latin American countries to follow it, proletariat will of course he unable to support such a war, because principle enemy at present, of Latin American countries is not Hitler, but Roosevelt. But other wars are possible between a country of colonial type and an imperialist country, wars of anti-imperialist defense. History is full of them.
At present China is struggling against Japan. The proletariat cannot remain indifferent in face of such wars. Of course, fact that the proletariat supports an oppressed country in its struggle against an imperialist power by no means indicates that revolutionary party identifies its program with that of its national bourgeoisie. But this question has been clarified a number of times in theoretical documents of the Fourth International. Comrade Lagos also mentions a war between two colonial countries. It is impossible to give a general reply. Both countries may very well be agents of two different imperialist bandits (war between Bolivia and Paraguay) and in this case everything must be done in order to transform war into a common struggle against imperialism. But it is also very possible that one of the colonial countries may be a direct agent of one imperialism against a colonial country struggling for its independence. In this way, for example, Japan might make use of Thailand against China. In such cases it is necessary on each occasion to make a serious analysis of the concrete conditions. But it is impossible for the proletariat simply to turn Its back on all wars by placing them in one bag with the trademark “imperialist war.”
Comrade Lagos’ pamphlet also forgets question of revolutionary party in Argentine. However correct political theses may be, if they are without an examination of problems of party formation, they are like an unloaded gun. You may be able to handle gun and aim very well, but you will never capture game.
I cannot end this letter without a few remarks on tone of your polemics, Argentinian comrades. In general we scarcely have habit of complaining of bitterness of controversies and we leave it to centrists to mourn over too lively a tone in disputes. But in your case question is not of calming down but of purifying. You’re in midst of discussing theoretical questions of the greatest importance for your future.
It would be futile to think yourselves able to solve problems in dispute by personal accusations that you can hardly justify to an outside observer, if indeed they are ever justifiable.
The decline of old capitalist Europe and imperialist explosion of United States constitutes for countries of Latin-America breaking down of their political and economic equilibrium, that is to say, revolutionary crises are ripening for these countries. They must seriously be prepared for [them]. Your discussion on character of your future revolution and on your tasks must be one step in this direction, and this letter has no other object than to seek together with you, and with entire International, for the path which must lead you to victory.



 


Revolutionary greetings,
Marc Loris



May 20, 1941
 



Since 1938 Soviet economy has entered into a profound crisis. One of the clearest symptoms of this crisis is the complete absence of statistics of production since that date. The Soviet government abruptly ceased to make public the production of the various branches of industry. Since this situation could become disagreeable to the “friends” of the USSR, the 18th Party Conference, held February 15–21, gave out statistics which the Stalinist agencies reprint in millions of copies, but of course without so much as the most superficial analysis. A large part of the figures are given in rubles and do not permit, as we shall see, any serious year by year comparison because of the increasing inflation. The other figures are deceitfully combined in order to hide the reality in place of revealing it. Thus the reporters announce dozens of percentages without giving a single absolute figure; the forecasts of the plan are mixed with the figures of actual production; the statistics apply according to the various years to quite different groups of the population, etc., etc. It was the task of the reporters to provide enough figures so that the “friends” would have “serious” arguments and to provide a selection of figures in such a way as to render impossible any exact picture of Soviet economy and of its development.
On the basis of the official figures, and without discussing their accuracy for the moment, we have undertaken to reconstitute the dynamics of the development of Soviet production for the last years. We have been able to obtain positive results for four important branches of production (steel, pig iron, coal, oil); some inconclusive indications for a fifth branch (rolled steel). But before explaining our method and its results it is necessary to review briefly the recent past.
 
From the Second to the Third Five-Year Plan
he second Five-Year plan was completed at the end of 1937. If one attempts to measure its success by the growth of the fundamental branches of industry, without entering into the question of the quality of the goods produced, we can say that the projected figures of the plan were realized from 70 to 80 percent. The Stalinist leadership claimed a success of almost 100 percent, but they can do this only because they replaced the original figures of the plan with much more modest ones during the course of the realization of the plan.
The third Five-Year plan was adopted at the 18th Congress of the Stalinist party in March 1939 (not to be confused with the 18th Conference of February); this means that during more than 15 months there was no plan whatsoever. Stalin announced at this Congress that the third Five-Year plan would take the country from socialism into communism and the third plan was baptized as the “Stalin plan.” However, the delay in announcing the plan was in itself a sign of the serious difficulties. Another symptom was the extremely low coefficient of growth in comparison with that of the second plan. Taken as a whole, the third plan forecast an average yearly increase only half of that of the period from 1932 to 1937. For certain branches the reduction was enormous. Thus the production of steel had increased from 1932 to 1937 by 193 percent. For the third Five-Year period the plan envisaged an increase of 58 percent; that is, one-third to one-fourth less. We shall see how these percentages have been realized!
 
The Carrying Out of the Third Five-Year Plan
Because of the lack of general statistics, it is impossible to obtain a rounded out picture. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain a sketch of the development in a few, but very important, branches of industry from 1937 to the present time solely on the basis of the official figures announced at the 18th Conference.
Steel
Last February the 18th Conference adopted as its goal for the production of steel in 1941, 22,400,000 metric tons. Voznesensky declared in his report that this figure represented an increase of 22 percent over the production of 1940, which permits us to calculate the latter as 18,360,000 tons (100/122 of the official figure for 1941). But the official figures of production for 1937 were 17,330,000 tons and for 1938, 18,000,000. The plan for 1939 envisaged 18,800,000 tons and no figure-of actual production was published for that year. The official report of the 18th Conference thus demonstrates that production for 1940 was well behind the plan for 1939. It is sufficient to open one’s eyes to the figures, something the servile “friends” of the bureaucracy are careful to avoid doing. As for the figure set as the goal of production for the end of the Five-Year plan in 1942, 27,500,000 tons, it is clearly at an inaccessible height. No one at the Conference, moreover, so much as breathed the figure adopted two years ago at the 18th Congress of the party when the goal was set under the genius-like leadership of Stalin.
The rates of growth speak a very dramatic language. The increase in the production of steel from 1937 to 1940 was 3.55 percent (if we utilize the official figure as the basis of calculation), or an average yearly increase of 1.18 percent during these three years. The Conference, however, decided to set 22 percent as the annual increase for 1941. The delegates voted unanimously for such a fantastic decision solely because of the revolver at their temples.
The plan for the period from 1937 to 1942 set as the goal an average annual increase of 11 percent, very modest in comparison with the preceding five-year period. However from 1937 to 1940 the average yearly increase in the volume of production was 1.18 percent; that is, the plan of growth was carried out by only 10 percent according to the official figures themselves!
Let those who find our figures too somber show us others! Our calculations are confirmed, moreover, by the Soviet newspaper Industrya which declared on November 17, 1938, that the production of steel was far behind schedule and that it had fallen even below the 1938 level.
The steel industry was not singled out for special criticism at the last Conference of the party. Some branches of economy may be in better condition. Many others are worse. Steel, however, is an essential raw material in the economy. The production of steel at the present time thus represents an average barometer of the whole industry. The conclusion is inescapable: since 1938–39 the Soviet economy has entered a profound crisis. The reality is completely out of accord with the figures unanimously adopted at the inauguration of the “Stalin plan” of 1939.
Pig Iron
For 1941 the 18th Conference set 18,000,000 tons as the goal for pig iron production, asserting that this would constitute an increase of 21 percent over the preceding year; that is, that the production of 1940 computed on the basis of the official figures amounted to 14,876,000 tons. The production of 1937 was 14,487,000 tons, that of 1938, 14,600,000; the 1939 goal was set at 15,600,000 tons. As in the case of steel, the production of pig iron in 1940 was well behind the plan set for 1939. The Five-Year plan envisaged an average annual increase of 10.23 percent. From 1937 to 1940 the increase was 2.70 percent, or an average increase of 0.90 percent per year, that is, an increase of scarcely one-twelfth the one set by the plan. Here also no correlation exists any longer between the plan and the reality.
In March 1939 Stalin declared: “We may consider quite feasible an average annual increase in the output of pig iron of two or two and a half million tons, bearing in mind the present state of the technique of iron smelting.” (From Socialism to Communism, Joseph Stalin, International Publishers, 1939.) The average yearly increase between 1937 and 1940 as derived from the official figure was in reality 130,000 tons, that is, one-fifteenth to one-eighteenth of the figure proclaimed by Stalin. Woe to the delegate who at the last Conference might have dared to recall the figure given out by the “master-planner” two years previously!
Coal
The 18th Party Conference set the production of coal at 191,000,000 tons for 1941, and the reporter declared that this was an increase of 16 percent over 1940. The production in 1940, if we again compute from the official figure, was consequently 164,655,000 tons. In 1937 it had been 127,900,000 tons. During the first three years of the plan (from the end of 1937 to the end of 1940) the production thus increased yearly by an average of 9.58 percent. The plan forecast 18 percent. The actual gain according to the official figure was thus half the goal set in the plan. This figure, somewhat greater than for the production of steel and pig iron, is explained by the tremendous capital investments in the coal industry.
From 1937 to 1940 new mines were opened with a capacity output of 40 percent of the total production in 1937, whereas the capital investments in the other fundamental branches of industry were considerably smaller. But if tremendous expenditures in new mines have been able to increase the official production up to half of the planned increase, the conditions in the coal industry have not changed very much. On April 4, 1940, the People’s Commissariat for the Coal Industry declared that one of the principal coal fields, the Don Basin, had swallowed up great sums of money for technical improvements, but that its production during the last three years increased scarcely 3 percent!
Oil
The 18th Conference fixed 38,000,000 tons for the production of oil and derivative products in 1941. The planned increase for the year 1940–41 was set at 11 percent. That means that the 1940 output if we again accept the official figure was 34,234,000 tons. The production in 1937 was 30,500,000 tons. No figures are available between 1937 and 1940. So the actual average yearly increase between 1937 and 1940 was 4.08 percent, while the plan forecast a yearly increase of 15.41 percent, or almost quadruple. As for the planned production for 1942 adopted in 1939, 54,000,000 tons, that has been left hanging in the clouds. And there was complete silence about it at the last Conference.
Rolled Steel
The production of rolled steel in 1937 was 13,000,000 tons. The 18th Conference fixed 15,800,000 tons as the goal for 1941. But here we run up against one of the stratagems used by the bureaucracy to hide the reality. The rate of growth for the year 1941 was announced at the Conference as 23 percent for “high-grade” rolled steel, while the output announced was for rolled steel in general. Hence it is impossible to make any conclusions about the actual production! Nevertheless, if we apply this rate of 23 percent to the general output of 1941, we obtain an actual official production of 12,846,000 tons for 1940. In 1937 the output was 13,000,000 tons. So the output would have decreased yearly from 1937 to 1941 by 0.39 percent instead of increasing 12.31 percent a year according to the plan. We must admit that the ruse of the bureaucracy leaves this assumption inconclusive. However, the very fact that the leadership laid down a smoke screen over this branch of industry is an infallible indication that the situation is far from brilliant.
Steel, pig iron, coal, oil, and rolled steel, these are all the branches of industry in which we can draw conclusions. The other figures given at the last 18th Conference have so little relationship one with another; the bureaucracy knows so well how to cover up the reality, that it is impossible to follow the development from year to year.
In his report at the 18th Conference, Voznesensky compared a few figures of the daily output at the end of 1940 with those at the end of 1937. He concluded from these figures the “possibility not only of fulfilling but of over-fulfilling the 1941 plan.”
An examination of the figures shows that the rate of growth thus calculated is far behind those forecast in the Five-Year plan. In fact they are not much more than a third. Thus according to Voznesensky the daily output of oil at the end of 1937, between 84 and 86 thousand tons, reached 97 to 98 thousand tons at the end of 1940 which gives an average yearly rate of growth of 5.1 percent, while the plan forecast 15.41 percent. The rates thus calculated are however somewhat greater (except for coal) than those we have obtained by the comparison of the total yearly outputs. How explain this? The key to the enigma is given us by the bureaucracy itself through the pen of Walter Duranty, who last February mentioned the “spurt” in the final quarter of 1940. The figures of daily output presented by Voznesensky are in reality those of a very short period, prepared for the use of the Conference.
The Inflation
We shall not discuss here the question of the quality of production (which has become worse since 1937). Nor shall we discuss the deterioration of the machines which occurs in the “spurts” that take place at each change of director (ami they are frequent) and at the end of each year (to attain the figures of the plan). On the basis of the official figures, prepared for the party Conference, we have tried to show the purely quantitative development of some fundamental branches of industry.
The 18th Conference was told that the output of industry had increased from 95.5 billion rubles in 1937 to 162 billion rubles in 1940; that is an increase of 44 percent or almost 15 percent a year. Not a single one of the fundamental branches of industry have made, by far, such an advance. The sole explanation is that during the last three years the ruble has melted away, prices have increased, the printing press has been working overtime. An analysis of the official budget will lead to the same conclusion. (See the article by John G. Wright in The Militant, March 8, 1941.)
* * *
True to the teachings of “socialism in one country,” Voznesensky opened his report on the economic tasks by declaring that the Soviet economic development is not affected by the “blows of crises and wars.” However, his speech, those of the other reporters, and the very holding of the conference itself were nothing but denials of such an affirmation. Stalin’s silence, more eloquent than his speeches, only underlined the gravity of the crisis that the Soviet union is now undergoing.
The conference did not concern itself over the causes of the crisis. Its task was to cover it up by denouncing the “individual insufficiencies.” The present crisis is the crisis of the whole system of bureaucratic leadership. The nationalized economy is more and more strangled in the bureaucratic noose. Thus to resolve the fundamental problem of the economy, that of the productivity of labor, Stalin has found nothing in his arsenal but ever more brutal violence against the workers. The present war intensifies this fundamental policy, and in two ways: by extremely increasing the needs of Soviet defense and by making much more difficult the buying of tools abroad.
To the catastrophic consequences of his system, so aggravated in the face of the war, Stalin has only one answer: ever-increasing terror. Seven People’s Commissars have been “warned” by the Conference, that is, they work now under the direct muzzle of the revolver. To complete the picture, it is necessary to add that they direct such commissariats as aviation, munitions, electric power, chemicals. The three last representatives of some importance remaining of the old Stalinist crew are on the way out: Litvinov has been “purged,” Molotov and Kaganovitch received “family” warnings. Besides all this, there is a tremendous circulation of completely new faces who appear and disappear. The most extraordinary exemplar of that type is one Merkulov who shone for three weeks like a meteor at the head of the GPU, but was expelled from the Central Committee by the Conference and disappeared. Without doubt his fate has been sealed in the cellars of the Lubianka.
With its expulsions and warnings, the Conference represents Stalin’s lash to pull the economy out of the mud-hole where it has bogged down. The method is not new, the results likewise will not be new. They will be those noted above, but extremely exacerbated. To save the USSR, today economically, tomorrow militarily, the Soviet masses have only one road: to seize the power from the bureaucracy and to restore the democracy of the Soviets.
 


Proofread by Einde O’Callaghan (March 2015).
This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

When Engels, revered patriarch of international social democracy passed away peacefully in London, burdened with years, the end of the century was approaching which separated the revolutions of the bourgeoisie from those of the proletariat, Jacobinism from Bolshevism. The transformation of the world, announced by Marx, was to become the immediate task, and revolutionists were to know unparallelled vicissitudes. And in fact the heads of the three greatest revolutionary leaders since Engels sustained the blows of reaction. The historian of the future will not fail to see in this one of the characteristic marks of our epoch. Nor should he fail to note the source of these blows. Lenin’s head was pierced by a bullet from the “Socialist Revolutionary” Fanny Kaplan. Rosa Luxemburg’s head was shattered by the butt-ends of the guns of the “Social Democrat” Noske’s soldiery. Trotsky’s head was laid open by the pick-axe of one of the “Communist” Stalin’s mercenaries.
Our epoch of crisis, with its abrupt jumps and feverish tempo, devours men and parties more and more rapidly. Those who only yesterday represented the revolution become the instruments of the darkest reaction. This struggle between the head of the historic process and its leaden, dragging rump assumed its most dramatic form in the duel between Trotsky and Stalin, precisely because this struggle unfolded against the background of a workers’ state already established. Trotsky, borne to the summits of power by the revolutionary explosion of the masses, persecuted and harassed when the defeats of the proletariat succeeded each other, became the very incarnation of the revolution.
He was aided by an astonishing physique. What struck you first was his forehead – phenomenally lofty, vertical, and not heightened by baldness. After that his eyes, blue and deep, with a gaze powerful and sure of its power. During his stay in France Lev Davidovich very often had to travel incognito in order to simplify the problem of guarding him. Then he would shave off his goatee and brush his hair to one side dividing it by a part. But when it came to his leaving the house and mingling with the public I was always worried: “No, it’s really impossible ... the first one to pass by will recognize him, he can’t change that gaze of his ...” Then, when Lev Davidowich began to speak, what attracted attention was his mouth. Whether he spoke in Russian or a foreign language his lips constrained themselves to shape words distinctly. He was irritated at hearing confused and precipitate speech from others, and always compelled himself to enunciate with complete distinctness. It was only in addressing Natalia Ivanovna in Russian that on occasion his enunciation became more hurried and less articulate, descending sometimes into a whisper. In conversations with visitors in his study his hands, resting on the edge of his work-table at first, would soon begin moving with large, firm gestures, as though aiding his lips in molding the expression of his thought. His face with its halo of hair, the set of his head, and the whole carriage of his body were always proud and stately. His stature was above medium, with a powerful chest and a broad, stalwart back, and in comparison his legs appeared somewhat slender. It is undoubtedly easier for someone who paid him one visit to say what he saw in Trotsky’s face than for one who was at his side for many years in the most variegated circumstances.
The one thing I never saw was the faintest expression of vulgarity. Nor was there any greater likelihood of finding what is called bonhomie. But a certain sweetness was not lacking, which no doubt originated in the formidable intelligence of whose readiness to understand everything you were always aware. What you usually saw was a youthful enthusiasm which joyously undertook everything, and at the same time was strong enough to induce others to cooperate in the undertaking. When it was a question of cudgeling an opponent this sort of gaiety swiftly changed into irony, biting and malicious, alternating with an expression of contempt, and when the enemy was particularly swinish, you would, for a moment, almost find a hint of malevolence. But his vivacity returned quickly. “We’ll fix ’em!” he would say then with animation. In the isolation of exile the most dramatic circumstances where I could see Lev Davidovich were his conflicts with the police, or incidents with adversaries of bad faith. At these times his face would harden, and his eyes would flash, as though in them had suddenly been concentrated that vast will-power which ordinarily could be measured only by the labors of his entire life. Then it was obvious to everyone that nothing, nothing in the world could make him budge an inch.
 
How Trotsky Worked
In daily life this will-power expended itself in strictly organized labor. Any unmotivated disturbance irritated him extremely: he hated pointless conversations, unannounced visits, disappointments or delays in keeping engagements. To be sure there was nothing pedantic in any of this. If an important question turned up he would not hesitate a moment in upsetting all his plans, but it had to be worth it. If it had the slightest interest for the movement he would heedlessly give his time and energy, but he showed himself all the more miserly of them when the carelessness, lightmindedness, or bad organization of others threatened to waste them. He hoarded the smallest particles of time, the most precious material of which life is made. His whole personal life was rigidly organized by the quality called singleness of purpose. He set up a hierarchy of duties, and brought to a conclusion whatever he undertook.
As a rule he did not work less than twelve hours a day, and sometimes, when it was necessary, much more. He remained at table as briefly as possible, and after sharing his meals for many years I could not say that I ever noticed on his face any mark of enjoyment for what he ate or drank. “Eating, dressing, all these miserable little things that have to be repeated every day ...” he once said to me.
He could find his only diversion in great physical activity. Merely walking was scarcely a relaxation. He walked actively and in silence, and you could see that his mind was always at work. Now and then he would ask a question: “When did you answer that letter?” “Can you find me that quotation?” Only violent exercise gave him repose. In Turkey this consisted of hunting, and especially fishing, deep-sea fishing, complicated and agitated, where the body had to spend itself recklessly. When the fishing had been good, that is, very fatiguing, he began work on his return with redoubled enthusiasm. In Mexico, where fishing was impossible, he invented the gathering of cacti, of enormous weight, under a blazing sun.
Of course the necessity for security created certain obligations. During the eleven and a half years of his third emigration it was only for a few months, at certain times during his stay in France and in Norway, that Lev Davidovich could walk about freely, that is, unguarded, in the countryside around his house. As a rule each one of his excursions constituted a minor military operation. It was necessary to make all arrangements in advance, and fix his route carefully. “You treat me as though I were an object,” he sometimes said, jokingly dissimulating whatever impatience there might have been in this remark.
He demanded the same methodical spirit he observed in his own work from the comrades who assisted him. The closer they were to him, the more did he demand of them and the less did he trouble himself with formalities. He desired precision in everthing: an undated letter, an unsigned document always irritated him, as did in general anything easygoing, slipshod, or happy-go-lucky. Do whatever you’re doing well, and do it till you finish. And in this rule he made no distinction between petty day-to-day chores and intellectual work: conduct your thoughts to their conclusion, is an expression that often sprang from his pen. He always displayed great solicitude for the health of those around him. Health is revolutionary capital that must not be wasted. He grew angry at seeing someone read in a bad light. It’s necessary to risk your life for the revolution without hesitating, but why ruin your eyes when you can read comfortably and intelligently?
 
Trotsky’s Conversations
In conversations with Lev Davidovich what visitors were struck by chiefly was his capacity to find his bearings in a novel situation. He was able to integrate it in his general perspective, and at the same time always give immediate and concrete advice. During his third emigration he often had the opportunity of conversing with visitors from countries he was not acquainted with directly, perhaps from the Balkans or Latin America. He did not always know the language, did not follow their press and had never had any particular interest in their specific problems. First of all he would allow his interrogator to speak, occasionally jotting down a few brief notes on a slip of paper in front of him, sometimes asking for a few details: “How many members has this party?” “Isn’t this politician a lawyer?”
Then he would speak, and the mass of information that had been given him would be organized. Soon one could distinguish the movements of different classes and of different layers within these classes, and then, bound up with these movements, there would be revealed the play of parties, groups and organizations, and then the place and the activities of various political figures, down to their profession and personal traits, would be logically fitted into the picture. The French naturalist Cuvier used to boast of his ability to reconstruct an entire animal from a single bone. With his vast knowledge of social and political realities Trotsky could devote himself to a similar work. His interrogator was always astounded at seeing how deeply he had been able to penetrate the reality of the particular problem, and would leave Trotsky’s study knowing his own country a little better.
At every moment you felt in Trotsky a huge fund of experience, not merely engraved in his memory but organized and reflected on lengthily and profoundly. You could also see that the organization of this experience had taken place around indestructible principles. Though Lev Davidovich hated routine, though he was always anxious to discover new trends, the least attempt at innovation in the realm of principles made him prick up his ears. “Trimming Marx’s beard,” was his expression for all these attempts to put Marxism in line with the current fashion, and he did not dissimulate his contempt for them.
 
Trotsky’s Style and Writing Methods
Trotsky’s style is universally admired. It is undoubtedly to be best compared with that of Marx. However, Trotsky’s sentences are less spacious than those of Marx, in whom one is aware of a wealth of scholarly resources, especially in the youthful works. Trotsky’s style achieves its effects by extremely simple means. His vocabulary, especially in his more properly political writings, is always rather limited. The sentences are short, with few subordinate clauses. Their power arises from a sturdy articulation, most often with strongly marked but always well balanced oppositions. This temperance of means gives his style a great freshness and, one might say, youthfulness. In his writing Trotsky is considerably more youthful than Marx.
Trotsky knew how to take advantage of that Russian syntax whose inflections permit the word-order within a sentence to be upset, giving the expression of the thought a force and emphasis difficult to attain with the limited means of modern western languages. And also difficult to translate. Lev Davidovich demanded a mathematical fidelity from his translators, and at the same time kicked against the rules of grammar in the foreign language which forbade a similarly concise and direct rendition of his thought. Compared to that of Lenin, Trotsky’s style is superior, by a large margin, in its lucidity and elegance, without any loss of power. Lenin’s sentences occasionally become cumbrous, too heavy, disorganized. It seems as though the thought sometimes cripples its expression. Trotsky once said that in Lenin you could discover a Russian mushik, but one raised to the level of genius.
Even though Lenin’s father was a provincial functionary and Trotsky’s a farmer, it is Trotsky who is the city-dweller, as opposed to Lenin, doubtless because of his race. This may be seen at once in the difference of styles, without any attempt being made here to uncover this opposition in other aspects of these two giant personalities.
When Trotsky was deported to Turkey, the passport the Soviet authorities gave him put down his profession as writer. And in truth he was a great, an exceedingly great writer. If the bureaucrats’s inscription causes a smile it is because Trotsky was so much more than a writer. He wrote with ease, being able to dictate several hours at a sitting. But then he would go over the manuscript and correct it carefully. For some of these great writings, such as the History of the Russian Revolution, there are two successive drafts behind the definitive text, but in the majority of cases there is only one. His enormous literary production, in which are to be found books, pamphlets, innumerable articles, letters, hurried statements to the press, and notes of all sorts is, needless to say, uneven. Some parts are more worked over than others, but not a sentence in any of them has been neglected. You can take any five lines in this ponderous accumulation of writing and you will always recognize the inimitable Trotsky.
Their volume is also impressive, and would alone bear testimony to a very rare will and capacity for labor. Thirty volumes of Lenin’s complete works have been collected, in addition to thirty-five volumes of correspondence and odd notes. Trotsky lived seven years longer than Lenin, but his writings, from his long books to his brief, personal notes, would undoubtedly come to triple that amount. In the eleven and a half years of his third emigration he amassed a labor which would honorably fill an entire lifetime. It may be said that the pen never abandoned his hand, and what a hand it was!
 
He Lives in His Books
Trotsky has put all of himself into his books. Personal contact with the man himself did not modify the portrait that emerged from a reading of his works, but deepened it and made it more precise: passion and reason, intelligence and will, all carried to an extreme degree, but at the same time blending into one another. In everything Lev Davidovich did one had the feeling that he had given his whole being. He often repeated Hegel’s words: Nothing great is done in this world without passion; and he had nothing but contempt for the philistines who object to the “fanaticism” of the revolutionaries. But intelligence was always present, in miraculous harmony with the fire. Nor could one dream of discovering a conflict: the will was indomitable because the mind saw very far. Hegel would have to be quoted once again: Der Wille ist eine besondere Weise des Denkens. Will is a specific function of thought.

Footnote by ETOL
1. The 1959 reprint of this article was introduced by the following note:
Jan van Heijenoort, as a devoted and fervent Trotskyist, left his native France in 1932, when still very young, to join Leon Trotsky on the island of Prinkipo. He became Trotsky’s principal secretary, and was with him until a few months before the assassination. Van Heijenoort later left the movem
 

