

THROUGHOUT the preceding studies the relationship between Marx and Feuerbach has received peripheral mention. In the following pages I wish to examine this relationship more closely, particularly the advance which Marx’s work represented, according to his own conception, over Feuerbach. The foregoing has already made clear, I hope, that Marx, in the decisive years between 1841 and 1844, was a Feuerbachian – to be sure, with critical reservations. Die Heilige Familie was written in behalf of the philosophy of “real humanism” – phrase directly out of Feuerbach. In the unpublished papers of 1844, which appeared under the title of Philosophische-ökonomische Fragmenten (in the Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 3, pp. 33–172) the Feuerbachian influence is even more perceptible. [1] And in the very manuscript in which he definitely breaks with Feuerbach, Die deutsche Ideologie (1845–1846), we find a warm defense of Feuerbach against the attacks made upon him by Bruno Bauer and Max Stirner. Feuerbachian elements, not to mention characteristic modes of expression, abound even in the maturest works of Marx. Like Feuerbach, Marx calls for a reconstruction of philosophy as a method of approaching the practical problems of men. Like Feuerbach, he regards human beings in their empirical social contexts as the carriers of the cultural process. Like Feuerbach, he explains the false traditional conceptions of the world in terms of fetishistic expressions of activities unconsciously engaged in at different times and periods.
What fundamentally separates Marx from Feuerbach is his historical approach and his concrete analysis of those factors of social life which appear in Feuerbach only as abstractions. Another way of putting this is to say that Marx differs from Feuerbach even where he adopts Feuerbachian principles in the stress he places upon the dialectical method and the concrete application he makes of it. On several occasions he specifically reproaches Feuerbach for his lack of dialectic and goes so far as to attribute to him a share of the responsibility for the neglect by contemporaries of the rational kernel of Hegel’s method. [2] Feuerbach had simply repudiated Hegel’s philosophy without attempting to disengage Hegel’s methodological insights from his systematic errors. Marx himself died before he could write the materialistic dialectic in which he had planned to criticize, in immanent detail, the logic of Hegel. But the methodology of his work as well as his explicit criticisms of Feuerbach suffice to provide the main outlines of his philosophy. Since Marx’s criticism of Feuerbach preceded his own constructive achievements, they are of greater importance in tracing the development of Marx’s thought.
The real significance of Marx’s criticism of Feuerbach has not been adequately grasped by the overwhelming majority of his zealous and “orthodox” disciples. They have failed to understand Marx because to most of them the philosophy of Feuerbach has been a sealed book. Here as well as in other important works of Marx the very language used will mislead the reader unacquainted with the technical jargon of those whom Marx criticized. Because I believe that Marx’s critical theses on Feuerbach represent in nuce a turning point in the history of philosophy, I propose to adopt a method of exposition which may strike the reader as pedantic but which will at least put him in a position where he can control my interpretations by the text of Marx’s remarks. Instead of giving a discursive description of Marx’s views, I shall draw upon relevant passages from Die deutsche Ideologie.
Thesis I.:
“The chief defect of all previous materialism – including Feuerbach’s – is that the object, reality, sensibility, is conceived only in the form of the object or as conception, but not as human sensory activity, practice (Praxis) not subjectively. That is why it happened that the active side [of the object], in opposition to materialism, was developed by idealism – but only abstractly, for idealism, naturally, does not know real, sensory activity as such. Feuerbach wants to recognize sensory objects which are really differentiated from objects of thought, but he does not conceive human activity itself as an objective activity. Consequently in the Essence of Christianity, he regards only the theoretical attitude as the truly human one, while practise is conceived and fixed only in its dirty-Jewish form. Hence he does not grasp the significance of ‘revolutionary’, of practical-critical, activity.”
There are two different points made by Marx here which must be noted and clarified. The first is Marx’s criticism against all materialisms from Democritus to Feuerbach; the second, is his criticism of the attempted Feuerbachian solution of the difficulty which Feuerbach in common with all other materialists faces. The first raises the question to what extent the mind, or since Marx, like Feuerbach, does not separate the mind from the body – to what extent man is active in knowing. The second presents the distinctively Marxian conception of Praxis.
Marx was a close student of ancient and modern materialism. His dissertation concerned itself with the difference between the Epicurean and the Democritean philosophies of nature. He was at home, as his short excursion in Die Heilige Familie into the history of materialism shows, with modern materialisms. He could trace down to its finest nuances the influence of Cartesian rationalism and Locke’s empiricism upon French medical theory out of which the materialistic sensationalism of the Encyclopaedists developed. He followed with keen interest the progress of the biological sciences in the 18th century. In all of these philosophies he finds one fundamental defect, an inability to explain the facts of perception and knowledge – in short, of meaningful consciousness.
No matter what form traditional materialism took, it explained not only the composition of man’s body but the contents of his mind as resultant effects of elements and energies streaming into him from without. The human mind was conceived as passive and plastic. Even where, as in Locke, the mind was endowed with certain powers by which it combined the original ideas derived from without, there was no adequate recognition of the part which human beings played in reacting upon, altering, and transforming their environment. Since materialism, operating with a simple cause-effect relationship, could not account for the redirective activity of man, it could not account for the actualities of human thinking and its practical fruits. At most it pictured thinking as a private, subcutaneous reflection upon what had already happened, an incandescent after-glow – beautiful, perhaps, in design and color, but absolutely impotent to affect the course of things.
The corrective to this “scientific” way of explaining mind away came not from the materialists themselves but from the idealists. Despite the fantastic and, literally construed, unintelligible constructions of the German idealists from Kant to Hegel, their great contribution was their insight into the essential activity of mind. Here is no place to repeat the arguments of Marx against the vagaries of all idealistic schools but it must be remembered that when he broke with idealism, it was not in order to return to the simple materialism which made thinking appear to be either unnecessary or miraculous, but to provide a materialistic basis for the genuine discoveries the idealists made in their analysis of consciousness. That is why both Marx and Engels regarded themselves as the heirs of whatever was sound in the classic German philosophic tradition. Stripped of all distorting elements the contribution of idealism consists in the illumination it sheds upon the relation between the acts of consciousness and the contents of consciousness. Not only the simplest thought but even the simplest perception cannot be plausibly explained as an effect of a mechanical impulse, for the very description of the mechanical impulse as an object of knowledge presupposes some active subject who approaches it with this category rather than that, with a whole set of values, assumptions, memories and anticipations which, whatever their origin, now contribute to what is seen and thought. The idealists saw correctly that in what-was-given-to-knowledge something was involved about the subject-to-which-it-was-given. Their errors arise out of attempts to deduce the very existence and character of the given from the activity of mind, and from the fatal step by which the relatively autonomous activity of mind became transformed into absolute independence of complex material conditions.
In mythological form, Hegel had described in his Phänomenologie des Geists and Logik, the way in which objects and subjects were reconstituted in an interacting process whose constituent elements were materials, furnished by nature and previous history, and activities, resulting from the psycho-physical powers of man in some historical context. In mythological form, I repeat, because the whole process was supposed to have transpired in a timeless divine Subject. Feuerbach had riddled the conception of a divine Subject by showing that in so far as the predicates of the divine Subject were meaningful, they were nothing more than representations of the powers of the human mind, expressed in the language of metaphor and hyperbole. The secret of the growth of the divine Subject of self-consciousness was declared to be nothing more than the development of the mind of man. But Feuerbach’s abstract conception of man and his disregard of the historical factors conditioning the emergence of the human mind led him to a blank confrontation of nature and man which generated the same insoluble problems that had plagued earlier materialists. They had wrestled with the antithesis between “things and consciousness,” and ended in a blind alley because they could not get any process started between the two except by dissolving the latter into the former. Feuerbach, despite the overtones of natural piety in his writings, began by contraposing “man and nature”, too. When he projected his solution of the opposition, he oscillated between an unbridged dualism, the natural and the human, and a reduction of the natural to a form of human sensibility.
Both materialists and idealists had taken as the pre-suppositions of their philosophy a relatively fixed element – matter in the one case, the subject in the other – to serve as a starting point for the development observable in nature, man and society. Marx’s own starting point was not presuppositionless. But since he was attempting not to deduce history but to discover the rhythms of its flow, he avoided introducing as an explanatory principle abstractions which had no empirical function, and which could not be vindicated by observing the ways in which human beings actually behaved.
“The presuppositions with which we begin,” he writes in Die deutsche Ideologie, “are not arbitrary; they are not dogmas. They are real presuppositions from which we can abstract ourselves only in imagination. They are individuals as they actually are, their actions, and their material conditions of life – those which they find at hand as well as those which their own activity produces. These presuppositions are observable in purely empirical fashion.” (Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 5, p. 10.)
Feuerbach, too, had said that man was the presupposition of his philosophy. But what kind of man? “Essential man” – not men as they existed here and now, in city and country, in high estate or low – but man as such, realiter, a kind of man in which “a band of scrofulous, work-worn, starving men” were equal to all other men, a type of man in the light of whose meaning all historical differences between individuals, groups, and classes were superficial accidents. Marx, too, starts with human beings but with human beings understood “not in a fantastic fixity and completeness, but in their real, empirical, perceptual process of development. As soon as their active life process is described, history ceases to be a collection of dead facts, as it still is among abstract empiricists, or an imaginary activity of imaginary subjects as among the idealists” (Ibid., p. 16).
To say that human beings must be the starting point of any attempt to understand history, is to say that human needs must constitute the starting point of all inquiry. Again, not the abstract needs of Feuerbach but the primary needs of production, reproduction, communication. The gratification of these needs requires the discovery of instruments which are partly the cause and partly the result of an increasingly pervasive division of labor in social life. But the very processes of gratifying old needs gives rise to new needs, – technological, psychological, and spiritual. The movement of history is not imposed from without by the creative fiat of an Absolute Mind nor is it the result of a dynamic urge within matter. It develops out of the redirective activity of human beings trying to meet their natural and social needs. Human history may be viewed as a process in which new needs are created as a result of material changes instituted to fulfill the old. According to Marx, the whole of theoretical culture, including science, arises either directly or indirectly as an answer to some social want or lack. The change in the character and quality of human needs including the means of gratifying them, is the keynote not merely to historical change but to the changes of human nature.
The concrete needs of men is the true middle term for Marx between nature and history. The possibility of having needs and satisfying them, that which makes men need-ful creatures, has its explanation in the physical environment of men and the biological structure of his body. The specific forms through which these needs both of the senses and the mind are gratified, as well as the development of these needs, are attributable to man’s social organization. The interaction between physical conditions and social organization is history. Philosophies themselves are critical historical activities which arise to fill some social need [3], prevail among those groups that recognize them as a justification of their way of life, and systematize the unconscious principles and prejudices by which men attempt to direct life. Men, conditioned as they are by their environment, can change that environment or preserve it, because human activity, including thought, is an objective activity having objective effects.
Surely, the critical reader will protest, is not a great deal of this already contained in Feuerbach’s philosophy? Does not Marx’s thought reduce itself to a filling in of details in a position whose chief outlines were laid down by Feuerbach? This brings us to the more specific criticism which Marx makes against Feuerbach’s theory of practise (Praxis).
The last two sentences of the first gloss on Feuerbach contrast Feuerbach’s contemplative or purely theoretical attitude towards life with Marx’s “critical, practical” standpoint. They also contrast Feuerbach’s “dirty Jewish” [4] conception of practise with what Marx regards as a true one. For purposes of exposition these two contrasts may be discussed independently. The first very briefly, for it arises again in a subsequent thesis.
In rejecting Feuerbach’s identification of the theoretical attitude with the human attitude, Marx is criticizing him not so much for his inadequate materialism as for his vestigial idealism. It is one thing to overcome the idealistic hypostasis of different phases of temporal activity by demanding a return to the facts of experience. It is quite another to carry out the necessary reform and be faithful in the analysis to one’s own program. Feuerbach, because of his unhistorical and abstract conception of man, needs, object, community and communism, sins against his own program and relapses into idealism. He holds up against the existing order an ideal of what man should be, of man as he could have been at any time and any place, of the essential man. Since this ideal is not related to the concrete needs of men in the concrete social situations in which they find themselves, it can provide no leverage with which to change the existing state of affairs. Unable to make a practise, a revolutionary and revolutionizing practise, of his ideal – Feuerbach makes a religion of it. Indeed, for Marx, the religious attitude consists in the belief in, or worship of, unhistorical abstractions. All thought, all conceptions, arise as generalizations of concrete modes of response to specific historical situations. When they are taken as eternally valid, independently of the possibility of their application to fresh situations, men become victimized by the creations and discoveries of their own minds. Whether they are aware of it or not, they become Platonists, supernaturalists, behind whose backs the world continues in its accustomed way. In Marx’s eyes, the whole theoretical tradition of Western European philosophy with its apotheosis of Reason, its conception that thought has an underived and independent history, its identification of theoretical activity with divine activity, and when divinity was no longer fashionable, with the “highest” type of human activity – all this represented a religious pattern of behavior. This was the ground for his contention that the Young-Hegelians, despite their world shattering phrases and militant atheism, were religious, and that the battles they fought were sectarian episodes in a common religious tradition which they shared with their opponents.
True, Feuerbach never lost sight of human Praxis and its influence upon the development of culture. But precisely because of his abstractions, he could not grasp, maintains Marx, the true Praxis. Feuerbach takes the general form of human Praxis to be the same as the kind of Praxis he examined in his Wesen der Christenthums. There, he points out that religion, too, has a Praxis stemming from the needs of the heart. Its motives were practical, its instruments, prayer and miracle; its character, a cosmic egoism which assumed that the world could be compelled to gratify human desires. Feuerbach was openly disdainful of the narrow practicability concealed in the finery and tinsel of religious ritual. The ritual, imagery and belief of historic religions in his eyes represented a gratification in fancy of what could not be secured in reality, a sublimated expression of the animal needs and animal fears of man. The positive religion of the worship of man through love of one another which Feuerbach put in the place of traditional religion was free from religious Praxis. It was enlightened by science and socialism, both very vaguely conceived. In place of the egoism animating the wish to make the world over to our heart’s desire, he set up an unselfishness whose pleasant duty it is to love one’s neighbors to the very death. In place of the miracle and prayer which are the common resort of fearful souls in distress, he defended the ennobling conception of the universality of law, of the eternity of scientific objects, of a cosmic democracy in which all things are equally important – or unimportant. At times Feuerbach seems to oppose to the degraded practicality of man a kind of Spinozistic intellectual love of God. But running through all of his descriptions of the highest form of theoretical knowledge is the belief that man is truly human only when like God he views things sub specie aternitatis. The very fact that man conceived God as an eternal knower was indirect testimony of the value he placed upon the thinking life – for the attributes of God are but the idealized attributes of men.
Marx opposed Feuerbach’s conceptions both of theory and practise. A theory was a guide to action; practise, the specific activities which had to be carried out to test the theory. Practise (Praxis) was something much wider than practicality. It was selective behavior. Its character was not given by personal interests which might or might not have been present but by the skills and techniques, the living traditions and modes of procedure which man brings to whatever he sees and does. Praxis could not be contrasted with science, for science has a Praxis, too. The scientific objects which the scientist studies are essentially related to the practises of scientists. These in turn are related to the basic practises of the culture which supports science. Marx rarely discusses science without underscoring the influence of modern commerce and industry upon its development. Marx’s theory of the Praxis could explain what all other philosophers recognized but which they could not begin to account for, without writing fairy-tales, viz., how knowledge could give power. For Marx knowledge gives power by virtue of the activities it sets up in transforming things in behalf of social needs. The meaning of any theory is ultimately to be found not in what men say but in what it leads them to do or leave undone. Actual or possible Praxis is not only the locus of meaning but also the test of truth. This point is expressed in Marx’s second thesis.
 
Thesis II:
“The question whether human thought can achieve objective truth is not a question of theory but a practical question. In practise [Praxis] man must prove the truth, i.e., the reality, power and this-sidedness of his thought. The dispute concerning the reality or unreality of thought – which is isolated from practise [Praxis] – is a purely scholastic question.”
To the modern reader these sentences suggest pragmatism but in view of the multiple ambiguity of this term it is advisable to avoid its use and to search more directly for Marx’s meaning. Marx here equates the real and the true, the unreal with the false. Reality cannot therefore in this connection mean existence, since false ideas exist as well as true, Reality has the sense of the “actually” or “genuinely” true, that which is established to be “really” true in the face of critical inquiry and doubt. For idealism, the truth of any idea consists in its coherence with other ideas. Inasmuch as existence was essentially ideal it was possible to discover the truth, although not the whole truth (that was accessible only to Absolute Mind) by developing consistently the logical implications of any meaningful sentence. It is obvious that such a theory of truth could never submit to control by empirical fact, for in the first place, according to its assumptions, there were no “empirical” facts but only logical necessities. Secondly, granting the “appearance” of empirical fact there was no way of telling which of a number of equally consistent theories was true without going outside of the systems of coherent propositions. For example, on what grounds could the consistently developed propositions of a paranoiac be rejected for a more plausible account? Thirdly, since the idealists assumed with Hegel that truth can only be found in the whole, knowledge of everything must be relevant to knowledge of anything else. Numerous other paradoxical consequences flow from this theory which need not be developed here. They can all be deduced from the difficulties mentioned.
Materialism, strictly speaking, did not and could not develop a theory of truth. The very existence of ideas constituted a difficulty which it originally tried to answer by regarding ideas as a tenuous kind of matter, and later, as sense-impressions of varying degrees of complexity resulting from the bombardment of material particles on sensitive nerve-endings. But how could ideas derived in such a way be characterized as true or false? The standard formula which was invoked, viz., that a true idea was one which “agreed” or “corresponded” with its object, raised just as baffling problems. The proper meaning of correspondence presupposed a qualitative identity between the entities corresponding with each other, as e.g., the correspondence between a yard-stick and some other standard measure, or a picture and an original. But what could this common element be? Material? This would mean that ideas would have to be of the same stuff as things. A palpable absurdity! Ideal? The materiality of the world would disappear, and we would be back to Hegel and the coherence theory of truth.
Usually the materialist shifted the problem so that it became a question of what caused ideas. But the difficulties could not be evaded – in fact they were multiplied. False ideas have causes as well as true ideas. What criterion, then, enabled us to distinguish between the two? Further, if ideas are effects, then the question suggests itself what is it that is known, their causes of ideas or the non-material effects themselves? Here, at least two answers were possible. The causes might be known or the effects might be known. If the causes were known, the truth could not consist in an “agreement” between the causes and effects, for causes do not at all have to be like effects, any more than unripe apples necessarily have to resemble the cramps produced by eating them. Some other theory of truth would have to account for the facts of knowledge. If only effects were known, that is to say, if the ideas produced by the molecular agitation of the nervous system, were objects of knowledge, the implications were even more startling. How could effects (ideas) be compared with their causes (things), since according to the supposition of the case, all that our knowledge of causes (things) could consist in was the possession of their effects (ideas). What assurance have we, then, on this view that there are causes of our ideas? To call ideas “effects” of things is question-begging. We are aware of ideas as mental events. They may not be caused at all, or if caused, they may be caused by other mental events, and not at all by things. The indecisiveness of the materialist’s theory of truth leads either to the subjective idealism of Berkeley, viz., only ideas are objects of knowledge, and what we call things or matter is merely a complex of ideas – or to the skepticism of Hume, viz., only ideas are objects of knowledge and there is no telling whether they are caused by something which is not an idea.
Marx’s conception of truth cut under all of these theories. We have seen in a previous study why he rejected subjective idealism as represented by Bruno Bauer. It could not begin to account for the compulsive features of experience. Its solipsism was not only a theoretical reductio ad absurdum, and inconsistent at that, but it mocked the efforts of the working class to liberate itself from poverty and degradation by asserting that these were nothing else than their private constructions. Traditional materialism, although congenial to Marx in its social intent, was muddled both in its theory and practise. By professing to see in all human history and activity nothing but a special case of universal physical categories, and in human thought a mere resultant of mechanical or chemical influences, it made unintelligible the redirective judgments of the revolutionist whose primary aim was to transform the world. Not that Marx was unaware that a great many materialists had been revolutionists and had urged their revolutionary proposals in the name of materialism. In Die Heilige Familie he describes the almost obvious connections which exist between a philosophical theory that explains men’s ignorance, criminality, etc., in terms of their conditions and the gospel of socialism which seeks to eliminate the social factors which make for inhumanity. But in Die deutsche Ideologie he raises two allied questions concerning the theoretical and practical adequacy of this socially enlightened materialism. They concern the possibility of justifying on the materialist view, judgments of value about conditions; and explaining how, if men are completely determined by their environment, they can change that environment. These problems are the subject of the next thesis. But it is clear that in the practical judgments Marx made as a revolutionist, e.g., if certain actions were performed, certain desirable consequences would follow, we have a conspicuous illustration of a type of judgment whose truth could never be established by the idealistic or traditional materialistic theories.
When Marx says that any dispute about the truth or falsity of a judgment which is isolated from Praxis is a scholastic question, he is saying that such questions cannot be answered in principle, that in short, they are no genuine questions at all. The truth of any theory depends upon whether or not the actual consequences which flow from the Praxis initiated to test the theory are such that they realize the predicted consequences. In other words, for Marx all genuine questions are scientifically determinable even though for a variety of reasons we may never know the answer to some of them. Since all judgments are hypotheses, the expectations which enter into the process of discovering the truth about them are not the personal and private expectations of the individual thinker but the public and verifiable expectations which logically flow from the hypotheses entertained. What a man wants to believe is relevant only to what he believes but not to its truth. There is no will to believe in Marx but a will to action in order to test belief and get additional grounds for further action if necessary. What takes place as a result of practise is not a relevant consequence of the theory unless the conditions involved in the meaning of the theory are met. The defeat of the Paris Commune is not a refutation of Marx’s theory of the way political power is to be conquered because the objective conditions presupposed by that theory were absent when the political Praxis occurred.
The continual admonitions of Marx and Engels – and of Lenin and Trotsky, too – that their theories were not to be taken as dogmas – admonitions more honored in the breach than in the observance by most of their reputed followers – warn against accepting beliefs as if they were fixed truths, truths which must be realized independently of the results of Praxis. What must be, come what may, expresses a resolution of the pious believer, not a scientific prediction which depends upon many factors including what the predicter himself does.
Marx did not live to develop the implications of his scientific theory of truth. That is not a ground for denying that he held it. Not only do his glosses on Feuerbach and other writings [5] declare its principal features, but his cardinal doctrines of the class struggle and historical materialism demand it. Part of the reason why Marx did not state it in more precise and detailed form is to be found in his belief that a theory of truth, like any method, is to be judged by the concrete applications made of it. And when it is recalled that Marx wrote not to achieve absolute theoretical clarity but to guide the action of the working class, and that in the light of contemporary standards of analytic rigor almost every field of 19th century thought, including many technical disciplines, fall short of verbal accuracy, only an unhistorical literary prudery will demand that he be judged by our own standards of expression and not by the intent, spirit and fundamental sense of his doctrines.
 
Thesis III:
“The materialistic doctrine that men are the products of circumstances and education, and that changed men are therefore the products of other circumstances and a changed education, forgets that circumstances are changed by men, and that the educator must himself be educated. Consequently materialism necessarily leads to a division of society into two parts, of which one is elevated above society (e.g., in Robert Owen).
“The coincidence of the transformation of circumstances and of human activity can only be conceived and rationally understood as revolutionizing practise (Praxis).”
This gloss is directed against some contemporary forms of Utopian socialism which despite their materialistic approach to natural phenomena relapsed into idealism in their social and historical theory. The Utopian varieties which were not materialistic in their natural theory, i.e., which were consistently idealistic, are not under discussion. Marx raises the question about Utopian socialism here because he considers Feuerbach to belong to this school. In Die deutsche Ideologie he specifically says of Feuerbach that “in so far as he is a materialist, history does not exist for him, and in so far as he treats of history, he is no materialist” (loc. cit., p.34). In addition, it was crucial for Marx to differentiate clearly between his own realistic theories of social struggle and those of an influential group which professed to have the same ideal goals in view.
Every simple theory of the causal dependence of mind upon matter encounters difficulties just as soon as it hitches that theory to some program of reform or revolution. For a program presupposes a plan which is not yet realized and suggests methods of changing the social world, based upon the causal dependencies established by science, which have not yet been adopted. If every idea or program is a reflection of the existing world, and is only that, how can human action be intelligently guided by some ideal which is yet to be, which outruns existence and lights up a possible path for its future development? After history has run its course, by looking away from the multitude of occasions on which the consequences of human activity have had a redirecting influence on the stream of events, it is easy to argue that human ideals were nothing but passive, mirror-like reflections of antecedent realities – even though analysis discloses such a mode of speech to be metaphysical nonsense. But when human beings are faced by real alternatives of action – i.e., alternatives both of which cannot be realized although both may be attempted, it is impossible to hold that human ideals are “images”. At those moments they are so obviously plans of action!
The Utopian socialists could explain how the state of affairs which they deplored came about. They could also explain why such a state of affairs did not appear deprecative to others. But they could not explain in the slightest their own ideals of social reform. They appeared to themselves as if they were outside of the social process – as if they were historical mutants whose fertilizing ideas would revolutionize the existing order. Other people’s philosophy was determined by circumstances and education but not their own philosophy. And in fact how could it be on their simple materialistic assumptions since their circumstances and conditions were quite similar to those who disagreed with them? That is why Marx properly points out that this mixture of socialism and materialism leads to a belief in a division of society into two parts – one of common-run people whose ideas are simply determined by circumstances and education, the other of choice Utopian spirits who are elevated above society and social laws, the rare gifts of the gods to an errant humanity. The cult of leadership among the Utopian groups, their assumption that they could appeal to any social class, from paupers to princes, for support of their ideals, their belief in a cure-all for every evil including natural stupidity – all flowed from the view that the keys to salvation were in the possession of a handful of right-thinking men – call them saints or scientists or philosophers or social engineers, as you please.
Since it followed from their own doctrines that there was nothing which determined their social ideals, it seemed plausible to the materialistic Utopians that there was no reason why these ideals could not have been embodied in practise at any time, except for chance or ignorance. Some of the Utopians of the 18th century actually defended this view and sketched accounts of what the history would have been if their ideas had prevailed at an earlier time. But most of them, refusing to surrender the rigorous determinism involved in their physical materialism, transferred the determinism to an ideal or conceptual plane. In Hegelian fashion, none the less vicious for being unconscious, they explained the succession of historical ideals as moments in an unending development of Mind. The life history of ideals became the life history of society. In Die deutsche Ideologie Marx calls attention to the process by which men like Stirner, for whom Feuerbach was not materialistic enough, ended up by embracing the philosophy of history of absolute idealism. The process, as described by Marx, consists of three steps:

Dominant historical ideals are cut loose from the complex of social conditions and needs of the dominant classes. “Therewith the domination of these ideals or illusions in history is proclaimed.”
Since certain ideals are connected with others both organically and temporally an order of development is introduced of which the different ideals are successive phases.
To avoid the appearance of mysticism suggested by the notion of an immanent development of ideals, certain individuals are regarded as the carriers of these ideals. These are “the thinkers, ideologists and philosophers” who are conceived as “the makers of history”. “Therewith all materialistic elements have been eliminated from history and one can give free reign to his speculative fancy.” (Ibid., p. 39.)

We have already seen how Marx conceived of the interacting processes between nature, society and man. The development of the forces of production gives rise to new needs. In the struggle to achieve these needs, ideals and principles are forged to guide activity looking towards a transformation of society. These ideals “express” the needs of the groups or classes who rally around them as standards, “express” them in the sense that they are outgrowths not reflections of material conditions of need. The struggle to achieve institutional change produces changes in those who participate in the strugles. The Praxis of trying to bring about a new social order, not abstract doctrine, educates the workers. No messiah can assure them of anything save that which they can win for themselves. Marx’s great insights that human beings cannot change the world without changing themselves, and that the actual social struggles, under certain conditions, is, the best school for acquiring an education in social realities are not isolated thoughts but organically connected with his materialistic theory of history – a theory which in his Die deutsche Ideologie he develops in greater detail than he does in any other writing. In a chapter of the section on Feurbach, entitled by Marx himself, Concerning the Production of Consciousness, he writes of his theory of history:
“This philosophy of history rests upon the development of the real process of production, taking in fact its point of departure from the material production of immediate life, tracing the forms of social intercourse bound up and produced by this mode of production and conceiving civic society in its various stages as the foundation of the whole of history. It also describes civic society in its actions as state power and explains the origins and developing processes of the whole of its various theoretical creations and forms of consciousness, religion, philosophy, morality, etc. In this way it presents the situation in its totality (and therefore the reciprocal interactions between the various factors upon each other). In any given period this philosophy of history as distinct from the idealist conception does not seek for some category but remains continually upon real historical ground explaining not practice out of ideas but the formation of ideas out of material practice. In this way it reaches the conclusion that all existing forms and products of consciousness can be resolved not through mental criticism, or by being dissolved into ‘self-consciousness’ or transformed into ‘apparitions’, ‘ghosts’, etc., but only through the practical overthrow of the real social relations out of which these idealistic fantasies have developed. It is not criticism but revolution which is the driving force of history – as well as of religion, philosophy and every other theory. This philosophy of history shows that history does not find its end by disappearing into ‘self-consciousness’ or becoming ‘spirit of our spirit’ but that at every stage it is confronted by a material result, a sum of productive forces, an historically created relation to nature and of individuals to each other, which every generation inherits from its predecessors. This mass of productive forces of forms of capital and of circumstances, on the one hand, is modified by the new generation, and on the other hand, prescribes to the new generation its own conditions of life, accounting for its special character and determinate development – showing that circumstances make men as much as men make circumstances. This sum of productive forces, capitals and forms of social intercourse which every individual and every generation finds as something given, is the real source of what philosophers have represented as “substance” and’ “the essence of man”, the real source of what they have hypostasized or struggled against, and whose effects and influences upon the development of men have not in the least been affected by the revolt of the philosophers of “self-consciousness” and “the ego” against it. These given conditions of life of the different generations also decide whether or not the periodically recurring revolutionary upheavals of history are strong enough to overthrow the basis of the existing order. Where these material elements of a total revolution, i.e., on the one hand, the existing productive forces, and on the other, the creation of a revolutionary mass rebelling not merely against individual conditions of existing society but against the whole ‘production of life’ itself, the ‘total activity’, upon which society is based – where these are not present, then it is immaterial for practical development, as the history of communism proves, whether or not the idea of this revolution be proclaimed a hundred times over.” (Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 5, pp. 27–28.)
  
Thesis IV:
“Feuerbach takes his point of departure from the fact of religious self-alienation, from the splitting up of the world into a religious, imaginary world and a real one. His achievement consists in dissolving the religious world and revealing its secular foundations. He overlooks the fact, however, that after completing this work the chief thing stills remains to be accomplished. The fact that the secular foundation lifts itself above itself and fixates itself as an independent empire beyond the clouds can only be truly explained in terms of the internal division and contradictions of this secular foundation. The latter must first be understood in its contradictions and then through the elimination of the contradictions practically revolutionized. For example, once the earthly family is discovered to be the secret of the holy family it must be theoretically criticized and practically transformed.”
This thesis together with VI and VII contains the main points of Marx’s criticism of Feuerbach’s psychology of religion. Feuerbach had found the essence of religion to be rooted in the human feelings of dependence upon the external forces of the natural and social world, and the chief agencies in the compensatory expression of emotional frustration to be ritual mythology and theology.
Grant, says Marx, that wherever religion is present, it has the characteristic features Feuerbach selects for emphasis. But as an explanation of religious thought and behavior Feuerbach’s theory is inadequate because it is too abstract. It leaves totally unexplained the historical diversity in religous phenomena and contents itself with a mechanical table of needs which different kinds of religion fulfill. For example, if in any religion there prevails a belief in a God who created the world out of nothing, this expresses, according to Feuerbach, the irrational needs of man’s nature. “He deifies nothing but his own irrationality.” (Wesen des Christenthums, Eng. trans, p. 83.) If, on the other hand, we find in any religion a belief in the eternity of the world, then the rational needs of man’s nature are asserting themselves. But Feuerbach never descended from these vague generalities to explain why one, rather than the other of these beliefs, was accepted at any given time. Nor did he ask whether these needs are always invariant in man – and if not, what determines their appearance and disappearance. Supposing further that we grant a fixed need for, or tendency towards irrational expression. Off-hand one can think of a thousand different irrational beliefs, aside from a belief in the creation of the world out of nothing, which could satisfy all the conditions of man’s irrational nature. Why, then, this particular kind of irrational belief and not others?
It is here that Marx’s own psychology of religion comes into view. Religion is not born of a natural, tragic split within the human breast. The real forces impelling men to find satisfaction in some dreamy empire where they enjoy the uncontested power denied them in this life, are not merely phychological but social. The source of religion is to be sought in the antagonisms between the way men actually produce and the traditional, social, legal and moral forms under which that production is carried on – or between the new needs generated in the course of their social Praxis and the old needs which give rise to and yet are in opposition to the new needs. From these antagonisms results the fragmentization of experience, the absence of unified control of the collective lot, the worship of the abstractions which express the needs of yesterday, the contrast between an everyday self and an ideal holiday self – all of which constitutes the cultus and theology of religion. Religion, according to Marx, is to be construed from the real condition of man’s empirical life and not from his essence. And if these conditions are such that they generate certain kinds of emotional conflicts and theoretical illusions, then these illusions and conflicts must be removed by removing that which gives rise to them.
Here again it must be pointed out that Marx is making predictions and not establishing anything by definition. It remains to be seen whether the emotional conflicts and theoretical illusions associated with religion will disappear with the transformation of the economic order which, according to Marx’s hypothesis, is responsible only for the ways in which these conflicts and illusions are expressed but for their very existence.
The same is true as far as the existence of the state in a classless society is concerned. Only a religious attitude and not a scientific philosophy can assure us that the state is destined to “whither away”. So it may, in name! But the real question is whether any new social conflicts will arise, necessitating the existence of separate bodies of armed men standing over against the community as a whole to enforce special interests. This cannot be settled by definition.
If Feuerbach claimed to have discovered the secret of theology in anthropology, Marx sought to transform anthropology into realistic sociology. Feuerbach had shown the religious world to be illusory; Marx asks however: “How does it come about that these illusions arise?” (Abt. I, Bd. 5, p. 215.) Neither Marx nor any of his orthodox followers have worked out detailed analyses of the great religions of the past from the standpoint of historical materialism. Some interesting attempts to uncover the social contradictions at the basis of religious constructions have been made by men like E. Bernstein, Max Weber, E. Troelsch and R.H. Tawney, but not strictly along Marxian lines. In this field as in so many others, a casual phrase of Marx’s, penned in 1843 when he was till a Feuerbachian, has been substituted for his considered philosophy. Marx’s sentence, “Religion is the opium of the people” has itself acted like opium upon the minds of his followers who have repeated it as if it constituted all that can be said on the subject. If religion were the opium of the people, the necessary precondition of all criticism would be the awakening of the people from their drugged slumbers. This is precisely the position which Marx criticized when he argued against B. Bauer, Stirner, Feuerbach and others that the political and social movement of the working class must not be explicitly or programmatically anti-religious. Such a movement, according to Marx must in the first instance be directed against the milieu whose social antagonisms are eased through the cultural opium dispensed by those classes which control the means of production, education and communication.
 
Thesis V.:
“Feuerbach, not satisfied with abstract thinking, appeals to sensory thinking [Anschauung]; but he does not conceive sensibility as practical, human-sensory, activity.”
This links up with the point made in Thesis I. That Marx regards it as important is indicated by the fact that he returns to it in several different ways in Die deutsche Ideologie, where Feuerbach is criticized for not grasping the sense object (sinnliche Gegenstand) as a sensory activity (sinnliche Tätigkeit). Here again, Marx’s historical sense asserts itself against formalism in a twofold way. To the idealistic identification of reality with thought, Feuerbach had countered with the identification of reality with sensibility or sensation. Feuerbach’s description of the nature of sensation was no more empirical than the idealistic description of the nature of thought. The latter overlooked the historical materials which were the prior condition of effective thinking, the former overlooked the elements of selective activity determining the concrete character of sensation. For Marx sensations were not merely experienced effects of things acting upon the body, they were effects of an interaction between an active body and the things surrrounding it. The sensations which appear to be passively experienced to a large degree depend for their frequency, their specific context, and even their relative intensity upon where the body looks and listens – in short upon where the body attends as well as upon what it attends. In fact this is the differential characteristic between living and non-living things, preeminently present in man because of his more highly developed nervous system and intelligence.
In Die deutsche Ideologie Marx goes even further and shows that sensation has not only a biologically selective dimension but a social dimension. Given the “same” environment, defined as the co-presence of a number of different things or actions in a fixed physical area, it is well known that subjects drawn from different cultures will “see” different things and interpret them differently. Tradition, education, language, and all the other aspects of culture intertwined with the basic mode of production influence what seem to be purely biological reactions. This in fact differentiates the biological reactions of man from those of other living beings. Man’s hunger, for example, is a natural phenomenon but the ways in which he gratifies his hunger and the character of what he regards as food are social facts. Through social organization man is continually modifying his primary natural environment, reducing its role to that of a pure limiting condition. Through social organization, particularly industry, Marx asserts, the given can sometimes be explained as well as the ways in which the given is taken. If you want certainty, Feuerbach had preached in one of the phases of his philosophy, open your eyes and grasp the given as an immediate, natural datum, e.g., that cherry tree over there. What met one’s eyes, Marx retorted, was likely to be not a god-given eternal fact of nature but a socially mediated object.
“He [Feuerbach] does not see that the sensory world which surrounds him is not something immediately given from eternity, something always the same, but the product of industry and the social situation, in the sense that it is an historical product, the result of the activity of a whole series of generations, each one standing on the shoulders of those preceding it, developing previous industry and forms of social intercourse, and changing their social order in accordance with changed needs. Even the objects of the simplest ‘sensory certainty’ are given through social development, industry and commercial relations. The cherry tree like almost all fruit trees was transplanted to our zone, as is well known, through commerce; it was only by virtue of this action of a determinate society at a determinate time that it was gives to ‘the sensory certainty’ of Feuerbach.” (Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 5, p. 33.)
Marx adds immediately that this historical approach converts every “profound” philosophical question into a simple question of empirical fact. The question of the possibility of this or that piece of knowledge, of the reliability of our perceptions, of things as they are and as they appear to be are all to be answered in terms of biology, psychology or history. A valid implication of Marx’s position would be that psychology is either the study of animal behavior or social behavior. In so far as human reactions are isolated from a social context and correlated with various external stimuli we are analyzing animal behavior – we are in the realm of physiological psychology.
 
Thesis VI.:
“Feuerbach resolves the religious essence into the human. But the essence of man is not an abstraction residing in each single individual. In its reality it is the whole of social relationships.
“Feuerbach, who does not enter upon the criticism of this real essence, is consequently compelled:

“1) to abstract from the historical process and to fixate the religious feeling as something self-contained, and to presuppose an abstract – isolated – human individual.
“2) to conceive the essence of man only as ‘the species’, as an inner, inarticulate, natural tie, binding many individuals together.”
  

Thesis VII.:
“Feuerbach does not therefore see that the ‘religious feeling’ is itself a social product, and that the abstract individual whom he analyzes belongs in reality to a specific form of society.”
The above glosses develop the argument made in Thesis IV. They deny that religion and the religious experience are primary natural facts about man. Until recently this was the assumption made by most armchair theorists of the origin of religion. Religion for one is an expression of a direct natural fear, socially unmediated, of unseen powers and uncontrollable forces. For others, it can attempt to placate spiritual beings whose presence is suggested by phenomena of dreams and psychic illusion. For Schleiemacher, it is the feeling of absolute dependence upon the cosmic ineffable whole.
For Feuerbach it is the projection of an experienced need. All of these theories imply that man is a religious creature in the same sense as he is a food, clothing and shelter-seeking creature. They all assert that at the very least a common denominator can be found in all religious theory and practice which expresses its essential characteristic, and which remains invariant throughout its varying historic forms. Now for the purposes of identification, Marx would never dream of denying that religious behavior must exhibit certain properties enabling investigation to differentiate it from other forms of behavior. But he does not look for these properties in the characters of individual religious belief or action. Believing that religion arises as a set of doctrines and practises whenever society has reached a certain stage in the division of labor, he tries to locate its specific character in the social functions which it fulfills. The defining trait of religion, as developed by Feuerbach and other philosophers of religion, was a generalization of one historical expression of “religious feeling”. It was true that many contemporaries of Feuerbach would recognize his psychological analysis as an accurate account of their religious experience. But from Marx’s point of view, a more adequate explanation of their religious experience would be found by analyzing the concrete social situation out of which this religious experience developed. It could hardly be claimed that the religious experience of a 19th century citizen of France or Germany was the same as the religious experience of a Greek or Roman citizen. So great is the pervasive character of the totality of social relations which give “the tone” to a culture, that Marx felt justified in claiming that there is a greater difference! between ancient religion and ancient politics, art, or any other phase of ancient culture.
Strictly speaking, for Marx there is no history of religion as such but only a history of the cutures of which religions are fragmentary aspects. To erect a definition of religion on the basis of one of its historic expressions, is to assume that there is a religious sentiment as such with which man is naturally endowed and which can be studied in its pure form once its accidental social and historical expressions are sloughed off.
The VIth thesis restates in a few terse sentences the criticism which Marx passed upon Stirner. The “individual”, whose psyche Feuerbach probed so deeply, is a rather late and complex product of society. No social phenomena, therefore, can be explained in terms of any of the traits imputed to individuals as creatures of nature. Feuerbach realized the impossibility of ever deriving consciousness of the existence of oneself from individual behavior. There is no Ich which is not the necessary complement of Du. But the social bond between the self and others was conceived on the plane of grammar and common emotion – both of which, according to Marx, already presupposed a common social world of production. Where Feuerbach strives to make the social bond between men concrete, he falls back upon the biological facts of interdependence and reproduction. For Marx the social bond between human beings – a bond which makes their differences as well as their agreements intelligible – is the totality of social relations. If one must speak of the “essence of man”, one must find it in man’s civilization – material and ideal – and not in biology.
 
Thesis VIII.:
“Social life is essentially practical. All mysteries which mislead theory into mysticism find their rational solution in human practise and in the understanding of this practise.”
Here we have a heuristic principle of the first importance. It guided Marx in all of his own work. It served as the acid test of the meaning of the theories he opposed. It denies both the existence of insoluble problems and of mystical solution to problems.
The disparity between what human beings do and the explanations they offer to themselves and others of what they do, is a striking phenomenon in all social life. Even the history of science appears, from one point of view, to be a continuous effort to substitute more exact descriptions of what man sees and does, for less exact descriptions. Several reasons may be offered for this lag in our understanding. First of all, the body acts in some decisive way long before thought can strike a trial-balance of all factors involved. Secondly, “new” discoveries are made and “new” techniques developed while the “old” principles still exercise their sway. And since for anything to be intelligible, it must at least impart a sense of “the familiar”, the traditional principles are retained for explanatory purposes, at the cost of slighting the distinctively novel features of experience. In due course, the novel becomes familiar and principles are reformulated, but by that time the situation demands still further clarification and refinement of expression. Thirdly, the social context of theories and practises is lost sight of, and ideas are treated as if they were independent entities, irrelevant to the needs and interests of their proponents. The problems of why ideas and theories arise when they do, why they prevail, and why they develop a life so different from that planned for them by their authors – become mysteries or, more accurately, give rise to mystical solutions.
Marx was primarily interested in the effect which the neglect of social context had upon obscuring the relation between theory and practise. This social context was understood in its broadest terms and included not only the immediate social needs which influenced the direction and development of scientific research but the social habits of thought and action involved in communication. According to Marx, the basic criteria of intelligibility presupposed a common activity in a common world. Somewhere along the line in every theory, a determinate form of behavior exemplified its meaning. The alleged independence of the socalled non-existential sciences is due to a failure to relate their fundamental concepts to the concrete situations and concrete activities out of which they grow and to which they must in some form or another be applied. Were Marx alive today he would trace the flights to mysticism induced by recent work in modern physics to the fundamental methodological error of directly comparing the refined hypothetical results of theory with the crude data of evperience. In the light of his genial insight, he would urge scientists to examine their conclusions in terms of the operations and practises necessary to achieve them, and to set forth the meaning of their theories as prescriptive guides to specific action.
 
IX.
“The highest point which can be reached by contemplative materialism, i.e., materialism which cannot grasp the fact that sensibility is a practical activity, is the point of view of single individuals in ‘civic society’.”
 
X.
“The standpoint of the old materialism is ‘civic society’; the standpoint of the new materialism is human society or socialized humanity.”
The key to the meaning of these theses lies in the phrase “civic society” (bürgerliche Gesellschaft), the title of the second section of the third part of Hegel’s Rechtsphilosophie. The mistranslation of the phrase as “bourgeois” or “capitalist” society by some “Marxists” makes nonsense of the passage, for materialism is older than capitalism and is not always the official philosophy of bourgeois society. Some who have recognized the reference to Hegel have assumed that Hegel is being charged with a kind of contemplative materialism, forgetting that the culmination of the Hegelian social philosophy is the doctrine of the State in which the abstract rights, the individualism, the conflicts and compromises of sovereignty between different social groups, all flowing from the nature of civic society, are transcended. It is the Hegelian philosophy and not contemplative materialism which represents for Marx the highest philosophical expression of capitalism. It is significant that the last ideological defence of developed capitalism is everywhere a variation of Hegel’s social and political philosophy, particulary his theory of die Korporation which serves as the transition in the Rechtsphilosophie to the nature of the state.
It is clear then that the meaning of Marx in these theses does not lie on the surface. We must ask what Hegel meant by “civic society”, why Marx associates the theory and practise of civic society with contemplative materialism and why the new materialism is declared to be the philosophy of a truly human society.
Civic society in Hegel is the complex of organized social ties which knot individuals together by the cords of self-interest. The individual in such a society is himself a system (Ganzes) of needs or wants, some of which are an expression of natural necessity, some a result of arbitrary choice. He regards himself, or the fulfillment of his needs, as his sole end, and all other individuals as necessary means to his self-expression. His social and political philosophy is individualism, which assumes that everyone else is by nature self-seeking and free. Whatever social and governmental constraints exist are external to the minds and feelings of those who abide by them. They are compromises which are made necessary by the conflict of activities in the collective pursuit of individual gratifications.
According to Marx traditional materialism could only conceive of human consciousness as a passive form of sensation. Sensation was a property of human bodies which arose whenever they were subjected to the impacts of other things and bodies. Mind together with all intellectual processes, like memory and generalization, is sensation modified and organized in such a way as to increase or diminish the basic feelings of pleasure and pain. The natural tendency of all bodies despite their oral behavior is to preserve themselves, and more concretely, to pursue their own self-interest. This was supposed to be a deduction justified, according to some materialists, by the laws of mechanics. The gratification of self-interest is the source of all duty to one’s self and to one’s fellow-man.
The completest expression of the materialistic “self-interest” theory of human activity in the eyes of Marx was the philosophy of Bentham. In Die deutsche Ideologie Bentham’s views are submitted to close analysis and the basic assumptions of utilitarianism are rejected. “Interest” as conceived by Bentham – “whose nose”, says Marx, “must first have an interest before it makes up its mind to smell” (Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I., Bd. 5, p. 192) – is declared to be a needless third term introduced between human beings and the manner in which they live their life. The reason, however, why all natural impulses are first related to some imaginary interest is that a peculiar set of social relationships has made it impossible to gratify natural desires directly or to lose oneself into activities for their own sake. The existence of a social and economic order in which production is dependent upon a market, upon “free” laborers, upon the expectation of profit, affects every human relationship within it. Everything is vain in such a culture except the “useful”. But to have utility means to be exploitable. The rule of “live and let live” makes way for the maxim “exploit or be exploited.” The objective expression of this utility is money in which is represented the value of all things, human beings and social relations. (Ibid., p. 388.)
Marx admits the progressive role which the theory of utilitarianism played in helping to clear the ground of feudal anachronisms. In stressing the importance of the mutual exploitation of one another through competitive effort, a common attack was made by the bourgeoisie on the institutional exploitations of feudalism – political, patriarchal and religious – which prevented free scope for the development of commercial and competitive talents. At no time however did the utilitarians apply their criteria of moral validity to the institutions of capitalism and their consequences. Criticism was directed only against those vestiges of an earlier social period which restricted the field of “personal exploitation”. Whereas in France the theory of utilitarianism assumed “a moral form” in England its content rapidly became more and more economic. The special forms which the division of labor took were justified as the expressions of and contributions to social utility. Variations in market exchanges resulting from competition were equated to each other by the use of a least common denominator of relative utilities whose values established themselves only post hoc, i. e., after the exchanges were made. The result was, said Marx, that
“its economic content gradually transformed the theory of utility into a pure apologia of the existing order, into a proof that under given conditions the present relations of human beings to each other represent the best and most useful relations possible. All subsequent modern economic theory carries the same character” (Ibid., Abt. I, Bd. 5, p. 392).
The standpoint of the old materialism is the standpoint of civic society because it is “atomic”. It assumes that each individual organism is a god-given independent whole with private pains, pleasures and interests. Existing social arrangements are explained as contractual obligations to which each individual commits himself out of his own interest. The standpoint of the new materialism is the standpoint of the human society because in emphasizing the historical and cultural determinants of private experience it claims that what any man is must be explained, so to speak, in terms of what all men are. But what all men are must be inferred from what they do, from the institutional conditions under which they do it, and the historical forces which have moulded and are reshaping these conditions. This is another way of establishing the truth that the nature of man is therefore not a biological fact but a social one. The organizing relations and traditions of society are not something put on and off by individuals; they enter deeply into what appears at first glance as immediate reactions of the single organism. The theorists of an atomistic, civic society were aware that the consequences of the private pursuit of private interest rarely squared with the expectations of pain and pleasure entertained by the overwhelming mass of citizens. They either explained the discrepancy as the result in each case of false calculation or they sought refuge in a mystical conception of a pre-established harmony operating in invisible ways to bring about an undefined social welfare. Marx’s conception of man pointed to the necessity of a direct collective control of all social institutions which influenced man. Such a control presupposes a theory of social interest which in a human society must give meaning and content to private interest. “Socialized humanity” on Marx’s view does not destroy individuality; it modifies its form, enriches its content and makes it a value accessible to all. In a similar way, Marx expected all values whose expressions are frustrated by class interests in a class society to take on new forms and content.
 
XI.
“Philosophers have only interpreted the world differently: the point is, however, to change it.”
This oft-quoted remark evidently continues a line of criticism begun in Die deutsche Ideologie. Marx had pointed out that the Young Hegelians despite their “world-shattering phrases” were doing nothing more than rebaptizing the world as they found it with a new set of distinctions. Feuerbach, too, was not chary of using radical phraseology. But since he, like the others, sought the key to social change in the alteration of a personal attitude, in a generalization of the feeling of love already implicit in much of common-day behavior, Marx refused to take him at his revolutionary word. For all his talk about man, humanity and communism, Feuerbach never investigated what the social conditions of men were, to what extent the qualities of humanity which he regarded as “essential to the species” were historical, and what program of action his communism laid upon him. In Feuerbach’s eyes, as we have already seen, the concrete differences between a group of healthy men and a mass of “scrofulous, overworked men fainting with hunger” are less important than the common characteristics which they share as members of an ideally defined human species. Since his abstract materialism does not come to grips with the specific causes which produce differentiations in the human species, Marx argues that Feuerbach cannot do justice to the historical elements in culture. The latter are precisely the factors which must serve as points of leverage in social change. Where Feuerbach does pay fleeting attention to historical situations, particularly in religion, he tries to find the key to them in presumably invariant patterns of human feeling and behavior.
In reading Feuerbach one cannot help sensing the illusionism which pervades his writings. He writes as if the demonstration of a truth were itself a proof that the truth would prevail, as if to have exposed an error were tantamount to passing a sentence of doom upon it. Stressing feeling as he does, he nevetheless pays little attention to the social sources of feeling. Despite his criticism of the superficial rationalism which explains all conduct in terms of consciously entertained ideas, he himself relapses into that very position when he expects institutional changes to be effected by his analysis. At times he strikes a different note as when he reflects upon the outcome of the German revolution of 1848. But he always returns to his rationalistic faith. His pathetic trust that the future of atheism belongs to America where the absence of feudal traditions makes human beings more accessible to argument, is a case in point. His friend Kapp who had been in America and had some first-hand experience with American piety hastened to disillusion him but Feuerbach clung to his comforting belief to the end of his days. (Cf., L. Feuerbach, Briefwechsel und Nachlass, Bd. 2, p. 7.)
A more conspicuous illustration of Feuerbach’s illusionism is his characterization of himself as a communist. His grounds for such bold language, which later conributed to bringing down on him a visitation from the police and a thorough house-searching, were philological rather than political. In a review of Max Stirner’s book which makes merry over Feuerbach’s religion of humanity and the inconsistencies between his method and conclusions, Feuerbach attempts to fix the character of his philosophy in the following words:
“Feuerbach is neither materialist, idealist or a believer in the philosophy of identity. Well, then, what is he? He is in thought as in deed, in spirit as in flesh, in essence as in feeling – man; or rather, since for him the essence of man is given only in society, communal man, communist”. (S.W. I, Bd. I, 342)
Marx seized upon this passage as epitomizing the confusion and limitation of Feuerbach’s thought. A term whose meaning in use refers to allegiance to a specific political organization is converted into a purely abstract category. The abstract category expresses in an abstract way the commonplace that human beings find each other necessary to one another’s existence. Nothing is said about the specific forms this necessary relation to each other can take and the relative justification, at definite historical periods, of one form rather than others. Finally, the whole purport of Feuerbach’s description is to bring to consciousness an existing fact, whereas “the real communist aims at the revolutionizing of the existing order” (Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 5, p. 31). The point of Marx’s impatience with Feuerbach’s failure to concretize his descriptions and to distinguish between the historical and natural elements in his analysis becomes clearer. If the existing facts about the relations of men to each other are natural, or in Feuerbach’s language, are essential to the nature of man, then it is nonsense to talk about revolutionizing them.
Marx admits that Feuerbach has gone as far as a pure theoretician or philosopher, in the traditional sense, can go without ceasing to be a theoretician or philosopher. For practice, on every conception of philosophy except Marx’s own, is a foreign element in philosophy. It involves decision, conflict, an element of partisanship in behalf of one among a number of possible alternatives. The kind of philosophy Marx called for and which his own activity illustrated, involved not merely risking an idea but risking one’s whole person in carrying it out. Without an attempt at carrying out ideas, philosophy becomes a mere playing with possibilities unrelated to the quest for truth and the furtherance of the good life which have always been its professed objectives. In a dim way Feuerbach, too, had realized this. But his false conception of the nature of practice led him to confine the philosophical activity to thinking about ideas. Confronting the simple, and even on his own view, the artificial dichotomy between passionless thought and thoughtless passion or activity, he identifies philosophy with passionless thought, i.e., thought unrelated to practise. His whole way of phrasing the alternative reveals not only patent inconsistencies with his other doctrines but a failure of nerve in realizing his own call for the reconstruction of philosophy. He writes of the relation between reason and passion in history as follows:
“Reason writes history but passion makes it. Everything new therefore is an injustice against the old ... One can think without doing an injustice to anyone, without inflicting pain upon any one, for thoughts do not go further than one’s own head. But one cannot act without setting one’s whole body into motion, without running up against obstacles on all sides, without wounding even against one’s will.” (S.W. I, Bd. 2, p. 408)
Marx rejects the disjunction as being neither exhaustive nor exclusive. It is true that there is no action without a violation of some right or interest. It is not true that such action need be blind, uninformed by theory or reason. It is true that one can think without acting directly but it is not true that no injustice is thereby done. For existing injustices are tolerated and remain unaltered. Philosophical activity may be conceived as action in behalf of values and interests which have been criticized by knowledge and reason. The very fact that philosophy is an activity in a world of space, time and incompatible interests, makes it clear that its goals cannot be absolute truth or absolute justice. But the fact that action is thoughtful makes it possible to achieve beliefs which are truer; the fact that thought leads to action makes it possible to achieve a world which is more just.
This, I believe, is the sense of Marx’s final thesis on Feuerbach.
 

 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (IX: The Marxian Dialectic)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Part II: The Philosophy of Karl Marx
Marxismus ist ein revolutionäre Weltanschauung, die stets nach neuen Erkenntnissen ringen muss, die nichts so verabscheut wie das Erstarren in einmal gültigen Formen, die am besten in geistigen Waffengeklirr der Selbstkritik und im geschichtlichen Blitz und Donner ihre lebendige Kraft bewährt. – Rosa Luxemburg [1]
‘Our theory is not a dogma but a manual of action’, said Marx and Engels. – Lenin [2]
 
Chapter IX: The Marxian Dialectic
A witty Frenchman once said that Marxism like Christianity has its bible, its councils, its schisms, its orthodoxies and heresies, its exegesis sacred and profane. And like Christianity it has its mysteries of which the principal one is the dialectic. This is not an infrequent judgement. There has hardly been a critic of Marx who has not regarded the dialectical principle as either a piece of religious mysticism or of deliberate mystification. In the writings of Marxists it appears more often as a magic symbol than as a clearly defined concept.
Yet the apparently mysterious character of the Marxian dialectic is due to nothing more than the Hegelian terminology with which Marx, out of piety to Hegel’s memory, invested it, and to the refusal of Marx’s critics to translate its meaning from the technical idiom of philosophy into the ever fresh experience of change, growth and novelty. Thus it becomes clear that although there is a significant continuity between the thought of Hegel and Marx there are profound differences.
I: The Scope of Dialectic: Hegel was a man of vision who belied his own insights in order to assure the Prussian monarchy that its existence was part of the divine plan and, indeed, its final expression. Since the reasons he adduced were the most transparent rationalisations, both his system and his methods fell into disrepute. Attempting to prove that all of existence was rational, therefore, necessary, and, therefore, good, he failed to make the existence of any particular thing intelligible. There was not much difference between his ruthless optimism which assured the rising German bourgeoisie that this was the best of all possible worlds and the sentimental pessimism of his arch-enemy, Schopenhauer, who held it was the worst. For neither system admitted that the world could significantly change one way or the other. For Hegel, change was merely appearance, for Schopenhauer, illusion.
Marx was an empiricist. If change was not real, nothing was real. Even if permanence and invariance were characters of existence, they could only be recognised in change and difference. The dialectic method of Marx is a way of dealing with what is both constant and variable in every situation. It is the logic of movement, power, growth and action.
The dialectic method is not opposed to scientific method but only to pseudo-scientific philosophies which overlook the specific context and tentative character of the results won in physical or biological investigation and seek to apply their findings to other realms without making the proper qualifications. It is not science but mistaken philosophies of science which use the ‘principle of the conservation of energy’ or the doctrine of ‘the struggle for existence’ to construct systems of social physics or social biology. The dialectic method is wider than scientific method if the latter is narrowly conceived to assert ‘only that exists which can be measured’, for although it accepts the findings of science as an accurate report of the structure of the external world, it recognises that there are other realms of experience, such as the arts and practical affairs, in which qualities and activities are the fundamental organising concepts and not quantities. It distinguishes between types and levels of existence, investigates their interrelation, and synthesises them in their order of temporal and structural dependence. In physics, the dialectic approach begins with the end-products of scientific analysis – its equations and abstractions – and instead of declaring as the metaphysical materialists do, ‘these alone are real’, asks such questions as how these relational formulæ are derived from concrete problems of practice, and how the invisible, inaudible, intangible world of mathematical physics is related to the many-coloured world of familiar experience. In biology, it accepts the descriptions of the ways in which the structure of organs condition their present functions, but seeks for the evidence of past functions in present structure and attempts to discover how at any given time both the specific structure and the specific function of any organ are related to the functioning of the organism as a whole. Behind the facts and figures of social life, it sees the grim realities of the class struggle; in the struggle, possibilities of social development; in possibilities, plans of action. Marx used it to solve problems in political economy with which the unhistorical ‘classical school’ wrestled in vain; Lenin, to correct the one-sidedness of both Bukharin and Trotsky on the trade-union question.
The dialectic method is applicable to all levels of existence. On each level it reflects the novelties in the behaviour of its subject-matter. When it deals with the structure of the atom, it does not introduce, as idealists do, will or purpose or feeling (Whitehead); when it deals with the rise and fall of civilisations, it does not interpret the historical process in terms of biological stimulus-and-response, as is the fashion with the ‘vulgar’ behaviouristic materialists (Watson).
Wherever the dialectic method is applied, it presupposes not the attitude of contemplation but of action. Freed from its idealistic mésalliance, it is genuinely experimental. It seeks objective knowledge of natural and social fact from the standpoint of the doer not the spectator. Indeed, the very meaning of what it is to possess objective knowledge of any ongoing process, involves the prediction of a future outcome, to achieve which, human activity enters as a necessary element. That is why Marx claimed that only in practice (Praxis) can problems be solved. Any problem which cannot be solved by some actual or possible practice may be dismissed as no genuine problem at all. The types and varieties of practice are determined by the existential context in which problems arise.
II: Some Contrasting Conceptions of Dialectic: A few words are necessary to distinguish the Marxian dialectic from older meanings of the term. Ancient dialectic – the ‘eristic’ of the Sophists – as well as medieval dialectic, was not a method of demonstrating known truths or of discovering new truth. It was in the main a method of disputation whose primary aim was to trip up a speaker by showing that the implications of his statements were self-refuting. It seized upon ambiguities of terms, elliptical expressions, awkward grammatical constructions, to twist a meaning from words which was quite foreign to the intent of the one who uttered them. In this way dialectic was a method of proving anything, or more strictly, of disproving everything, since it showed that the speaker was contradicting himself and therefore talking nonsense. It was used in court room and public assembly and sometimes at philosophical exhibitions of low order. In common parlance this kind of dialectic is often used as a synonym for sophistry.
There was a more honourable sense of the term ‘dialectic’ in ancient thought, illustrated by the writings of Plato. Dialectic is the process of thinking by which the dramatic conflict of ideas, as they arise in dialogue or monologue, is resolved by definition, differentiation and re-definition until one ultimate, luminously self-evident insight is reached in which the original conflict of ideas is harmonised. For Plato, ideas are not mental events or physical things. They are meanings, essences, forms, and have no reference to existence. Dialectic, therefore, is the process by which the structure of logical systems is discovered.
In Hegel the dialectic method is not only a process by which logical ideas develop; it is a process by which all things in the world develop. For according to Hegel the very stuff of nature, society and the human mind is through and through logical. Plato’s world is a frozen pattern of mathematical logic; Hegel’s world is historical and organic. But in order to explain the rationale of historical development in physical nature and human culture, Hegel is compelled to endow his logical ideas or principles with efficient power. Just as in traditional theology thoughts in the mind of God created the world, so in Hegel’s system the whole furniture of heaven and earth is the result of the development or unfolding of logical ideas. Marx abandoned the Hegelian dialectic because its logical processes were just as mysterious as the creation of Genesis. Despite the grinding of his elaborate intellectual machinery one could get no more out of Hegel’s logic than was already in the world. The real task for the empirical philosopher, according to Marx, was not to show that the content of history was logical but that the content of logic was historical. This could be done only by taking logic in the widest possible sense so that it included all the processes by which knowledge was attained, and showing how the problems and purposes of knowledge were always set in some concrete historical context.
In contradistinction to Hegel, Marx’s dialectic method was applied primarily to human history and society. Here he succeeded in doing what Hegel had failed to do. Without denying the enormous complexity of the factors involved, he offered a guiding thread into the mazes of the social process. If followed, it leads not only to a fruitful exploration of the past but to a course of action which may free mankind from its major social evils. The detailed application of Marx’s dialectic method is to be found in his economic theories, the materialistic conception of history, and his philosophy of state and society. In this chapter the dialectic method will be expounded as it applies to the general questions of culture, and an attempt will be made to derive and state the formal characters of the method without forbidding terminology.
We may begin by contrasting Marx’s philosophy of culture with the most fashionable cultural theories of Spengler, who in one sense is the greatest right-wing disciple of Hegel, as Marx is the greatest among the left-wing disciples. According to Spengler each culture is an organic whole of institutions, habits, ideas and myths; it is marked off in the same unmistakable way from all other cultures as one individual is from another. Although each culture has its own life-cycle, the formula of all cultural cycles is the same. It is a movement, to use Spengler’s own terms, from culture to civilisation, from life to death. When a culture grows old and cold, thought replaces feeling, mechanics life, law individuality. Each culture runs its own course in independence of all others; there is no significant diffusion of its cultural pattern. It is the morphology of these cultural patterns which interests Spengler most. Just as it is the whole nervous system which sees through the eye, the whole body which moves the arm, so it is the whole pattern of a culture which underlies its art, its religion, its mathematics, even its kitchen pots and pans.
When we inquire, however, what determines the character type or pattern of a specific culture, why the categories of finitude, quality and natural order are central to Greek culture while contemporary Europe and America are so much concerned with process, quantity and experience, why the ‘world-feeling’ of medieval culture is so different from that of the Renaissance – Spengler, like Hegel, answers in terms of metaphysical abstractions. It is the soul or spirit of a people which expresses itself in its culture, and the spirit of a people in turn is an expression of spirit as a primary metaphysical reality. Indeed, Spengler even appeals to ‘the style of the soul’ to account for the fact that different peoples have produced different types of mathematics. Spirit, soul, style, destiny – all these are one. They are the ultimate determining force of whatever exists. They cannot be explained; but they explain everything else:
Style is not... the product of material, technique and function. It is the very opposite of this, something inaccessible to art-reason. It is a revelation of the metaphysical order, a mysterious must, a Destiny. [3]
Here we have a conception of culture which is not empirical but essentially mystical (as are all objective idealisms); which at best accounts for the organisation of a culture, not its development; which is fatalistic and denies to human beings genuine creative power; and which is distinguished for its cool disregard of the immense importance of cultural diffusion and social heredity in Western history.
The key weakness of Spengler’s architectonic construction is to be found in his use of the terms ‘spirit’ and ‘soul’ to explain differences in culture. If spirit determines an existing culture, what determines spirit? And if spirit is self-determined, why cannot the culture-complex be self-determined? If spirit is the source of such different institutions as slavery, feudalism and capitalism, how account for the fact that they appear when they do, and in the order they do? Every culture shows a conflict between different groups which develop their own ideologies. How can the spirit of the age or people or nation account for these different expressions? Why did the reformation succeed in Northern Europe and fail everywhere else? Why did the ‘spirit of freedom’ liberate Europeans from slavery and feudalism only to reimpose slavery upon the Negroes in America? It is clear that to invoke the soul of a culture as an explanation of a material culture is to invoke a mystery.
Marx’s philosophy of culture already contains the kernel of truth which Spengler wraps up in masses of pseudo-erudition. Like all students of Hegel, Marx realised that every culture is a structurally interrelated whole, and that any institutional activity, say religion or law, can be understood only in relation to a whole complex of other social activities. But in two respects he advances beyond his early master and those who have either followed or plagiarised him since. He does not claim that a culture is organic through and through and that one principle can explain all its existing aspects, from the latest frills in the culinary arts to the most recent development of theoretical physics. He admits the presence of relatively independent factors which do not all possess the same weight, although they all arise out of antecedent social processes and function in determinate ways in the existing social process. But more important, he seeks for the causes of cultural change within the social process itself and not in the realm of metaphysical abstraction. His method is realistic and materialistic. He holds that any explanation of cultural change must fulfil two conditions. First, it must suggest some way in which the theory can find empirical verification. To proclaim that society must change is not enough. That is too vague. The conditions under which the social order changes must be indicated and the determinate possibilities of change at any moment stated. Secondly, it must do justice to the consciousness of human beings that they actively participate in making their own history. That is to say, when the determinate possibilities of social change have been presented, the probabilities that one direction will be taken rather than another, must be shown to be, in part at least, a function of class interests and purposes.
III: The Dialectic of Social Change: Marx’s own hypothesis that the development of the mode of economic production is the central but not exclusive causal factor of social and cultural change will be examined in detail later on. There are first to be considered certain problems of culture and knowledge confronting all philosophies of history. Marx’s dialectical method really grew out of his reflection upon them.
One of the obvious facts which a philosophy of history must explain is the continuity between one culture and another. The continuity of culture can mean nothing else than the development of its institutions. Their development, indeed, their very functioning, implies the continuous activity of human beings. This activity has a twofold aspect. It is conditioned by an antecedent state of affairs, and yet contributes either to perpetuating or transforming that state of affairs. The central problem of cultural change as formulated by Marx, is how it is possible for human beings conditioned by their cultural education and environment to succeed in changing that environment. The French materialistic philosophers had long since pointed out that human beings were over-determined by environment and education; but they could not explain in these terms how they themselves could be agitating for a revolutionary change to a different society.
The materialistic doctrine [wrote Marx] that men are products of their environment and education, different men products of different environment and education, forgets that the environment itself has been changed by man and the educator himself must be educated. That is why it separates society into two parts of which one is elevated over the whole.
The simultaneity of both change in environment and human activity or self-change can only be grasped and rationally understood as revolutionary practice. [4]
Refusing to dissociate social experience into something which is only cause, the external world, and something which is only effect, consciousness, Marx tries to show how social change arises from the interacting processes of nature, society and human intelligence. From objective conditions, social and natural (thesis), there arises human needs and purposes which, in recognising the objective possibilities in the given situation (antithesis) set up a course of action (synthesis) designed to actualise these possibilities. All change from one social situation to another, and from one social system to another exhibits 1) unity between the two phases, in that certain features are preserved (for example, the technical forms of socialised production under capitalism are preserved under communism); 2) difference, in that certain features of the first are destroyed (for example, the social relations of capitalist production, private property, etc); and 3) qualitative novelty, in that new forms of organisation and activity appear which change the significance of the old elements still preserved, and which cannot be reduced merely to a mechanical combination of them. The process of creative development continues for ever. There are no laws of social life which are invariant except the general schema of development. At a critical point in the complex interaction of 1) the social institutions from which we start, 2) the felt needs which their immanent development produces, 3) and the will to action which flows from knowledge of the relation between institutions and human needs, new laws of social organisation and behaviour arise.
The logic of the situation is not foreign even to natural phenomena. At certain critical points in the varying temperature of water new qualities, ice and steam, emerge. But Marx is never weary of repeating that the distinctive character of social development as opposed to the natural processes of development lies in the fact that human consciousness is involved.
We can now see how undialectical it is for some pseudo-Marxians to maintain that communism involves a complete break with the past. The very fact that the same language would be used rich with the connotations of past experience, precludes the possibility of such discontinuity. The existence of the great cultural heritage of the past would always constitute a challenge to reinterpretation in and for the present. Change there must be, and selective change. The impact of selective change, to be sure, will necessarily be destructive. But only to religious values and attitudes which stress prayer rather than knowledge and action, to social values which in expressing the snobberies of birth, station and economic power, stultify the widest possible development of creative personality – to all values which in exalting the mastery of technique over life (machinery for machinery’s sake, art for art’s sake, science for science’s sake, philosophy for philosophy’s sake) mistake the part for the whole, sacrifice the organic connections between one field and another, impoverish the world by clinging to the tried and established, and oppose adventure, experiment and growth. None the less, communist culture is not merely destructive to the inheritance of the past. It realises that Socrates and Bruno and Rousseau, conditioned by their time, were just as great rebels in their day as Marx was in his; that Aristotle, Ockham and Kant in relation to their past, were, at the very least, the intellectual peers of Marx. Only undialectical Marxists like Bukharin will speak of the ‘outspoken black-hundred tendencies of Plato’. [5] Does this mean that in accepting the heritage of the past communism accepts the theories of these men; fosters, for example, the style of Michelangelo and encourages imitations of the church music of Bach? Not at all. It reinterprets them in a new cultural synthesis. The permanent, invariant and universal aspects of human experience, as reflected in art and literature, reappear in a new context so that the significant insights of the past become enriched through the reinterpretation of the present. The dialectic of culture and history leads to the paradox that the past is not something dead, a pattern congealed into an eternal rigidity, which may have beauty but not life. The past grows whenever a new perspective in the present enables us to look back and see what has grown out of it. And when we know what has grown out of it, we can without exaggeration say that we understand it better than it did itself.
Marx, himself, was well aware of the fact that the art or culture of an historical period, although reflecting a definite form of social development, can make an aesthetic appeal which far transcends the immediate historical milieu in which it arose. Something, of course, is irretrievably lost when the persons for whom a work of art was originally created have disappeared and there is no way of fully reconstructing the prejudices and presuppositions which served as their criteria of aesthetic appreciation. But human experience is sufficiently continuous to enable us to translate the significance of past artistic achievement into some present mood, emotion or faith. Often we are able to regard an ancient work of art as a specific expression, in local idiom, of a wider social or aesthetic experience. In either case a critical discrimination results in making contemporary the significance of past cultural activity.
It was with this problem in mind that Marx wrote of the recurrent appeal of Greek art:
... the difficulty is not in grasping the idea that Greek art and epos are bound up with certain forms of social development. It rather lies in understanding why they still constitute with us a source of aesthetic enjoyment and in certain respects prevail as the standard and model beyond attainment.
A man cannot become a child again unless he becomes childish. But does he not enjoy the artless ways of the child and must he not strive to reproduce its truth on a higher plane? Is not the character of every epoch revived perfectly true to nature in child nature? Why should the social childhood of mankind, where it had obtained its most beautiful development, not exert an eternal charm as an age that will never return? There are ill-bred children and precocious children. Many of the ancient nations belong to the latter class. The Greeks were normal children. The charm their art has for us does not conflict with the primitive character of the social order from which it has sprung. It is rather the product of the latter, and is rather due to the fact that the unripe social conditions under which the art arose and under which alone it could appear can never return. [6]
The heavy overtones of German aesthetic theory of the nineteenth century, especially Hegel’s philosophy of art, can be heard in this passage; and its characterisation of Greek art may, therefore, produce a comic effect upon the contemporary reader. Nonetheless, it strikes a clear note on behalf of the relative autonomy of the aesthetic experience.
In discussing social change, Marx, however, presses the point of his dialectic a little deeper. Social institutions in the course of their own careers produce the means by which they are changed and generate the needs which ultimately inspire men to revolutionary action. Some important consequences follow. The conditions of extant social production must be accepted before they can be transformed. The evils generated by the private ownership of the means of production in an era of large-scale machine manufacture cannot be eliminated by rejecting the machine process and returning to hand industry, or to the soil, or, for that matter, to the bosom of the church. History may be reconstructed but it cannot be reversed. To attempt any such movement would result in more distress than originally called it forth. It could easily be shown, for example, that population, which is a function of the system of production, has grown to such an extent that its barest necessities could hardly be fulfilled today by a system of primitive hand manufacture and agriculture. It is not the machine which oppresses men but the social relations within which machine production is carried on. Periodic crises, unemployment and mass misery flow not from the former but from the latter. Consequently it is the social relations of production which must be changed. ‘But in every society’, writes Marx, ‘the relations of production constitute a whole.’ [7] If they are a whole, we cannot accept one aspect which we call good and reject another which we call bad. For the good and the bad are organically related to one another. We cannot preserve an open field for all business talent and economic initiative – the allegedly good side of capitalism – and eliminate overproduction – the bad side of capitalism; we cannot repudiate competition for the sake of a planned economy and at the same time accept the existing state. Here, one can achieve a genuine synthesis only by revolutionary action. It is the weakness of the reformer’s ideology at this point to seek to mediate irreconcilables, just as at other points it is the incurable defect of his Utopian half-brother, to break cultural and economic continuities. For one, all change is a slow evolutionary process upon whose lazy movement mankind floats forever forward; for the other, nothing develops but that it jumps. For Marx, however, revolution is the political mode by which social evolution takes place. When, where and how, cannot be settled in advance. It is always a question of concrete specific analysis. But when it takes place the political contrast between the old and the new forms of government is stronger and sharper than between the old and the new forms of art, literature and philosophy.
IV: The Dialectic of Social Psychology: We are now in a position to appreciate the profundity of Marx’s social psychology. All social activity revolves around the gratification of human needs and wants. But those needs and wants are more than a schedule of biological impulses. They are social and therefore historical. We explain their character and variations in terms of the productive processes in which man as a member of a definite social system finds himself engaged. Production both in time and logic precedes consumption. Only late in his career does man begin with a ready-made idea of what he wants. His consciousness is a slow reflection upon what he finds himself doing; only as a subsequent effect is there a reorganisation of his activity. Anthropologists have shown that art production precedes art appreciation. That production usually precedes appreciation is true in other fields too. In social life, Marx showed that production affects consumption and appreciation in three different ways. It furnishes the objects to be consumed; it determines the manner of consumption; and gives rise to new wants of consumption which, in turn, further other productive activities.
That production is necessary for continued consumption, on behalf of which it is undertaken, is too obvious to call for elaboration. But that production determines the manner in which human beings consume, the form and character of their wants, and often the highest reaches of their consciousness, runs counter to those social philosophies which draw a sharp distinction between man’s nurture – which is social and variable – and his original nature – which is biological and constant. Marx was the first realistic sociologist to challenge this sharp disjunction without making man a purely passive agent in the social process. Whatever the drives and impulses which constitute his animal nature, man’s human nature is revealed only in a socially determined context, in which the biological pattern functions as only one constituent element of the whole. And since the social context is historically conditioned, human nature, too, is an historical fact. ‘Hunger is hunger’, writes Marx, ‘but the hunger that is satisfied with cooked meat eaten with knife and fork is a different kind of hunger from one that devours raw meat with the aid of hands, nails and teeth.’ [8] Similarly, selfishness is selfishness, and power is power; but a selfishness and power that assert themselves in a system of commodity production, in which the legal right to prevent others from using land and machines means the material power to condemn them to poverty and death, are different kinds of selfishness and power from those which express themselves within a socialised economy, guaranteeing to all who are capable and willing to work, the right to life and subsistence.
Human nature is a complex of needs and desires. Man’s productive activities, by giving rise to new needs and desires – whether it be the need for rapid locomotion unknown to our ancestors or the desire for romantic love whose vogue is comparatively recent – result in a significant development of human nature. Processes of social transformation are thus at the same time processes of psychological transformation. The dialectic principle explains how human beings, although conditioned by society, are enabled through activity to change both society and themselves. Intelligent social action becomes creative action. ‘By acting on the external world and changing it’, says Marx, ‘man changes his own nature.’ [9] The normal individual, the natural individual who plays such a part in the writings of sociologists, is always a projection of the limited ideal of an historically conditioned society and of the dominant class in that society. Aristotle defined man as naturally a ‘political’ animal (literally, a city-dwelling animal); Franklin as a ‘tool-making’ animal. For Marx, man is all that and more. Once he acquires control of the conditions of social life, he can consciously make over his own nature in accordance with a morally free will, in contradistinction to man in the past whose nature has been unconsciously made over by the socially determined will of economic classes.
The emphasis which Marx placed upon the dialectic development of human nature and the possibilities of its growth has not prevented critics – even sympathetic ones – from charging him with a mechanical and rigid conception of its character. Almost at random I turn to a book which says:
Karl Marx laid out a complete span of historical sequence on the basis of economic determinism in which he reckoned almost not at all with the possibilities of change in human nature. [10]
One could fill pages with quotations to show how unjust such a characterisation is. One single sentence suffices. Arguing against Proudhon, who, interestingly enough, seems to have come alive again in the modern petty-bourgeois socialism of public works and social planning, Marx exclaimed: ‘M Proudhon does not know that the whole of history is nothing but the progressive transformation of human nature.’ [11]
V: The Dialectic of Perception: Human nature does not change overnight. It develops slowly out of the consciousness of new needs which, together with the limiting condition of the environment, determine new tasks and suggest new goals. But the new needs themselves do not emerge suddenly into human experience. They arise out of an attempt to gratify the old needs in a shifting environment and find conscious articulation only in the active practical process by which man both changes and adjusts himself to his environment. That is why the principle of dialectic, for Marx as for Hegel, finds expression in the active quality of individual perception and thought as well as in society and nature. Marx did not work out his views in detail, but his criticism of Feuerbach’s materialism contains suggestive hints of a dialectical theory of perception. This theory of perception was necessitated by his philosophy of history. If human beings are active in history, then, since all human activity is guided by ideas and ideals, human thinking must be an active historical force. That human stupidity is an historical force is a proposition which no one who has lived long can help believing sometimes. That human thought is active is a proposition which is characteristic of all philosophical idealism. But idealism is inadequate because it does not take into account the material conditions of intellectual activity, and the relation between thought and sensations. The materialists maintain that sensation depends upon something which is not thought. They swing, however, to a view which is the direct converse of the idealist error, and just as erroneous. They reduce thought to sensation; so that the ideas in a man’s head are regarded as passive effects of an external world – as experiences which just happen to him in the same way that he gets electrical shocks. There is one short step from the view that consciousness is merely a product of forces acting from without, to Democritus’ view that nothing exists but ‘atoms and the void’, to Hobbes’ reduction of all psychic phenomena to ‘ghosts’ and ‘apparitions’, to Feuerbach’s aphorism, ‘Der Nahrungstoff ist Gedankenstoff’, and to bring the variations in this record of absurdity down to the present, to J.B. Watson’s contention that there is no such thing as consciousness at all.
After an early period of allegiance to Schelling and Hegel, Marx threw his idealism overboard. But he sought to save the idealist’s insight that knowledge is active. Otherwise his own historical materialism would result in fatalism. Marx reasoned that if knowledge is active and is organically related to sensation, sensation itself must be something other than a passive experience out of which the world is built up by the psychological process of association and the logical process of inference. Things are not revealed in sensation: sensations themselves arise in the course of man’s activity on things. The starting point of perception is not an object on the one hand, and a subject opposed to it on the other, but an interacting process within which sensations are just as much the resultant of the active mind (the total organism) as the things acted upon. What is beheld in perception, then, depends just as much upon the perceiver as upon the antecedent cause of the perception. And since the mind meets the world with a long historical development already behind it, what it sees, its selective reactions, the scope and manner of its attention are to be explained, not merely as a physical or biological fact but as a social fact as well. ‘Even objects of the simplest “sensory certainty” are given to man’, writes Marx, ‘only through social development.’ [12] All psychology, which is not a phase of biophysics or psycho-physics, thus becomes social psychology. For it is not perception alone, he adds, which is bound up with the practical material processes of social life, but the production of ideas and the higher forms of consciousness as well. Consciousness, therefore, is social before it is individual. And this is something which no mechanical, sensationalistic materialism can adequately explain:
The chief defect of all previous materialism (including Feuerbach’s) is that the thing – reality – sensation – has been considered only in the form of the object or of direct apprehension; and not as sensory human activity, not as practice, not subjectively. Therefore in opposition to materialism the active side was developed abstractly by idealism which naturally did not recognise real sensory activity as such. Feuerbach is willing to recognise sense objects which are really something other than objects of thought; but he does not conceive human activity itself as objective activity... He therefore cannot grasp the significance of ‘revolutionary’, of ‘critical-practical’ activity.
The highest point to which sensationalistic materialism can reach, that is, the materialism which does not conceive sensation as practical activity, is the standpoint of the single individual and bourgeois society. [13]
VI: The Future of Dialectic: A larger problem suggested by the social expression of dialectic is the question of what form the principle will take under communism. On this question a great deal of confusion prevails both in the camp of Marx’s critics and in that of his friends.
The three leading principles of the Marxian doctrine are obviously historically conditioned in the sense that they hold only for class societies. Historical materialism, which explains the general character of social life in terms of the economic relations in which human beings find themselves and by which they are controlled; the theory of surplus-value, which teaches that the greater part of what the worker produces is filched from him by those who own the instruments of production; the theory of the class struggle, which maintains that all history since the downfall of early Gentile society has been a struggle for state-and-social-mastery between different economic classes – these principles, of necessity, must be suspended in a collectivist society in which man makes his own social history, in which the total product of labour-power, although not returned to the individual worker, is disbursed and reinvested for the good of the commonalty, and in which economic classes have disappeared and only shifting vocational distinctions remain. Well then, what becomes of the possibility of social development under communism? What contradictions of social life provide it with driving force? Or is this the last word in human development, the idyll of the Kingdom-Come in which all evil, struggle and frustration disappear? (That is what professional critics of Marx, like Sorokin, charge Marx with believing!) What happens to dialectics? Hegel denied that it had any sway when it came to the Prussian state. When Marx condemned him, did he mean to say, only, that Hegel should have waited for the communist society before he proclaimed the end of history?
As distinct from all other doctrines of Marx, the principle of dialectic still continues to operate in a communist society. It is not historically conditioned in the same sense as his other theories. It finds expression, however, on a more elevated plane. Although in advance no one can describe the detailed form it will take, it is clear that its general locus is individual and personal, and that whatever social change takes place, proceeds through cooperative conflict and not anti-social class struggles. The world still exists in incomplete process, and conflict ever remains at the heart of flux, but now, however, man wrestles not with the primary problems of social existence but with the more significant problems of personal development. Every social advance will create its own institutional abuses and problems, natural phenomena will still run their course indifferent to human welfare, and men will never be equally wise or beautiful. But the opportunities for the development of creative personalities will be more widespread than ever before. For it is a law of true creation that the mind flourishes best when the obstacles it has to overcome are not imposed upon it by material problems of subsistence but by the problems which arise in the course of the individual’s intellectual, emotional and spiritual development.
Marx was not a utilitarian. Nowhere does he promise ‘happiness’ in the future or fight for it in the present. He condemns capitalism not because it makes people unhappy but because it makes them inhuman, deprives them of their essential dignity, degrades all their ideals by setting a cash value on them, and inflicts meaningless suffering. He would have approved of Nietzsche’s savage thrust at Bentham: ‘Man does not desire happiness, only the Englishman does’ [14]; and he himself contemptuously remarks in Capital with an eye on the utilitarian bookkeeping of pains and pleasures that ‘with the driest naïveté, Bentham takes the modern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal man’. [15]
This does not mean that Marx was opposed to human beings seeking happiness or that he denied the possibility of its existence. He felt quite rightly, however, that, of itself, utilitarianism could never serve as the basis of a fighting, revolutionary ethics. The reason is simple. Happiness arises through the gratification of needs, desires and ambition. It can therefore be attained either by increasing achievement in the way of effort or material goods, or by cutting down desire and ambition. Happiness comes, as William James somewhere says, either ‘by getting what we want or learning to like what we’ve got’. There is nothing to show that honest Christians, and all other people for whom religion is an anodyne, are less happy than those who do not, ‘like the Camel and the Christian take their burdens kneeling’ (Bierce). But there is a great deal to show that those who are prepared to struggle for their ideals even unto death, who pit their intelligence and strength against all remediable evils, who scorn the cheap Philistine worldliness which will risk nothing that endangers its fleshpots as well as the religious otherworldliness which forsakes the most precious of all human virtues – intelligence and courage – are noble, even in their very defeat. Marx’s own life with its ostracism, grinding poverty, refusal to compromise truth and revolutionary honour, is an illustration of what his ethical values were. He was surer that there were some things that a human being ought to do than he was that those things would bring pleasure and not pain. Nowhere does Marx put this more strongly than in his contrast between the revolutionary morality of the proletariat and the social morality of Christianity:
The social principles of Christianity preach cowardice, self-contempt, abasement, submission, humility ... but the proletariat, which will not allow itself to be treated as canaille, regards its courage, self-confidence, independence and sense of personal dignity as more necessary than its daily bread.
The social principles of Christianity are mealy-mouthed; those of the proletariat are revolutionary. [16]
In Marx as in Hegel the dialectic is, so to speak, the philosophical rhythm of conscious life. The dialectic method is a way of understanding this rhythm and participating in it. It expresses the tension, expansion and growth of all development. It does not sanction the naive belief that a perfect society, a perfect man, will ever be realised; but neither does it justify the opposite error that since perfection is unattainable, it is therefore immaterial what kind of men or societies exist.
Granted the principle of the imperfection of man, what then? [Asks Marx] We know in advance that all human institutions are incomplete. That does not take us far: that does not speak for or against them. That is not their specific character, their mark of differentiation. [17]
For Marx as for Hegel cultural progress consists in transferring problems to higher and more inclusive levels. But there are always problems. ‘History’, he says, ‘has no other way of answering old questions than by putting new ones.’ [18] Under communism man ceases to suffer as an animal and suffers as human. He therewith moves from the plane of the pitiful to the plane of the tragic.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. ‘Marxism is a revolutionary world outlook which must always strive for new discoveries, which completely despises rigidity in once-valid theses, and whose living force is best preserved in the intellectual clash of self-criticism and the rough and tumble of history.’ (Rosa Luxemburg, The Accumulation of Capital: An Anti-Critique, Chapter VI. – MIA)
2. V.I. Lenin, Letters on Tactics, Collected Works, Volume 24. – MIA
3. Oswald Spengler, Decline of the West, Volume 1 (London 1926), Chapter VII.
4. Third gloss on Feuerbach, Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band V, p. 534 [Karl Marx, Theses on Feuerbach. /ndash; MIA
5. Nikolai Bukharin, Historical Materialism: A System of Sociology (New York, 1925), Chapter VI. – MIA
6. Critique of Political Economy (Kerr edition), pp. 311-12 [Karl Marx, Grundrisse. MIA
7. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. – MIA
8. Karl Marx, Grundrisse. – MIA
9. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p. 198 [available here. – MIA
10. Eduard Lindeman, Social Discovery: An Approach To the Study of Functional Groups (New York 1924), p. 46.
11. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. – MIA
12. Karl Marx, The German Ideology. – MIA
13. Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band V, pp. 533-35 [Karl Marx, Theses on Feuerbach – MIA
14. See Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols (Oxford 1998), p. 58 – MIA.
15. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1. – MIA
16. Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band VI, p 278 [Karl Marx, The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter &#ndash; MIA
17. Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band VI, p 201 [Karl Marx, On the Freedom of the Press. – MIA
18. Karl Marx, The Question of Centralisation in Itself and with Regard to the Supplement to No. 137 of the Rheinische Zeitung, 17 May 1842. – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (VI: The Syndicalist Heresy)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter VI: The Syndicalist Heresy
The earliest critical reactions to the official Marxian orthodoxy manifested themselves in France. Here the traditions of Blanqui, Proudhon and Bakunin still flourished. They were strengthened at the turn of the century by the existence of a socialist party whose left wing revealed the same divided soul between the revolutionary phrase and the reformist deed which possessed the German party, and a right wing which regularly fed ministers to a bourgeois coalition government. The republican form of government, the existence of a radical strata of the bourgeoisie which led the fight against clericalism, the hang-over of the democratic ideology of the French Revolution and the petty-bourgeois socialism of 1848, obscured in the minds of many socialists the fundamental practical difference between a party of the proletariat and all other parties.
The trade unions, however, battling on the economic front, were compelled perforce to keep the main issue of the class struggle clear. They sought to free themselves from admixture with non-working-class elements and to produce a pure proletarian socialist movement (le socialisme ouvrier). Syndicalism was the theory and practice of that movement. So fearful were they of the dangers of parliamentarianism that they restricted themselves to organising direct economic action which arose in the spontaneous struggle of the class-conscious trade unions. All political activities were renounced. Power was to be won by the single weapon of the general strike. Anti-intellectualist in principle, as a protest both against the careerist leadership of the socialist party and the whole conception of political and theoretical guidance from without, they developed no systematic theory. They sought unity in the empirical practice of the defensive and offensive strike. Before long, however, they unofficially accepted the formulations of their position drawn up by a group of anti-intellectualist intellectuals of whom Sorel, Lagardelle and Pelloutier (who was also an important functionary) were the most outstanding. It was Sorel, an ‘old’ Marxist, who attempted to lay the theoretical foundations of the movement.
If Bernstein was led to a revision of Marxism by an acceptance of the actual politics of socialist parties, Sorel undertook to revise Marx on the basis of a blank rejection of that politics. Even before Bernstein’s criticisms had been noised abroad, Sorel had resolved to ‘revise Marxism with its own methods’ (‘renouveler le marxisme par des procédés marxistes’) [1], a task which suffered temporary interruption during the Dreyfus affair but to which Sorel again ardently devoted himself with the resurgence of political opportunism in France at the turn of the century.
The relation of Sorel and his followers to Marx has been sadly misunderstood. The current impression (circulated by the ‘orthodox’ interpreters of Marx) that syndicalism was avowedly anti-Marxian in origin, intent and practice, is ungrounded. Its opposition was not so much to Marx but to what was being done in his name. Sorel for many years shared with Antonio Labriola the reputation of being the leading philosophic spirit among Marxists. Appalled, however, by the excesses of parliamentary ministerialism in France on the one hand and by the wave of trade-union reformism in Germany on the other, Sorel repudiated both the pacifist illusions of Jaurès and the sleepy, ambiguous formulæ of Kautsky as equally foreign to the meaning of Marxism. Especially did he combat the fetishism of non-violence to which all the leaders of Western Social-Democracy, with the exception of the Russians, were wedded. Marxism, he said, was the theory and practice of the class struggle. Since outside of the syndicalist movement the principle of the class struggle had been practically abandoned, only revolutionary syndicalism could be regarded as the true heir of Marxism. To be sure, there were minor criticisms of Marxian theory scattered throughout all of Sorel’s writings; but wherever Sorel speaks of la décomposition du marxisme he explicitly refers to the reformist practices and the apologetic literature of official Marxism. Of Marx himself Sorel wrote in his most important work:
No better proof perhaps can be given of Marx’s genius than the remarkable agreement which is found to exist between his views and the doctrines which revolutionary syndicalism is today building up slowly and laboriously, keeping always strictly to strike tactics. [2]
In his attack upon parliamentarians and state socialists on the right and the anarchist groups with their denial of the principle of authority on the left, Sorel could with justice claim some continuity with Marx; but his disregard of Marx’s continued criticisms of the ‘no politics’ cry of the Bakuninists and Proudhonians was so open that it bordered on quaintness. Since the latter were anarchists, Sorel claimed, what was true against them could not also be true for those who, like himself, condemned them.
Even more interesting in this connection is the note of cultural iconoclasm which Sorel sounds in his practical emphasis upon the class struggle, a note which was taken up by the international working-class movement only after the Russian Revolution. The economic and political conflict between bourgeoisie and proletariat are at the same time cultural conflicts. Arrayed in mortal combat are two civilisations whose fundamental values cannot be arbitrated by an appeal to objective social duty. There is not even a significant common interest in the light of which these conflicting claims may be disinterestedly surveyed as partial interests. Duty, Sorel reminds those who have flown above the battle to get a larger view, has a meaning only ‘in a society in which all parts are intimately connected and responsible to one another’.
Sorel was not content with underscoring the instrumental efficacy of revolutionary sentiment. He proceeded to develop a ‘logic’ of sentiment on the Bergsonian model. It was this anti-intellectualistic current in Sorel which not only made éclat in the Catholic salons of the Third Republic but soon cost him the support of the syndicalist rank and file in whose presumable interests it had been elaborated. The classic expression of Sorel’s irrationalism is to be found in his theory of the ‘myth’. A myth for Sorel is any general notion, belief or fancy which drives men to great social action:
Men who are participating in a great social movement always picture their coming action as a battle in which their cause is to triumph... These constructions, a knowledge of which is so important for historians, I propose to call ‘myths’ ... the syndicalist ‘general strike’ and Marx’s ‘catastrophic revolution’ are such myths. [3]
But how are such myths to be understood? By careful analysis? By distinguishing between what is description and what is prophecy? By disentangling the probable consequences of action from the desired consequences? Intuition forbid! A myth is not something which can survive analysis. It betrays a lack of intelligence even to try to analyse it. ‘It must be taken as a whole, as an historic force.’ Is not this equivalent to characterising the myth of the general strike as Utopian? No, Utopian construction is the third member of the trinity of vicious abstractions whose other two members are socialist compromise and anarchist intransigence. Utopias operate with ideas which can be discussed and refuted; a myth, however, is an emotion which can only be enacted. It was upon this phantasy in a Bergsonian key that the socialist movement was invited to stake its life.
By sheer intellectual violence Marx is transformed from the theorist of social action into its poet; his rational analyses are translated into romantic insights; his attempt to explain the processes of production into an indirect confirmation of the mysteries of creation:
No effort of thought, no progress of knowledge, no rational induction will ever dispel the mystery which envelops socialism; and it is because the philosophy of Marx recognised fully this feature of socialism that it acquired the right to serve as the starting point of socialist inquiry. [4]
This glorification of the violence incarnate in the general strike was a clarifying influence in the foggy atmosphere of parliamentary talk. It brought the ‘legalists at any price’ to self-consciousness and forced them openly to avow what they had already secretly confessed to themselves; viz., that they desired to constitute a new administration, not to create a new state. But syndicalism itself provided no specific way by which the old state could be destroyed except by professing to ignore it. The general strike which it offered as a tactical panacea was a highly abstract conception. The general strike was regarded as a technical weapon which could be used at will instead of a controlled politico-economic reaction arising within a concrete historical situation. It was taken as an isolated single economic act instead of a phase of a political revolutionary process. The syndicalists did not realise that a general strike could never of itself produce a revolutionary situation; that, on the contrary, its efficacy depended on whether it was itself produced within a revolutionary situation. Again the failure to think dialectically avenged itself upon them by driving them into a position which practically was no different from that of the orthodox Marxists whom they opposed. Their end was not linked up with their means.
Until 1914 the positive accomplishment of the syndicalist movement was to keep the French trade-union movement free from the views of parliamentary reformism. But like the IWW in America, instead of building a revolutionary party, they proclaimed the slogan of ‘no party’; instead of relying upon their high fever of revolutionary sincerity to cure them of the infections of ‘dirty politics’, they used as protection only the formula of ‘no politics’; instead of distinguishing between the legitimate organisational independence of trade unions from all political parties, and the inescapable acceptance of a political philosophy, they lumped both together, in the Charte D’Amiens of 1907, so that organisational independence in their minds meant political independence. But it really meant nothing of the kind. The economic struggle is always a political struggle. Even before the war it was clear that the state could not be snubbed out of existence because the syndicalist theory and programme refused to recognise the necessity of fighting it on the political front. And during the war when the state smashed the syndicalist unions in America and corrupted the syndicalist movement in France, a classic demonstration was offered that the maxim, to be is to be perceived, was no more valid in politics than in philosophy.
Syndicalist philosophy had a twofold motivation. Politically it sought to convert a war of attrition for petty reform into a campaign of direct action for social revolution. It was a protest against the heterogeneous composition of the socialist parties, so many of whose leaders were arrivistes, indigent professionals, eloquent shopkeepers, and personalities from the fringe of hobohemia. Indicate that the ‘general strike’ was a serious, perhaps a bloody business, and with one clean stroke you would sweep away all those intellectuals who had ‘embraced the profession of thinking for the proletariat’. Theoretically, by denying that the future was predictable no matter how much scientific data might be at hand, it focused attention upon the necessity of risking something in action. The usual Bergsonian grounds were offered in denying that analysis could ever adequately render existence, especially in its dynamic aspect. Change could only be grasped in feeling; feeling could only be expressed in action. Thought followed action and derived its canons of validity from the successes registered. Any thinking is valid which gets you where you want to go. But since ‘where you want to go’ is a feeling which defies description, the question ‘whether you have got to where you wanted to go’ can only be decided after action, and then only by another feeling. The whole position runs out into a vicious variety of Jamesian pragmatism. [5]
The syndicalist movement was an embryonic revolutionary party. Because it did not recognise itself for what it was, it went to pieces and its revolutionary energy and zeal were dissipated. The most the syndicalists could do was to scare the state, not to conquer it. One critic aptly characterised them as ‘headless horsemen of the revolution riding furiously in all directions at once’.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Georges Sorel, Matériaux d’une Théorie du Prolétariat (Paris 1919), p. 253.
2. Georges Sorel, Reflections on Violence (Glencoe 1900), translated by Hulme, p. 153. [1915 edition available at here. – MIA]
3. Sorel, Reflections on Violence, p. 22.
4. Sorel, Reflections on Violence, p. 164.
5. Consistently embraced in Sorel’s De l’Utilité du Pragmatisme (Paris 1921).
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XVI: The Class Struggle and Social Psychology)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XVI: The Class Struggle and Social Psychology
A letter to the author from a union organiser active in New England, who is interested in revolutionary theory, reads in part as follows:
I have had many and quite intimate contacts with trade unions. I know for instance that in Haverhill, Mass, where I tried to run a union for some time, the decisive factors in the working population, sex, religion, nationality, etc, are so strong that while they are all shoemakers, they have no common characteristic. They will act much more readily as men and women – the women get more work than the men – as Irish, Greek, Italian, and as Catholic and Protestant and Jew than as a working class.
This is not an uncommon experience. It poses some crucial problems. If the class struggle is the central doctrine of Marxism, it is important to know whether the class struggle is a theory or a fact, whether there is one class struggle or many, whether it derives from other Marxian doctrines or they from it.
We may begin by pointing out the organic connection which exists between the theory of the class struggle and the theories of historical materialism and surplus-value. The theory of historical materialism holds that the different roles which different classes play in the process of production give rise to a conflict of needs and interests. Out of this conflict there crystallises opposing modes of thought and practice which express themselves in different reactions to a common situation, and, where the conflict is carried on within a common historical tradition, in different emphases and interpretations of supposedly common doctrines. The widening rift between the expanding forces of production and the fixed property relations under which production is carried on, leads to an even sharper differentiation in social philosophy and practical struggle. For this conflict to be historically resolved, classes must identify themselves with, and become the carriers of, conflicting social relations. The march of history is forced by class action, not by the dead instruments of production, nor by isolated individual acts. We have already seen how integral the class struggle is to Marx’s economic theories. The division of the surplus social product is never an automatic affair but depends upon the political struggles between the different classes engaged in production. The truth of the theories of historical materialism and surplus-value presuppose, therefore, the existence of the class struggle. If the facts of the class struggle can be successfully called into question, the whole theoretical construction of Marx crashes to the ground.
Some definitions are in order. What is a class? Logically, in any universe of discourse, a class consists of a collection of elements all of which have a common characteristic not shared by some other elements. When we speak of human beings, any group of men constitutes a class if each one of its members possesses some distinctive property not shared by other men. Any member of such a class may also be a member of some other class. If x is a member of the class of red-heads, he may also be a member of the class of fathers, the class of tall men, the class of Irishmen. Marx, however, is not interested in classes as such but in social classes. Not in every type of social class but only in those social classes which are defined by the roles which different groups of men play in the processes of economic production, that is, in economic classes. Social classes – taken in the broadest sense – are bound up with the existence of any type of society in which there is division of labour; economic classes, however, represent the fundamental social divisions in those societies in which private property in the means of production exists. In what sense economic classes represent ‘fundamental’ social divisions will be indicated below.
In Capital Marx distinguishes between three different economic classes – capitalists, landlords and wage-earners. Their respective source of income is profit, ground-rent and wages. No contemporary society, however, exhibits this stratification of classes in a pure form. There are intermediate, transitional and vestigial groups within and between these classes. In one country there are remnants of a feudal class, in another a large lumpen, or slum, proletariat, and almost everywhere, pauperised peasants, professionals, hand-workers and an officialdom. But already in the Communist Manifesto Marx contended that the normal development of capitalist production would result in ‘splitting society more and more into two great hostile classes... bourgeoisie and proletariat’ [1], and in Capital he shows how this results from the tendency towards centralisation of industry and concentration of wealth. In the era of monopoly capitalism, the interests of large landholders are so closely involved with the interests of the capitalists at many points in the financial and marketing structure, that both groups may be regarded, for all their rivalry, as wings of substantially the same economic class.
In the interests of political action, however, at no time is the economic schema of class divisions to be abstractly applied in a way to suggest that all classes or groups outside of the proletariat constitute ‘one reactionary mass’. For one thing, what these classes have in common may at certain times be obscured by their differences. Then again, the composition of classes as well as their impending future is continually changing as the limits imposed by the processes of production narrow. In the fifties of the last century it may have been possible to exploit the antagonism between the English landowners and capitalists to win the Ten-Hour Day. At the present time no antagonism between these groups is so great that it will not be overlooked in the common defence against the working class. During the last century, although the working class made common cause with the continental petty bourgeoisie and peasants to win certain political reforms, it could not overcome the bitter hostility of these classes to its socialist programme. Today, in the face of the impending transfer of large sections of these classes into the ranks of the unemployed or pauperised proletariat, they may be won over for revolutionary social action. This necessitates the use of a broader conception of what constitutes a class – and who constitutes it. So far as history in the making is concerned, the political potentialities of a class are not simply and unequivocally determined by its economic status – though this is basic – but by a whole complex of socio-psychological forces as well. That is why one cannot infer the political future of a country if one has knowledge only of its economic set-up and the numerical strength of its classes. Marx begins by locating an economic class by its role in production and then, by analysis of the particular historical situation, discovers its specific socio-psychological attitude. In the Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, as in all other of his political writings, Marx uses the concept of class in this wider socio-psychological sense, but in every case it is based on the functions which a group plays or has played in production:
In so far as millions of families live in economic circumstances which distinguish their mode of life, their interests, and their culture from those of other classes, and made them more or less hostile to other classes, these peasant families constitute a class. [2]
If classes are defined with reference to their productive functions, it follows that the source of their antagonism must be sought in the processes of production. According to Marx, in any society in which a class has a monopoly of the instruments of production, an inevitable opposition, not necessarily conscious, arises over the distribution of the total social product. The more one class appropriates, the less remains for the other. The best will in the world cannot alter the fact that where a finite amount of goods must be distributed in a society in which there exists potentially unlimited wants, the division must take the form of an inverse relation.
The inverse relation in the distribution of the product does not of itself define a class antagonism although it must always be present wherever class antagonisms are present. For a great many social antagonisms, which are not yet class antagonisms, may arise from the same general social situation. For example, the more electric power is consumed, the less coal will be bought: the public utilities trust, therefore, will find itself in opposition to the coal producers. Orange growers may find that the more tomatoes are sold, the less will be their own sales. The prosperity of the one group may mean the ruin of the other. In certain industries, the higher the wages of the skilled workers are, the lower are the wages of the unskilled. And it is clear that in any human society, so long as some goods or privileges do not exist in sufficiently large quantities to provide everyone with as much as he wants (and it must be remembered that wants and needs are variables, which have no upper limit) there will always be an objective basis for social opposition and conflict. None of these forms of social opposition, from Marx’s point of view, constitutes a class opposition. Why not?
In the first place, the oppositions between different groups of capitalists may in time be ironed out by mergers, combines and trustification. The railroad companies absorb or come to an understanding with the auto-bus companies, the public utilities with the mines, one association of farmers with another. Where this does not take place and one group actually goes under, the opposition is not reproduced as is the case with the continuous opposition between worker and capitalist – an opposition which is a natural consequence of the fact that the social instruments of production are owned and controlled by a class other than that which uses them. Secondly, viewing capitalist production as a whole, all the employers have a common interest against all the workers in that the lower the average wage rate, the higher the profit. Thirdly, oppositions between different vocational groups within capitalist society, as well as the social oppositions which may arise outside of capitalist society, are not oppositions in which one group is exploited by another. This is the key difference between social oppositions which are class oppositions and those which are not. In all societies in which the instruments of production are not held in common, the process of production is at the same time a process of human exploitation. The class opposition which is essential to capitalist production is more important than any other social oppositions, such as are generated in the higgling of the market or in the competition between different industries or in disagreements between different groups of workers. For class oppositions cannot be resolved without changing the structure of society, whereas the other social oppositions are continually being resolved within the unaffected framework of the capitalist mode of production. The most fundamental of all the necessary objective presuppositions of social revolution, therefore, is a class antagonism and not the other social oppositions which are present as contributory factors. Many of the latter, upon analysis, appear to be derived from the former.
So far we have only spoken of class opposition, not of class struggle. Struggle involves consciousness, and not all class opposition is accompanied by class consciousness. Many Negro slaves before, and even during, the Civil War, accepted their lot, if not contentedly, nonetheless without active protestations. Class struggles arise when men become aware of the nature of class antagonisms. This awareness does not come all at once. It grows slowly out of actual participation in a dispute about some immediate issue. It becomes deeper in the face of the severer repressions which the first signs of revolt call forth. It may be expressed in allegiance to abstract ideals. It is always sure to see in the realisation of a specific set of class needs the most effective and most equitable method of realising the needs of the community.
Do class oppositions automatically produce class struggles? Obviously not. Certain factors operate to prevent the existence of class opposition from becoming a self-conscious opposition. The most important of these factors are other social oppositions which conceal the basic class opposition and often lead to an alliance of a section of a class with its class enemy against other sections of its own class. These social oppositions may be the opposition between the skilled and unskilled, the rich and poor, Negro and white, Catholic and Protestant, employed and unemployed. The social and economic history of Europe and America is rich in illustrations of the way in which these and other varieties of social opposition have served as counteracting forces to arrest the growth of consciousness of class antagonisms. The history of the English Labour Party, and to a considerable extent of the American Federation of Labour, is a history of successive alliances between the highly skilled workers and their employers against the unskilled. Manufacturers have been known in America to foster labour troubles in the plants of richer and more powerful competitors in order to gain for themselves a temporary economic advantage. In the basic American industries, employers have for many years played upon race and national prejudice to divide the ranks of the workers and to recruit an army of strike-breakers in case of industrial disturbance. The Belfast Port Strike was lost because of the religious dissensions created between Protestant and Catholic workers. In the division of the German working class after the war into four types of trade unions, religious differences played an appreciable part. Since 1929, in some industries controlled by conservative unions, employers have been able to cause the employed and unemployed to fall out with each other by offering workers a choice between either reducing wages and spreading work or upholding wages and restricting work.
The simple and undeniable fact is that every member of society is not only a member of a class but a member of other groups as well. In the clash of group loyalties is it necessary and inevitable that loyalty to one’s class will triumph over, say, loyalty to one’s church or to one’s country? Let us listen to Marx apropos of the division in the ranks of the English and international working class:
The English bourgeoisie has not only exploited Irishmen in order to reduce the standard of living of the English working class by compelling the Irish poor to emigrate; in addition, it has split the proletariat into two hostile camps. The revolutionary fire of the Celtic worker does not unite itself with the powerful but slow-moving strength of the Anglo-Saxons. On the contrary, in all the great industrial centres of England there prevails a deep antagonism between the Irish and English proletariat. The ordinary English worker hates the Irishman as a competitor who depresses his wages and living standards. He feels a national and religious antipathy towards him. He regards him almost in the same light as the poor whites of the Southern States of North America regard the black slaves. This opposition between the English proletariat is kept alive and artificially nurtured by the bourgeoisie. It knows that the true secret of the conservation of its power lies in this division. [3]
This antagonism repeats itself on the other side of the Atlantic. The Irishmen who are driven from hearth and home for the sake of oxen and sheep [enclosures] find themselves in America where they constitute an appreciable and ever growing part of the population. Their only thought, their only passion is hatred of the English. The English and American governments – that is to say, the classes which these governments represent – feed these passions, in order to perpetuate the international oppositions which hinder every earnest and honest alliance between the working class of both sides of the water and consequently their common emancipation. [4]
The key questions, then, are 1) under what conditions does the common class opposition which unites the whole of the proletariat against the whole of the bourgeoisie focalise itself in consciousness and struggle, and 2) under what conditions does class consciousness triumph over divisive ties of racial, religious or national consciousness? No final and synoptic answers to these questions can be given; or more accurately, the answers depend on a peculiar complex of social, economic and traditional factors which vary from situation to situation. At best only the most general necessary conditions can be indicated.
Class opposition develops into class struggle whenever in the course of production an exploited class finds that it can no longer sustain itself at the level to which it has been accustomed. The development of the productive forces of society continually widens the gap between those who have property rights to the production forces and those who live by toiling at them. Cultural disparities grow with the differences in material comfort and security. The rapidity with which an oppressed class locates the source of its exploitation and the extent to which its consequent class consciousness triumphs over its other loyalties are functions of a peculiar set of historical circumstances. In one country, due to the accidents of natural wealth and free land, the illusion that every man with initiative can win a living may still prevail even when the original conditions have vanished. In another country, a low standard of living may make for acquiescence. In one country, the population may be divided into opposing races and religions, and a fall in the standard of living may exacerbate their differences instead of uniting them. In another country, a strong revolutionary tradition may result in turning every industrial conflict into an armed battle.
The existence of political groups or parties is just as necessary for the growth of class consciousness as is the development of productive forces. The political party is the agency by which the socio-psychological obstacles to class consciousness are removed. It formulates a class philosophy to express the class needs already dimly sensed in the daily antagonisms of economic life and in the occasional conflicts into which those antagonisms burst out. The political party makes explicit as a programme what is implied in the struggle of the masses. It agitates for action on the basis of ideals, helps organise the masses, and seeks to convince all progressive elements in society of the desirability and practicality of its social ideas. It prepares for the conquest of power. The course of preparation is a course of education in which the religious, national and racial oppositions within the class it represents are overcome. Class struggles are possible without a political party. But of themselves they can never become revolutionary struggles unless they are transformed from sporadic and undirected explosions of pent-up misery into the starting and continuing points of one long campaign. The political organisation serves as the active principles of revolutionary continuity. Marx and Lenin realised that left to itself the working class would never develop a socialist philosophy. Its intermittent class struggles would be regarded as only one kind of social opposition among others and not the most crucial of all social oppositions. The programmes of most conservative trade unions throughout the world proclaim an essential unity, not an antagonism, between the interests of the employer and the wage-earner. [5] A revolutionary socialist philosophy does not flow from the same source as the primitive class struggle of trade unionism. It must be introduced literally into the trade-union movement, although without the existence of such a movement, socialism would have no revolutionary meaning. Only when the working class becomes imbued with the knowledge of the causes of its own existence, and fired with the ideals suggested by this knowledge, can it be called, in a truly radical sense, class conscious.
This emphasis upon the conscious activity of the political party, far from representing an idealistic deviation from Marxism, as most mechanical Marxists imagine, is central to Marx’s revolutionary position. The opening sections of Parts II and IV of the Communist Manifesto make this clear to all who read it. Plekhanov’s epithet of ‘heretic’ to the contrary notwithstanding, Lenin was in direct line with the Marxist tradition when he condemned the attitude of those who held that the spontaneous movement of the working class would result in revolutionary class consciousness:
... subservience to the spontaneity of the labour movement [he wrote], the belittling of the role of the ‘conscious element’, of the role of Social-Democracy, means whether one likes it or not, growth of influence of bourgeois ideology among the workers. All those who talk about ‘exaggerating the importance of ideology’, about exaggerating the role of the conscious element, etc, imagine that the pure and simple labour movement can work out an independent ideology for itself, if only the workers ‘take their fate out of the hands of the leaders’. But in this they are profoundly mistaken. [6]
Class antagonism can develop into revolutionary class consciousness only under the leadership of a revolutionary political organisation. But now, under what conditions do the messages of the revolutionary organisation fall upon willing ears? Here we seem to be arguing in a circle. Taking social need and want for granted, the class consciousness of the workers depends upon revolutionary organisation, and the effectiveness of the revolutionary message upon the class consciousness of the workers. The circle, however, is only apparent. The conjunction of the two necessary conditions gives us the sufficient condition of radical class consciousness. The programme of the political party of the workers wins greater support as the pressure of the environment produces greater misery.
Just as the political party is the agency by which class antagonism comes to life, so there exists a political agency which bends all its energies to prevent class antagonisms from rising to class consciousness. This political agency is the state. Through myriads of instrumentalities it seeks to secure the status quo. Although it is itself the executor of the interests of the dominant social class, it systematically cultivates the mythology that the state is above all classes and that the well-understood interests of all classes are one. Every legal code proclaims this; every school system teaches it. No one can challenge the myth without suffering certain penalties. To the forces of ignorance, inertia and divided allegiance which revolutionary agitation must overcome, must be added the inverted, official, class-struggle propaganda which teaches that there is no class struggle.
It is a well observed fact that ruling groups are always more class-conscious than those over whom they rule. The possession of power and the necessity of making choices compel them to realise that almost every act on behalf of themselves is at the same time an act, directly or indirectly, against other subject classes. Even measures taken presumably for the good of the whole community, for example, protection of the public health, are carried out in such a way that the larger benefits fall upon those who need them least.
The state is indirectly involved in every manifestation of the class struggle. Not only in the obvious sense that the court, police and soldiers are often brought in to break strikes with injunctions, clubs and bayonets, but in the more important sense that every class struggle which seeks to abolish the social conditions of exploitation out of which class antagonisms arise, is aimed at the very existence of the state power itself. The sine qua non of political clarity, whether it be in the interest of reaction or revolution, is the realisation that every class struggle is a political struggle; for the consequences of a class struggle are such as either to weaken or to strengthen the political rule of the class which controls the instruments of production. The fact that every class struggle is a political struggle suggests why Marx believed that the class struggle is more fundamental than any other forms of social struggle whether they be religious, national or racial. Only through class struggle can a change in property relationships, that is, social revolution, be achieved. That is how Marx read the great revolutions of the past. That is how he evaluated the instrumentalities of social change in the present. He did not deny that other social oppositions – notably religious, ethical and national – play an important part in historical change. But they never assert themselves as revolutionary forces unless they are linked up with the immediate interests of the class struggle. Cromwell’s men marched into battle with hymns on their lips, but their victories sealed the fate of the feudal nobility. The rising German bourgeoisie and the revenue-hungry princes backed Luther’s fierce attack on Rome; but church estates and not the doctrine of transubstantiation was at issue. Later all parties to this dispute joined in a religious war against the Anabaptists, peasants and plebeians whose poverty led them to take the social doctrines of primitive Christianity seriously.
Marx held that religious oppositions in bourgeois society, in contradistinction to the past, no longer paralleled class antagonisms. As a consequence of institutionalisation, all influential religions have become wedded to the existing order of property relations. Doctrinal differences remain, but these are as nothing compared to the unity of interest in their real estate holdings, educational privileges and practical political power wielded through their communicants. Any attack upon the stability of the social order, that is, upon the existing order of property relations, is an attack upon their vested interests. Whereas they regard atheism as only a disease of modern civilisation, they denounce communism – free thought in economics – as the enemy of all civilisation. In his own day Marx observed that ‘the English Established Church will more readily pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1-39th of its income’. [7] Whether or not this be literally and universally true, there can be no doubt that all institutionalised churches have nothing to gain by the abolition of class antagonisms and a great deal to lose. That is why whenever any crucial class issue arises, religious leaders of all denominations make a common front against the common enemy. The daily press offers pointed illustrations. [8]
What is true of the religious differences of the ruling classes is true of their national differences. Tradition, local piety and immediate interests feed the spirit of patriotism. But once the class war raises its head at home or in the enemy’s country, the fires of nationalism are banked and out of the smouldering flame there springs up the furies of international class interest more relentless than any national zeal can be. Bismarck permitted republican France to live in order to scotch the deadly threat of the Paris Commune; France helped save bourgeois Germany from the proletarian revolution in 1919 and 1923; Miliukov, who had accused the Bolsheviks of being German agents because of their refusal to continue war against Germany, after the October Revolution fled for help and refuge to the arms of the German general staff.
In order to avoid easy simplification, it will bear repeating that class struggles have often been fought, at least in the minds of the participants, as national and religious wars. Marx does not deny this. But he holds that this is the case only when the ruling class within a country has identified itself with one form of religion, so that an attack upon its religion is an attack upon the whole complex of social institutions of which its religious practices are a part. This is the key, as most scholars have admitted, to the attack of the German Reformation and the French Revolution upon Catholicism. Similarly for the national consciousness which becomes a unifying force in most colonial wars. A local class, proclaiming its interests to be identical with that of the whole of the subject nation, may, as in the case of the American Revolution, lead in the attack against the national oppressor. But however it may have been in the past, in the era of monopoly capitalism economic considerations and class divisions overshadow all others. In an era in which the slogan, ‘where markets and raw materials are, there is the fatherland’, expresses an economic necessity, in an era in which all religions are equally true, if only they inculcate respect for the mysterious ways by which God works in the social order, national and religious differences are clearly subordinate to class interests.
What is true for the ruling class is decidedly not true for the class over whom it rules. The international working class is torn by the national, racial and religious differences which the culture of capitalism breeds, teaches and systematically intensifies. If these differences and conflicting loyalties did not exist, capitalism would disappear. As it is, until the social revolution takes place, they will never completely disappear. Until then, the class struggle may be regarded legitimately as permanent war between the state and the political party of the working class, in which the state is aided by all the agencies of existing bourgeois culture, and the revolutionary party by all the consequences of existing bourgeois production.
We can now answer the fundamental question, which served as our point of departure, less ambiguously. Class antagonism and opposition is a fact in the sense that its existence does not depend upon class consciousness. Class consciousness is a fact in the sense that sometimes class antagonisms have developed from implicit opposition to explicit struggle. The class struggle is the most important of all other social struggles in the sense that the historical record shows that a change from one social order to another has always been achieved by class struggle and in no other way. The class struggle is a theory in the sense that today as in the past it is regarded as the most fundamental struggle in contemporary society. As a theory, it is a guide to action. That is what is meant by saying that it is the most fundamental struggle. The proof that the class struggle is the most fundamental of social oppositions in society can be found only in revolutionary action which by socialising the productive base of society therewith transforms all existing national and racial oppositions from anti-social antagonisms to cooperative and mutually fructifying antagonisms. For example, one of the most striking consequences of the still incomplete Russian Revolution is the progressive elimination of national, cultural and racial hostilities among its heterogeneous peoples. This has been accomplished not by suppressing national units or indigenous cultures but by strengthening them – strengthening them by showing that their local political autonomy, natural piety for countryside, and legitimate pride in the best of their language and traditions can be perpetuated most fruitfully by voluntary participation in a socialist economy.
This is not saying that after the socialist revolution has been completed there will no longer be social oppositions. It simply asserts as an hypothesis to be tested in practice that these social oppositions will not be accompanied by economic oppression. Nor is this merely a matter of definition, as some Marxists believe who argue that since class struggles arise only in class societies, therefore, in the classless society by definition there cannot be any class struggle. It is only in the realm of Platonic essences that anything can be settled by definitions. Here it is a question of the adequacy of definition. From the point of view of the materialistic dialectic, definitions, if they are to have any relevance to the things defined, are predictions; and no predictions about anything which happens in time – especially about the social events in which man is an active element – can claim necessity or finality. That is why the apparent paradox is inescapable that the truth of Marx’s theory of the class struggle can be established only in the experience of social revolution, that is, after class society has been overthrown. For a Marxist, there is no other avenue than the concrete experience of social action by which the truth of any theory of human history can be discovered. That is the method by which he tests the doctrines of his opponents. That is the method by which he must test his own. Any other method involves faith, revelation – in short, superstition.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, available here. – MIA
2. Karl Marx, Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, English translation, p. 133. [available at here. – MIA]
3. Karl Marx, Letter to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt, 9 April 1870, available here. – MIA
4. Karl Marx, Letter to Kugelmann, 28 March 1870 [actually Confidential Communication on Bakunin, 28 March 1870. – MIA]
5. For example, Paragraph 10 of the constitution of the Federation of Conservative Trade Unions of Berlin, organised in 1913, reads: ‘The trade unions see in the employer not an economic enemy of the worker but a collaborator in the processes of production. It follows from this conception that the interests of the workers and employers far from being always antagonistic are, on the contrary, in most cases in harmony with each other.’ (Correspondenzblatt, 11 October 1913, p. 627, quoted by Michels, Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demokratie. Untersuchungen über die oligarchischen Tendenz des Gruppenlebens (revised second edition, Leipzig 1925) The theory and practice of the American Federation of Labour is too well known to need documentation.
6. V.I. Lenin, Works, Volume IV, English translation, p. 122 [V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Volume 5. – MIA
7. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1. – MIA
8. Of the many citations available, none is more eloquent than a modest death notice taken from the New York Times, 14 September 1925: ‘Chicago, 14 September (AP) – The death of Max Pam in New York City today closed a noted legal career in which he was associated not only with Judge E.H. Gary, the late E.H. Harriman and the late John W. Gates, but with Vice-President Dawes in the organisation of the Central Trust Company of Illinois. He had a large collection of paintings and was known as a lover of music, literature and art. Mr Pam was an unrelenting foe of Socialism, and, although a Jew, contributed liberally to several Roman Catholic institutions on the ground that they would oppose the spread of Marxian doctrines. He also was a frequent contributor to the Zionist movement and active in that international organisation. Burial will be in Chicago.’
‘A frank recognition of the real social issues at stake is contained in the report of the Layman’s Foreign Missions inquiry which summons all denominations to forget their theological differences and to unite in a common struggle against “the real foe” of all “prophets, books, revelations, rites and churches” – the philosophies of Marx, Lenin and Russell.’ (New York Times, 7 October 1932)
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XVIII: The Theory of Revolution)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XVIII: The Theory of Revolution
I: ‘The Revolutionary Situation’ and ‘The Revolution’: If Marx’s analysis of the state is valid, then it follows that no fundamental change in the control of the instruments of social production is possible without the overthrow of the state. The overthrow of the state means revolution. Since the acceptance of the class theory of the state is the sine qua non of Marxism, to be a Marxist means to be a revolutionist. The strategy and tactics of Marxists everywhere must be guided by an evaluation of the consequences of any proposed course of action upon the conquest of political power. When conditions are different, methods of procedure will be different, but the use of one method rather than another is determined by a revolutionary purpose which is constant in all situations. This does not mean that such a purpose can be translated into action at any time. That was the error of the Blanquists who, for almost half a century in France, conceived of revolution as a conspiratorial coup d’état on the part of a band of determined men, whose first task was to seize the state offices and, independently of the condition of productive forces and the political maturity of the proletariat, introduce socialism. Such a policy necessarily leads to a mad adventurism which, for all its heroic qualities, has disastrous effects upon existing organisations of the working class.
Many socialists who survived the abortive revolutions of 1848 were peculiarly subject to the belief that the sole and exclusive condition of a successful revolution at any time was the will and power of a political organisation. They did not stop to inquire whether the complex of objective conditions, economic, political and psychological, which had once been favourable for an uprising, had remained so. In the desperation of their defeat, they impatiently urged resort to direct action before the state had an opportunity to take protective measures on its own behalf and annihilate the revolutionists. Many of these men worked with Marx in common organisations. But in the interests of the true revolutionary objective for which these organisations were founded, Marx was compelled to dissociate himself from the revolutionary Utopians – sometimes to the point of splitting with them. It was not their sincerity which he attacked but what was, in its objective consequences, even more important, their lack of intelligence. ‘In moments of crisis’, he once wrote, ‘stupidity becomes a crime.’
One of the earliest struggles which Marx waged against this tendency in the international revolutionary movement, took place in London in 1850. On this occasion he split the Communist League by his attack on the Willich-Schapper fraction of direct actionists. In the course of the discussion, he said:
In place of a critical attitude, you [the minority] substitute a dogmatic one; in place of a materialistic conception, an idealistic one. For you, pure will instead of objective conditions is the driving force of revolution.
While we say to the workers: ‘You have to go through 15, 20, 50 years of civil war and national struggles, not only to change conditions but to change yourselves and to acquire the capacity for political mastery’, you say on the contrary: ‘We must seize power at once or else we may as well lie down and go to sleep.’ While we particularly call to the attention of the German workers, the undeveloped character of the German proletariat, you flatter (in the crudest way) their national feeling and the professional prejudices of the German craftsmen. Certainly, the more popular thing to do. Just as the democrats convert the word ‘people’ into a holy fetish, so do you the word ‘proletariat’. And like the democrats you palm off the revolutionary phrase for revolutionary development ... [1]
This note is struck again and again in the history of the European working-class movement. In a different context it appears in the writings of Engels, of Lenin, of Rosa Luxemburg. Sometimes, these passages from their writings will be found quoted in the works of those who call themselves Marxists but for whom revolutionary activity at any time is anathema. Such citations may be dismissed as dishonest distortions. For Marx condemns ‘revolutionists of the phrase’ not because he is an advocate of ‘moral force’, but because he is interested in discovering the conditions under which a successful revolution is possible.
A political party can prepare itself and large sections of the working class for a revolutionary situation in which its action may be the decisive factor. But it cannot of itself produce the revolutionary situation. That depends, first, upon the breakdown of the forces of production and distribution as measured by the disparity between what the workers receive and what they have produced, by the growing unemployment, by the jamming of the mechanism of credit, by all the familiar phenomena attendant upon an actual or incipient economic crisis. Second, a revolutionary situation is evidenced in the lack of immediate political homogeneity on the part of the ruling classes. This may be the result of an exceptionally prolonged economic crisis or of a lost war or of some natural calamity which demoralises production. The lack of political homogeneity is reflected in dissensions between different groups over policy. Its objective effects are loss of prestige of the ruling group in the eyes of the mass of the population, a growing sense that ‘anything might happen’, increasing restlessness and unreliability of administrative agencies. To all this must be added, thirdly, spontaneous manifestations of class consciousness and struggle; strikes, riots and mass demonstrations; the disintegration of the habit-patterns of blind response and obedience on the part of the oppressed elements. The revolutionary situation is experienced by all classes as one of seething chaos. [2]
It is only in relation to the objective revolutionary situation that the revolutionary act and the role of the revolutionary party can be grasped. Psychologically, the seizure of power is felt as an attempt to bring a new order out of the existing confusion. Revolutionary slogans and programmes are put forward as ways of saving society. To the mass of the population, without whose support the revolution would fail, the ensuing civil war and destruction appear as the costs of social salvation. Where the revolutionary situation is not conceived of as the condition precedent to the revolution, the latter is regarded as an abstract affair – a putsch or coup d’état. It is doomed to failure; and if it succeeds, it is only as a superficial, political phenomenon which leaves the essential class relationships unaltered. The proletarian revolution, which is the greatest social upheaval in history, must strike deeper roots. For it marks the transition not from one class society to another, but from class society to classless society.
The revolutionary party does not make ‘the revolutionary situation’. Nor does it, by itself, make ‘the revolution’. It organises and leads it. This is a task heavy with responsibility; a task whose execution is influenced more directly by such ‘subjective’ factors as previous education, theory, personality of leaders than by any one ‘objective’ aspect of the revolutionary situation. A revolutionary situation does not automatically come to fruition. Unless a revolutionary party exists, free from the twin faults of sectarianism and opportunism, and therefore capable of properly exploiting every lead towards the seizure of power, the situation may lose its potentialities for revolutionary change. But it is not only at such moments that the political party is of central importance. Long before the revolutionary situation develops, it must be active on every front on which there is social discontent. It seeks to broaden the base of mass struggles, to organise and educate the working class politically, and to build up its own ranks in preparation for the coming revolutionary situation.
For Marx, questions of revolutionary organisation and strategy were of the highest political significance. They were not treated as details incidental to larger problems of theory but as integrally connected with them. This is clearly revealed in that classic statement of tactical first principles, The Address to the Communist League (1850). Some illustrations: In the processes of capitalist production, the wage-workers and agricultural labourers are those who have most to gain by a revolution. Their political party must therefore lead the revolution. It must never surrender its independent revolutionary policy and organisational autonomy no matter how closely it works in united action with the political parties of the discontented petty bourgeoisie. Even more important: The international character of capitalist production necessitates an international organisation to overthrow it. The social revolution is not complete until it is international. A social revolution in one country creates a breach in the international system of capitalist production which must either become wider or be closed up. As Marx proclaimed in his Address:
... it is our interest and our task to make the revolution permanent, to keep it going until all the ruling and possessing classes are deprived of power, the governmental machinery occupied by the proletariat, and the organisation of the working classes of all lands so far advanced that all rivalry and competition among themselves has ceased. [3]
It goes without saying that the uneven character of capitalist development and the varying concomitant political consciousness demand a flexible, concrete application of fundamental principles to specific problems of each nation. But by virtue of the character of the state and of the existence of special bodies of armed men, it is imperative, however, that revolutionary organisations everywhere be prepared, when the revolutionary situation arises, for the ultimate overthrow of the state.
II: Force and Non-Violence: The emphasis on readiness for the ultimate overthrow of the state indicates the kind of revolution Marx is talking about. It raises the most fundamental of all questions concerning revolution, viz., the place and justification of force and violence in social change.
Marx and Engels never discussed the use of force in the abstract. For what could one say of it? Taken by itself, in independence of a concrete historical context and a specific purpose, it is a neutral event devoid of moral quality. It is only in relation to the socio-historical conditions and consequences of its use that it can be intelligently discussed. For example, before one passes moral judgement upon the ancient practice of enslaving prisoners of war, it would be well to ask what the alternative historical methods of treating them were – in this case decimation, and sometimes cannibalism – and why the practice of enslaving prisoners prevailed over others. Where the subdivision of labour has reached a point at which it becomes possible, by the forced labour of prisoners, to provide enough for their wants and a surplus to liberate others for cultural activity, slavery constitutes a distinct moral advance. To condemn slavery as essentially wrong wherever and whenever it is found on the ground that the alternative of freedom always existed as an abstract possibility, is to pass moral judgement not upon slavery but upon the natural and social conditions out of which ancient life developed and over which one had but limited control. Abstract moral considerations of this kind have no relevance when it is a question of evaluating between institutions all of which fall short of ideal perfection. Engels properly retorts to Dühring who approached the problem in this abstract fashion: ‘When Dühring, then, turns up his nose at Greek civilisation because it was based on slavery, he might just as reasonably reproach the Greeks for not having steam engines and electric telegraphs.’ [4]
In contradistinction to economists like Bastiat, who sought to explain social institutions in term of ‘natural law’ concepts of force, Marx denied that the use of force alone – as a naked assertion of power – can ever explain the course of social development. At most it accounts for the destruction of a culture or its retardation. The use of force can achieve higher social and moral ends only when it liberates the productive capacities of the social order from the repressive property relations within which they are bound. That is not merely the condition of its historic justification but of its historic efficacy: ‘Force is the midwife of every old society pregnant with the new. It is itself an economic power.’ [5]
All this indicates that Marx did not make a fetishism of force. His theory that political force must derive its ethical sanction from some positive social function serves as a guide to its revolutionary use. He had made a close study of the role of force in the great English and French revolutions, and knew from first-hand experience what it had won and lost in the revolution of 1848. For Marx, the use of force in a revolutionary situation was no more a moral problem than the use of fire in ordinary life; it was only the intelligent use of force which constituted a problem. In this position he had to defend himself against two types of anti-revolutionary, theoretical intransigence. One was the official point of view of the bourgeoisie. Having already made its revolution by force, it now taught that the use of force in political matters was in principle a crime against civilisation. And this in the face of the facts that the bourgeois state and law functioned by the use of force; and that the struggle between capital and labour, upon which bourgeois civilisation rested, took the form of open civil war whenever workers were driven to defend themselves as a result of intolerable oppression. The second point of view was more sincere, and because it sometimes called itself revolutionary, too – more dangerous. This was the position of the ‘moral force’ men, Christian Socialists, philosophical anarchists, legalists at any price, and of the perennial Utopians of whom Marx had already written in the Communist Manifesto that ‘they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means and endeavour’. [6]
Contemporary political thought and practice has witnessed a resurgence of this social philosophy in the doctrines of pacifism and non-resistance. A statement of the Marxist criticism of this view should be timely.
First of all, it should be clear that non-resistance in politics – if it does not betoken the attitude of complete acceptance – is a species of resistance. Strictly speaking, it means passive resistance. It is a technique of resistance. On what grounds can it be asserted, then, that the technique of passive resistance is superior to the technique of active resistance? Obviously only in terms of the consequences which follow from their respective use, only in the light of their efficacy in realising the ends to which they are the technique. In the case in question, the end is the introduction of socialism which will eliminate the remediable horrors and degradation of bourgeois society – war, unemployment, starvation and the manifold forms of spiritual prostitution that flow from the dominance of the profit motive. To say, then, that passive resistance is more effective than active resistance is to say that by its use socialism may be achieved in the shortest space of time and at the lowest price in human life and suffering. What is the evidence for believing this to be always true? Must not this be redetermined for every situation? If the theoretical possibility is admitted, that this may sometimes not be the case, does not the absolutistic foundation of pacifism collapse? And with it the fetishism of the technique of passive resistance?
Whoever denies that passive resistance is a technique to achieve certain ends, is constrained to affirm that it is a religion, since it hypostasises an attitude which may be valid in some situations into an unconditional postulate of all situations. As a religion it is beyond argument. But its effects are not beyond argument, especially for those who do not share the faith. These effects may be such as to perpetuate and intensify existing evils and disorganise active techniques which aim at their rapid elimination. In such situations the objective implications of the attitude of passive resistance convert it into a religion of acceptance and make its adherents more immediately dangerous to those who urge revolutionary action than the sworn defenders of existing evils. For example, Mr Gandhi has publicly proclaimed in an address on the future of India:
I would consider it nothing if we had to pay a million lives for our liberty, but one thing I hope the Congress has set its heart on is the campaign of non-violence. So, whether it is one life or a million we have to pay, I am praying it will be possible for the future historian to say that India fought and won her liberty without shedding human blood. [7]
It must be remembered that the imperialistic penetration of India has taken place to the continuous accompaniment of bloodshed; the Amritsar massacre was only a dramatic illustration of the process of ‘pacification’. In the light of this, the implications of Mr Gandhi’s position are very interesting. He does not say, as do some Indian revolutionists, that since the probable cost of attaining national independence by other techniques would come to much more than a million lives, passive resistance is preferable. This is an arguable position. No, Mr Gandhi declares that he rejects active resistance even if it could bring national independence at much less than a million lives. It is Mr Gandhi, then, who is prepared to justify the shedding of human blood, if only it does not flow as a result of a violent revolution. For what end? The independence of India? Hardly, since he refuses to consider any other methods of attaining it. Out of compassion for those who must suffer? Obviously not, since a humanitarian is one who seeks the least costly road no matter what it is, and who justifies human suffering only when it is either a way of avoiding still greater suffering or the indispensable condition of some greater good. Mr Gandhi’s end or good can be only the abstract principle of non-violence itself. But in that case why stop at a million lives? If it is immaterial to the principle whether it is ‘one life or a million’, it cannot be material whether it is one million lives or ten million. In strict consistency Mr Gandhi must be prepared to say that if India could win her freedom by a campaign of non-violence, he would ‘consider it nothing’ if no Indians were alive to enjoy it. Pereat mundus fiat principia!
Let us leave India. A sober analysis of the effects of passive resistance and non-cooperation in social life will reveal that at certain times more privation for the community may follow upon their use than through some forms of militant action. A general walk-out in a key industry may cause more suffering and yet be less effective than a violent demonstration. At other times, a violent revolution may stave off international carnage. If the Second International had been true to its pledged faith in 1914 and had been organised for social revolution, it is unlikely that the costs would have come as high – to mention only the most conspicuous item – as twenty-five million of dead and wounded. The punishment for the excessive legalism and pacifism of the Italian socialists in 1920 was Mussolini and Fascism.
The logic of personal relations applies in social affairs, too. An abject humbleness is not always more effective in redressing grievances than a spirited defence. We cannot always get rid of our enemies by loving them. It may make them more furious. And as for the much-heralded effects of passive resistance in spiritually disarming the enemy, they cannot be very reliable under conditions where it is not necessary to see men in order to kill them; where bomb, gas and germs do their work in distant anonymity. But under any conditions the technique of passive resistance has its moral limits. For although we may meet force against ourselves with charitable forgiveness, we call a man a coward, and not a saint, who forgives the use of brute force against others and does not try to stop it – by force if necessary!
It is often declared that application of force demoralises those who use it and that a new society won by force of arms would be insensitive to truly ethical values. So Dühring. So Tolstoy. So Bertrand Russell. But again it must be emphasised that it is not the use of force but the purpose for which it is used which makes it degrading. Otherwise every engineer, surgeon and soldier in any cause would be a degraded creature. There are many things ethically worse than the use of force: for example, cowardly sufferance or lazy tolerance of degrading social evils and political tyrannies which a resolute use of force might eliminate. Nor is it true that a victory won by arms leads to demoralisation. Marx and Engels often point to the moral and intellectual advance which followed the French Revolution. The release of creative collective energy by the Russian Revolution is unparalleled in the history of mankind. In principle, then, the use of force – although always dangerous – cannot be always condemned. It eventuates in brutality no more often than humility leads to hypocrisy and servility.
But that does not yet establish Marx’s contention that when the revolutionary situation is ripe the final conquest of power must be won by force of arms. Here we must pick up the thread of our earlier exposition. The existence of the state presupposes the existence of special bodies of armed men obedient to the will of those who control the state. These come into play directly or indirectly even in the ordinary struggles which arise in the course of the class war – a fact which is overlooked by those who profess not to believe in the use of any force and yet pay their state taxes which support the soldiery and the police. In a revolutionary crisis, although these forces cannot escape the general ferment and disaffection, the very uncertainties of the situation lead to their wider use on the part of those who are trying to save the old order. The application of force against rising discontent becomes more ruthless and irresponsible. It sometimes appears as if the defenders of the existing state were trying to provoke a violent rather than a peaceful revolution. Even if the parties of social revolution were to be carried to power ‘legally’, their victory would be nugatory unless the armed forces of the state, as well as the defence corps which would be rallied by the leaders of the bourgeoisie, were won over, disarmed or defeated. In such a situation, the ‘readiness is all’. Force must be met by force – by a stronger and more intelligent force. The determining consideration is not one of ‘legality’ but of ‘revolutionary expediency’. In revolutionary situations ‘legality’ is the outworn shibboleth of a system of social repression now in dissolution whose very guarantees of civil rights, such as they were, have long since been abrogated by the bourgeoisie itself. One false step – even hesitation – may be fatal to the revolution. To insure victory strategic places must be seized, points of military vantage occupied, insurrectionary tactics deployed wherever resistance manifests itself.
Marx lived in an age in which the traditions of violent revolution were common to all classes. This was especially true on the Continent. The extension of the suffrage to the entire population did not alter matters, for the crucial question was not the forms by which the strength of the revolutionary ideal was measured but the efficacy of the methods by which the ideas were achieved. Marx never asserted that the social revolution could take place without the support – active or passive – of a majority of the population. Without the assurance of such support, the revolution must not be undertaken. But although this support is necessary, it is not sufficient unless it is translated into power. Ultimately, whether fifty per cent or ninety per cent of the population support the revolution, state power will be won not by pencil and ballot-paper but by workers with rifles. As late as 1872 in speaking of the continental countries (we shall consider the exceptions below) Marx wrote: ‘It is to force that in due time the workers will have to appeal if the dominion of labour is at long last to be established.’ [8]
But it may be asked: Why cannot the revolution be made peacefully? Why may not the ruling class voluntarily surrender its power rather than risk defeat or the destruction of the whole of society in civil war? These questions may be answered by asking others. When has this ever been the case? When has any ruling class permitted itself to be bowed out of power without putting up the most desperate kind of resistance? Again it must be emphasised that the socialist revolution involves not merely the substitution of the power of one class for that of another in the ownership of private property, but of the very existence of private property itself. In past revolutions it was possible for members of one class to save their property by shifting their class allegiance. And still they fought tooth and nail against the rising class who were often more than ready to compromise! How much more fiercely must they fight against the socialist revolution which makes forever impossible the exercise of power over human beings through the possession of property, and which cannot compromise this principle without suffering disaster? It should also be borne in mind that by virtue of their past training, ideology and class status, the ruling class necessarily regards the defence of its property interests as the defence of civilisation against barbarism, the preservation of the refinements of its culture as the preservation of all culture against the vandalism of the rabble. Out of this subjective sincerity there often arises – at least on the part of a sufficient number to constitute a danger – a desire to go down fighting for what they consider honour and the good life.
That the workers will have to resort to force to achieve the socialist revolution, is for Marx, then, as likely as anything can be in history. To disregard the evidence of historical experience, and not to prepare on the basis of it, is to betray the revolution in advance. To be sure, there is always the abstract possibility that power may be won peacefully. But history is not determined by abstract possibilities. If peaceful demonstrations on the part of workers for minor concessions of relief and insurance in ordinary times are broken up by savage force and violence, how can it be assumed that the milk of kindness will flow when the demand is made for the abolition of the entire profit system? The socialists captured a legal majority of the Finnish parliament in 1918. Before they could put through their programme, they were drowned in rivers of blood by an armed counter-revolution.
III: Some ‘Exceptions’: We must now consider the exceptions which Marx makes to this general rule. In the very same speech from which we have quoted his remarks about the necessity of a resort to force, he says:
Some day the workers must conquer political supremacy, in order to establish the new organisation of labour; they must overthrow the old political system whereby the old institutions are sustained. If they fail to do this, they will suffer the fate of the early Christians, who neglected to overthrow the old system, and who, for that reason, never had a kingdom in this world. Of course, I must not be supposed to imply that the means to this end will be everywhere the same. We know that special regard must be paid to the institutions, customs and traditions of various lands; and we do not deny that there are certain countries, such as the United States and England in which the workers may hope to secure their ends by peaceful means. [9]
Although the possibility of a peaceful revolution in England and America is stated conditionally, the sense of the passage is clear. In 1886, Engels, in his preface to the first English translation of Capital, echoes the same sentiment. He calls upon England to hearken to the voice of a man:
... whose whole theory is the result of a lifelong study of the economic history and condition of England, and whom that study led to the conclusion that, at least in Europe, England is the only country where the inevitable social evolution might be effected entirely by peaceful and legal means. [10]
And then immediately after, with an unconsciousness which almost borders on simplicity, he introduces the joker:
He [Marx] certainly never forgot to add that he hardly expected the English ruling class to submit, without a ‘pro-slavery rebellion’, to this peaceful and legal revolution. [11]
As if it were not precisely the danger of a ‘pro-slavery rebellion’ – a counter-revolution – which demanded that the revolution everywhere assure its victory by a resort to force! As if the mandate for its legality were derived from the existing order, which always has a ‘legal provision’ for changing the rules whenever they are working against it, and not from the power of the masses!
Lenin, who, to my knowledge, never challenged a single word in Marx or Engels, instead of calling an error by its right name, attempts to show that Marx and Engels were perfectly justified in holding that a revolution in Anglo-American countries was possible, at that time, ‘without the preliminary condition of the destruction “of the available ready machinery of the state”’. He hastens to add, however, that at the present time, this is no longer true by virtue of the development of bureaucratic institutions.
He writes:
... he [Marx] confines his conclusions [about violent revolution] to the continent. This was natural in 1871, when England was still the pattern of a purely capitalist country, without a military machine and, in large measure, without a bureaucracy.
Hence Marx excluded England where a revolution, even a people’s revolution, could be imagined, and was then possible, without the preliminary condition of the destruction ‘of the available ready machinery of the state’ ...
Today in 1917, in the epoch of the first great imperialist war, this distinction of Marx’s becomes unreal, and England and America, the greatest and last representative of Anglo-Saxon ‘liberty’ in the sense of the absence of militarism and bureaucracy, have today completely rolled down into the dirty, bloody morass of military-bureaucratic institutions common in all Europe, subordinating all else to themselves, crushing all else under themselves. Today both in England and in America, ‘the preliminary condition of any real people’s revolution’ is the break-up, the shattering of the available ready machinery of the state (perfected in those countries between 1914 and 1917, up to the ‘European’ general imperialist standard). [12]
Lenin was a political genius but his explanation here is obviously forced and unconvincing. England and America were no different from continental countries in any respect relevant to the conquest of power by a revolutionary movement than they were in 1917. If anything, it would have been more difficult to achieve the social revolution peacefully in these countries than elsewhere.
Let us look at England. It was Marx who showed in Capital that capitalism had developed in England through the most merciless dictatorship. After the peasants had been forced off their land, they were physically punished if they would not work, and driven to the poorhouse when they could not work as a result of unemployment. By the eighteenth century Cromwell had become a national hero. Hastings, Clive and others had carried out England’s colonial policy in India, Egypt and elsewhere with the same ruthlessness that Cromwell had used in subduing Ireland. A year after Marx’s birth, English workers in peaceful assemblage had been shot down at Peterloo. Marx himself had witnessed the suppression of the peaceful Chartist movement and knew many of its leaders who had languished in jail. At the very time when Marx was making his exception in favour of England, she had the largest navy in the world, standing armies in India, Egypt and Ireland, a highly developed bureaucracy, and as Marx’s letters testify, the most astute and class-conscious ruling class in the world. In 1869, at a mass meeting in Hyde Park, Marx introduced a resolution which demanded political amnesty for imprisoned Irish patriots and denounced Britain’s ‘policy of conquest’ – a policy which could not be broken without the active cooperation of the English working class. In the same year he wrote to Kugelmann, ‘England has never ruled Ireland in any other way and cannot rule it in any other way... except by the most hideous reign of terror and the most revolting corruption’ [13] – a sentiment which Engels expressed again and again in his letters to Marx from Ireland a decade earlier. Is this a country in which the social revolution could have taken place peacefully? [14]
Nor is the reference to the United States any more fortunate. A few years before Marx’s Amsterdam address, America had gone through her second revolution to break up the semi-feudal slavocracy which barred the expansion of industrial capitalism. At the very moment Marx was speaking, the North was exercising a virtual dictatorship over the South. A few years later profound industrial disturbances, which almost took on an insurrectionary character, shook the country. Was it likely that in a country in which feeble and ‘constitutional’ attempts to abolish chattel slavery had called forth the most violent civil war of the nineteenth century, the abolition of wage-slavery could be effected by moral suasion? Marx was right when he said that ‘special attention must be paid to the institutions, customs and traditions of various lands’, [15] but he did not know nor did Lenin, that already in 1872 the traditions of violence and legislative corruption were stronger in America than in any major European country with the exception of Russia.
It may be argued in defence of Marx, that he merely maintained that in England and America their institutions made it possible, through the ‘formal processes’ of election, to register the will of the people for a social revolution; but that this did not obviate the necessity of using the reconstituted state power to destroy counter-revolutionary elements and consolidate the victory. If this was Marx’s meaning, then, first, there was no justification at the very outset for the distinction between Anglo-American and European countries, since the same ‘formal’ procedure was possible in France and Germany; and second, Marx’s own historical studies of the transition from one form of state power to another indicate that the weight of probability was against this mode of procedure proving successful.
It remains to be asked, then, what led Marx and Engels into the error of qualifying their general position as they did – an error which could easily be dismissed as unimportant had it not led to intense controversy among Marxist and pseudo-Marxist groups in England and America. After toying with several hypotheses, the author frankly confesses that he does not know.
IV: One Or the Other: Marx’s realistic conception of social revolution has so often been rejected as offensive to the enlightened conscience of well-intentioned men that it is necessary in closing to stress again – at the risk of repetition – its thoroughly human motivation. It is asked: ‘Do not the costs of social revolution come too high?’ This is a question heard more often from those on the sidelines of the class struggle than from those who actually bear the brunt of its struggles. But it is a question which deserves an answer. The Marxist replies that he is willing to judge any project by its cost. But to judge anything only by its cost is to condemn everything ever undertaken and carried to completion in this imperfect world. Hardly a major good has come down from the past, from the discovery of fire and speech to the latest developments of scientific technique, for which human beings have not paid a price in blood and tears. Both logic and morality demand, however, that before we reject a proposal because of its cost, we consider the cost of rejecting it for any of the available alternatives. The Marxist contention is that the costs of social revolution are far less than the costs of chronic evils of poverty, unemployment, moral degradation and war, which are immanent in capitalism; that the ultimate issue and choice is between imperialistic war which promises nothing but the destruction of all culture, yes, of the human race itself, and an international revolution which promises a new era in world history.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Enthüllungen über den Kommunistenprozess, von Karl Marx, mit Einleitung von Friedrich Engels und Dokumenten (Mehring edition, Berlin 1914), p. 52. [citing minutes of the last session of the London Central Authority of the Communist League, 15 September 1850. – MIA]
2. Lenin states this as follows: ‘The fundamental law of revolution, confirmed by all revolutions and particularly by the three Russian ones of the twentieth century, is as follows: It is not sufficient for the revolution that the exploited and oppressed masses understand the impossibility of living in the old way and demand changes; for the revolution it is necessary that the exploiters should not be able to rule as of old. Only when the masses do not want the old regime, and when the rulers are unable to govern as of old, then only can the revolution succeed. This truth may be expressed in other words: revolution is impossible without an all-national crisis, affecting both the exploited and the exploiters.’ (V.I. Lenin, Infantile Sickness of ‘Leftism’ in Communism (Contemporary Publishing, New York, 1920), pp. 76–77. [“Left-Wing” Communism: An Infantile Disorder/a>, Collected Works, Volume 31. – MIA]
3. Karl Marx, Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League. – MIA
4. Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring, p 191 [available here. – MIA]
5. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p. 824. [available here. – MIA
6. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, available at here. – MIA
7. New York Times, 13 October 1931.
8. G.M. Steklov, History of the First International (London 1928), p. 240. [available here. – MIA
9. G.M. Steklov, History of the First International (London 1928), p. 24.0 [available at here. – MIA
10. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, Kerr translation, p. 32. [the text of the Progress Publishers edition refers to ‘inevitable social revolution’, available here. – MIA
11. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, Kerr translation, p. 32. [available at here. – MIA
12. V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution (English translation, London and Glasgow, 1919), p. 40, [available here. – MIA
13. Karl Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, 29 November 1869, available here. – MIA
14. ‘Ireland is the sole pretext of the English government for maintaining a big permanent army which, when it is necessary, will be let loose upon the English workers as has often happened after the army has been turned into a praetorian guard (Soldateska) in Ireland.’ [Author’s note, citing Karl Marx, Confidential Communication on Bakunin, enclosed with letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, 28 March 1870, available here. – MIA]
15. Karl Marx, Speech delivered on 8 September 1872 [available at here. – MIA]
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (I: Introduction)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Part I: The Quest for Marx
Rétablir la vérité historique n’est pas seulement une question de conscience; c’est aussi une question d’un intérêt pratique immêdiat. – Sorel
Chapter I: Introduction
The world today stands in the shadow of the doctrines of a man dead barely fifty years. The social philosophy of Karl Marx, comparatively unknown and ignored in his own lifetime, exercises a stronger influence upon the present age than the social theories of any of our contemporaries. History is being made in its name. A new philosophy of life, avowedly Marxist in inspiration, is slowly emerging to challenge the dominant attitudes and values of Western and Oriental cultures.
And yet, as soon as one devotes oneself to the study of Marxian doctrine, one discovers that there exists no canonic formulation of its position. Marx’s literary activity, extending over a period of forty years, is for the most part extremely controversial. None of his writings contains a definitive and finished expression of doctrine. He himself lived to say, ‘Je ne suis pas un marxiste.’ Various conflicting interpretations of his philosophy have split the ranks of his professed followers as well as those of his critics. There has been a greater eagerness to discuss the truth of his doctrines than to establish their meaning.
The situation is no different today than it was when Marx was first discovered by ‘bourgeois’ thinkers. The academic German professors, after the conspiracy of silence against Marx had been broken in the 1890s, charged that Marx’s conclusions were vitiated by the presence of irrelevant moral considerations. Later, neo-Kantians as well as religious socialists made the contrary charge that Marx’s conclusions were vitiated by the absence of such judgements. Some said that Marx was overemphasising the importance of revolutionary will; others, that he was paralysing human effort in a monstrous economic fatalism. Both were agreed that his thought was a contradictory mess of analyses, prediction, faith and passion. Each critic had his counter-critic; and every attempt at synthesis brought forth another campaign of polemics. Add to these academic lucubrations not only the denunciatory defence of the ‘orthodox’ Marxists, but the shrill outcries of preachers, publicists and minor literati, who rushed to refute Marx without stopping even to read him, and the atmosphere of the discussion is set. To some it appeared to be an intellectual circus; to others, another illustration of the class war.
Of itself, however, this diversity of interpretation is not an unusual thing in the history of thought. There has been hardly a single thinker of historical importance who has not paid a price for having disciples; who has not been many things to many men. There is no canonic life of Christ as there is no canonic interpretation of Plato. But in Marx’s case, the natural diversity of interpretation was reinforced by the introduction of an explicit political axis into the discussion. In addition, a peculiar way of arriving at those interpretations complicated matters. The unity of his thought was sought solely in his conclusions and not in his method of arriving at them. The systematic results were examined and not the systematic method. It was uncritically assumed that unity and simplicity were synonymous; so that in the face of complex findings, often apparently contradictory, it was concluded that his thought lacked unity. Simplicity, however, is an attribute of content; unity, of organisation. If Marx’s thought possesses unity, it is to be found not in his specific conclusions but in his method of analysis directed by the revolutionary purposes and needs of the international working class. The method, to be sure, is to be checked in the light of his conclusions; but the latter are derivative, not central. They are tentative and contingent. They may be impugned without necessarily calling the method into question, especially when the new results are won by a fresh application of the method. Just as it is possible to dissociate the Hegelian method from the Hegelian system (as Marx and Engels repeatedly insist), so it is possible to dissociate the Marxian method from any specific set of conclusions, or any particular political tactic advocated in its name. This is another way of saying that there is nothing a priori in Marx’s philosophy; it is naturalistic, historical and empirical throughout.
To distinguish between Marx’s method and his results is not to separate the two any more than to distinguish between the essence of scientific method and the scientific findings of any particular day – which are sure to be faulty and incomplete – is to deny any organic connection between them. Ultimately the validity of scientific method depends upon its power to predict, and, wherever possible, to control the succession of natural phenomena. It is this progressive power of prediction and control which justifies us in retaining scientific method even when we have discarded or modified the physics of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Newton. Similarly the validity of Marx’s method depends upon whether it enables us to realise the class purposes on whose behalf it was formulated.
But here the similarity between ‘science’ and ‘Marxism’ ends. This does not mean that Marxism is not a ‘scientific’ method, that is, adequate and efficient to secure its goals. The distinction sought flows from the recognition that the natural sciences and the ‘social sciences’ are concerned with two irreducibly different subject-matters. This difference in subject-matter compels the further recognition that values – class values – are essentially involved in every attempt to develop a methodology and programme of social action. The distinction therefore means that in so far as Marxism is a method of thought and action designed to achieve a class goal, it is something more than science, or less; for science, as such, although it may be used on behalf of class purposes, has no class character. The truth or falsity of its propositions have nothing to do with the class struggle even when the class struggle is the objective reference of its propositions. It is not denied that the direction scientific research has taken has often been determined, to a not inconsiderable extent, by the economic, political and ‘moral’ interests of the classes which have endowed laboratories and subsidised scientists. But since this applies to the false theories which have arisen as well as the true, the difference between the true and false cannot be explained by class or social considerations. To affirm the contrary is to confuse categories.
In Marx’s theories, on the other hand, a class bias and a class goal are presupposed. His doctrines do not merely describe the phenomena of class society and class struggle. They are offered as instruments in waging that struggle, as guides to a mode of action which he believed would for ever eliminate class struggles from social life. As instruments they can function effectively only in so far as they approximate objective truths; but as objective truths, they cannot be effective instruments without reference to subjective class purposes. Marx’s philosophy is a dialectical synthesis of these objective and subjective moments. By subjective is meant not unreal or uncaused – for obviously class purposes are conditioned by the socio-economic environment – but a mode of response which is directed by conscious will or desire. The range of possible class goals which can be willed at any moment in history is determined by objective social factors, but neither the willing nor the specific choice at any definite moment of time can be explained without introducing other factors. These latter we call subjective in relation to the first set; but in relation, say, to what a particular member of a class wills, they are objective. To overlook this distinction and to speak of Marxism as an ‘objective science’, is, therefore, to emasculate its class character. The disastrous consequences of such a procedure both in logic and historic fact will be examined in subsequent chapters.
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XIV: Marx’s Sociological Economics)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XIV: Marx’s Sociological Economics
Marx’s economic doctrines are the result of the application of historical materialism to the ‘mysteries’ of value, price and profit. The solution of all mysteries, Marx taught, was to be found in social practice. And it is his analysis of the social character of all economic traits and categories which represents Marx’s distinctive contribution to political economy.
Traditional economics had approached the objects of political economy in the same way that a physicist approached a steel bar or a chemist a dye. Economic relations were not derived from the way in which things entered into the social process, but were regarded, on the analogy of the physical sciences, as intrinsic properties of things. They were as much in evidence in the solitary domestic economy of a Robinson Crusoe, and in the primitive economy of the savage horde, as in the complex economy of a modern society. It was therefore not necessary, orthodox economists assumed, to take into account the distinctively historical contexts in which the economic properties of things were discovered. Further, all attempts on the part of the state to regulate prices, wages or capital investment could be denounced as absurd and pernicious attempts to interfere with the natural functioning of economic laws. No room was left for normative judgements. From this abstract unhistorical point of view gold was regarded as naturally money, instruments of production naturally capital, human labour-power naturally wage-labour, the soil, and not society, the natural locus of rent. What for Marx was the outcome of a socio-historical process was taken as the natural precondition of that process. The historical expressions of a set of relations of production were turned into fixed things; and human behaviour in all its economic ramifications was explained as controlled by things.
The upshot of this unhistorical approach corresponds to the actual consciousness of those who live in a commodity-producing society and have not yet penetrated to the secret of commodity production. The rise and fall of the market, periodic glut and scarcity, small-scale and large-scale panics, are taken as natural events bestowing blessings and calamities, like the fortunes of the weather, upon the just and unjust, the wise and the unwise. The social relations between human beings are ‘thingified’ into impersonal, automatic laws, while the material instruments of life are ‘personified’ into the directing forces of human destiny. Man finds himself ruled by the products (commodities) of his own hands. The relationships between these products:
... vary continually, independently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. To them, their own social action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them. [1]
The whole of bourgeois economy consists of a process in which things carry on, so to speak, behind man’s back. It is a process which makes a mockery of man’s strivings for security, comfort and peace by producing unemployment, want and war. It diverts human relations from their human form, and by casting a shadow of mystery on human affairs generates mysticism, superstition and religious obscurantism. Instead of the instruments of production being utilised by human beings for human purposes, in bourgeois society human beings are utilised as instruments to serve machines. It is not only in Samuel Butler’s satiric Utopia that human beings are the instruments of production used by machines for the manufacture of bigger and better machines. That is what they are in the practice and theory of commodity-producing societies. This is what Marx means when he calls bourgeois society a ‘fetishism of commodities’ and the orthodox ‘science’ of political economy, its theology.
Although the marginal utility school came into its own after Marx, its unhistorical character is just as marked as that of the classical school. In its most developed form it regards its task to be the study of ‘human behaviour as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses’. [2] Pure economics would result in the statement of formal laws – invariant relations – derived from the general empirical fact that many things are wanted which are mutually incompatible. The character of the psychological incentives and aims involved in human behaviour, the social institutions which provide its framework, are ruled out of the scope of economic inquiry, while the propositions of pure economic science – which are really empirical – are paraded as analytic deductions from first principles. Changes in evaluation, which flow from altered psychological and social conditions of economic behaviour, are regarded as brute irrational data. No attempt is made to show how economic laws change with a developing society, for by definition, economic laws are eternal. Only their historical expression can change, not their meaning and validity. From this point of view, the laws of economics are the same for all societies – feudal, capitalist and communist. An analysis which refuses to investigate the way in which formal relationships are affected by material context, cannot escape, for all its disavowal of value judgements, the air and manner of subtle apologia for the status quo. To maintain that propositions such as ‘the share of income which is received by land, labour and capital is exactly proportionate to their specific, marginal productivities’, are expressions of eternal, economic laws without further distinguishing between the formal, skeletal economic elements which are presumably invariant, and the concrete historical situation which provides the flesh and blood of significance, is to encourage the uncritical belief that the economic system is rightly ordered because, from a strict economic point of view, it can be no other than what it is.
Not all non-Marxian theories of economics are guilty of overlooking the specific historical and social context of the economic relations they submit to analysis. But the question which arises concerning those schools which adopt a genetic and functional approach – like the historical school of the nineteenth century and the institutional school of the twentieth – is: to what extent are they really theories? The task of a theory is to organise the empirical propositions of its subject-matter into some systematic connection, so that the consequences deduced are either compatible with observed phenomena or capable of serving as a guide to the discovery of new phenomena. Descriptions of mechanisms and processes can only supply the raw material for theoretical elaboration. The historical school cannot do justice to the present tendencies of economic development unless it is guided by a theory. Although its starting point is diametrically opposed to the abstract, analytical school, its practical upshot is the same: the acceptance of what is as the norm of what should be.
It would be a mistake, however, to contrast Marx’s sociological economics with the economic systems of those who begin with price, or demand, or cost, or welfare as fundamental, and then to inquire which of the two systems is truer. For they are not concerned with the same problems. The empirical findings of the various contemporary schools can be taken over by Marxists as the indication of certain correlations in the fetishistic expression of the movement of commodities. But what distinguishes Marx’s economic analysis from all others is its fusion of the historical and analytic moments of capitalist production in the interests of a practical programme of revolutionary activity. His refusal to consider political economy as an independent science, his evaluation of the significance of the historic tendencies of capitalist accumulation in the light of the totality of the social relations of production, which includes the specific historical context, the politics, psychology and legal relations of the day, enables him to incorporate in a concrete synthesis what is sound in both the historical and analytic approach. What Marx is really offering is a philosophy of political economy based upon all of the important observable facts and suggestive of a method of fundamentally transforming the existing order. His theory of political economy cannot be used as a guide to play the market or make safe investments any more than a treatise on the fundamental causes of war can be used as a manual for military operations on the field of battle.
The ‘immediate’ aim of Marx’s economic analysis is to discover the laws governing the production and distribution of wealth in capitalist societies. Wealth in capitalist societies presents itself as ‘an immense accumulation of commodities whose elementary form is the single commodity’. [3] Not every product is a commodity and not all wealth is capital. These are historical categories. Societies exist in which things produced are not commodities and in which wealth is not capital. A commodity is a product which can be exchanged for other products – it is something which normally can be bought or sold; capital is wealth used for the production of more commodities. Capital may exist in the form of money or means of production; but no matter what the form of its embodiment, ‘it is not a thing, but a social relation between persons established by the instrumentality of things’. [4] The social relations between persons, under which the wealth used for the production of more wealth is known as capital, are expressed in that mode of economic production called capitalism.
What is capitalism? Capitalism is private ownership of the social means of production carried on for private profit, and employing workers who are formally or legally free to sell their labour-power. The italicised phrase distinguishes capitalism from all other forms of production (including what is sometimes mistakenly called ancient capitalism) and stamps it with a definitely historical character. Since the decline of genteel society, there has always been private ownership of the means of production; and the profit motive is as old as the traders of antiquity. But it is only when the quest for profit is carried on with ‘free’ wage-labour that the capitalist system emerges. Wage-labour under capitalism is free:
... in the double sense that neither they [the free-labourers] themselves form part and parcel of the means of production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, etc, nor do the means of production belong to them, as in the case of peasant proprietors; they are therefore free from, unencumbered by, any means of production of their own. [5]
This point is important because Marx maintained that the wages of labour constituted the chief ‘mystery’ of capitalist production, and that the solution of the mystery would reveal that the labourer, for all his freedom, was still being exploited as his forbears had been under feudalism and slavery. Why is the exploitation of labour, if it exists, any more of a mystery under capitalism than it was under previous forms of society? [6] To answer this we must glance for a moment at the relations of production as they existed in feudal and slave times. Here everything is as clear as daylight. The serf who works three days on his own field and three days on his lord’s field can distinguish between the work he does for himself and the unpaid work which he does for another. He does not have to infer the existence of this difference; the difference is visible in space and time. The parcels of land are generally separate from each other and the days which he must allot to the lord’s land are already assigned. Or, where he must pay his tithe in products, he can divide into two piles that which he may keep and that which he must turn over. Under slavery all labour is unpaid and the very food which the slave receives as fuel for his body seems to come as bounty from his master. In none of these cases is there any mystery about the fact of exploitation, and where and when it takes place.
Under wage-labour the case is quite different. For all of the labour, both what is strictly necessary to keep the labourer in condition and the surplus produced over and beyond this necessary minimum, seems to be paid for. The labourer, say, is hired to work by the day. He does not stop at that point where the value of what he has produced equals the value of the money or commodities he receives as wages. There is no clear physical or temporal division between the work for which he is paid and the work for which he is not paid. At the end of the day, his wage payment is ostensibly for the whole day’s work. Now it may be asked how is it known that there is any portion of the day’s work for which the labourer is unpaid? Isn’t the assumption that the worker creates more value in the form of goods and services, than what he receives in wages, an arbitrary one? Marx’s answer is that if there were no difference between the value of what the worker produces and the value of what he received, there would be no profit, or interest or rent.
There is no mystery about the existence of profit, interest and rent. It is their origin which is in question. In contradistinction to all other economists before or since, Marx contended that these forms of income were all derived from the unpaid labour of those actually engaged in production. That the origin of profit and interest constituted a problem was sure to strike anyone who inquired by whose largesse those unproductive classes in society which neither toiled nor spun were fed and clothed and housed. And as for the huge profits often made by entrepreneurs who participated in production, it was implausible, on the face of it, to attribute it all to wages of superintendence. How, then, did profit arise? Before we examine Marx’s own theoretical construction, it would be well to see on what grounds he rejects the current theories of the origin of profit.
1) Does profit arise in the course of the ordinary exchange and circulation of commodities? The normal situation in the circulation of commodities is the exchange of equivalent values. This does not mean that the use-values of the commodities exchanged are equivalent, for then there would be no motive for the exchange. So far as use is concerned both sides gain in the transaction. But in respect to the exchange-values of the commodities, their combined price – which is the rough index of their exchange-value – is the same immediately before and immediately after the exchange. Consequently, no new value has been produced. In circulation, a buyer may take advantage of a seller or vice versa, in which case we say there was no honest bargain. This only means that existing values were redistributed, not that new value was created. The circulation of commodities, however, in a competitive market, cannot take place through a series of dishonest bargains. The seller may take on a capricious surcharge to the value of his commodity. But in order to keep on selling, he must be a buyer, too. The seller, from whom he buys, reasons that what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander, and places the same overcharge upon his goods. The result is that only nominal prices increase. In a society where buyers are sellers and sellers are buyers, it is absurd to explain profit as something created by the sale of commodities above their values. And if they are exchanged at their values, the world is not the richer by any new value. It is true, however, that even if profit is not created in exchange, it may be realised through exchange. But the real question is: What is the original source of profit?
2) Does profit arise from the use of machines or instruments of production? This is a view originally proclaimed by JB Say, the French economist. It has been revived by those who have noticed that other things being equal, a plant working with a great deal of machinery (say $9000) and with little wage-labour (say $1000) shows a rate of profit at the end of the year which is the same as that produced by a plant with relatively little machinery (say $2000) and much wage-labour (say $8000). If it is true, as Marx claimed, that the source of profit is the unpaid labour or surplus-value produced by the worker, then the second plant should have shown a much greater profit than the first, since a larger portion of its total capital consisted of wage-labour. In addition, if profit is exclusively derived from labour-power, how account for the eagerness of capitalists to replace labour-power by machines? We shall consider these problems in further detail in the following chapter. Here the question must be asked: What specific character do machines possess which enable them to confer more value upon their products (we are not speaking of use-values) than they themselves possess? Assuming there is no monopoly, the value produced by the machine upon the total annual product of goods, according to Marx, is no more than its annual depreciation. The business man in fixing the price at which he is to sell his commodity, just as his accountant does in drawing up his profit and loss statement, adds an amount derived by dividing the original cost of the machine by its average life. The machine transfers value, which it itself has, to its products; but it cannot produce new value. Where monopoly conditions permit prices to be charged which are higher than the real value of the commodity, it is not the machine which is the source of the additional profit so made but the social conditions of monopoly production. [7]
3) Is profit and interest on capital the reward of abstinence? Senior regarded profit as the natural reward for not immediately consuming capital, as a return for the sacrifice involved in accumulating capital in order to get a higher return later. The ‘waiting’ or ‘deprivation’ of the capitalist in the present was regarded as part of the cost of production and had to be paid for. What is called abstinence, however, by itself never produces any new value; at most, it only permits a situation to develop under which the new value is produced. Whether the capitalist class as a whole accumulates or consumes its wealth, does not depend upon its own free will but upon the necessities of capitalist production. This is true with certain qualifications even of the individual capitalist. So long as he desires to make a profit, the amount he consumes and the amount he reinvests in his plant are settled for him by the market. If he does not desire to make a profit, there is no less and no more abstinence involved on his part than if he does. The choice of either one of two possible acts open to him involves on his part an ‘abstinence’ from the other. Why, then, should some kinds of abstinence result in a profitable reward?
4) Does profit arise from the fluctuations of supply and demand? If this were so, the prices at which commodities are exchanged would have to be the resultant of the interacting forces of supply and demand. That prices varied with supply and demand, Marx did not deny. The clue to the price of a particular commodity at a particular time in a particular place must always be sought in the local schedules of supply prices and demand prices. But Marx was interested in the direction in which prices moved, in the conditions by which supply and demand were themselves limited. Although the final price of a commodity in the absence of monopoly is dependent upon the higgling of the open market, the seller already knows what its market value approximately is before he offers it for sale, indeed, before he even produces it. Otherwise why should he risk everything in production? Business may sometimes be a gamble; but it is not yet a game of pure chance. If the answer is made that the seller is guided by knowledge of the past schedules of supply and demand for the commodity in question, it can be pointed out that where a brand-new commodity is put on the market its price is determined long before the demand has begun to make itself felt. In fact, the demand for it can be treated in part as a function of the price, that is, as a dependent variable.
The accidents of the market will determine whether a commodity is sold above or under its ‘real value’, and in this way profit may partly depend upon the fluctuation of supply and demand. But in order to make his profit the seller need only dispose of the commodity at its real value. What determines the real value of a commodity? According to Marx it is the amount of socially necessary labour-power involved in its production. Are commodities ever sold at their real values? Rarely, if ever. When would they be? If the organic composition of capital were equal. Are they equal? No. Is there any sense, then, in saying that the prices of commodities tend to equal their ‘real values'? Yes, as much sense, as we shall later see, as there is in saying that bodies in motion tend to remain in motion unless acted upon by an external force, even when we know that there is no body which is not acted upon by the external force of gravitation.
We return now to a more straightforward exposition, reserving the analysis of Marx’s methodology until the next chapter.
Under capitalism labour-power appears on the market like any other commodity. Its value is determined in the same way and it is subject to the same variations of supply and demand. Under the ideal or typical conditions of capitalist production, the worker receives in exchange for his labour-power a sum of money equivalent in value to the means of subsistence necessary to sustain him – food, clothing and shelter for himself and family. Like all commodities the use-value of labour-power is different from its exchange-value. But in one respect it is absolutely unlike other commodities. Its specific use-value lies in the fact that it creates more exchange-value than it is itself worth. If labour-power produced no more exchange-value than what it receives in money wages, then the value of the commodities produced would be equal merely to the value of the raw material, machinery and labour-power which entered into its manufacture. Where would profit come in? The capitalist might just as well close up his shop, for the only income he could receive under such circumstances would be the exchange-value of his own labour-power, provided he did work in his own plant. But why should he stay in business to give himself a job, when, without risking his capital, he might take a job elsewhere? He can remain in business only so long as there is a difference between the value of the labour-power he has purchased and the values which that labour-power creates. Profit is possible only when the value of the second is greater than the value of the first.
Marx calls that portion of the working day in which the worker produces commodities whose exchange-value (as distinct from the exchange-value of the raw materials, etc) is equivalent to the exchange-value of his own labour-power, necessary labour time; anything over and above this is surplus labour time. What is produced during this latter time is surplus-value for which the worker receives no return whatsoever. The ratio between surplus-value and wages (the value of labour-power) Marx calls the rate of surplus-value or the rate of exploitation. The profit of capitalist production is derived solely from surplus-value; and the progress of capitalist production consists in devising ways and means by which surplus-value may be increased. There are two generic methods of doing this. One is by prolonging the length of the working day. In this way absolute surplus-value is derived. Another generic method of increasing surplus-value, more in evidence under modern capitalism than in early capitalism, is by increasing the productivity of labour and curtailing the necessary labour time. In this way, even when the length of the working day remains constant, the difference between necessary labour time and surplus labour time increases, and therewith the rate of surplus-value and exploitation. By this means relative surplus-value is derived. Surplus-value is not appropriated in its entirety at the point where it is produced, but in the course of the whole process of capitalist production, circulation and exchange. The distribution of the total surplus-value at any time is determined not only by the operation of immanent economic laws but by the political struggles between entrepreneur, landowner and bankers; between entrepreneurs themselves even when production has become monopolistic; and, above all, between the entrepreneur and the wage-earners.
Marx divides the capital of a manufacturing concern into constant capital and variable. Constant capital consists of what orthodox political economy calls fixed capital, such as buildings and machinery, and part of what it calls circulating capital, that is, power and raw materials. Variable capital consists of wages, which non-Marxian economists regard as only part of circulating capital. The division of capital into constant and variable is made in the interests of Marx’s analysis according to which the value of constant capital is only reproduced in the manufactured products, whereas wages, or variable capital, always creates some new value over its own cost of reproduction. The ordinary distinction between fixed and circulating capital reflects the entrepreneur’s assumption that the source of profit is not only wage-labour but inanimate instruments of production as well. He, therefore, computes his rate of profit upon the whole of the capital he has sunk into his project and not upon the amount he has advanced as wages. This accounts for the disparity between what is called the rate of profit and the rate of exploitation. For example, in a $1,000,000 concern, $900,000 will represent investment in machinery and raw material (which Marx calls constant capital c) and $100,000 wage payments (variable capital v). If profit (which is called surplus-value s, since all profit, according to Marx, is produced during surplus labour time) is $100,000, then the rate of profit is s divided by c plus v, which is 10 per cent. The rate of surplus-value, however, is s divided by v, which is 100 per cent. The larger the rate of surplus-value (which is always being increased by either one or both of the two ways indicated above), the greater the absolute amount of profit produced. The total profit is not consumed for personal purposes but a large part of it is reinvested in constant capital; modernisation and rationalisation is made necessary by the pressure of competition and the quest for ever larger profits. The total amount of capital in use grows. In order, however, to keep the rate of profit constant, since the total amount of capital has been enlarged, the amount of profit and therewith the rate of surplus-value (the rate of exploitation) must be increased. The yearly increment of profit which is added to the capital investment grows together with that to which it is added. The constant capital of today is nothing but the unpaid labour of yesterday. Relatively to the increase in the magnitudes of constant capital, the amount of variable capital employed in production diminishes. The diminution of the amount of variable capital is attended by a demand for relatively fewer labourers and by a substitution of unskilled for skilled. Wages fall and an industrial reserve army comes into existence.
The rate of profit, as we have seen, is determined by the ratio between surplus-value and the total capital invested. With the increase in the organic composition of capital (that is, the ratio of constant to variable capital) the rate of profit falls even when the rate of exploitation, or surplus-value, remains the same. The desire to sustain the rate of profit leads to improvement of the plant and to increase in the intensity and productivity of labour. As a result ever larger and larger stocks of commodities are thrown on the market. The workers cannot consume these goods since the purchasing power of their wages is necessarily less than the values of the commodities they have produced. The capitalists cannot consume these goods because (i) they and their immediate retainers have use for only a part of the immediate wealth produced, and (ii) the value of the remainder must first be turned into money before it can again be invested. Unless production is to suffer permanent breakdown, an outlet must be found for the surplus of supplied commodities – a surplus which exists not in respect to what people need but to what they can buy. Since the limits to which the home market may be stretched are given by the purchasing power of wages – which constantly diminishes by virtue of the tendency of unemployment to increase with the increase of the organic composition of capital – resort must be had to export.
The first things to be exported are consumption goods: say, Boston shoes to South America, if we are an American manufacturer, and Lancashire textiles to India, if we are English. There was a time when natives had to be taught to use these commodities. But having learned how to use them, they soon desired to learn how to make them. In this they are helped by the manufacturers of shoe machinery in New England and textile machinery in Manchester who naturally desire to dispose of their own commodities. The raw materials are right at hand – Argentine hides in the one case, Egyptian and Indian cotton in the other. They are relatively cheaper than in the mother country because (a) transportation costs are lower; (b) where land is cheap its products – hides and cotton – are cheap; and (c) the working day is longer. Before long, Argentine shoe plants are underselling the Boston factories and India is ‘spinning its own’. The Manchester looms lie idle and the New England manufacturers clamour for a tariff even while their stocks remain unmoved. But this is an ever-continuing process. Having learned how to use shoe and textile machinery, what is more natural than that the colonies should wish to learn how to manufacture it? In this they are helped by the manufacturers of machine tools in America and England who desire to dispose of their own commodities. Before long there is a shoe machinery factory in the Argentine, and India is manufacturing her own looms. Later on, representatives of the US Steel Corporation will be convincing the South Americans and Indians that it would be more profitable to import iron and steel and other materials which enter into the manufacture of machine tools than to buy them ready made. Or natural resources may be discovered which will invite exploitation. A New York or London banking house will advance the money necessary for this capital outlay as it did for the other plants. Interest and profit will be considerable but none of it will turn a wheel in the many idle factories in New or Old England. If there is a glut on the colonial market, and interest payments cannot be met, the governments of the United States and Great Britain will step in to save their national honour and protect life and property.
This process is accompanied by periodic crises of overproduction. They become progressively worse both in local industries and in industry as a whole. The social relations under which production is carried on, and which make it impossible for wage-workers to buy back at any given moment what they have produced, leads to a heavier investment of capital in industries which turn out production goods than in industries which produce consumption goods. This disproportion between investment in production goods and investment in consumption goods is permanent under capitalism. But since finished production goods must ultimately make their way into plants which manufacture consumption goods, the quantities of commodities thrown on the market, and for which no purchaser can be found, mounts still higher. At the time the crisis breaks, and in the period immediately preceding it, the wage-worker may be earning more and consuming more than usual. It is not, therefore, underconsumption of what the worker needs which causes the crisis, because in boom times his standard of living is generally higher than in slow times, but his underconsumption in relation to what he produces. Consequently, an increase in the absolute standard of living under capitalism, since at most it could only affect the rate and not the tendency to overproduction, would not eliminate the possibility of crisis. That can only be done by the elimination of capitalism as such. Although the standard of living may be higher as production goes from the crest of one boom to another, once the crisis begins, the standard of living declines at an accelerated rate.
The anti-social consequences of the contradiction between the tendency towards ever-expanding forces of production under capitalism and the relatively progressive limitations upon consumption finds its crassest expression not merely in the existence of crises but in the way they are overcome. Despite the crying want of millions of human beings commodities are deliberately destroyed and basic production systematically curtailed. Even war is sometimes welcomed as the best means of disposing of surplus stocks of commodities – and of the surplus population which the normal progress of capitalism produces. The historical tendency of capitalist production is to go from small-scale organisation to large; from the exploitation of wage-labour to the expropriation of the capitalist, from isolated action against individuals to the organised overthrow of the system. No one can improve upon Marx’s own graphic recapitulation:
As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the labourers are turned into proletarians, their means of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist mode of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialisation of labour and further transformation of the land and other means of production into socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form. That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. This expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalist production itself, by the centralisation of capital. One capitalist always kills many. Hand in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever extending scale, the cooperative form of the labour process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour into the instruments of labour only usable in common, the economising of all means of production by their use as the means of production of combined socialised labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world market, and therewith the international character of the capitalist regime. Along with the constant diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and monopolise all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with this too grows the revolt of the working class, a class always increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism of the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along with, and under it. Centralisation of the means of production and socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalist integument. This integument is burst asunder. The knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated. [8]
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p. 86. [available here. – MIA
2. Lionel Robbins, An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science (London 1932), p 15. – MIA
3. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, available here. – MIA
4. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, available here. – MIA
5. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, available here. – MIA
6. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p. 591. [available here. – MIA]
7. ‘However useful a given kind of raw material or a machine or other means of production may be, though it may cost £150, or say 500 days labour, yet it cannot, under any circumstances, add to the value of the product more than £150. Its value is determined not by the labour process into which it enters as means of production, but by that out of which it has issued as a product.’ (Karl Marx, Capital, Volume, p. 229. [available here. – MIA])
8. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, pp. 836–37. [available here. – MIA]
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XII: What Historical Materialism Is Not)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XII: What Historical Materialism Is Not
So widespread are the current misinterpretations of historical materialism that a chapter is necessary to show how they arise from a one-sided emphasis upon different phases of the doctrine. Such a discussion will also contribute to making the fundamental concepts of the theory more precise.
I: Technique and Economics: The commonest misinterpretation of historical materialism, and one shared by many who regard themselves as Marxists, is the identification of the social relations of production with the technical forces of production, and the consequent transformation of the materialistic interpretation of history into the technological interpretation of history. According to the technological interpretation of history, all social life depends upon the nature of the tools employed in production and upon the technical organisation of their use in mines, fields and factory. The hoe and the rake, the pick and the shovel, will produce one society; the steam plough and tractor, the pneumatic hammer and the steam derrick another. The difference between the tenth century and the twentieth may be expressed as the difference between the individual hand-tool and the standardised machine-tool. All other cultural differences are derivative from this central fact.
Marx often said that the development of technology could serve as an index of the development of society; but that is an altogether different thing from saying that we must look to the development of technology as the cause or independent variable of social change. [1] For Marx, technique was only one of three generic components of the productive process. The other two were nature and the social activity of man. When he speaks of the economic foundations of society, he means the whole complex of relationships which arise from the specific ways in which these three elements are organised. Machinery as such, he reminds Proudhon, ‘is no more an economic category than is the ox which draws the plough. It is only a productive force.’ [2]
The social relations of production (which are synonymous with the expressions ‘the property relations’, and ‘the economic foundations of culture’) cannot therefore be regarded as the automatic reflection of technology. On the contrary, the development of technology is itself often dependent upon the system of social relationships in which it is found. The direction that technical invention takes is determined by needs which are not themselves narrowly technical but economic or social. Indeed, the important question as to whether any specific invention is to be utilised or scrapped is normally decided not by the inventor or by the logic of his creation but by its compatibility with the underlying rationale of production. Today, for example, the decisive consideration is whether or not it will contribute to diminishing production costs and to increasing profits. This does not mean that whenever a social need exists, some invention will arise to fulfil it. Think of all the many crying needs of industrial and social life which still remain unfulfilled. Nor does it mean that whatever technical invention does arise is always directed towards realising some improvement in production, for thousands of ingenious devices have come from the mind of man which have had no bearing upon production or have been permitted to lie unused. What is asserted is only that the selective application of technical invention is determined by the existing relations of production and not vice versa. The primitive technology of antiquity was in large part due to the character of a slave economy which found it easier to use human beings as machines than to make more efficient their labour. This was indirectly reflected in the attitude which prevailed among the leisured classes, who possessed a monopoly of the science of the day, that it was degrading (slave-like) to apply theoretical knowledge to material and practical subject-matter. Whenever, as under capitalism, the continuous improvement of all technical forces leads ultimately to the paralysis of the productive process, the cause is to be sought not in the forces of production but in the relations of production (the property system) which, by their very nature are compelled to call into being those productive agencies that turn out to be its own nemesis. It is not technology – or what soft and romantic thinkers call the ‘curse of the machine’ – which causes the downfall of capitalism. In a larger sense, capitalism is the source of its own downfall. It comes into the world bearing the seeds of death at its heart. The logic of its growth compels it to develop its productive limbs to a point where it can no longer coordinate its movements. Or more concretely, it is compelled to reinvest capital to produce further means of production without being able to guarantee the consumption of the commodities produced.
Not only does the character of technology and the direction of its development depend upon the social relation of production; it is even more obvious that the social consequences of technological invention can never be deduced from technological considerations alone. Otherwise how account for the fact that mechanical inventions, far from lightening the toil of the masses, freeing them from age-long burdens of drudgery, and opening opportunities for creative leisure, have instead intensified labour and reduced the worker ‘to an appendage of the machine’. The only promise of leisure the progressive mechanisation of industry holds out to the modern wage-worker today is the enforced leisure to starve.
One of the most interesting claims made for the technological interpretation is that it accounts for the final elimination of chattel slavery from Western Europe in the twelfth century. The reputed causal change in technique was a simple one. Until that time, cattle had been yoked by the neck (traction par la gorge) which winded them easily and made possible an average load of only half a ton even for relatively short distances. Production was necessarily limited, hardly more than enough to feed the families of both master and slave. Someone discovered, however, that yoking cattle by the shoulders (collier d’épaules) increased their pulling strength many times over and did not exhaust them so easily. As a result, productivity increased and man was able to provide his master with sufficient supplies in approximately half the working time that had been previously consumed. He now cultivated the rest of his patch in the remaining time and enjoyed a higher standard of living as a serf than had been possible to him as a slave.
The difficulties with this specific application of the technological theory are typical of all others. First of all feudalism was a full-grown system of production long before the twelfth century. Secondly, there is no assurance that yoking cattle by the shoulders was unknown in slave-holding antiquity and in parts of Asia. Thirdly, and most important, it is hard to see how the whole system of land tenure, with its specific codes of mutual obligations and services, could be derived from the shift from one method of yoking to another. Finally, it is not clear why the enhanced productivity of labour could not have been retained within a slave economy; for there was always the possibility of using slave labour on huge public works as had been done in Egypt and Greece, and of equipping armies for the purpose of conquest and pillage. The decline of slavery must be sought elsewhere than in the gradual improvement of productive technique.
For further evidence that technique of itself does not determine the mode of economic production, one need but point to the use of large-scale machinery in such different economies as prevail today in the USA and the USSR.
A technological interpretation of history which separated technique from antecedent social need in search for a measurable first cause of social change, would have to surrender its materialistic starting point just as soon as the simplified logic of that procedure were pressed against it. For no technical change is made without a leading idea in the mind of the technician or inventor. Even if it be true that no great invention has ever been the sole creation of one mind, nevertheless the machine is projected in thought before it is embodied in stone and steel. The cause then would be some bright idea or happy thought in the mind of one or more persons, and we would be back to a thoroughgoing idealistic philosophy of civilisation.
II: Economic Conditions and Economic Self-Interest: Perhaps the most unjustified of all misinterpretations to which Marx’s doctrine of historical materialism has been subjected is its reduction to a theory of personal motives. According to this conception Marx believed that all human beings are activated by a desire to further their own personal self-interest, and that this self-interest is inevitably expressed in a desire for economic gain. The materialistic interpretation then means that all behaviour is guided by material consideration, that every act has a cash value and every man has his price. Ideal motives – aesthetic, religious, moral – are just rationalisations of economic drives.
The amazing thing about this interpretation is that it cannot support itself by a single text from any chapter of Marx or from the open book of his own life. Yet it is found in high academic places. It arises in part from an ambiguity in the term ‘materialistic’ and from the resultant confusion between ethical materialism and historical materialism. Ethical materialism is egoism; it assumes that the object of every desire is the attainment of pleasure or the avoidance of pain; and that the life of reason is an organisation of natural impulses to secure for oneself the maximum amount of pleasure over pain. Historical materialism, however, is a theory which tries to explain when, where and why egoistic and non-egoistic motives arise. Marx was the first one to denounce the cheap cynicism which denies the sincerity of ideal behaviour whether it be sacrifice for one’s cause, religious piety, patriotic fervour or disinterested attachment to truth and beauty – a cynicism which cloaks itself in the sophisticated doctrine that all the large interests which sway individuals are constructed out of petty interests. Only a petty person generalising from his own case could project such a theory. Already as a young man Marx had maintained that, even if it were true that the object of every desire fulfilled some interest of the self, it by no means followed that the interest was a selfish, no less a pecuniary one:
It is known that a certain psychology explains greatness out of a multitude of small causes in the correct intuition that everything for which man struggles is a matter [Bache] of his interest. But from that it goes on to the mistaken notion that there are only ‘small’ interests, interests only of stereotyped selfishness. It is also well known that this kind of psychology and human science [Menschenkunde] flourishes particularly in cities where, in addition, it is regarded as a sign of subtle intellect to see through the show of the world, and to glimpse behind the cloud of ideas and facts completely petty, envious, intriguing manikins stringing the whole of things on their little threads. But it is well known that when one peers too closely into a mirror one bangs against one’s own head. The knowledge of the world and the knowledge of men of these clever people is primarily a mystifying bang into their own heads. [3]
Marx attacked both Bentham and Stirner precisely because they conceived man on the pattern of an egoistic and self-centred petty-bourgeois shopkeeper who keeps a profit and loss account of his feelings and whose every act is determined by calculation of the possibilities of personal gain. It is not commonly known that Marx answered Max Stirner’s Das Einzige und sein Eigentum – the most extreme gospel of super-sophisticated worldliness ever penned – with a work which was even lengthier than Stirner’s own. In it he shows that the common defect of Stirner’s glorious pseudo-paganism and of the sentimental Christian morality of Feuerbach (and Hess) to which it was opposed, is a disregard of the social and historic context of all ideals. He charges them – one, for his ‘I, me, myself’, the other, for his ‘Love your neighbour, for you are your neighbour and he is you’ – with committing the same religious hypostasis in the field of morality which they had both accused the metaphysicians of committing in the realm of knowledge.
For Marx, the motives which guide individual man are quite various. And it is only the rare individual who knows what his motives really are. But Marx is not in the least concerned with the motives of individuals as such except in so far as they typify a class attitude. His problem is to explain why certain ideals prevail at one period rather than at another; and to discover what factors determine the succession of ideals for which men live and die. His hypothesis is that economic conditions (in the wide sense indicated above) determine which ideals are to flourish; and that the locus of all effective ideals is the class struggle. It thus becomes easy to show that economic conditions cannot be identified with economic self-interests, for the prevalence or absence of the latter is explained in terms of the former. In any given society, economic interests, as motives of conduct, will be much weaker among those classes which need pay little attention to economic processes, than among those classes which do not enjoy the same measure of economic security. The careless lavishness of the American captain of industry does not prove that he is inherently more unselfish than his tight-fisted Yankee ancestors. It merely reflects the difference between early commercial capitalism, in which thrift was a virtue because of the part it played in production, and late finance capitalism, in which conspicuous waste has the same function.
III: Is Marxism a Monistic System? The most unfortunate characterisation that historical materialism has received – and this at the hands of its followers – is the ‘monistic conception of history’. Monism is a highly ambiguous term. It may mean that the stuff of history, that is, what must be explained, consists only of actions of one kind. Marxian monism would mean that history is nothing but economic activity – the most monstrous distortion ever fathered upon a critical thinker. Or historical monism may mean that only one kind of explanation is valid and that all historical events can be explained in economic or social terms. Some ‘Marxists’ believe this, but Marx never did. Or finally, it may mean that there is a continuity between the phases of historical life and that no branch of culture, be it ever so abstract, is heaven born; that all the arts and sciences have arisen from the stream of social life and that they bear the marks of their origin irrespective of their subsequent development. But this is a tautology, for it is involved in the very meaning of the historical approach. If anything cannot be historically approached, that is, studied in the light of its continuities, it simply is not part of history. The question whether anything exists in the external or internal world which is not a part of history is a question of metaphysical analysis and is outside the province of the historian. If everything is historical, it is clear that several senses of the term must be distinguished.
Marx’s concrete historical analyses show better than any exegesis possibly can what he conceived his method to be. He introduces the mode of economic production as the fundamental conditioning factor of only the general and most pervasive characters of a culture. He does not overlook what is specific and unique to each country and to each of its historical situations. Tradition, accident of personality, consideration of the formal possibilities of development, all enter as important variations upon the fundamental Grundton of economic production. In the hands of his uncritical ‘monistic’ followers, his method has often led to the attempt to explain specific cultural facts or historical events in terms of general economic conditions whose existence is often just as compatible with the absence of what is to be explained as with its presence. It is obvious that the explanation, for example, of any specific form or expression of contemporary American culture, for example, its contemporary religion, science, law or popular music, cannot be adequate unless it contains more than a treatment of the economic conditioning circumstances. For at any given time the mode of economic production would be invariant for all aspects of culture, and unless other traditional or formal factors were brought into the situation, we could not distinguish between the specific effect which economic organisation has on American religion and the specific effect it has on American law or American science. It should not be overlooked that the difference between American law and American science may be considered as a difference between two aspects of one underlying economy. But that is not the only difference between them. There is a formal difference between jural relationships and scientific propositions which cannot be reduced to anything else but which must be regarded as defining autonomous domains with logical relationships uniquely their own. This is not denying that legal and scientific activities arise out of the social processes and reflect every important change in many other domains – especially in the relation of production. But it calls emphatic attention to the fact that (a) each field reflects such basic social changes in its own characteristic way; (b) each field has a limited independent development of its own which must be explained in terms of its own technique, for example, in law, by the necessity of establishing a logically coherent body of rules; in science, by the necessity of accounting for all known phenomena on the basis of the simplest set of verifiable assumptions; in art, by the necessity of exhibiting some psychological pattern which unifies all details; and finally (c) the autonomous development within these fields under certain circumstances set up important counter-effects in the social process as a whole and in economic life particularly. Illustrations of this last abound on all sides. Herz’s discovery of electro-magnetic waves was the direct consequence of the quest for experimental confirmation of Maxwell’s equations; its profound influence upon cultural life and especially upon economic activity, by making wireless telegraphy and the radio possible, is as incalculable as it is indisputable. In law many rules of procedure adopted to facilitate the disposition of cases, for example, in bankruptcy, have become responsible for the increase of those very practices they had set out to correct.
There is a formal element in all cultural activity to whose existence Engels in later life felt it necessary to direct the attention of his followers:
Just as soon as the new division of labour makes necessary the creation of professional jurists, another new independent domain is opened which for all its dependence upon production and trade in general still possesses a special capacity to react upon these fields. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the general economic situation and be its expression; it must also be a coherently unified expression and free from glaring internal inconsistencies. In order to achieve this, the fidelity with which the law directly reflects economic conditions becomes less and less. This is all the truer in those rare cases where the legal code expresses the harsh, unrelieved and naked fact of class rule. [4]
... one point... which Marx and I did not sufficiently stress and in relation to which we are equally to blame. We both placed and had to place the chief weight upon the derivation of political, legal and other ideological notions, as well as the actions they led up to, from fundamental economic facts. In consequence we neglected the formal side, that is, the way in which these ideas arose, for the sake of the content ... It’s the old story. In the beginning the form is always neglected for the content. [5]
In addition to the formal elements of culture, there are traditional elements. In stressing the preponderant influences of the mode of economic production upon the general character of social life, Marx never failed to indicate that in every particular case tradition played an important part in modifying the rate of change in the non-material aspects of culture. ‘The tradition of all dead generations’, he writes in the Eighteenth Brumaire, ‘weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the living.’ [6] Sooner or later family relationships, religion, art and philosophy will reflect the new social equilibrium produced by changes in the economic order. But at any given time an analysis of their nature will reveal a lag both in the way they function and in the structure of their organisation. This is another way of saying that no culture is organic through and through. From the vantage point of a long-time perspective, the phenomena of cultural lag may not appear significant; but from the point of view of short-scale political operations, they are of great importance. To disregard, say, the peculiar character of local and sectional religious traditions in the United States may spell disaster even for such enterprises as organising trade unions or successfully conducting a strike.
Tradition, of course, is never of itself a sufficient explanation for the existence or survival of any cultural trait, otherwise we could not explain why some traditional influences and practices have survived while others have not. It may even be granted that any cultural practice or belief which common usage uncritically refers to as traditional, for example, the wearing of marriage rings, or the prevalence of Platonic and Hegelian idealism, has some functional relation to the contemporary process of social life. Nonetheless all cultural traits have their traditional aspect. An adequate social analysis must reveal these features and show how what they are at any moment is the resultant of what they once were and of the changes produced by a changing social environment. For example, the revival of the Platonic and Hegelian philosophies in Western Europe and their contemporary vogue may be partially accounted for by the easy formulæ they supply to cover up the great social problems generated by imperialist expansion and war. The perfect state as one in which all classes collaborate under the rule of the intellectually élite, the perfect society as a Schicksalsgemeinschaft of capital, labour and state officials [7] – what could be more in consonance with the corporative ideology of Fascism by which finance capital denies the existence of a class struggle in order to make its own class rule more secure? Nonetheless, the fact that it was the Hegelian and Platonic philosophies which were revived and not others sufficiently similar in type to serve the same social functions, demands an explanation in the light of academic and religious traditions as well as of certain standing philosophical problems. That these traditions and problems in their original form in some way reflected their contemporary economic and political milieu, does not alter the hopeless logical confusion which results from regarding the original cause of a tradition to be also the cause of the survival of that tradition. This fallacy vitiates the work not only of men, like Eleutheropoulos, who have clung to a simplistic economic approach, but also of their Marxist critics, men like Kautsky and Plekhanov. Plekhanov, we may note in passing, did most to give currency to the phrase, ‘the monistic conception of history’.
The source of the monistic fallacy in its refined form is the attempt to explain all specific cultural phenomena in terms of factors which are admitted to be plural but among which one – the economic – is always assumed to be predominant. Let us take some illustrations from Plekhanov’s own writings:
If we want to understand a dance performed by Australian Aborigines, it suffices that we should know what part is played by the women of the tribe in collecting the roots of wild plants. But a knowledge of the economic life of France in the eighteenth century will not explain to us the origin of the minuet. In the latter case we have to do with a dance which is an expression of the psychology of a non-productive class ... We must not forget, however, that the appearance of non-productive classes in a society is itself the outcome of the economic development of that society. This means that the economic factor remains predominant, even when its activity is overlaid by that of other factors. [8]
If you try to give a direct economic explanation of the appearance of the school of David in French painting at the close of the eighteenth century, you will certainly talk nonsense. But if, on the other hand, you regard this school as an ideological reflection of the class struggle which was going on in French society, on the eve of the great revolution, the problem will assume an entirely new aspect. Then certain qualities of David’s art which might have seemed to have no connection with social economy, will become perfectly comprehensible. [9]
Now these highly selected illustrations are obviously quite favourable to the Marxian point of view which Plekhanov is defending. In challenging Plekhanov’s explanation we are not calling Marx’s method into question but Plekhanov’s application of it. How valid are his explanations?
Suppose we begin with the minuet. The minuet as well as the gavotte, generally associated with it, was originally a peasant dance. It antedated not only the court of Louis XV but even of Louis XIV. As a rustic dance it was gay and lively; as a court dance it was stately and artificial. Consequently it is not its origin which can be explained in terms of the psychology of the non-productive class but at best its peculiar development. But now, what necessary connection exists between the psychology of a non-productive class and the mincing gravity of the minuet? The gavotte was a little more animated and was tacked right on to the minuet. Could not a debonair and tripping step convey the psychology of a non-productive class just as well as the minuet? Indeed, cannot one say that wild and licentious dances could just as readily have expressed the psychology of a non-productive class in the eighteenth century? And if these dances had been in vogue, the same formula could easily be invoked to explain their existence. No matter what dances had been performed, it would be easy to attribute their character to the fact that the dancers were not directly concerned with production. The class psychologies of non-productive classes are not all the same. Why was this particular dance associated with this particular non-productive class? And why could not the minuet have expressed the psychology of a productive class? As a matter of fact, there is evidence to show that the minuet was a national dance and not merely a court dance, and that its local variations were just as pronounced as the difference between its original rustic form and later court development. Further, how are we to explain, on Plekhanov’s theory, the rapid spread of the minuet through all of Western Europe among productive and non-productive classes alike? How are we to explain in terms of the psychology of a non-productive class the fact that Beethoven developed the minuet into the scherzo? But Plekhanov’s crowning error is to reason that because the minuet was the outcome of the psychology of a non-productive class, and because the appearance of a non-productive class was itself the result of economic development, therefore the minuet is the result of economic development. The logic would be similar to the argument that since Mr X’s suicide by shooting was made possible only by the existence of fire-arms, and since fire-arms depended upon the application of science to industry, therefore the real cause of Mr X’s death was science and capitalism. In any case, even if it be granted that the minuet had an origin in the economic life of the past, that economic life could by no known canon of logic or scientific method be regarded as a cause of the presence of the minuet in the economic life of a later day.
Similarly it can be argued that the style of David was not produced by the ideological struggles of eighteenth-century France, but that during and after the Revolution it was selected by republican France because of the definite political import of its imitation of the rugged virtues of Roman and Greek antiquity. As a matter of fact, definite departures from the rococo style had already been made before David. Independently of the whole movement of neo-classicism in France, the German, Winkelmann, had proclaimed that: ‘The sole means for us to become – if possible – inimitably great, is the imitation of the ancients.’ [10] It must be remembered that David was a member of the Convention and that his studies of the assassinated Lepelletier and Marat were political commissions. His technique in those pictures was no different from the technique he later employed in his Coronation which glorified Napoleon. Nor was it appreciably different from the technique of his greatest pupil, Ingres, who used it to celebrate the voluptuous beauty of nudes in a Turkish Bath.
All this suggests an important distinction between the origin of any cultural fact and its acceptance. In art, for example, all sorts of stylistic variations or mutants appear in any period. The social and political environment acts as a selective agency upon them. The dominant style selected may in turn exercise a social and political influence. When we say that the style which is accepted ‘expresses’ the social interests or political aspirations of a class, we may mean one of two things. We may mean either that the technical elements of a work have grown out of a new social experience or that technical elements already in existence have been fused in a new way or filled with a new content. This is not a hard and fast distinction, but all interpretation of culture demands that it be made. In literature this distinction is hardest to draw, in painting it is less hard and in music easiest of all. But even in literature it is clear that some formal elements, for example, the sonnet form, reportage, the autobiographical novel, may be used indifferently to express disparate political and social interests. In painting, realistic technique may serve revolutionary or non-revolutionary purposes. In music, the same tunes are often the battle songs of Fascists in Germany and of Communists in Russia.
The tentative conclusion we have reached is that although each specific expression of a culture is socially conditioned, its pattern of development may depend upon certain relatively irreducible, technical factors, and that for some purposes, an explanation in terms of these technical factors may be valid. The extent to which the social environment enters as a constitutive element in this pattern is a subject of empirical investigation. Nothing significant can be inferred from the truism that without some form of social organisation the cultural fact in question could not exist. Where the social environment influences a cultural phenomenon it may do so in two distinct ways which must be distinguished in analysis even though they may not be separated in fact. It may provide the technical materials out of which new forms develop. For example, the manufacture of inflated duralumin tubes may make possible new variations in architecture, the discovery of poison gas and aeroplane warfare may revolutionise the art of military science and strategy. The second way in which the social environment may influence a culture trait is by the use to which it is put. Inflated duralumin tubes may be used to construct more profitable skyscrapers or may be used to build more liveable homes for the working population in intelligently planned cities. An army which is knit together by a revolutionary, democratic faith will develop new forms of warfare impossible to an army which is only discipline bound. The use to which materials and techniques are put is in the larger sense of the words, political and moral. It is bound up with the class struggle and with the different objectives and paths of action which flow from it. The class character of any art is unmistakably revealed not so much in its materials and techniques – save derivatively – but in its objectives.
If the foregoing analysis is sound, a genuine Marxian criticism of culture will never be guilty of the monistic reductions which have only too often masqueraded in its name.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. This fundamental error runs through and vitiates the essential portions of Bukharin’s Historical Materialism. A representative example of his analysis is the statement on page 143 (English translation) that ‘the combinations of the instruments of labour (the social technology) are the deciding factor in the combinations and relations of men, that is, in social economy’ [see here – MIA]. Marx proved in Capital that just the converse of this was true. Bukharin’s position is closer to that of the mechanical materialists of the eighteenth century than it is to dialectical materialism.
2. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. – MIA.
3. Werke, Abteilung I, Band I, pp. 218–19 [Karl Marx, Debatten über Preßfreiheit und Publikation der Landständischen Verhandlungen; On Freedom of the Press – MIA.
4. From his Letter to Schmidt; cf. Appendix [Friedrich Engels to Conrad Schmidt, 27 October 1890. – MIA
5. From his Letter to Mehring; cf. Appendix. [Friedrich Engels to Franz Mehring, 14 July 1893. – MIA]
6. Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. – MIA
7. For an unwitting confession of the real secret of the Hegel Renaissance in Germany, especially the Hegelian philosophy of law, see J. Binder, Archiv für Rechts-und-Wirtschaftsphilosophie, Band XXII, 1929, p. 313.
8. G.V. Plekhanov, Fundamental Problems of Marxism (English translation), p. 61, italics mine [available here. – MIA
9. G.V. Plekhanov, Fundamental Problems of Marxism (English translation), p. 63, italics mine [available at here. – MIA
10. Johann Joachim Winckelmann, Gedanken über die Nachahmung der griechischen Werke in der Malerei und Bildhauerkunst (Thoughts on the Imitation of Greek Works in Painting and Sculpture) – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XI: The Materialistic Conception of History)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XI: The Materialistic Conception of History
Of all Marx’s theories, the materialistic conception of history has been most widely misunderstood. This is attributable not only to the ambiguity of some of its central terms, but to the fact that whereas Marx projected it as a method of understanding and making history, his disciples have tried to convert it into a system of sociology. Because of this the flexibility it possesses in the writings of Marx and Engels is sacrificed for unverifiable dogma in the works of the epigoni. Depending upon the class loyalty of the critics, the theory of historical materialism has been regarded as a commonplace, or an absurdity, or as the most powerful instrument available for investigating the origins of social thought. Marx himself sketched the theory only in general outline, but regarded the whole of his writings – in history, economics and philosophy – as an exhibition of its meaning and a test of its truth.
The theory can best be expounded in terms of Marx’s own intellectual development and in relation to the evolution of social and economic forces of the nineteenth century. Considerations of space, however, forbid this. For the purpose of the present analysis, it will be sufficient to state its central propositions in schematic form, discuss the criticisms and misunderstandings to which it has been subjected, point out where it has been fruitful and what problems remain to be solved. We may profitably begin by blocking the theory off from other theories with which it has been associated or identified.
I: Marx’s Conception of History: What does Marx mean by history? For Marx, history is not everything which has happened. Many happenings, like the birth of a planet or the disappearance of an animal species, are not historical in any sense which concerns him. Nor is history the records or chronicles of social life. For these are the result of history – the materials which must first be explained and interpreted to become significant. History is a process – and it is distinguished from all other natural processes in that ‘it is the activity of man in pursuit of his ends.’ [1] The fact that human behaviour is undertaken on behalf of ends or ideals distinguishes the subject-matter of history from that of physical nature. But the difference between the two is not so great that a realistic method cannot be applied to historical activity.
Although no historical activity is possible without ideals, historical effects cannot be explained in terms of ideals alone. For the interests and drives which move men in daily life are very diverse and conflicting. Each man reaches out to serve himself and yet each one finds himself caught up on the actions of others. The upshot of the complex interaction of individual wills is different from what each one has willed. Engels puts this very effectively in his Feuerbach:
The history of social development is essentially different in one respect from that of nature. In nature – in so far as we disregard the reaction of man upon it – there exist only unconscious, blind agents which influence one another and through whose reciprocal interplay general laws assert themselves. Whatever occurs... does not occur as a consciously willed end. On the other hand, in social history the active agents are always endowed with consciousness, are always men working towards definite ends with thought and passion. Nothing occurs without conscious intent, without willed end. But this difference, important as it may be for historical investigation... does not alter the fact that the course of history obeys general laws. For here, too, on the surface, despite the consciously willed ends of individuals, chance seems to rule. Only seldom does that occur which is willed. In most cases the numerous ends which are willed conflict with or cut across one another, or they are doomed from the very outset to be unattainable, or the means to carry them out are insufficient. And so, out of the conflicts of innumerable individual wills and acts there arises in the social world a situation which is quite analogous to that in the unconscious, natural one. The ends of actions are willed; but the results, which really flow from those actions, are not willed, or, in so far as the results seem to agree with the willed ends, ultimately they turn out to be quite other than the desired consequence. [2]
The crucial question, which every philosophy of history must face, is whether or not there are any factors which determine the historical resultant of the interaction of individual wills. Is it possible even without having knowledge of the content of innumerable wills to predict what will take place when, say, the density of population increases or the level of real wages falls? Or is the unexpected historical resultant – the whole record of what has happened – itself a matter of chance? There are some philosophers who have made the problem easy for themselves by denying that there is any determinate causation in history, that everything which has happened could have happened differently, that no rhyme or reason can be discovered in the direction of history save what the poets, prophets or fanatics read into it. They have pointed to the rack and ruin of past cultures, to needless blood and misery which have accompanied change from one social order to another, to the unrelieved tragedy and injustice of visiting the historical sins of one generation upon the heads of its descendants, as supplementary evidence that the surface appearance of chance is not, as Marx and Engels believe, a reflection of an inner law but is rather an expression of the stark irrationality of the historic process. The historical resultant, they say, has been determined by the interaction of many wills, and nothing else. And since these work at cross-purposes with one another, the arbitrary character of the historical pattern is explained.
There are at least three good reasons why this hypothesis of wholesale chance in history must be rejected. First, there are some events that have taken place which seem to us to have been necessitated by a whole chain of antecedent circumstances, although all the links in that chain may not be clear. No one can seriously maintain today that either the World War or the recent invasion of Manchuria was a chance phenomenon. To be sure, chance elements entered into them, but they were not decisive. The exact date of the World War, the type of men at the head of their respective governments, the thousand and one details with which the war burst upon the world, could never have been deduced in advance. None the less the event itself, the period within which it occurred, its most important consequences, were not only determined by the conflict between the imperialist powers for world hegemony – they were actually foreseen. They were not, however, predetermined, in the sense that they could not have been different even if antecedent conditions had been different. Had the international proletariat been both sufficiently organised and genuinely Marxist, it might have transformed the World War into an international civil war and fought its way to socialism. But the fact that the international proletariat was not prepared to do this was itself not a chance event, but followed, as we have already seen, from a whole constellation of other social forces.
Secondly, to take seriously the hypothesis that chance alone rules in history would involve the belief that anything could have happened at any time. This is the favourite assumption of all rationalist constructions which try to show that if only reason and intelligence had guided human behaviour, mankind would have been spared most of its evils. If only free-trade had been introduced at the time of the crusades, they say, hundreds of years of oppression would have been avoided; if slavery had only been abolished by the Church in the early centuries of Christendom, there would have been no civil war in America in 1861; if the crowned heads of Europe had only listened to Owen, we would all be living today in a communist commonwealth. Now just as it is true that there are chance elements in history, so is it true that many things in the past could have turned out differently from what they did; but only within a narrow range of possibilities conditioned by an antecedent state of affairs. Booth might very well have missed when he fired at Lincoln, but it is extremely improbable that Lincoln would have been able to carry out his reconstruction policy. The Church might have remained faithful to its primitive communism even after it had entered into concubinage with the Roman Empire, but it would have been no more able to arrest the course of economic development in Europe than its condemnation of all interest as usury was able a thousand years later to prevent the rise of capitalism.
Not only are the possibilities of development of material culture limited by determinate social forces, whose character we shall examine in detail below; even the autonomous creation of the mind, the flights of fancy by which men often think they transcend the limits of space and time – art, religion and philosophy – obey an order, in addition to their own, which is imposed upon them from without. Once they come into the world, they often exhibit relatively independent careers, but they cannot come into the world at any time and at any place:
Is the view of nature and of social relations which constitutes the basis of Greek phantasy and therefore of Greek art, possible in an age of automatic machinery, railroads, locomotives and electrical telegraphs? Where does Vulcan come in as against Roberts & Co; Jupiter as against the lightning rod; and Hermes as against the Credit Mobilier? All mythology masters and dominates and shapes the forces of nature in and through the imagination; hence it disappears as soon as man gains real control over the forces of nature. What becomes of the Goddess Fame side by side with Printing House Square? ... Or from another angle, is Achilles possible side by side with powder and lead? Or the Iliad with the printing press and printing machines? Do not singing and reciting and the muses necessarily go out of existence with the appearance of the printer’s bar; and do not, in consequence, the necessary prerequisites of epic poetry disappear? [3]
The third reason for not surrendering the field of history to the realm of the unknown and unknowable is that despite the enormous variation in the motives of human conduct, there are certain statistical constants which are observable in all mass behaviour. Not only are life insurance companies able to reap a harvest by safe betting on the death rates of different groups of people, but all other social institutions can function only by presupposing certain large regularities of human behaviour. We build schools for children who are not yet born and jails for people who have not yet committed crimes. What act is more supremely personal than suicide? Yet it is possible to tell within narrow limits how many people will take their lives next year, and what percentage will be men or women, Jew or Gentile, married, single or divorced. And where the rates of death, suicide, marriage and divorce change – and they do, of course – it is often possible to find variations in other social phenomena with which to correlate them. These correlations often suggest, although they do not necessarily involve, causal connections. What accounts for the recurrence of these regularities? It is not even necessary to assume as did Karl Liebknecht in his revision of Marxism, [4] that there are ‘average material motives’ behind human behaviour which express nothing but economic interests. For the greater the diversity of motives of human behaviour, the more impressive is the statistical regularity which results, and the more probable it is that if an explanation of this regularity is to be found, it will not lie in any of the schedules of invariant psychological forces, dispositions or desires so popular among latter-day sociologists.
II: Alternative Conceptions of History: So far we have shown only that there are definite patterns in history which all philosophies of history must recognise. In terms of what principle can the succession of these patterns be explained? We must now distinguish between two generic theories of history and civilisation – the idealistic and materialistic – before the differentiating character of Marx’s theory can be grasped.
Idealistic theories of history explain the ordered sequence of events in terms of purpose – divine or natural – and refuse to go beyond the will or intelligence of the men who make history or of the God who controls it. Whatever order is discovered to exist, must be for them a teleological order attributable to good or bad purposes, to intelligence or stupidity. The future of civilisation depends upon man’s willingness and ability to purify his heart or improve his mind – as the case may be.
Supernatural idealism may be dismissed with a word. It can never explain why anything happens. It can only bestow its blessings upon an event after it has happened. Whether the appeal is to God’s will, Plato’s Form of the Good, Plotinus’ One, Hegel’s Absolute, Schopenhauer’s Will, E von Hartmann’s Unconscious or Bergson’s élan, it cannot predict or make intelligible a single historical occurrence. Hypostasis, rationalisation and fetishism are its intellectual techniques; quietism and the narcosis of resignation its political consequences. Every practical step it takes is at the cost of a logical contradiction. The pious man who prays, ‘O Lord, Thy Will be done’, in a church whose steeple flaunts a lightning rod to correct that will if it absentmindedly strikes in the wrong place, expresses only more dramatically the confusion of the idealistic philosopher who proclaims that the immediate pain of the part is the ultimate good of the whole and then practically translates this sentiment into the proposition that the slavery of one class is necessary for the leisure of another.
Psychological idealisms which look to the ideas and emotions of human beings for the final causes of social and historical change are legion. An adequate discussion of them would require a separate volume. Their common defect may be briefly indicated. First, in appealing to psychological entities like ambition, sympathy, love of domination, fear or whatever it is that is taken as central in the historical process, something is being invoked which, although existent, is not easily observable. The specific mechanism by which it presumably transmits its efficacy is rarely given, so that its influence appears to be highly mysterious. When mechanisms are constructed or discovered on the basis of the biological analogy of the nervous system, a greater difficulty presents itself. These psychological attitudes which the hypothetical mechanisms make possible are either constant or variable. If they are constant, how explain the enormous variety in the social patterns out of which those attitudes – since they are never found in a pure form – are analysed? Man may be a loving animal, a playful animal, a fighting animal. But how explain in these terms the differences in the way man loves (that is, the forms of the family), the character of his play (contrast the primitive dance and the modern cinema), and the manner of his contests (socialist competition and nationalist war). Assuming, now, that these psychological attitudes are variable and that they are correlated with varying social relations, the more urgent question asserts itself as to what determines this change in their character. When, where and to what extent do they flourish and become dominant? These questions cannot be explained without introducing some material conditioning factors, since, as we have seen, the variations in the motives of individual behaviour are too extreme, the motives themselves – fear, love, ambition, hate – too ambiguous in meaning, to warrant using any specific psychological element rather than another as the key term in explaining the character of historical effects.
If human motives are subjected to material control from without, that is, by changes in nature or economic organisation, are these latter, too, of a purposive character? Do they fall into the teleological order so essential to all idealism? He would be a hardy man to assert it, for he would have to read will, feeling and reason, which are specifically characteristic of individual men, back into the social and physical conditions out of which the life of man arises. No, we must conclude that ideas do not make history, for whether they are accepted or are not accepted depends upon something which is not an idea; that, although there can be no history without psychologically-motivated behaviour, the particular emotional set which asserts itself from out of the whole gamut of emotional life is selected by factors which are not psychological but social.
Materialistic philosophies of history turn away from the quest for objective meanings, spirit and purpose in the historical process and seek for its controlling conditions in some observable aspect of the physical and social environment. Before Marx, most materialist philosophies took a physical, chemical or biological approach to cultural life. Hobbes, for example, laid down a theoretical programme according to which it should be possible to deduce from the mathematical laws of motion and the positions of material particles in space and time, all political and social life. Feuerbach, that suggestive but too impressionable thinker, was so carried away by the primitive food chemistry of his day that he tried to summarise the political difference between England and Ireland as a difference between roast beef and potatoes. This might have been a starting point for a social analysis, but Feuerbach remained stuck in his chemistry. The result was that the same man who produced the most fruitful hypothesis of the nineteenth century in the psychology of religion, offered the most ludicrous revolutionary theory ever devised by attempting to base his politics upon food chemistry. Feuerbach actually believed that the revolution of 1848 had ended with the triumph of reaction because the poorer elements of the population had been made sluggish by their potato diet. ‘Potato blood [träges Kartoffelblut] can make no revolution!’, he cried.
Shall we then despair? [He inquires] Is there no other foodstuff which can replace potatoes among the poorer classes and at the same time nurture them to manly vigour and disposition? Yes, there is such a food-stuff, a food-stuff which is the pledge of a better future, which contains the seed of a more thorough, even if more gradual, revolution. It is beans. [5]
To be sure, not all chemical determinists were guilty of such excesses. But the same methodological absurdities were committed by the racialists and later by the social-Darwinists, who regarded all social life as a resultant of a biological struggle for existence.
The attempt has recently been made, especially by Ellsworth Huntington, to revive the geographical interpretation of history, already suggested by Herder and Montesquieu in the eighteenth century and more explicitly stated by Buckle in the nineteenth. It is asserted that there are certain climatic pulsations and shiftings of the climatic zone which can be correlated with the rise and fall of cultures. The nature of the evidence for these climatic changes is highly questionable. Uncontrolled extrapolations have been made from one region of the world to another – and from the present to the past. There is not the slightest ground for believing that the climate of Greece has varied in any appreciable way from the sixth century BC to the first AD – a period of tremendous social change. And even where periods of extreme climatic stress have been observed, as in the great floods and cold of the fourteenth century, no plausible connection has been established between these facts of climate and the profound subsequent changes in European material and ideal culture. Sometimes the effects attributed to natural forces are really the effects of social factors. For example, the devastation produced by periodic floods in China is not always the result of uncontrollable natural disasters but is due to the fact that the Chinese war lords divert to military purposes the tax money raised to keep the elaborate system of dykes and canals in repair.
There is no climate that cannot support different cultures; while similar cultures often flourish in different climates. The same arguments apply to the racial interpretation of history, especially where differences between the races are explained by differences in the climate and the selective effect it has had upon man. Were the wildest claims concerning the correlation of climate and cultural change to be accepted, still, in the absence of any knowledge of the specific ways in which climate affects creative impulses, we should have to look for more relevant social causes to explain the rise and fall of ideas.
The chief defect of all these materialistic philosophies is the attempt to reduce the social to merely a complicated effect of the non-social, and the consequent failure to observe that new types of relations arise in the associated behaviour of men which are irreducibly distinctive. In addition to the fundamental objection that the reduction of the specific qualities and laws of social behaviour to categories of physics and biology is not intelligible, the evidence points to the fact that in any given area these physical and biological factors are relatively constant while social life shows conspicuous variations. So much even Hegel, the idealist, had pointed out. Marxists admit that climate, topography, soil and race are genuine conditioning factors of social and historical activity; they deny that they determine the general character of a culture or its historical development. They claim that a truly historical philosophy must do greater justice to the activity of man upon all phases of cultural life than is provided for in the theories of the physical and biological determinists. Engels writes in his Dialektik und Natur:
Natural science as well as philosophy has completely neglected the influence of the activity of man upon his thinking. They know only nature on one side, thought on the other. But it is precisely the changes in nature brought about through men, and not nature as such alone, which is the most essential and primary foundation of human thought. In proportion to the extent to which man learned to change nature, his intelligence developed. The naturalistic conception of history, found, for example, more or less in Draper and other natural scientists according to which it is nature which exclusively acts upon man, and natural conditions which exclusively determine his historical development, is therefore one-sided. It forgets that man can react upon nature, change it, and create new conditions of existence. Of the ‘natural conditions’ of Germany as they existed when the German tribes came in, mighty little has remained. The surface of the soil, climate, vegetation, fauna, man himself have gone through infinite changes, and all by virtue of human activity. On the other hand, the changes that have taken place in the natural aspects of Germany in which human beings had no hand, is incalculably small. [6]
III: The Theory of Historical Materialism: In the remainder of this chapter we shall state briefly the central propositions of the theory of historical materialism, following Marx as closely as possible and leaving difficulties and problems for the succeeding chapters. We shall begin the exposition by stating Marx’s theory of social organisation and then go on to his theory of social development. They constitute respectively the (a) static and (b) dynamic phases of historical materialism.
A-I: Every society for Marx is a structurally interrelated cultural whole. Consequently no material or ideal aspect of that whole, whether it be its legal code, methods of manufacture, educational practices, religion or art, can be understood as an isolated phenomenon. It must be taken in relation to the way in which the system functions as a whole. Traditional elements may exist within it but they have been readapted to harmonise with the dominant patterns of thought and action. For example, Christianity in America is a traditional religion, but the specific character it exhibits today as distinct from the past, and in America as distinct from, say, Bavaria, is a reflection of the American frontier life with its alternations between drab experience and emotional release, American exhibitionism, philosophical optimism, go-getting tactics in business, etc. These in turn reflect the influence of American religion. But although cultural elements exist in some functional connection, they are not so organically related with one another that a change in one produces a change in all at the same time or to the same degree. Even in such a highly organised system as the human organism – though the whole organism is involved in the functioning of any of its parts – a change in some of the organs will not produce an immediate effect upon others and may leave still others comparatively unaffected. Similarly, no one can seriously contend that the latest refinements in philosophical logic must necessarily affect fashions in women’s dresses. Nonetheless important changes in fashions of dress and fashions of ideas reveal not only a development peculiar to their own fields, but changes outside of them. When women took to wearing breeches and abandoning corsets in the twentieth century and philosophers stressed race or national ideas in rewriting their histories, it was not because of any immanent logic within the fields of fashion or philosophy, but rather because of the impact of certain social and political forces from without. Or even more obviously, looking at the legal systems of Rome, the medieval church and twentieth-century Europe, we can see that, despite the similarity of some of the concepts, these systems did not grow out of one another, but out of deep social changes. A significant history of law – or even an analysis of law – then, would have to include an account of the social and cultural changes which found expression in formal and legal concepts. A knowledge of only the logical interpretation of these concepts would tell us more about logic than about law. Interestingly enough, the starting point of the development of Marx’s theory was the philosophy of law. In sketching his own intellectual history, he tells us that even earlier than 1844, in the course of a criticism of Hegel’s philosophy of law, he had become convinced ‘that legal relations as well as the forms of the state could neither be understood by themselves nor explained by the so-called progress of the human mind, but that they are rooted in the material relations of life’. [7]
What is true for one phase of ideal culture is true for all. And if true for all, we can understand Marx’s paradoxical remark that, from his point of view, there is no history of ideas as such, but only a history of societies. That is to say, just as it is possible to regard the thoughts of an individual as events in his life – the proper history of their succession involving, therefore, his biography – so the rise and fall of leading ideas (their truth is another question) may be regarded as social events to be properly grasped only as part of world history. This was Hegel’s great empirical insight, overstated and obscured by a too inclusive organic determinism, but corrected and developed by Marx. To what extent this is compatible with pluralism will be considered in the succeeding chapter.
A-II: Within any civilisation law exercises an influence upon education, education upon religion, religion upon economic organisation, economic organisation upon politics, and vice versa. This is apparent to all but those who would build life out of one block. But to recognise that the cultural process is one of multiple reaction and interaction does not help us understand why the general character of one civilisation is distinct from another, or in what direction a particular civilisation has developed and will develop. To stop at the recognition of the complexity of the factors involved is eclecticism. Neither Hegel nor Marx was an eclectic. Both sought for a key which, allowing for the reciprocal influences of the parts of a culture upon each other, would provide a general explanation of the whole process. Hegel maintained that ‘political history, forms of government, art, religion and philosophy – one and all have the same common root – the spirit of the time’. [8] We have already seen that this is theology. Whether it has any meaning or not, its truth cannot be tested.
According to Marx’s hypothesis it is the material ‘relations of production’ (Produktionsverhältnisse) which condition the general character of cultural life:
The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society – the real foundations, on which rise legal and political superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. [9]
The economic structure of society, the Produktionsverhältnisse, includes, but cannot be identified with, the forces of production (Produktivkräfte) such as technology, existing skills, both physical and mental, inherited traditions and ideologies; nor is it the same as the conditions of production (Produktionsbedingungen) such as the natural supply of raw material, climate, race, population. The ‘relations of production’ express the way in which productive forces and productive conditions are organised by the social activity of man. They constitute the mode of economic production. Property relations are their legal expression. For Marx it is the relations of production, not the forces of production and not the conditions of production, which are the basis of the cultural superstructure. Later we shall see how important these distinctions are. At any rate it should be clear that it is only the relations of production that can properly be described as feudal or bourgeois. We cannot speak of feudal or bourgeois forces and conditions of production except in a metonymous sense.
A-III: Relations of production are indispensable if processes of production are to continue. The only question which can be intelligently asked about them is whether any given set of relations is still compatible with the continuance of production. Whatever set of relations exists is independent of the will of those who participate in production. A man finds himself an employer or employee, a feudal lord or serf, a slave or a slave holder. Some few individuals may succeed in changing their status, but no class as a whole can do so without revolutionising the existing system of social relations. Such a revolution cannot be undertaken at any time, nor if undertaken, succeed, save under certain determinate conditions, all of which are necessary for victory but no one of which is sufficient. Since a class is defined by the objective role it plays in the organisation of production, the sources of the antagonism between classes flows not from the consciousness (or lack of it) of individual members of the class but from the division of the fruits of production. To insure the system of division against discontent, to facilitate a greater appropriation of the product, the property relations which are the formal expression of the relations of production must be backed up by extra-economic power. The state is the institution and instrument through which the legal relations receive their moral and physical sanctions. No class can dominate production unless it controls the state. All political life and history, then, since it revolves around struggle for the mastery of the state power, is to be explained in terms of the class conflicts generated in the process of production.
A-IV: The division of society into classes gives rise to different ways of looking at the world. This is in part determined by the character of the actual work done, but even more so by the desire to preserve the existing order or to transform it. The political, ethical, religious and philosophical systems – no matter how high their summits tower – are reared on values that may be universal in form but never in fact. Analysis reveals that they all turn out to be relevant to the struggle for social power, even when they profess not to be concerned with it. A struggle for survival and domination goes on between ideas no less than between classes. Since those who control the means of production also control, directly or indirectly, the means of publication – the church, press, school, cinema, radio – the prevailing ideology always tends to consolidate the power and strengthen the authority of the dominant class. ‘In every epoch’, wrote Marx, ‘the ruling ideas have been the ideas of the ruling class.’ [10] It does not follow that ideological indoctrination is always deliberate or that those who embrace a doctrine can themselves distinguish between what is true in their belief and what is merely helpful in achieving their political purposes. In every system the deepest and most pervasive kinds of cultural conditioning are never the results of a mechanical inculcation. In the course of his life-career the individual imbibes the values and attitudes which are accepted as natural by those who surround him. A system of checks and approvals controls conduct at every step – not only on those rare occasions when an individual rises from one social level to another but even within his own class. The tone and model of behaviour, the very objects of ambition, are set by those who wield power or who serve those that wield it. In every age the prevalent conception of the ‘ideal man’ summarises the virtues and celebrates the status of the ruling group. Aristotle’s ‘magnanimous man’, Castiglione’s ‘courtier’, the medieval ‘fighting monk’, the English ‘gentleman’, the early American ‘log-cabin president’, and the late American ‘captain of industry’, inspired a pattern of feeling and action among the ruled as well as the rulers.
B-I: We now turn to the dynamic phase of the social process. If this is the way a culture is organised, how does it come about that it changes? In every social system a continuous change goes on in the material forces of production. In early societies, where production is primitive, these changes are often produced by natural phenomena such as the desiccation of rivers or the exhaustion of soil. Usually, however, and more particularly under capitalism, this change takes place in the development of the instruments of production. At a certain point in the course of their development the changed relations in the forces of production come into conflict with existing property relations. At what point? At a point when it no longer becomes possible on the basis of the existing distribution of income to permit the available productive processes to function to full capacity; when the great masses of human beings, out of whose labour all social value and capital have come, cannot be sustained by their own institutional handiwork. It then becomes recognised that ‘from forms of development of the forces of production the relations of production turn into their fetters’. [11]
B-II: The class that stands to gain by modifying the relations of production becomes revolutionary in order to permit the forces of production to expand. It asserts itself as a political force and develops a revolutionary ideology to aid in its struggles for state power. Sometimes it masks its class interests in the guise of slogans of universal appeal as did the French bourgeoisie in the eighteenth century when it declared for freedom from all oppression but fought only for the freedom to buy cheap and sell dear; sometimes it dresses itself up in the borrowed robes of antiquity or echoes the prophets, or, like Cromwell’s men, marches into battle to the song of hymns; but at all times, its doctrines are patterns of social action which function instrumentally to rally a frontal attack against the enemy, or by insidious criticism operate to undermine his morale. A class is not always critically conscious of what it really is fighting for. It is the shock and consequence of the struggle which brings it to self-consciousness. Strictly speaking it is only in the absence of self-consciousness that a set of ideas becomes an ideology:
... the distinction should always be made [writes Marx] between the material transformation of the economic conditions of production which can be determined with the precision of natural science and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic or philosophic – in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on what he thinks of himself, so can we not judge of such a period of transformation by its own consciousness. [12]
The most important task of historical materialism is to criticise cultural and social doctrines in order to lay bare their social roots and presuppositions, to expose the contradiction between their avowed programme and their class allegiance, and to discover the social incidence which practical activity on their behalf will probably take.
B-III: Viewed in the light of contemporary experience, all history since the disappearance of primitive communism may be regarded as a history of class struggle. A class, it will be remembered, is any group of people which plays a definite role in production. This is not to say that all history is nothing but class struggles. As we shall see later, it only asserts that no other form of human association, whether it be of struggle or of cooperation, can be intelligibly regarded as the moving agent of social change. Every class struggle is at the same time a political struggle, for the state is never really neutral in class conflict, and a class struggle carried to successful completion is directed towards the overthrow of the existing state. Every ideal struggle, in so far as it bears in any way upon the class struggle, has political repercussions, and may be evaluated from a political point of view without prejudice to its own specific categories.
B-IV: The struggle between the capitalist and proletarian classes represents the last historic form of social opposition, for in that struggle it is no longer a question of which class should enjoy ownership of the social functions of production but of the existence of private ownership as such. The abolition of private ownership in the means of production spells the abolition of all classes. This can be accomplished only by the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. Political power is to be consolidated by the proletarian state during a transitional period in which the last vestiges of anti-social activity will be rooted out. When this is accomplished the proletarian state, to use Engels’ phrase, ‘withers away’, that is, its repressive functions disappear and its administrative functions become part and parcel of the productive process of a society in which ‘the free development of all is the condition for the free development of each’. [13]
This in bare outline is what historical materialism means. In the next chapter we shall dissociate it from what it is often interpreted to mean, and then proceed to a discussion of its validity.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band III, p 265 [Karl Marx, The Holy Family – MIA
2. Engels, Feuerbach (Duncker edition), p 56 [Friedrich Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen Philosophie (Vienna & Berlin 1927); English translation Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy. – MIA
3. Karl Marx, Introduction to Critique of Political Economy (English translation), pp. 310–11 [Karl Marx, Grundrisse – MIA
4. Karl Liebknecht, Studien über die Bewegungsgesetze der gesellschaftlichen Entwicklung (München 1922), p. 181.
5. Ludwig Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke (herausgegeben von Bolin and Jodl, Stuttgart 1904), Band X, p. 23.
6. Marx-Engels Archiv, Band II, p 165 [Friedrich Engels, Dialectics of Nature. – MIA]
7. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. – MIA
8. Hegel, History of Philosophy, Volume 1.
9. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. – MIA
10. Karl Marx,  The German Ideology. – MIA
11. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy – MIA
12. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. – MIA
13. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (III: ‘Der Kampf um Marx’)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter III: ‘Der Kampf um Marx’
The struggle for the possession of Marx’s spiritual bequest had already begun in Marx’s own lifetime. Marx, himself, had called down a plague upon both the Marxists and anti-Marxists; but he watched with critical uneasiness the doctrinal deviations and false tactical moves of his adherents throughout the world and especially in Germany. As early as 1875, in a scathing criticism of the Gotha programme adopted by his followers on the occasion of their union with the party of Lassalle, he complained that they were giving their socialism a nationalistic twist and that they had become infected with a servile faith in the bourgeois state. [1] No criticism was ever more prophetic. Before the next quarter of a century had elapsed these tendencies had become full blown and had flowered into a doctrinal interpretation of Marxism according to which it was no longer a philosophy of social revolution, but a classless science of social development which countenanced open nationalistic and reformist practices.
If Marx’s method of social analysis is valid, then the key to this doctrinal development is to be sought not in the ideas of a few individual leaders, but in the social and economic development of Germany. To this we must now turn.
The last quarter of the nineteenth century witnessed the emergence of Germany as an imperialist power of the first rank. With the conquest of foreign markets, opportunities for work increased – evidenced in the decline of emigration; prices on colonial raw material and consumption goods (rubber, tea, coffee, etc) which were unprotected by tariffs, fell; and both the money and real wages of the highly organised skilled workers – but not of the unskilled workers in heavy industry or of the agricultural labourers – rose. The enormous profits of foreign trade and the superior technical organisation of German industry enabled the state to maintain and extend the system of limited social insurance which had originally been adopted as safeguards against the revolutionary upsurge of the masses. [2] All this was not without its profound effects upon a working class efficiently schooled by state institutions in the traditions of a nationalist culture. The skilled workers who felt that they stood to gain by the extension of the imperialism of the mother country were precisely those who were the most influential in the socialist trade unions; and the trade unions, then as now, had the socialist party in tow. The ideology of the trade unions, which centred around the day to day struggle for a higher standard of living, seeped into the political party. Although the party congresses still paid pious allegiance to the formula of revolution, the practices of the organisation were exclusively devoted to a gradual social reform. The right-wing leaders stole a leaf from the scientific Marxists and urged that it was Utopian to oppose an imperialist expansion which followed with ‘iron necessity’ from economic laws discovered by Marx himself; the only sensible policy was to put forward a colonial programme which would relieve the pangs of economic penetration suffered by the natives. An enlightened, peaceful and civilised imperialism, accompanied by a liberal educational policy, would raise the cultural level of the indigenous population to a point from which it could appreciate the economic, social, scientific and, therefore, moral necessity of imperialist expansion.
With the growth of the party the domination of the trade unions in the interest of their immediate social politics increased. The trade unions were primarily interested in keeping their members at work. This was obviously bound up with the export of commodities. Exports demanded markets; markets a strong foreign policy. How, then, could the leaders of the trade unions reconcile their devotion to the immediate interests of the workers with a militant struggle against their own national imperialism? To be sure, they were aware that the lion’s share of the profits of imperialist expansion fell not to themselves but to their employers. But then there were the concessions – the crumbs of bounty which fell from the table of superfluity. Certainly, cried Schippel and other reformist leaders, it was better to work than to hunger. To fight was out of the question. But fight they had to! On one sad day in 1914, in remembrance of the crumbs of concessions, they goose-stepped into battle to fight in a war brought on by imperialism. [3]
The orientation of the German Social-Democracy towards practical immediate reform produced an important change in the social composition of the party. Numerous non-proletarian elements – petty-bourgeois shopkeepers, professionals and intellectuals – began to stream into the organisation. They did not stay in the rank and file, but, by virtue of their technical accomplishments and social connections, forged to the top of the party as functionaries, theoreticians and political representatives. Although the party membership still remained overwhelmingly proletarian, their strategic posts enabled them to wield an influence altogether disproportionate to their numbers. The growth of the trade unions, too, created an administrative apparatus whose standard of living was higher than that of the ordinary worker. The officials functioned so long in office that they lost contact with the actual raw experience of the industrial struggle and slowly acquired the narrow, self-centred ideology of the typical bureaucrat whose eternal archetype they always had before their eyes in the persons of the Prussian state officials. The persecution of the party and trade unions by their political opponents and the government often took the form of an economic and social boycott. This resulted in the rise of a not inconsiderable group of tradesmen and innkeepers [4] who catered to the needs of the movement and consequently developed special interests not always compatible with the party line or the welfare of the membership. An amusing but very eloquent manifestation of the power of such groups was the existence of ‘The Association of Socialist Tavern-Keepers’ who at one time supplied more than seven per cent of the party representation in the Reichstag. [5]
As the years went by the party took on more and more the character of a benevolent organisation with eschatological trimmings. The vested interests of the party bureaucracy in their posts were linked up with more material interests. By 1913 the German socialist party and trade unions owned in real property alone close to ninety million marks. This was, for them, substantial evidence that they were growing into socialism. When the decisive hour struck in 1914, they were in no mood to sacrifice all this.
Political events as well as the pressure of the socio-economic environment contributed to enforcing the interpretation of Marxism as an ‘objective science’ of social development with which only those blinded by illusion or self-interest could not agree. During the 1870s the censor kept a wary eye open for militant class-conscious phrases and analyses. During the 1880s, under Bismarck’s exception laws, the socialists played safe by choosing restrained and scientific language. (Engels’ prediction of European revolutionary disturbance for 1885 or thereabouts had failed to materialise.) During the 1990s, after the exception laws had been abolished, the growth of the socialist vote to three millions provoked the feeling among the German leaders that they were a party of opposition rather than ‘the party of revolution’. Their desire for social and intellectual respectability led them to stress the importance of systematic doctrine. Could a theory be dangerous which was grounded in real knowledge and expressed in heavy prose?
The practical and spiritual embourgeoisement of the German movement was not long in bearing theoretical fruit. The contradictions between Marx’s revolutionary standpoint, of which there was still some lingering memory, and the life activity of his ‘disciples’, compelled the latter to seek some way of reconciling the two which did not require too great a sacrifice of legality and security. Two ways suggested themselves to square the practice of social reform with the theory of Marxism. One of them was taken by the official party under the intellectual leadership of those who called themselves ‘orthodox’ Marxists; the other by Bernstein and others who were called ‘revisionist’ Marxists. Between these two a literary war broke out on an international scale.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. ‘Doch das ganze Programm, trotz alles demokratischen Geklingels, ist durch and durch vom Untertanenglauben der Lassallischen Sekte an den Staat verpestet.’ (Posthumously printed, Neue Zeit, Volume IX, 1891, p 574) [‘But the whole programme, for all its democratic clang, is tainted through and through by the Lassallean sect’s servile belief in the state...’, Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme.  – MIA]
2. So effective was the system of state insurance that the president of the Reichesversicherungsamtes looking back upon its results was able to write: ‘The approval of the war credit by the Social-Democratic Party represents the most beautiful success of German social reform.’ (P. Kaufmann, Was dankt das kämpfende Deutschland seiner sozialen Fürsorge (1918), p. 11)
3. For an interesting and well-documented analysis of the causes of the social patriotism of the German working class, cf. Mausa Zarchi, Die oekonomische Kausalität des Sozialpatriotismus (Strasbourg 1928).
4. In Germany each political party has its own inns – Lokale – which serve as the centres of political and social life.
5. Robert Michels’ Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demokratie. Untersuchungen über die oligarchischen Tendenz des Gruppenlebens (revised second edition, Leipzig 1925), contains a great deal of relevant material on this aspect of German Social-Democracy, which does not justify, however, the theoretical conclusions he draws therefrom. [An English translation of first edition, Robert Michels, Political Parties: A Sociological Study of the Oligarchical Tendencies of Modern Democracy (New York 1915), is available at here. – MIA]
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (V: The Revisionist Exegesis)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter V: The Revisionist Exegesis
The economic conditions of Europe at the turn of the century together with the peculiar ‘science’ of Marxism conspired to make the Social-Democracy a liberal reform group whose tactics bore no relation to their principles. And yet this did not prevent the intellectual leaders of the movement from mouthing the revolutionary phrases of Marx’s early days. It was this dualism between the prosaic, class-collaborative activity of the organisation on the one hand, and the lofty revolutionary tones of its holiday Versammlungsredner on the other, which gave Bernstein, the student of Engels and the teacher of Kautsky, his great opportunity. In his Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie – the Das Kapital of all subsequent revisionism – he declared to the mortification of his comrades that the Social-Democracy ought ‘to find the courage to emancipate itself from a phraseology which in fact had long been outmoded and to be willing to appear what in reality it already is today: a democratic, socialistic party of reform’. [1] Bernstein did not disapprove of the practice of Social-Democracy; he was intent, however, upon showing that the logical, theoretical counterpart of that practice was in flat contradiction with the theory which Marxists were professing. It was the effort to justify what the Social-Democracy was actually doing which led Bernstein to utter that memorable sentence: ‘What is generally taken as the goal of socialism is nothing to me, the movement is everything.’ [2] In its colonial policy and agrarian programme, in its political collaboration with liberal parties and its trade-union activity, the true philosophy of the socialist movement was expressed. Why not make that philosophy explicit? To talk big was merely cant. And against this cant Bernstein opposed Kant. (Kant wider cant. The pun is Bernstein’s.)
It is in Bernstein’s neo-Kantianism and in the conditions which made for the revival of the ethical and political doctrines of Kant that the theoretical source of Marxian revisionism is to be found. With characteristic short-sightedness, the ‘orthodox’ opposition restricted itself for the most part to a bitter criticism of Bernstein’s economic deviations from Marx. Bernstein had challenged the accuracy of some of Marx’s analyses which despite the fact that they did not treat of exact quantitative correlations or specific time coefficients, the ‘scientific’ socialists regarded as literal predictions valid at any time: notably, disappearance of the middle class, the increasing severity of the business cycle and its corollary, the rate and quality of mass impoverishment. As a matter of fact, however, Bernstein’s economic views were a form of immanent criticism. Allowing for the time factor, the development of finance capitalism and the rise of new industries, the ‘inconvenient’ facts he cited could all be properly interpreted within the framework of the Marxian position. But it was Bernstein’s ethical Kantianism which introduced the irreconcilable element in his discussion. For from it there followed as a matter of principle what the Social-Democracy claimed to be doing as a mere matter of expediency.
The subdued Kantian tones of his original work became progressively stronger in subsequent publications – of which his Wie ist wissenschaftlicher Sozialismus möglich? (1901) is representative. [3] Socialism as a science has as its object the understanding of the socialist movement. It gives us knowledge of the causes and conditions of that movement. But it can never justify that movement, for at its heart there are socialist claims, demands, strivings. It is these ideal motives (moralische Interessen) telling us what ought to be which gives strength to the movement, not the knowledge of what is. In fact, a conflict between scientific theory and ethical practice is always possible. Not only may ‘what is’ be opposed to ‘what ought to be’, but one ‘ought’ may be opposed to another ‘ought’. To resolve these conflicts an objective ethical theory of the right and reasonable is necessary. Bernstein maintained that such an objective theory must necessarily eschew naturalism and embrace some form of the Kantian philosophy. That was behind his oft-repeated reproach that the Social-Democracy was too naturalistic. With such an ethical doctrine the socialist movement could now speak of one’s ‘ethical duties’ to mankind, could now make explicit its ‘natural rights’ doctrine already hidden in such words as Aus-beut-ung (exploitation, Beute, originally meaning booty). The writings of F.A. Lange and Hermann Cohen, together with those of other neo-Kantians like Natorp, Staudinger and Vorländer, who were developing socialism as an ethics and religion, strengthened Bernstein in his views. When Bernstein wrote, ‘The Social-Democracy is in need of a Kant’, it was not so much because of his interest in critical method as in ethical consciousness.
It is obvious that an objective classless morality furnished a beautiful premise for piecemeal social reform. The proletariat as the banner-bearer of the ethics of the community could formulate demands and proposals which included its class opponents as part of the wider social whole. It could claim to be integrating not separatist; characterising itself, as the occasion demanded, as the fulfilment of the prophets, of Christianity, of the French Enlightenment. Struggle was not for a class right but for a common right. The growth of ethical self-consciousness in the community is gradual. Consequently the methods of Social-Democracy must be evolutionary. Class violence involves the negation of the fundamental rights of other classes as human beings. Consequently, Social-Democracy must be peaceful. Phrasemongery about force and dictatorship of the proletariat was worthy of the followers of Blanqui and Bakunin, not of Marx. Class dictatorship means not social progress but a relapse into barbarism. Once more the Volksstaat of Lassalle (who had derived his conception of the state from Hegel – a conception excoriated by Marx in his Critique of the Gotha Programme) reappeared as an undertone in the discussion, especially in Bernstein’s defence of the worker’s Vaterland.
Marx had written in the Communist Manifesto: ‘The proletariat has no fatherland’, meaning that not the workers but the landlords and industrialists owned the country and that it was the task of the proletariat to expropriate them of it. Bernstein understood this to mean, however, that the worker had no nationality and that he was only a member of the international of have-nots. He protested that since the worker had become enfranchised as a citizen, this was no longer true. His duties as a citizen, his duties to the nation, were distinct from his duties as a member of a particular class. And so there began this blurring between the concept of class and country, class and public, class and people, which later on was to prove so fateful to the cause of the international working class. Economic classes were regarded as a species within the genus of the nation. Since the worker was a member of the nation before he was a member of an economic class, his duties as a citizen took precedence over his class interests. As a citizen, of course, he was free to agitate for the existence of a ‘people’s state’. And it was, indeed, with a heavy consciousness of their duties as citizens of the state that the German Social-Democracy, which had come so close to expelling Bernstein and his followers from its ranks as heretics, voted the war-budget in 1914 for the defence of the potential Volksstaat in the actual Vaterland. This was not a capitulation to Bernstein but a logical fulfilment of the party’s reformist past. When Wilhelm II proclaimed from the balcony of his palace in Berlin: ‘Ich kenne keine Partein mehr; ich kenne nur noch Deutsche’, the Social-Democrats, together with all other parties, applauded him to the echo. Before long the party and trade-union theoreticians were grinding out apologetics which Bernstein himself (who had been opposed in the fraction caucus to the approval of the war credits) courageously opposed. A representative passage which strikes the new note with utter frankness, follows:
The masses know and feel that the fate of the nation and of its organised expression – the state – is also their fate. They feel themselves economically, politically and culturally bound to it through participation in the life of the community under the leadership of the state. Their economic welfare and future depends upon the state of the national economy which needs freedom of movement in order to develop. Trade unions can successfully negotiate conditions of work and wages only when trade and exchange are in full bloom. In this way the masses of workers are interested in the fate of the national economy and in the political validation of the state community. That is why they feel such an inner solidarity with the rest of the population in fighting off the dangers which threaten from without. [4]
The revisionists in their time were quite consistent – and honest. They were justified in reproaching the ‘orthodox’ for acting in one way (always with the revisionists) and speaking in another (always against the revisionists). The hue and cry that went up against them in the party was an expression of intellectual confusion and troubled conscience as well. Auer, a member of the Central Committee, wrote to Bernstein confidentially: ‘Mein Lieber Ede, so etwas tut man, aber sagt man nicht.’ [5] In no important respect was Bernstein at odds with his party except in calling a dogma by its right name. It was Kautsky himself, the man who led the theoretical onslaught against Bernstein, who confessed on the occasion of Bernstein’s eightieth anniversary:
Since 1880 in political party affairs we have been Siamese twins. On occasions even Siamese twins quarrel with one another. And at times we did plenty. But even at those moments you could not speak of one without the other. [6]
There can be no question but that Kautsky in essence is right. He and Bernstein were the Siamese twins of Marxian revisionism who differed only concerning the manner in which the practice of reformism could find adequate theoretical expression.
Bernstein, as an exponent of enlightened common sense, attributed the intellectual confusion of his fellow socialists to their pretended use of the dialectical method. In his own thinking he reverted to the sharp and exclusive dichotomies of the ideologues of the French Revolution for whom he always professed great admiration. Bernstein’s conclusions can best be appraised in the light of his methodological starting-point, eighteenth-century rationalism with its ‘terrorism of reason’ mellowed by an acceptance of the theory of social evolution and a faith in human perfectibility. So blunted was the appreciation of Marx’s method on the part of his ‘orthodox’ followers that the discussion with Bernstein raged around his specific conclusions, often around the wording of those conclusions, instead of his superficial rationalism. [7]
Bernstein’s great merit lay in his intellectual honesty. He interpreted Marx and Engels as they appeared to him in their sober years – peace-loving, analytical, monocled scholars, devoted to the cause of social reform, with stirring memories of a revolutionary youth. The movement of which he was the literary head represented the strongest tendency in the alignment of socialist forces in Europe before 1918. It was Marxism as a liberal philosophy of social reform.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Eduard Bernstein, Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie (first edition, Stuttgart 1899), p. 230, last edition. ‘But is Social-Democracy today anything beyond a party that strives after the socialist transformation of society by the means of democratic and economic reform? ... Bebel... has entered the most vigorous protests against the idea that Social-Democracy upholds a policy of force, and all the party organs have received these speeches with applause; nowhere has a protest against them been raised. Kautsky develops in his Agrarian Question the principles of the agrarian policy of Social-Democracy which represent a system of thoroughly democratic reform straight through. The Communal Programme adopted in Brandenburg is a democratic programme of reform. In the Reichstag, the party supports the extension of the powers and the compulsory establishment of courts of arbitration for trades disputes, which are organs for the furtherance of industrial peace. All the speeches of their representatives breathe reform. In the same Stuttgart where, according to Clara Zetkin, the “Bernstein-ade” received the finishing stroke, shortly after the congress the Social-Democrats entered into an alliance with the middle-class democracy for the municipal elections. Other towns in Württemberg followed their example. In the trade-union movement one union after another proceeds to establish unemployment funds, which practically means a surrender of the functions of a purely fighting trade union, and declares for municipal labour bureaus embracing equally employers and employees. In various large towns – Hamburg, Elberfeld – cooperative stores have been started by socialists and trade unions. Everywhere action for reform, action for social progress, action for democracy.’ (Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus, pp. 231–32) [Full text of 1902 edition available here. – MIA]
2. ‘Was man gemeinhin Endziel des Sozialismus nennt, ist mir nichts, die Bewegung alles.’
3. Eduard Bernstein, Wie ist wissenschaftlicher Sozialismus möglich? (Berlin, 1901); full text available here. – MIA
4. Quoted by K. Korsch, in Kampf-Front, 11 January 1930.
5. A. Winnig, Der Krieg und die Arbeiterinternationale, in Friedrich Thimme and Karl Legien (eds.), Die Arbeiterschaft im neuen Deutschland (Leipzig 1915), p. 37.
6. Der Kampf, 1930, p. 15.
7. In a conversation with me in the early summer of 1929, Bernstein (then seventy-nine) cheerfully admitted that he was, to use his own words, ‘a methodological reactionary’. ‘I am still an eighteenth-century rationalist’, he said, ‘and not at all ashamed of it. I believe that in essentials their approach was both valid and fruitful.’ Towards the close of the conversation when I asked him whether he regarded this method to be the method of Marx, he lowered his voice and in confidential tones, as if afraid of being overheard, said: ‘The Bolsheviks are not unjustified in claiming Marx as their own. Do you know? Marx had a strong Bolshevik streak in him!’
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XV: The Philosophy of Political Economy)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XV: The Philosophy of Political Economy
Most of the criticism of Marx’s economic theories, both favourable and unfavourable, concerns itself with the truth of specific propositions in his analysis. At best it considers the connections which exist between one proposition and another, but it overlooks the further double connection between 1) the entire set of propositions contained in Capital and Marx’s methodology of abstraction, and 2) the relation between his economic analysis and the political and economic struggles of the working class.
In what way does the method of abstraction enter into Marx’s analysis? For Marx the social process is a developing whole in which man and the conditions of human activity are in continuous interaction. An analysis of any aspect of the social process, for example, its economic organisation, will necessarily seem to involve tearing certain institutional aspects of social life out of their living context and transforming them into self-acting agencies. Over any given period of time, other social factors, in the interests of the analysis, will have to be regarded as constant even though everyone knows – and no one more than Marx – that they are not constant. A further distortion, however, enters when the analysis of the economic organisation of society begins. For economic life is not made up of discrete and haphazard activities which are fully intelligible in their own immediate context; they are organic parts of a process, too – a process in which the material needs of society, whether it be as ends or means, are gratified. The simple economic act, then, with which Marx begins Capital – commodity exchange – involves a twofold abstraction, once from the whole complex of social activity, and once from the specifically economic process which, in relation to the social process, is itself an abstraction. This double initial abstraction is necessary to any analysis which seeks to disclose the complicated rhythm of social life, and to discover why it takes the direction it does.
The methodological difficulties involved in this approach may be clarified by expanding an analogy which Marx himself employs. The system of human needs and activities which Hegel called civic society, Marx refers to as a social organism. Political economy, he calls the ‘anatomy’ of that organism. Now, it is clear that the anatomy of an organism may be studied independently of its nervous, vascular and digestive systems, as well as of its embryology and comparative history. Nonetheless, its function within the organism can be properly understood only in relation to these other processes. A detailed study of the bone structure – its composition, rate of growth, etc – reveals that the anatomy, too, is a process to be explained in the light of other aspects of the organism as a whole, and that it has a history which is illuminated by a study of the skeletal structure of other animals. The more we learn of the way in which the body functions as a whole, the more we may be compelled to modify our conclusions about the nature of anatomical structure. But we can only study the organism as a whole by beginning with an analysis of its parts. What is true of the relation between anatomy and the organism as a whole, is true of the relation between the anatomy as a whole and any part of it. Whether we take as the anatomical unit, the bone cell, or the mechanical configuration of a limited area of the skeletal structure, the knowledge derived by analysing the unit in isolation will have to be modified as other aspects and areas are considered. Just as the organism as a whole cannot be studied unless parts are abstracted from it, so here, too, the anatomy as a whole can only be studied by beginning with a relatively isolated unit and showing how the larger system of interrelations is involved within it. This will involve modifying some of the conclusions arrived at in the preliminary analysis of the isolated unit.
Marx was interested in the analysis of capitalist production as a whole. But he necessarily begins with an analysis of a part – its tiniest part, the economic cell-form – the value-form of the commodity. In ordinary life no one can see this economic cell; it is embedded in a huge structure. ‘But the force of economic abstraction replaces the microscope.’ [1] Marx attempted in the course of his analysis to show how all the characteristic phenomena of economic activity are already involved in this simple cell-form:
In the value-form of the commodity there is concealed already in embryo the whole form of capitalist production, the opposition between capitalists and wage-labourers, the industrial reserve army, the crisis. [2]
The leading assumptions of Marx’s analysis are such as to permit him to derive all the known phenomena he was interested in. Practically, it was necessary for Marx to begin his analysis with the simple abstraction – the unit of commodity exchange; theoretically, it would have been possible to begin anywhere, for the nature of capitalist production is revealed in all economic phenomena. Similarly, in the interest of analysis, he was compelled to assume, at the outset, that the exchange of commodities took place under a system of ‘pure’ capitalism in which there were no vestiges of feudal privilege and no beginnings of monopoly; that the whole commercial world could be regarded as one nation; that the capitalist mode of production dominates every industry; that supply and demand were constantly in equilibrium; that having abstracted from the incommensurable use-values of commodities, the only relevant and measurable quality left to determine the values at which commodities were exchanged, was the amount of socially necessary labour-power spent upon them.
Marx’s distinctive contribution to economic theory was not the labour theory of value, nor even the application of the labour theory of value to the commodity of labour-power – all this is already found in Adam Smith – but his claim that the use-value of the labour-power purchased by the entrepreneur was the source of more exchange-value, under normal conditions of demand, than what the labour-power itself possessed, and that out of the difference between the exchange-value of labour-power and the exchange-value of what labour-power produced was derived profit, rent and interest. Marx ‘proves’ his claim by showing that if there were a system of ‘pure’ capitalism, and if we were to disregard for a moment the presence or absence of revolutionary action of the proletariat (which as we shall show Marx never really does), then his theory of labour-power, together with the labour theory of value, play the same logical role in the explanation of the mechanics and dynamics of the economic system as, say, the Copernican hypothesis in the explanation of the movements of the solar system. To say that Marx’s assumptions play the same logical role as the Copernican hypothesis is not to say that they play the same role. For in one case, our knowledge and our activity make no difference at all to what is going to happen, while in the other case, they decidedly do; in one case, the reliability of prediction is overwhelming, in the other, only tendencies and directions can be charted; in the first, the occurrence of new phenomena can be inferred, in the second, nothing not already known can be inferred, so that fundamental assumptions take on the character of elaborate ad hoc hypotheses; as a consequence, in the first, no laws are historical, in the second, all laws are.
By pure logic alone no one can prove or disprove any theory of value. In this respect theories of economic value may be compared to theories of geometry. The same relations of physical space may be described by many different geometries. Here, no matter what the deliverances of experience are, so long as we retain a narrowly theoretical view, spatial experience can be described in either Euclidean or in one of the many varieties of non-Euclidean geometry. The deliverances of experience can never refute a geometry, if we resolve to cling by it. It can only make it more complicated. Of course, experimentally, it makes considerable difference whether experience compels us to complicate our geometry or not. The ‘true’ geometry, for the physicist, is the one that, on the basis of his experimental findings, he need complicate least. But where experimental control is not in question, the geometer may save all the appearances by introducing subsidiary assumptions and spin out his theories in any geometrical language he chooses. The same may be said of theories of economic value.
Indeed, the analogy between the different theories of value and different theories of geometry may be pressed further. Just as it is possible to translate any description of a physical relation, written in terms of Euclidean geometry, into the language of non-Euclidean geometry, so theoretically it is possible to restate any explanation of an empirically-observed economic phenomenon offered from the point of view, say, of the labour theory of value into the marginal utility theory of value and vice versa. In the instance in question, this is all the easier because both the Marxian and the marginalist schools allow that both utility and labour-cost enter into determination of price but differ in their assignments of relative primacy to the two factors involved. The marginalists, although insisting that labour-costs must ultimately be derived from price, admit that price may be affected by supply, which, in turn, is controlled by labour-costs. Marx, in consonance with the classical school, [3] insists that price must ultimately be derived from labour-cost; but in qualifying labour-cost by the phrase, socially necessary, he admits the powerful influence of demand. [4]
Subsidiary hypotheses play even a larger part when a theory of value is applied to economic phenomena than they do when theories of geometry are applied to physical existences. That is why no theory of value can be refuted by pointing to alleged contradictions. These contradictions can always be regarded as difficulties to be solved by introducing special conditions or assumptions. The latter may be additional analytical principles or particular historical data. The much heralded contradiction between the first and third volumes of Capital may be taken as an illustration. Instead, however, of introducing a subsidiary hypothesis to solve the difficulties, all Marx did was to point to the fact that the abstract and ideal conditions postulated as holding in the first volume did not actually exist.
Let us look a little closer at the contradiction. It arises as follows. The source of profit is surplus-value. Surplus-value can be produced by labour-power alone. The wages of labour-power represent the variable capital of the concern. If the same total capitals are involved, and if the rate of exploitation is the same, the larger the variable capital, the greater should be the profit, and the greater the rate of profit. Let a represent a concern whose total capital is $1,000,000, of which $900,000 is invested in constant capital c, and $100,000 in variable v. The rate of exploitation being 100 per cent, the profit or surplus-value s will be $100,000. The rate of profit, which is given by s divided by c plus v, will equal 10 per cent. Let b represent a concern whose total capital is $1,000,000, of which $700,000 is invested in constant capital c1 and $300,000 in variable capital v1. The rate of exploitation being 100 per cent profit or surplus-value s1 will be $300,000. The rate of profit which is given by s1 divided by c1 plus v1 should be 30 per cent. Is it? It is not. The rate of profit is independent of the organic composition of capital.
It was Marx himself who pointed out the apparent contradiction and it was he who offered an explanation of it. In this connection, one can say of him what has been said of Darwin, that there was hardly a single criticism directed against his theories which he himself had not already anticipated and stated. In his chapter on Different Composition of Capital in Different Lines of Production and Resulting Differences in the Rates of Profit, he writes:
We have demonstrated, that different lines of industry may have different rates of profit, corresponding to differences in the organic composition of capitals, and, within the limits indicated, also corresponding to different times of turnover; the law (as a general tendency) that profits are proportioned as the magnitudes of the capitals, or that capitals of equal magnitude yield equal profits in equal times, applies only to capitals of the same organic composition, with the same rate of surplus-value, and the same time of turnover. And these statements hold good on the assumption, which has been the basis of all our analyses so far, namely that the commodities are sold at their values. On the other hand there is no doubt that, aside from unessential, accidental and mutually compensating distinctions, a difference in the average rate of profit of the various lines of industry does not exist in reality, and could not exist without abolishing the entire system of capitalist production. It would seem, then, as though the theory of value were irreconcilable at this point with the actual process, irreconcilable with the real phenomena of production, so that we should have to give up the attempt to understand these phenomena. [5]
How does Marx account for the fact that in the normal processes of production and exchange an average rate of profit would result from varying rates of profit in different industries? By assuming that the variations in the rate of profit would give rise to competition for larger returns between capitals of varying organic composition, producing in this way an average rate of profit. At any given time, the price of a commodity is determined not by the amount of socially necessary labour-power contained in it but by its cost of production plus the average rate of profit:
Now, if the commodities are sold at their values, then, as we have shown, considerably different rates of profit arise in the various spheres of production, according to the different organic composition of the masses of capital invested in them. But capital withdraws from spheres with low rates of profit and invades others which yield a higher rate. By means of this incessant emigration and immigration, in one word, by its distribution among the various spheres in accord with a rise of the rate of profit here, and its fall there, it brings about such a proportion of supply to demand that the average profit in the various spheres of production becomes the same, so that values are converted into prices of production. [6]
It is clear that Marx’s explanation implies that commodities, as a matter of fact, are never actually exchanged on the basis of the amount of socially necessary labour-power contained in them, but always over or under this norm. The analysis of the economic cell-form in the first volume of Capital was not an empirical description of what actually took place in the observable world, but an attempt to discover the tendencies of capitalist production if variations in supply and demand could be ruled out, if no monopolies existed, if the organic composition of all capitals was the same, etc. It is only under the latter presuppositions that the theoretical analysis of exchange would correspond to the actual empirical practice, that the price at which a commodity was sold would correspond with its true value. But Marx was not interested in the variations of price. He could accept any of the orthodox psychological theories from Jevons to Pareto which concern themselves with price variations from one moment of time, to another not far removed from it. When it came to explaining the pattern of price variations over a long period of time, psychological notions were irrelevant.
The significant point to be made here, however, is that no matter what the deliverances of market experience are, the labour theory of value can be saved. But why save it? Some have claimed that it should be saved for the same reason that any other scientific hypothesis should be saved, that is to say, because of its power to predict. Yet neither the labour theory of value nor any other theory of value can predict anything which is not already known in advance. War and crisis, centralisation and unemployment, were already quite familiar phenomena when Marx reformulated the theory of value. He could show that their existence and increasing frequency were compatible with that theory and that the most significant phenomena of economic life could be described in its terms. It is a mistake to believe, however, as, for example, Bukharin does, that one can predict anything specific on the basis of the labour theory. That wars and panics will occur and capitalism break down are propositions too general to be enlightening; for unless these events are given specific temporal coefficients, it can be shown that they follow just as readily from economic assumptions other than those used by Marx. To counter in the familiar way by saying that economic phenomena are too complicated to permit of prediction is to concede the point at issue, for it is to admit that the theoretical assumptions are not adequate to what one has started out to explain; that no method of measuring the degree of relative indeterminacy in the conjunction of events exists, and most important of all, that no specific guide to action can be derived from these allegedly true general propositions. Theories of value have no predictive power.
Why, then, save the labour theory of value? Save it, say some radical thinkers who in their hearts are convinced of its scientific untenability, because it is a good rallying cry to stir the proletariat into action. It teaches the worker that he is being robbed of what he has produced, that exploitation is as natural and automatic in social life as expansion and contraction of the lungs in breathing. It is one of those necessary myths that arise to gratify the universal need for a doctrine which will fortify by logic the heart’s immediate demand. Karl Liebknecht [7], Helander, Beer and the theoreticians of the syndicalist movement throughout the world, represent this view.
This position has nothing to recommend it but its simplicity. It involves an un-Marxian theory of the nature of a myth and of the relation between the myth and the environment in which it functions. If we were to assume that a social myth is tacked on to a movement merely for purposes of helping its propaganda along, any one of a half dozen myths which painted the worker as the incarnation of all virtue and the entrepreneur as a personally wicked oppressor would be an improvement upon the labour theory of value and surplus-value. If we were to assume that a social myth owes its efficacy to the poetic way in which it ritualises the fighting demands of a group, then the theory of value with all its analytical curlicues would have to be discarded as an aesthetic blasphemy. From a Marxian point of view, a myth is an element in a general system of ideology. It consequently reflects in a distorted form its social environment, and the activities and purposes which develop within that environment. No large myth which grips millions of people can be an arbitrary creation.
The theory of value and surplus-value in its specifically Marxian form is neither an arbitrary intellectual construction nor a myth. It is not even an ideology. For it is not an unconscious reflection of class activity. It is rather the self-conscious theoretical expression of the practical activity of the working class engaged in a continuous struggle for a higher standard of living – a struggle which reaches its culmination in social revolution. It states what the working class is struggling for and the consequences of its success and failure. In this respect it is no different from the whole of Marx’s doctrines which he himself tells us in the Communist Manifesto, ‘only express in general terms the circumstances of an actually existing class struggle’. [8] In its full implications it can be grasped only by one who has accepted the class struggle from the standpoint of the working class and thrown himself into its struggles. To the extent that economic phenomena are removed from the influences of the class struggle, the analytical explanations in terms of the labour theory of value grow more and more difficult. The labour theory of value is worth saving if the struggle against capitalism is worth the fight.
This may seem a cavalier way of settling the problem but anyone who has read Marx closely will see that the whole theory of value and surplus-value bears upon its face the marks of this continuously experienced struggle between those who own the social means of production and those who must live by their use. Every struggle between capital and labour expresses a conflict between two theories of value – one which would leave the distribution of the social product of collective labour to the brutal historic fact of legal possession and the operation of the laws of supply and demand, and the other which would distribute the social product in accordance with some social plan whose fundamental principle is not the accumulation of capital for private profit but its intelligent use on behalf of mankind. Every struggle of the working class is an attempt to wrest surplus-value from the control of the propertied classes and to apply it to its proper social use. The final victory in the conflict for the possession of surplus-value can be won only by political means. Meanwhile every concrete economic struggle is also a theoretical struggle between economic principles. Speaking of the victory of the English working classes in carrying the Ten Hours’ Bill, Marx said:
This struggle about the legal restrictions of the hours of labour raged the more fiercely since, apart from frightened avarice, it told indeed upon the great contest between the supply and demand laws which form the political economy of the middle class, and social production controlled by social foresight, which forms the political economy of the working class. Hence the Ten Hours’ Bill was not only a great practical success, it was the victory of a principle; it was the first time that in broad daylight the political economy of the middle class succumbed to the political economy of the working class. [9]
The practical import of the theory of value is clearest in its bearing upon wage-labour. However it may be with other commodities, the value of wage-labour, in the strictest economic sense, depends to a large extent upon the class struggle. According to Marx, the value of labour-power is determined by the value of the means of subsistence necessary to sustain the labourer. What is necessary to his sustenance? At least the gratifications of his natural wants. Are his natural wants fixed and determined by nature? Marx writes:
The number and extent of his [man’s] so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are nevertheless the product of historical development, and depend therefore to a great extent on the degree of civilisation of a country, more particularly on the conditions under which, and consequently on the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free labourers has been formed. In contradiction therefore to the case of other commodities there enters into the determination of the value of labour power an historical and moral element. [10]
The historical and moral element which enters into the determination of labour-power is measured by the intensity of the class struggle. Its existence explains the continuous transformation in the ‘meaning’ of a subsistence wage. It is the living link between economics and politics. The outcome of today’s class struggle affects the measure of value tomorrow. When crisis comes or war or unemployment, their social and political consequences are not merely a matter of economic laws inevitably working themselves out, but of the presence or absence of working-class activity. This is what Marx means when he says that man is at the basis of production and all the laws of production. The portion of surplus-value which goes to the entrepreneur, the landowner, the banker on the one hand, and to the proletariat, on the other, is not only an economic fact, but a political and moral one as well. It is a moral fact not because it depends on an abstract theory of justice, but on the concrete practice of struggle on behalf of class needs and interests. Marx’s revolutionary outlook was not something which he ‘added on’ to his economic analysis. It was involved in his economic analysis.
The fundamental deviations from Marx’s economic theories on the part of international reformism are not to be sought in the substitution of different explanations of the economic process, but in its refusal to carry on a fundamental struggle against the domination of capital. This is the root deviation from Marxism.
The philosophy of Marx does not involve fatalism either in the metaphysical or economic sense. Social institutions exhibit a definite structure in the course of their organic growth. But the pattern of this structure never realises itself in its pure form. Within limits, human beings are able to re-determine its development. Indeed, it was Marx himself who insisted that the activities of human beings were the material basis of all social institutions. Knowledge of the ways in which man can react upon the social conditions which seem to control him, brings power and freedom!
Man himself is the basis of his material production as of everything else he established. All institutions [Umstände] in which man, the subject of production, expresses himself, modify more or less all his functions and activities including those concerned with the production of material wealth – commodities. In this connection it can easily be proved that all human relationships and functions influence material production and exercise more or less of a determining effect upon it. [11]
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Hook seems to be referring to the following from Karl Marx, Preface to the First German Edition, Capital, Volume 1: ‘In the analysis of economic forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both.’ Available here. – MIA
2. Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring, p. 336 [available here. – MIA]
3. ‘Possessing utility, commodities derive their exchangeable-values from two sources: from their scarcity, and from the quantity of labour required to obtain them ... Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative value of a commodity ...’ (David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Everyman edition), pp. 5, 15)
4. Emphasis on this point is one of the distinctive merits of Lindsay’s interesting volume, Karl Marx ’s Capital (London 1925), pp. 78ff.
5. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 3, pp. 181–82. [available here. – MIA]
6. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 3, p. 230 [available here. – MIA]
7. Liebknecht, however, offers his own economic construction in which wages do not represent the exchange value of labour, but always less than its value, so that the worker is cheated not only of the surplus exchange-value which results from the use of his labour-power, but of the actual price of reproducing that labour-power (Karl Liebknecht, Studien über die Bewegungsgesetze der gesellschaftlichen Entwicklung (München 1922), p. 259).
8. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, available here. – MIA
9. Karl Marx, Inaugural Address of the International Working-Men’s Association, October 1864, available here. – MIA
10. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p 190, italics mine [available at here. – MIA
11. Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, Band I, p. 388 [Theories of Surplus-Value, Part 1, available here. – MIA]
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 26 February 2020



 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XIX: Dictatorship and Democracy)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XIX: Dictatorship and Democracy
Critics of Marx once observed that true believers in democracy were not so much opposed to Marx’s ideas as to the emotional associations of the words with which he clothed them. Unfortunately for the accuracy of his remark, the critic forgot to consider the possibility that the words had acquired their associations because of the ideas they expressed. But there is one essential principle of Marx’s political philosophy to which, to some extent, the remark applies. This is ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’.
Dictatorship in popular parlance is used synonymously with terms like despotism, autocracy and absolutism. And yet historically there have been dictatorships directed against absolutism and autocracy, as illustrated in the rules of Cromwell and Robespierre. The popular conception carries with it the connotation of illegality. Yet the constitutions of the ancient Roman Republic and of the modern German Republic make ‘legal’ provisions for a dictatorship; and even the coup d'état of Napoleon the Great, as well as that of the Lesser, was confirmed by a popular plebiscite. A dictatorship, it is said, is essentially personal, yet history knows of dictatorships by triumvirates, religious organisations and political parties. None of these popular notions can serve as a clue to what Marx meant by the principle of ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’. It must be considered as an integral part of his philosophy of history and theory of the state.
I: What Is Proletarian Dictatorship? The key to Marx’s conception of proletarian dictatorship is given by Marx himself in his letter to Weydemeyer, 12 March 1852:
As far as I am concerned the honour does not belong to me for either having discovered the existence of classes in modern society or their struggles with one another. Bourgeois historians had long before me shown the development of this struggle of the classes and bourgeois economists the economic anatomy of classes. What I added was to prove: (i) that the existence of classes is only bound up with certain historical struggles in the development of production; (ii) that the class struggle necessarily leads to the dictatorship of the proletariat; (iii) that this dictatorship is itself only a transition to the ultimate abolition of all classes and to a society without classes. [1]
Here it is clear that the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ is the domination not of an individual, group or party but of one class over another. Its opposite is not ‘democracy’ but the ‘dictatorship of the bourgeoisie’. The political forms by which dictatorships are imposed are varied, but what all dictatorships have in common is the possession of the state authority which is used on behalf of the dominant economic interest. The ultimate basis of the state authority, as we have seen, is physical power; its specific function, the preservation of the economic order. A dictatorship then, in Marx’s sense of the term, is not recognised by the name with which its jurisconsults baptise it, but by the objective signs of repression in its social and political life. Wherever we find a state, there we find a dictatorship. Whoever believes in a proletarian state, believes in a proletarian dictatorship. This is Marx’s meaning.
Is it adequate to the facts of political life? Does it not overlook important differences between the various forms of ‘bourgeois dictatorship’, for example, differences between monarchy and republic, limited suffrage and universal suffrage? Marx does not deny the existence of these differences nor their importance for the day by day political strategy of the proletariat. He maintains, however, that the differences are irrelevant to the fundamental facts of social inequality which are common to all political forms of bourgeois dictatorship. In order to see why, we must look at Marx’s analysis of ‘bourgeois dictatorship’ a little more closely.
II: The Dictatorship of the Bourgeoisie: In a class society, social equality is impossible; and without social equality, only the political form, but not the substance of democracy can exist. In bourgeois society, the most important matters which affect the lives of the working masses – the social conditions under which they live, their opportunities of employment, their wages – are determined, for the most part, by extra-political agencies. The bank, the factory and the market control the very right of the worker to live, for they control his means of life. This control is not malicious and deliberate but is an automatic consequence of existing property relations. [2] ‘Representative’ political institutions cannot control them in turn because within the frame of the capitalist mode of production (i) political institutions cannot be ‘truly’ representative, since they do not provide for democratic control of economic life; (ii) the tendencies towards centralisation of industry and concentration of wealth are not consequences of political rule but of inherent tendencies in the economic order and cannot be checked; and (iii) the possession of economic power gives almost complete domination over the leadership, programme and activities of political parties through the control of campaign funds, the organs of ‘public’ opinion, and the national budget. The result is widespread indifference among the working population to political processes except on spectacular occasions once every few years when they are given an opportunity ‘to decide which member of the ruling class is to represent them in Parliament’ (Marx). [3] Politics becomes an annexe to business and the principles of public morality are derived from successful commercial practice.
Bourgeois dictatorships may express themselves in different forms of government. For agitational purposes these differences are of no little significance to the working class. Everywhere a struggle must be waged for universal suffrage – not because this changes the nature of the dictatorship of capital, but because it eliminates confusing issues and permits the property question to come clearly to the fore. ‘Nowhere does social equality obtrude itself more harshly’, wrote Marx as early as 1847, ‘than in the Eastern States of North America because nowhere is it less glossed over (übertünscht) by political equality.’ [4] Twenty-five years later in his criticism of the Gotha Programme, he repeats: ‘... vulgar democracy... sees the millennium in the democratic republic and has no inkling of the fact that the class struggle is to be definitely fought out under this final form of state organisation of capitalist society.’ [5]
The existence of a formal political democracy is accompanied by sharper expressions of the class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie, for now there is only one issue on the agenda of history – whether man shall serve property or whether property, for the first time since the rise of traditional civilisation, shall serve man. In the course of the class struggle the bourgeoisie is compelled to abandon its own formal political guarantees whenever the sanctity of private property and the authority of the state are endangered. The dictatorship no longer remains veiled, but comes into the open. Martial law is proclaimed; freedom of the press and assemblage is suspended; minorities are unprotected, unless they accept bourgeois rule; the hemp rope is substituted for the cord of gold as a measure of repression. In the absence of the objective social presuppositions of equality, the formal possession of political equality – although it must be used to the utmost – turns out to be inadequate for any fundamental social change.
Bourgeois democracy is not the opposite of bourgeois dictatorship; it is one of its species. It is a dictatorship of a minority of the population over a majority – a minority defined not by the number of votes cast but by the number of those who own the instruments of social production. Bourgeois democracy may be parliamentary, and yet still be a dictatorship; it may be parliamentary, and still be, as Marx said of the French Republic of Louis Napoleon, ‘a government of unconcealed class terrorism’. [6]
True democracy, according to Marx, is possible only in a society where class divisions do not exist, where by virtue of a common administration of the means of production, an objective social morality harmonises the interests of men and establishes the goals of the social process. True democracy, therefore, cannot be bourgeois democracy (dictatorship) nor proletarian democracy (dictatorship). But how is it to be achieved? Only by substituting for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, which declares itself to be the perfect enduring expression of democracy, the dictatorship of the proletariat, which regards itself as transitional and paves the way towards communism.
III: The Tasks of the Proletarian Dictatorship: In his critical analysis of the Gotha Programme, Marx wrote:
Between the capitalist and communist systems of society lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of one into the other. This corresponds to a political transition period, whose state can be nothing else but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. [7]
Communism does not spring full born from the shell of capitalist society, for the latter can only create the presuppositions of communism. The proletariat must do the rest. When a revolutionary situation arises, it seizes power with the aid of other oppressed groups of the population. After it seizes power, it must organise to hold it against the practically certain attempts which will be launched, from within and without, against it. It uses its power to carry out the measures of socialisation and cultural education which lead to communism. The organisation of power is known as the proletarian dictatorship.
The proletarian dictatorship, like all dictatorships, is based on force. But it is not lawless or irresponsible. Its acts are strictly determined by the dictates of revolutionary necessity. It justifies what it does by principles which, in the course of time, it proceeds to codify – as all other states do. In the eyes of those who suffer by their application, these principles are regarded as spawned of hell, infamous and unnatural – a judgement often uttered before by those who have lost power. [8] But if anything, revolutionary principles make a greater and more sustained demand upon the integrity, courage, strength and intelligence of those who profess them than the principles they have replaced.
The first task the proletarian dictatorship must accomplish is to crush all actual or incipient counter-revolutionary movements. Otherwise, it cannot survive and goes down in a blood-bath which, as historical experience indicates, surpasses anything the proletariat is capable of. Marx cherished the lessons of the June days of 1848, the October days of the same year in Vienna and, bloodiest of all, the May days after the fall of the Commune in 1871. Revolutionary terrorism is the answer of the proletariat to the political terrorism of counter-revolution. Its ruthlessness depends upon the strength of the resistance it meets. Its acts are not excesses but defensive measures. Its historic justification is the still greater tragedies to which it puts an end. It was as the result of his studies of the successful French Revolution of 1793, which could never have been won without the Terror, and of his experience of the unsuccessful revolutions of 1848 and their bloody epilogue, that Marx wrote:
The fruitless butcheries since the June and October days, the protracted sacrifice-festivals of victims since February and March, the cannibalism of the counter-revolution itself, will convince the people that there is only one means by which the tortuous death agonies of the old society and the bloody birth-pangs of the new society, may be shortened, simplified and concentrated – only one means – revolutionary terrorism. [9]
The suppression of the counter-revolution is the first of the tasks which must be accomplished by the proletarian dictatorship, but it is by no means the most important. The problems of economics and educational reorganisation are far more fundamental. Although the material bases of the new social order will already have been laid under capitalism, only mechanical Marxism – which is the obverse of fantastic Utopianism – can understand this to mean that when the revolution occurs, the maximum socialisation of the processes of production will have been achieved, that adequate mechanisms of distribution will necessarily be at hand, and that all small independent producers, peasants and craftsmen will have disappeared. Were this ever to be the case, there would be no need of revolution; capitalism would collapse of its own internal weight. But that collapse would be a far cry from the inauguration of socialism. For before capitalism could have developed to such a point, it would have long since crushed out of existence an active independent working-class movement. Its collapse would mean absolute social chaos.
Having assumed power with the help of the discontented petty bourgeoisie and peasantry, the proletarian dictatorship carries the tendencies of capitalist production to completion in such a way as to secure the foundations of the socialist society. In the process of reconstruction it must watch very carefully to see that the political tendencies of its allies – whose intermediate position in production has generated an ideology which is anti-capitalist rather than pro-socialist – does not flower into a programme demanding small independent production, complete administrative decentralisation, and other non-socialist measures. Concessions to these groups must, of course, be made but only with an eye to their ultimate withdrawal, or more accurately, with relation to a programme of social activity which, by nullifying the anti-social effects of these concessions, render them in time superfluous. Here the exigencies of the specific situation, together with first principles, dictate what is permissible and what is not.
The force of habit is stronger and more insidious than the force of arms. After the first flush of revolutionary enthusiasm has subsided, the traditional habits of the old order, which have been made part of the unconscious by the educational agencies of capitalism, reassert themselves. In the long run the processes of social reconstruction will effect a psychological transformation; meanwhile the obstructive consequences of anti-social motivation may result in serious obstacles to carrying through the programme. A strenuous effort must therefore be made to overcome the cultural and psychological lag of the masses. New incentives to conduct must be fostered; new moral values made focal. Consciousness of the creative possibilities of a socialist order must be furthered and the educational system remade in the light of new social objectives.
The relative difficulty of these tasks will vary with different countries, but if Marx’s guess is right, they cannot be accomplished anywhere in less than a generation. The proletarian dictatorship, in order to survive, must carry on a struggle on all fronts. Lenin, who not only studied the theory of proletarian dictatorship but tested it in practice, wrote:
The dictatorship of the proletariat is a resolute, persistent struggle, sanguinary and bloodless, violent and peaceful, military and economic, pedagogic and administrative, against the forces and traditions of the old society. The force of habit of the millions and tens of millions is a formidable force. [10]
IV: The Organs of Proletarian Dictatorship: The dictatorship of the proletariat is not a despotism. It expresses itself through representative institutions whose fundamental pattern was first revealed in dim outline in the political organisation of the Paris Commune. The constitution of the Paris Commune showed that Marx said:
It was essentially a working-class government, the product of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, the political form at last discovered under which to work out the economic emancipation of labour. [11]
The representative institutions projected by the Commune – which served as the forerunners of the Russian Soviets of 1905 and 1917 – distinguished themselves from the representative institutions of bourgeois democracy in several important ways. First, since the means of production, land and capital, were to be socialised, the government was to be a government of producers. All administrative functions were, therefore, to be performed at workmen’s wages. Second, all delegates to representative bodies could be recalled at any time by those who had elected them. Third, the commune was to be, in the words of Marx, ‘a working, not a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at the same time’. This would make officials more sensitive to the needs of those whom they represented, and more capable of checking and coordinating their administrative functions with the processes of production. Fourth, the source of power was to be ‘the nation in arms’, and not a special army. [12]
The logic of this scheme was completed in the Soviet system of 1917 in which the unit of representation was shifted from a territorial to an occupational basis – an idea already expressed by Daniel De Leon in America in 1904.
Despite all this, the Commune or the Soviet is still a state, that is, a dictatorship. It exercises its repressive powers against those elements of the population which resist the transformation of society into a cooperative socialist commonwealth. It is therefore not yet a true democracy. Nonetheless, it more closely approaches true democracy than any previous political democracy in that it is a dictatorship of producers over non-producers, and, therefore, of a majority over a minority. Within the ranks of the producers the principles of true democracy prevail. Further, its activities are directed to making its own repressive functions superfluous. This is the justification of their use.
But in a society where there are no classes, will there not be conflicts between the majority of the population and the minority? How will these be solved? By force? But, by definition, the state – the organ of repression – no longer exists. Peacefully? Then why cannot the conflicts between the majority and minority be solved without acts of repression even before the state has disappeared? These questions overlook again the distinctive character of class oppositions. The proletarian state does not set itself up to be a true democracy. It frankly asserts that no true democracy is possible where a majority represses the minority. In a true democracy – due to the homogeneity of interests produced by the absence of economic class divisions – the minority, after discussion and decision, voluntarily subordinates itself to the majority. In a class democracy – bourgeois or proletarian – the presuppositions of social homogeneity are lacking and society is divided into two inarbitrably hostile camps. Since the subject class cannot be relied upon voluntarily to subordinate itself, the state power is necessary. If ever a time comes when in a class democracy the group which controls the state uses it in the interests of the class which its economic institutions oppress, or if ever in a true democracy a situation arises in which a minority resorts to force to overthrow the decision of a majority – the Marxian theory will have to be revised.
One further question. What guarantee is there that after the class enemy has been eliminated from the social scene, the proletarian dictatorship will disappear, or that it will not give way to a new type of dictatorship – the dictatorship of the leaders over those whom they lead? May not one form of oppression then be substituted for another? Robert Michels has developed this point into a system of sociology. [13] The nature of every organisation – especially political organisations – is such that they cannot function without leaders. In the course of time, oppositions arise between the leaders and those who are led which are analogous to the oppositions between classes. The power of the leaders, derived from control of the party machine, enables them to constitute themselves into a virtual oligarchy which is self-perpetuating. Where democratic forms prevail, the leaders, due to their control of the strategic positions in the political bureaucracy, can get themselves ‘legally’ voted into power again. If they are overthrown by organised mass protest or revolt, then the leaders of the revolt – those who have rallied the masses – take their places. A new bureaucracy arises and the process continues for ever. Michels calls this the ‘iron law of oligarchy’ and holds that it is valid for all societies. He, therefore, concludes that ‘socialists may be successful but socialism [true democracy] never’. History is the succession of one set of politicians for another.
That personal abuse of power will always be possible is undeniable. But what Michels overlooks is the social and economic presuppositions of the oligarchical tendencies of leadership in the past. Political leadership in past societies meant economic power. Education and tradition fostered the tendencies to predatory self-assertion in some classes and at the same time sought to deaden the interest in politics on the part of the masses. In a socialist society in which political leadership is an administrative function, and, therefore, carries with it no economic power, in which the processes of education strive to direct the psychic tendencies to self-assertion into ‘moral and social equivalents’ of oligarchical ambition, in which the monopoly of education for one class has been abolished, and the division of labour between manual and mental worker is progressively eliminated – the danger that Michels’ ‘law of oligarchy’ will express itself in traditional form, becomes quite remote. In addition, the organisation of the communes or soviets demands that all producers in the course of their work be drawn into the ‘social planning activities’ of society. Of necessity they must become politically conscious. And where political consciousness is widespread and the means of production held in common, bureaucracy cannot flourish. For limited periods, especially in the period immediately after the revolution, evils may appear, but it is impossible to predict in advance what specific form they will take. This bare and abstract possibility, however, is much too weak a foundation for the heavy sociological structure which Michels builds upon it.
V: Communism and Democracy: Hostile critics of Marxism have often designated it as the last system of Utopian socialism. Marxism, they have said, envisages the social order of the future as one in which there are no material lacks and no political constraint, in which human beings are moved only by altruistic motives. This is a millenary dream. From an opposite quarter, their fellow critics have protested that Marxism is the last theoretical expression of capitalism, that it assumes the same values and motives of human behaviour and gives no indications of the criteria of a desirable society. The same evils, they remind us, may be produced by different causes. Unless mankind is guided by a more adequate schedule of ethical values than those illustrated in the class war today, the meanness, cruelty and vulgarity of contemporary culture will reappear in a different guise in the culture of tomorrow.
Both criticisms – cancelling one another though they do – fall wide of the mark because they share two theoretical presuppositions which are utterly foreign to Marxism. Both assume that ethical values are relevant and meaningful in independence of a concrete social and historical context. The first school of critics, on the basis of the patent hollowness and inapplicability of all past schemes of ‘universal’ and ‘truly human’ morality in class society, argue that no objective system of social morality will ever be possible. [14] The second school desire to work out now, and to propagate in full detail, a system of morality which can only be realised and understood after social conditions have been changed. Both schools further assume that communism springs into existence immediately after the revolution, and overlook the gradual interactive effects between human ideals and social existence which result from the activities of socialisation. They do not view social experience as an educational and transformative process in which, by the control of social institutions, human motives and ideals are themselves changed.
According to the Marxist philosophy the content – the very meaning of moral ideals – is a function of a concrete situation in the process of historical development. Ideals must be redetermined from time to time in relation to what the forces of production make possible and what human beings will as desirable. Marx, therefore, never invoked a natural rights theory of ethics. The only formal ethical invariant he recognised, was man’s desire for ‘the better’. In class societies there are to be found only class moralities, for just as the ‘good’ of one class is the ‘bad’ of another, ‘the better’ of the first is ‘the worse’ of the second. This is most obviously true of such political shibboleths as liberty, equality and democracy. Just as soon as we give a concrete content to these terms we find that what is liberty for one class is wage-slavery for another; what is democracy for one class is the formal cloak of dictatorship for another.
After the socialist revolution, social morality will only gradually lose its antinomic character, for classes will not have been immediately abolished. But class divisions will not be relevant to the overwhelming majority of the population since it will consist of producers. The chief consideration now which determines the principles of justice, in accordance with which social wealth will be distributed, is the level socialised production will have reached. Even under communism, then, abstract principles of justice by themselves will not be adequate to settle the specific problems of distribution.
It is in his discussion of the principles which are to guide the distribution of the social product under communism that Marx appears at his realistic best. He avoids the abstract morality of the Utopians and at the same time transcends the morality of the status quo. This question is bound up with the problem of democracy. Since there can be no social equality without ‘just distribution’, and since political democracy, according to Marx’s earlier critique, is an empty form without social equality, his analysis of ‘just distribution’ is part of his analysis of democracy. This discussion will be found in his Critique of the Gotha Programme.
The ‘right to the full product of one’s labour’ had always been an agitational demand of the Utopian socialists. Due to the influence of Lassalle’s thought, a variant of this demand had slipped into the platform of the German Social-Democratic Party. It called for a system of society in which ‘the proceeds of society [Arbeitsertrag] belong to all the members of society, unabridged and in equal right’. The presupposition of their demand is that the social revolution has just been accomplished.
Marx protests that it is obviously impossible at such time both to reward ‘all members of society’, including those who do not work, and, at the same time, to give those who do work the full and unabridged products of their labour. If it is meant that only those who work are to receive the full product of their labour, while those who do not work are to be permitted to starve, then all talk about ‘equal rights’ on the part of these two groups must be dropped. Besides, it is nonsense to demand that those who work should receive the full product of their labour, for (a) the product is social and cooperative, not private and individual, (b) deductions from the social product must be made for wear and tear of social capital, expansion of production, etc, (c) deductions must be made for administrative expenses, education, public hygiene, and (d) deductions must be made for those who are unable to work. Making allowance for all these deductions and reservations, the principle of distribution in the first stage of communist society – a society which, as Marx says, has not ‘developed on its own basis, but, on the contrary, is just issuing out of capitalist society’ – amounts to this: Each individual is to be rewarded in proportion to what he produces. What he produces is measured by his labour time:
Accordingly, the individual producer gets back – after the deductions – exactly as much as he gives to it... He receives from the community a cheque showing that he has done so much labour, and with this cheque he draws from the common store as much of the means of consumption as costs an equal amount of labour. The same quantity of labour that he has given to society in one form, he receives back in another form. [15]
But this is not yet genuine Social-Democracy or justice, Marx adds. It is, however, the best attainable in a ‘society that still retains, in every respect, economic, moral and intellectual, the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it is passing’. [16] It is not genuine justice because it makes possible inequality of wage payments. A, who enjoys natural strength, may in the same span of time produce, with less exertion, twice as much as B. If he receives in payment twice as much as B, B is being punished for his natural weakness, for which he is no more responsible than A is for his strength. Or A and B may produce the same amount and get the same reward, and yet, because B is the head of a family and A is not, inequality will result.
Both A and B are equal before the law of the new society because, together with their fellow producers, they own and control the means of production. In this there is a definite advance over capitalism. But it is not yet communism. In respect to distribution one person may acquire more wealth than another and certain groups may be able to enjoy a higher standard of living. This will not constitute a danger to the social order because the ownership of the instruments of production will be common. But the incentives and motives of the old order will have survived down to this period. The possibility of social disorder will be quite real. A certain vestigial state apparatus will therefore be necessary to keep the peace. Coercion will still have to be employed. The principle that each one has an equal right to what he produces (and not to what he needs) is just, then, only under those social conditions in which productive forces have not been developed to a point where, by purely voluntary labour, everyone’s fundamental needs can be gratified. But ‘just’ though it be under the circumstances, the principle of equal right is still a hang-over from capitalism:
Equal right is here, therefore, still according to the principle, capitalist right... The equal right is still tainted with a capitalist limitation.
However, one person is physically or intellectually superior to the other, and furnishes, therefore, more labour in the same time, or can work a longer time; and in order to serve as a measure, labour must be determined according to duration or intensity, otherwise it would cease to serve as a standard. This equal right is unequal right for unequal labour. It does not recognise class distinctions, because everyone is only a working-man like everybody else; but it tacitly recognises unequal individual endowment, and hence, efficiency, as natural privileges. It is, therefore, in its substance, a right of inequality, like all right. According to its nature, right can consist only in the application of a common standard; but the unequal individuals (and they would not be different individuals if they were not unequal ones) can be measured according to a common standard only in so far as they are brought under the same point of view, or, are regarded from a particular side only. For example, in the given instance they are regarded only as working-men; we see nothing more in them, we disregard everything else. Moreover, one working-man is married, the other is not married; one has more children than the other, etc. Hence with equal contribution of labour and, therefore, equal shares in the social consumption-fund, the one receives actually more than the other, the one is richer than the other, etc. In order to avoid all these shortcomings right would have to be not equal, but unequal.
But these shortcomings are unavoidable in the first phase of communist society, as it has just issued from capitalist society after long travail. Right can never be superior to the economic development and the stage of civilisation conditioned thereby. [17]
Marx, at this point, stops short of specific description and contents himself with indicating the communist ideal of social distribution. This is: ‘Production according to one’s capacities, and distribution according to one’s needs.’ [18] He does not say when and how it will be realised, or even assert that it is some day certain to be achieved. After all, it is an idea. But the conditions for its realisation are stated and some intimations are offered of intermediate stages in the progress towards complete communism.
‘Need’ is an ambiguous term; ‘reward according to need’ even more so. One man’s need may be another man’s luxury. Certainly, except in paradise, not all individuals can be rewarded in accordance with their ‘fancied’ needs. During the first stage of communist society, all who are willing to work will receive sufficient for their fundamental needs – food, clothing, shelter, education, etc. But due to the inequality of wage payments, some will be able to gratify needs which are not fundamental. Later, when equality of wage payments has been established, it may be possible to redefine ‘fundamental needs’ – another elastic concept – in such a way that it will include the need for what were formerly regarded as luxuries – material or cultural. As production increases, the equal minimum wage is increased. But equality of payment in a world in which human beings are unequal, Marx showed, involved inequality. The true ideal of social equality must respect these human differences and seek to give each individual the opportunity to develop himself in accordance with his own moral ideal. The presupposition is that technology will be sufficiently advanced, and the educational processes of the new society sufficiently enlightened and effective, to make it possible that the material prerequisites necessary for a free career for all – will be produced by voluntary labour. Where this is not so, the principle of need will have to be modified by the principle of desert, that is, specific reward for individual effort.
Marx is not very much concerned with the higher phase of communism. His life-work and thought were primarily directed to overthrow the highest phase of capitalism. But he permits us to catch a glimpse of the social ideal which gave added meaning and justification, not alone to his own heroic struggles, but to the struggle of the international working-class movement of which he was a part. It is an ideal whose complete realisation is not as important as its directive power:
In the higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the individual under the division of labour has disappeared, and therewith also the opposition between manual and intellectual labour; after labour has become not only a means of life, but also the highest want in life; when, with the development of all the faculties of the individual, the productive forces have correspondingly increased, and all the springs of social wealth flow more abundantly – only then may the limited horizon of capitalist right be left behind entirely, and society inscribe on its banners: ‘From everyone according to his faculties, to everyone according to his needs.’ [19]
* * *<&h4>]

Notes
1. English translation by Beer, Labour Monthly, July 1922 [available at here. – MIA
2. Even when the control is conscious the motive is not personal but arises from the ‘objective’ interest of the business corporation. Mr Grace, President of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, testifying before the Lockwood Commission, admitted that his corporation was dictating to contractors and builders in New York and Philadelphia, that ‘they could buy fabricated steel only on condition that it be erected under open shop conditions’. He declared this to be a national policy. In answer to a question from Mr Untermeyer whether he did not think such dictation on the part of the manufacturers to be arrogant, Mr Grace responded: ‘If they thought it was to protect their interest, in line with what they considered the right policy for their interest, I would not consider it arrogant but self-protection.’ (New York Times, 15 December 1920)
3. Karl Marx, The Civil War in France, available here. – MIA
4. Karl Marx, ‘Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality’, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band VI, p. 309. [available here. – MIA]
5. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (English translation, SLP Press), p. 49. [available at here. – MIA
6. Karl Marx, The Civil War in France, available here. – MIA
7. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (English translation, SLP Press), p. 48. [available here.] – MIA
8. ‘At present you seem in everything to have strayed out of the high road of nature. The property of France does not govern it.’ (Edmund Burke, Letters on the French Revolution, Works (Bohn edition), Volume 2, p. 325).
9. Karl Marx, The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna, Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Marx und Engels, Band III, p. 199. [available here]. – MIA
10. V.I. Lenin, The Infantile Sickness of ‘Leftism’ in Communism, English translation, p. 31 [“Left-Wing” Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Collected Works, Volume 31. – MIA
11. Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (SLP edition), p. 78. [available at here. – MIA
12. Karl Marx, The Civil War in France, available here. – MIA
13. Robert Michels, Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demokratie (Leipzig 1925).
14. This is a generalised and illicit form of Marx’s specific line of criticism of all ‘classless’ morality in class society. Of the humanitarian Heinzen, Marx wrote: ‘... Mr Heinzen professes to be unconcerned either with the bourgeoisie or with the proletariat in Germany. His party is the “party of humanity,” that is, the noble and warm-hearted enthusiasts who champion “middle-class” interests disguised in the form of “human” ideals, without ever realising the connection between the idealistic phrase and its realistic kernel.’ (Karl Marx, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band VI, p. 321). [available at here. – MIA
15. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. – MIA
16. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. – MIA.
17. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. – MIA
18. This phrase does not appear in the Critique of the Gotha Programme. – MIA
19. Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme. – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 26 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (X: Dialectic and Truth)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter X: Dialectic and Truth
Marx’s theories by his own admission are historically conditioned. They could have arisen only at a stage in social history where the dominant mode of production divides society, in the main, into two classes: those whose income is derived from the sale of their labour-power, and those whose income, in the form of profit, interest and rent, flows from their legal ownership of the social instruments of production. Not only are Marx’s theories historically conditioned, they are also class conditioned in that they offer a survey of social life and a plan of social action in the interests of the international proletariat. But what does it mean to offer a survey in the interests of anything but the truth? To link truths, which are presumably general, objective and necessary, with class interests, which are limited, particular and subjective, is to create a chain of paradoxes. Marx certainly denied that economics, history and philosophy stand as impartial disciplines above the class struggle. Nor did he exclude his own theories. Speaking of his Capital (A Critique of Political Economy) he says:
So far as such criticism represents a class, it can only represent the class whose function in history is the overthrow of the capitalist mode of production and the final abolition of all classes – the proletariat. [1]
His followers over the world refer to Marxism as a class theory. In what sense, then, is it an objective theory? Are its propositions relative truths dependent upon presuppositions which may legitimately be challenged from other class points of view? If so, what becomes of their objectivity?
I: Objectivity and Presupposition: The question of objectivity and presupposition is the most difficult one in the social sciences. Marx attempted to solve it by the use of the dialectical method. He believed that his theories were true. But what did he mean by a true theory? ‘The question whether human thought can arrive at objective truth is not a question of theory’, he writes, ‘but a practical question. In practice man must prove the truth of thought.’ [2] Suppose we examine, from this point of view, the traditional definition of truth against which Marx, together with Hegel, directed his shafts; viz, that a true idea is one which reflects or corresponds with the external environment. In order to discover whether our ideas are true, we must act on them. In acting on them we change the external environment. The true idea, then, is one which is validated by the outcome of the interaction between our practical activity, which expresses the meaning of the idea, and the external object, which calls it forth. To be sure, in order to know how to act we must have some antecedent knowledge. But the reliability of that knowledge, again, can only be ascertained in practice. Whatever cannot be tested in action is dogma. But since, as the result of the activity of testing, some change has been introduced in the objective situation which we seek to know, the correspondence between idea and thing must be regarded as prospective, not retrospective.
Important consequences follow, if we bear in mind the distinction which Marx makes between the subject-matter of the physical sciences and the social and historical sciences. All human history is the result of the behaviour of men on behalf of certain ends, values or purposes. Theories of history and society are themselves historical, that is, they are offered on behalf of some value or purpose which enters as an important factor in determining what information is relevant or irrelevant to the problem in hand. In so far as these theories claim to be knowledge they involve setting up activities in social life, that is, the introduction of those changes which are necessary for their experimental confirmation. In so far as they are offered on behalf of some purpose, they involve setting up changes in a certain direction. The direction in which we desire to travel determines the aspects of the existing scene to which we are attentive, the information we seek, the experiments we perform – in short, the criteria of relevance. Depending, then, upon the different ends or values on behalf of which theories have been projected, different modes of social action will be proposed. But in a class society, according to Marx, there can be no unanimity about the direction or goal which social organisation should take. Different class interests express themselves in different goals.
To be sure, the possible goals that may be taken are always limited or conditioned by the state of the productive forces of society. But a choice is always possible, even if it be no more than one between the continuation of society or its destruction. The choices made by different classes are revealed in the social theories they accept. These social theories may contain a considerable amount of objective truth but from the point of view of one class the truths discovered by the other may be irrelevant. It would perhaps be more accurate to say that any social theory – the test of whose truth would involve a change in the existing property-relations or balance of class forces – will be denounced as a dangerous untruth by the class in power. That is why no true social experiment is possible in class society. As distinct from the experiment in the physical sciences, the criteria by which its success is judged will vary with the economic interests of the class which passes judgement. It is only in a metonymous sense that the Russian Revolution can be regarded as a social experiment. Those whom it swept from power, as well as their allies throughout the world, regarded the ‘experiment’ as a failure when the first expropriatory decree was issued.
To say that knowing initiates a course of action which changes some aspect of the situation from which we set out; to say further that social knowledge is a guide to action on behalf of certain ends or values, and that the action becomes a factor in realising the future state of affairs about which it professes to have the truth – all this does not imply that the casual connections which exist in the world of nature and history are created by men. This would mean subjectivism. The social laws which obtain in a capitalist economy, and the laws which obtain in a socialist economy, are not created by man; but whether the conditions are to exist, under which one or another type of law operates at certain historic moments, depends upon class will and activity. To deny this is to maintain that the laws of social life have the character of laws of nature. This expressed the pseudo-objectivism of the laissez faire economists, who, desiring to prevent the imposition of legal curbs upon the predatory expansion of capitalism, spoke of the laws of economics as natural necessities in order to deduce the convenient maxim that the government which interfered least was the best.
Marx’s materialistic approach to problems of social development was always oriented with reference to his class allegiance and class revolutionary goal. That did not make his conclusions less objective, but it made them partial in their bearings and implications. Marx contended that all social thought, whether objective or not – especially when it became the ‘accepted truth’ of its day – was similarly partial. On several occasions he suggests that ‘purely objective’ descriptions of the social scene – even when they are true – have a tendency to degenerate into an apologia of the conditions they describe. This can be overcome only by inquiring into the possibility that these conditions may be changed by class activity. He was frank in his belief that every description of the social process must be completed by an evaluation. Judgements of fact as such are not judgements of value; but where the facts concern conflicts of class interests, Marx believed that no one could escape the necessity of passing a judgement of value upon them. And whoever refused to do so, from Marx’s point of view, had therewith taken a position by virtue of the objective consequences of his refusal.
In an interesting passage, Lenin sharpens a distinction between the ‘objectivist’ and the ‘materialist’ which is quite faithful to Marx’s meaning:
The objectivist speaks of the necessity of a determinate historical process, while the materialist makes an exact investigation of the given socio-economic complex and the antagonistic relations which it produces. The objectivist, who tries to show the necessity of a determinate series of facts, continually runs the risk of degenerating to an apologist of these facts; the materialist lays bare the class oppositions upon which he proceeds to take a stand. The objectivist speaks of ‘irrefragable historical tendencies’; the materialist speaks of the class which ‘dominates’ the given economic order and therewith calls forth determinate forms of opposition on the part of other classes. The materialist is therefore more consistent than the objectivist and manifests a deeper, completer objectivism. He does not restrict himself to indicating the bare necessity of the process but reveals what social and economic complex gives this process content, what class determines this necessity... In addition, materialism involves a definite taking of sides in that it feels itself bound, when it evaluates events, to accept openly and clearly the standpoint of a definite social group. [3]
Like Marx Lenin also denied that it was possible to keep strictly neutral in analysing the facts of class relationships and struggle. It is ‘the whole man’ who knows. Although we must not let our values ‘cook’ the facts – which is more easily avoided by recognising our values than by pretending we haven’t any – our values determine what facts we are looking for, and what we are going to do with them after we have found them. Arguing against those social scientists who proclaimed that it was unseemly for a student of class relationships to sympathise with one class or another, that it was his ‘duty’ not to take sides, Lenin wrote:
It is absurd in this connection even to speak of the duty not to take sides, for no living man, once he has understood the relationships and struggles between classes, can prevent himself from embracing the standpoint of one class or the other, exulting in its triumphs, lamenting in its defeats, becoming indignant with those who are hostile to it, and who retard its development by propagating mistaken views. [4]
Despite these passages, it would be completely misleading to speak, as some Marxists do, of class truths. Truth is above classes. What is meant is usually one of two things. Either that classes find it to their interest to discover or call attention to some truths and to conceal other truths; or that the real subject of discourse is class values, not class truths. In the first case, the truth or falsity of a proposition is utterly irrelevant to the class which discovers it; in the second, values cannot be characterised as true or false, and it is obvious nonsense to say that one value is ‘truer’ than another when all that is meant is that a value is ‘more inclusive’ or ‘intenser’ – or simply that it is ours.
The relationship between the class presupposition of Marxism and its claims to objective truth is sufficiently important to justify a restatement of the position from a different point of view. As a result of private ownership of the means of production, class struggles arise over the distribution of the social product. This struggle manifests itself not only on the economic field but in the realms of politics and culture as well. Each class develops ideals and programmes of activity which, if acted upon, would involve loss, hardship or oppression for opposing classes. It develops a philosophy, a social and historical outlook which are congenial to its present role in the processes of production and to the role it desires to play in the future. It gathers facts and conducts analyses to justify its claims and to achieve its aims. Its doctrines cannot be impartial, for they express resolutions as well as descriptions, and therefore determine a course of social activity whose effects are prejudicial to one class in direct proposition as they are favourable to another.
Marxism, as the theory and practice of social revolution, is the class theory of the proletariat. In this sense it is a ‘partial’ or ‘partisan’ theory without ceasing to be an objective expression of the interests of the proletariat. But whether the consequences of acting upon it will really achieve the classless society – that can be tested without further reference to class interests. Here Marxism is either true or false. In taking note of the conditions which must be fulfilled to achieve the classless society, in its descriptions of tendencies which render revolutionary action timelier, more likely to succeed, etc, it again lays down propositions whose truth or falsity is independent of class interest. For example, the doctrine expressed in the preceding paragraph that class conflicts give rise to conflicting ideologies is such a proposition. To accept this particular doctrine or any other does not make one a Marxist unless one accepts the class purposes which make these propositions relevant.
II: Is the Social Revolution ‘Inevitable’? Let us test this exposition upon an important practical question – indeed, the central one of the socialist movement, viz, what does the advent of socialism depend upon? For one thing, upon the existence of large-scale, highly-centralised production which is the result of the accumulation of capital. But obviously this is only a necessary not a sufficient condition. For the facts of centralisation and concentration in industry are recognised even by bourgeois governments, which, although inexorably opposed to revolution, have obligingly furnished the statistical figures from the days of Marx down to the present. The existence of a class-conscious proletariat is just as indispensable as any of the foregoing conditions. What does it, in turn, depend upon? On the need and want produced in the course of the economic process. How much need and want? Can these be accurately measured in any way? Certainly not. But assuming that they can be, are they as inevitably produced, and produced in the same way, as industrial centralisation and financial concentration? And does this need, in turn, inevitably express itself in revolutionary action? Merely to put these questions is to see the absurdity of the assumptions involved. For if these propositions were true, there would be no necessity to enunciate them, no less to risk one’s life for them. Certain relatively independent factors enter into the situation. The degree of enlightenment of the workers; what it is that they regard as fundamental needs; ‘the consciousness of the class struggle and not alone its existence’; the presence of a political party which represents the principle of revolutionary continuity from one crisis to another – all these must be taken into account. They are not automatic, simple functions of economic development; for, as we shall see later, they are capable of initiating, within limits, important changes in the economic order. Neither God, man nor the economic process guarantees the final validity and certainty of communism. Only the objective possibilities are given. Whether they are realised is a political question. Economic development determines only the general period in which communism is possible, not the specific time of actual transition. ‘England possesses all the necessary material conditions of social revolution’, wrote Marx to Kugelmann in 1870, ‘what it lacks is universal outlook and revolutionary passion.’ [5]
Marx counts upon need, or rather consciousness of need, to supply the active force in social change. But, as we have already seen, it is not biological need which determines the path and means of action. It is a social and ethical need. It is not those who are most brutalised by physical want who are the most revolutionary; but rather those who are most conscious of the disparity between the objective possibilities of material and cultural life, and what they actually realise in their experience:
A house may be large or small, but as long as the surrounding houses are equally small, it satisfies all social requirements of a dwelling place. But let a palace arise by the side of this small house, and it shrinks from a house to a hut. The smallness of the house now indicates that its occupant is permitted to have either very few claims or none at all; and however high it may shoot up with the progress of civilisation, if the neighbouring palace shoots up also in the same or greater proportion, the occupant of the comparatively small house will always find himself more uncomfortable, more discontented, confined within his four walls ...
Although the comforts of the labourer have risen, the social satisfaction which they give has fallen in comparison with these augmented comforts of the capitalist, which are attainable for the labourer, and in comparison with the scale of the general development society has reached. Our wants and their satisfaction have their origin in society: we therefore measure them in relation to society, and not in relation to the objects which satisfy them. Since their nature is social, it is therefore relative. [6]
The consequences we have drawn from these observations may appear commonplace. Yet the history of the Second International reveals how important commonplaces sometimes are. We are now in a position to understand what Marx really means when he speaks of the historic inevitability of communism. Communism is not something fated to be realised in the nature of things; but, if society is to survive, communism offers the only way out of the impasse created by the inability of capitalism, despite its superabundance of wealth, to provide a decent social existence for its own wage-earners. What Marx is really saying is: either this (communism) or nothing (barbarism). That is why communists feel justified in claiming that their doctrines express both the subjective class interests of the proletariat and the objective interests of civilisation. The objectivity of Marxism is derived from the truth of the disjunction; the subjectivity, from the fact that this is chosen rather than nothing. Normally a recognition of the truth of the disjunction carries with it a commitment to communism. But the connection is not a necessary one any more than the knowledge that milk is a wholesome drink makes one a milk drinker. One might accept the economic analyses of Marx, recognise the existence of the class struggle, and apply historical materialism to the past. That does not make him a Marxist. Bourgeois thinkers have done so since Marx’s day, and some even before. It is only when one accepts the first term of the disjunction – which is a psychological, and, if you please, an ethical act – that he has a right to the name. [7] The choice is intelligent only if it takes note of Marx’s analyses; but once the choice is made, it itself becomes an historical factor in making the revolutionary ideal come true. How else can we explain why Marx’s philosophy is itself an historical force in the world today, or understand his remark that ‘of all the instruments of production the greatest productive power is the revolutionary class itself’? [8] The objective truth of Marxism realises itself in the informed revolutionary act. Marxism is neither a science nor a myth, but a realistic method of social action.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1. – MIA
2. Karl Marx, Theses on Feuerbach. – MIA
3. Quoted by Deborin, in his article Lenin als Revolutionärer Dialektiker, Unter dem Banner des Marxismus, Band I, p. 213 [V.I. Lenin, The Economic Content of Narodism and the Criticism of it in Mr Struve’s Book, Collected Works, Volume 1 – MIA].
4. Quoted by Ivan Luppol, Lenin und die Philosophie: zur Frage des Verhältnisses der Philosophie zur Revolution (Berlin 1929), p. 144. [We have been unable to locate this quotation in Lenin’s Collected Works. – MIA]
5. Karl Marx, Confidential Communication on Bakunin. – MIA
6. Karl Marx, Wage, Labour and Capital (Kerr edition), pp. 35–36.
7. ‘The theory of class war was not created by Marx, but by the bourgeoisie before Marx and is for the bourgeoisie, generally speaking, acceptable. The one who recognises only the class war is not yet a Marxist; that one may be found not to have freed himself from the chains of bourgeois reasoning and politics. To limit Marxist theory to the teaching of the class war means to shorten Marxism – to mutilate it, to bring it down to something which is acceptable to the bourgeoisie. A Marxist is one who extends the recognition of class war to the recognition of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. In this is the main difference between a Marxist and an ordinary bourgeois. On this grindstone it is necessary to test a real understanding and recognition of Marxism.’ (V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution (Vanguard Press, 1926), p. 141) [V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution, Collected Works, Volume 25. – MIA]
8. Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (VIII: Marxism as Method)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter VIII: Marxism as Method
What shall we do in face of these conflicting interpretations of Marx? Add another? Who will decide among them? Why not shelve his theories, then, as a set of more or less ambiguous doctrines which exercised great influence over men because it permitted them to do what they wished to do in any case? Such a procedure, however, would fail to explain why the appeal was to Marx and not to St Simon or Proudhon or Bakunin. There must have been aspects, at least, of Marx’s doctrines which lent themselves to these different interpretations. The possibility we wish to entertain here is that the views considered above (which are by no means exhaustive) are, with the exception of Lenin’s, one-sided emphases upon phases of Marx’s thought and suffer from a common failure to appreciate the nature of Marx’s dialectical method.
The significance of Marx’s method as the clue to his doctrines is rendered all the more important by the vogue of critical interpretations whose chief point is that these doctrines are contradictory. And it is true that if they are considered in independence of the method they illustrate and the historical context in which they arose, they do appear contradictory. From these apparent contradictions has been born Sombart’s zwei Seelen theory of Marx – as a thinker and as a hater; and the even more popular Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde conception of Marx as a professional revolutionist and a fuzzy metaphysician. But the most elementary methodological caution has here been overlooked. The full import of a doctrine is not to be sought only in the formal analysis of isolated texts. It is to be derived from a consideration of these texts in relation to the positions and views they oppose. Just as the meaning of a proposition becomes clearer when we formulate its logical contradictory, so the import of a man’s thought becomes more manifest when we know what the doctrines are which he is opposing. If the doctrines which he is opposing are themselves opposite, then we can expect that against one will be urged the accepted points of the other. If the critic has no clear idea of the positions which are being attacked, he runs the risk of converting the relative emphasis of different occasions into absolute contradictions. This is true of all the ‘critical annihilations’ of Marx with which I am acquainted.
Marx came to critical self-consciousness by settling accounts with the varied intellectual traditions and attitudes of his day. He did not write textbooks and fill them with cold-storage truths. His writings were programmes of action; his analyses a method of clearing the way for action. None of his works can therefore be understood without a comprehension of the opposing positions to which he makes explicit or implicit reference. Against the idealism of Bruno Bauer and his Young-Hegelian associates, Marx presents the argument for materialism. Against the passive materialism of Feuerbach, Marx defends the principles of activity and reciprocity which were central to Hegel’s dialectic. Against the fatalism of both absolute idealism and ‘vulgar’ (reductive) mechanism, Marx proclaims that human beings make their own history. As opposed to the revolutionists of the phrase, however, he adds that history is not made out of whole cloth but under definite, limiting conditions. It was as easy to characterise Marx as completely Hegelian in his method because he attacked the assumptions of atomic empiricism as to indict him as a ‘soulless’ materialist for seeking a causal explanation of values. To the wahre Sozialisten, who sought to initiate a movement of social reform on the basis of absolute ethical principles like ‘social love’ and justice, Marx declares that every realistic social movement must be a class movement. To simon-pure trade unionists struggling for a ‘fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work’, he insists that every class struggle is a political struggle. Stirner’s glorification of hard-boiled egoism with its perpetual declensions of ‘I, me and myself’, he reveals as the social defence mechanism of a petty-bourgeois soul desiring to save ‘its own’. Against the classical school of economics, which had regarded its economic categories as valid for any historical system, he urges that economic categories are not Platonic Ideas but are as transitory as the historical relationships which they express. Against the historical school of economics, he vindicates the necessity of analysing the structure of political economy independently of speculative fancies about its origin. As opposed to the anarchist ideal of complete decentralisation, he defends the principle of authority. To the Lassallean cult of the state, he counters with the idea of its ultimate disappearance. He was as critical of petty-bourgeois opportunism of the right as he was contemptuous of the ultra-left sectarianism of men like Most and Bakunin. The critics who made so much of Marx’s contradictory positions never made an attempt to find a point of view from which these alleged contradictions turned out to be applications of the same principles and purposes to different historical situations.
These historical situations as well as the wider social horizons against which Marx’s problems were formulated cannot be treated here. A complete treatment of Marx’s thought would have to include them together with an account of the industrial transformations, the political mass movements as well as the cultural developments of his age. Only then would we be applying Marx’s historical method to Marx’s own work. [1] Even so, the distinctive feature of Marx’s thought would hardly be in evidence, for Marx’s age presumably was the background of other thinkers from whom he violently differed. It is primarily that distinctive feature which I wish to discuss.
Granted, then, that if Marx is to be completely understood, his background must be explained. What else would we have to know about him? Obviously his purposes, his reaction to that environment and the logical interest of his thought in theorising about it. For only in terms of these purposes can we understand his problems. The purpose of Marx’s intellectual activity was the revolutionary overthrow of the existing order. That shines through all of his writings. Even his learned economic treatises did not deceive the academic representatives of constituted authority in Europe – although they did succeed in de-revolutionising some of his avowed followers. One can hear Marx’s own voice in the words which Engels pronounced upon him at Highgate Cemetery in 1883: ‘Before all else, Marx was a revolutionist.’ [2] And it was as revolutionist that he approached his theoretical problems in sociology, economics and philosophy. For him they were primarily the theoretical problems of social revolution. [3] No presuppositionless treatment of the social sciences is possible. At their heart there lie certain irreducible values or Stellungnahmen which are, to be sure, historically conditioned by the social situation and the balance of class forces existing at any determinate period, but which cannot be logically deduced from it. Social science is class science; and what Marx means by science is not what is meant by the word today, but criticism based on the observable tendencies of social development.
The scientific approach to society involves the continuous application of ideals to the functioning of institutions and the continuous testing of those ideals by the social consequences of their application. Marx regarded those who restricted themselves to an objective description of social behaviour, in which all notions of ‘what ought to be’ are ruled out, as apologists of the existing order and of the ideals which social institutions embodied. And those who set up their ‘ought to be’ as a categorical imperative, in independence of the limiting conditions of the given historical situation, he dismissed as Utopians. Marx was disinterested in the outcome of his inquiries only to the extent of drawing proper conclusions from his premises. He did not conceal his interests and bias but used them in order to reveal more effectively the interest of those who made a cult of impartiality. How it was possible for him to assert that his position was not impartial, and yet at the same time objective, is a problem which we shall consider below.
Marx’s revolutionary motivation was no more uniquely his own than was his social background. Many of his contemporaries, both among the Utopians (Owen) and reactionaries (Lorenz von Stein), felt the impact of what was essentially the same problem. And as for his purpose – the social revolution – it was the common goal of large numbers of German exiles, Blanquist Frenchmen, expatriate Poles and Russians. For some it was a religion in comparison with which Marx’s faith seemed pale. It was the goal not only of a few individuals; it was the goal of a class. What, then, must we ask, is distinctive of Marx’s thought, if it is neither his problems, his purposes, not his conclusions? The answer suggested here is, that what is characteristic of Marx’s thought is the dialectical method by which he undertook to solve these problems and attain his purposes. [4]
To distinguish between Marx’s dialectical method and his conclusions is not to say that his conclusions are false; and to consider Marx’s dialectical method is not to imply that it is an abstract instrument. On any specific occasion in which it is applied, Marx’s specific purpose is part of it. None the less it is possible to describe the general character of the method and indicate its larger philosophical and social implications.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Interesting beginnings have been made in Mehring’s biography, Karl Marx. Geschichte seines Lebens (Berlin 1919) [English edition, Karl Marx: The Story of His Life, available here; in Gustav Mayer’s Friedrich Engels (Berlin 1920) [English edition, Frederick Engels: A Biography (London 1936); text of German edition available at here. – MIA]; in the histories of the socialist movement by Mehring and Beer; and in Riazanov’s Marx and Engels (English translation, London 1927). [available here. – MIA]
2. Engels’ speech at Marx’s grave is available here. – MIA
3. That Marx’s purpose was really one of the defining terms of his problems and not an irrelevant psychological detail is evidenced by the way in which he and Engels gauged the import of the social theories of their opponents; first, by their probable influence on the formation of revolutionary political organisation; second, by their freedom from the ‘muddled humanitarianism’ which tended to wean these organisations away from militancy; for example, for the possible disorganising influence of Feuerbach, see Briefwechsel zwischen Marx und Engels, Volume 1 (Mehring’s edition), pp. 7, 24, 45–48; and Deutsche Ideologie, passim. For the dangerous influence of Grün and Proudhon, Briefwechsel zwischen Marx und Engels, Volume 1, pp. 40–42 [English edition, The German Ideology, available here. – MIA
4. ‘The working out of the method which lies at the basis of Marx’s criticism of political economy I regard as something hardly less important than the materialistic conception of history.’ (Engels in a review of Marx’s Introduction to a Critique of Political Economy, reprinted in Feuerbach (Duncker edition) [Friedrich Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen Philosophie (Vienna & Berlin 1927), p. 118 (available here – MIA)]. The method of abstraction, modified by historical description, which Marx uses in his economic analysis is only one specific application of the dialectical method.
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (Appendix: Four Letters by Engels)



Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Appendix
Four Letters on Historical Materialism
by Frederick Engels
Translated by Sidney Hook
* * *

I: Engels’ Letter to Conrad Schmidt
London, 27 October 1990
Dear Schmidt
I seize the first free moment to write you. I think you would be well advised to accept the position at Zurich. [1] You can always learn considerably about economic matters there especially if you bear in mind that Zurich is still only a third-rate money and business market, and that, consequently, the effects which make themselves felt there are weakened, and indeed deliberately falsified, by double and triple-fold manipulations. But one acquires a practical knowledge of the business and is compelled to follow first-hand market reports from London, New York, Paris, Berlin, Vienna – and that’s the world market in its reflected form as money and security market. Of the economic, political and other reflections the same thing is true as of the images in the human eye. They all pass through a convex lens and therefore appear upside down, standing on their head. Only the nervous system is lacking to set them right on their feet again. The money-market expert sees the movements of industry and the world market only in the inverted reflections of the money and security market, and takes the effect for the cause. I saw that take place already in the 1840s in Manchester. The London market reports were absolutely useless as a guide to the development of industry and its periodic maxima and minima because m’lords wanted to explain everything as arising from the crises in the money market which were, after all, only symptoms. Behind the matter at that time was the desire to explain away the fact that industrial crises arose out of temporary overproduction; in addition there was a bias which invited distortion. This last is now for us irrelevant; besides it is a fact that the money market can also have its own crises in which direct industrial disturbances play only a subordinate role or none whatever. In this connection there is much to be investigated especially in the last 20 years.
Wherever there is division of labour on a social scale, there will also be found the growing independence of workers in relation to each other. Production is in the last instance the decisive factor. However, as soon as the commercial exchange of commodities separates itself from real production it follows a movement which, although as a whole still dominated by production, obeys in its particular details and within the sphere of its general dependence its own laws. These flow from the nature of the new factors involved. This movement has its own phases and reacts in turn upon the course of production. The discovery of America resulted from the hunger for money, which had already driven the Portuguese to Africa (cf. Soetbeer’s Edelmetal-Produktion), because the tremendous expansion of European industry in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries together with the corresponding commercial activity demanded more currency than Germany – the great silver country from 1450 to 1550 – could provide. The conquest of India by the Portuguese, Dutch and English from 1500 to 1800 was undertaken for the sake of imports from India. At that time no one thought of exports. And yet what colossal counter-effects these discoveries and conquests which were determined purely by interests of trade, had upon exports from those countries and upon the development of large-scale industry.
The same is true for the money market. Just as soon as dealing in money [Geldhandel] is separated from commodity exchange it develops its own special laws and phases. These follow from its own particular nature, yet they all take place within the given limits and conditions of production and commodity exchange. Where dealing in money is extended to include securities that are not merely government consols but industrials and railroad stocks, and thereby wins direct control over a phase of the production which as a whole controls it, the reaction of the money market upon production becomes all the stronger and more complicated. The investment bankers are the owners of railroads, mines, steel mills, etc. These means of production take on a double aspect. Business has to be run now with an eye to the immediate interests of production, and now with an eye to the needs of the stock-holders in so far as they are money lenders. The crassest illustration of this is furnished by the activities of the North American railroads which at the present time depend completely upon the market operations of Jay Gould, Vanderbilt and others – operations that are totally foreign to the needs and interests of the railroads as common carriers. And even here in England we have witnessed years of struggle between different railway companies in competitive territories in which an enormous amount of money went up in smoke not in the interest of production and communication but solely because of a rivalry whose main function was to make possible the market operation of the wealthy stock-holders.
In these few words about my conception of the relation between production and commodity exchange, and of both to the money market, I have already answered in essence your questions concerning historical materialism in general. The matter can most easily be grasped from the standpoint of the division of labour. Society gives rise to certain public functions which it cannot dispense with. The people who are delegated to perform them constitute a new branch of the division of labour within society. They acquire therewith special interest in opposition to those who have elected them; make themselves relatively independent of them, and the state is already here. The same thing takes place, as we observed, in commercial exchange and later in money exchange. The new independent power must, of course, submit to the movement of production as a whole. But it also reacts, by virtue of the strength of its immanent, that is, its once borrowed but gradually developed relative independence, upon the conditions and course of production. There is a reciprocity between two unequal forces; on the one side, the economic movement; on the other, the new political power which strives for the greatest possible independence and which having once arisen is endowed with its own movement. The economic movement, upon the whole, asserts itself but it is affected by the reaction of the relatively independent political movement which it itself had set up. This political movement is on the one hand the state power, on the other, the opposition which comes to life at the same time with it. Just as the money market reflects as a whole, with the qualifications indicated, the movement of the industrial market, but naturally in an inverted fashion, so there is reflected in the struggle between government and opposition, the struggle between already existing and opposing classes but again in an inverted form, no longer direct but indirect, not as open class struggle but as a struggle between political principles. So inverted is this reflection that it required thousands of years to discover what was behind it.
The reaction of the state power upon economic development can take a three-fold form. It can run in the same direction, and then the tempo of development becomes accelerated; it can buck up against that development in which case today among every large people the state power is sure to go to smash before long; or it can block economic development along some directions and lay down its path along others. This last case is ultimately reducible to one or either of the foregoing two. It is clear that in the second and third cases the political power can do great damage to the course of economic development and result in a great waste of energy and materials.
We must add to the above the cases of conquest and brutal destruction of economic resources in which under certain circumstances it was possible in the past for a local or national economic development to be completely destroyed. Today situations of this kind produce opposite effects at least among the large nations. Often it is the conquered who in the long run wins more economically, politically and morally than the conqueror.
The same is true for law. Just as soon as the new division of labour makes necessary the creation of professional jurists, another new independent domain is opened which for all its dependence upon production and trade in general, still possesses a special capacity to react upon these fields. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the general economic situation and be its expression; it must also be a coherently unified expression and free from glaring internal inconsistencies. In order to achieve this, the fidelity with which the law directly reflects economic conditions becomes less and less. This is all the truer, in those rare cases, when the legal code expresses the harsh, unrelieved and naked fact of class rule. For that contradicts the very principle of justice and law. The pure and consistent jural concept of the revolutionary bourgeoisie of 1792–96 already appears falsified in many respects in the Code Napoléon. And in so far as it is carried out, it is subject to daily modification because of the growing power of the proletariat. That doesn’t prevent the Napoleonic code from serving as a legal model for new codifications of law in all parts of the world. The course of legal development is to be explained in large part first by this attempt to erect an harmonious system of law by eliminating the contradictions between jural propositions which are themselves the direct translation of economic relations; and then by the influence and compulsion exerted by the further economic development which keeps on upsetting the system and plunging it into new contradictions. (I speak here for the time being only of civil law.)
The reflection of economic relations as principles of law is necessarily an inverted one. The process takes place without the participants becoming conscious of it. The jurist imagines that he is operating with a priori propositions while the latter are only reflections of the economic process. And so everything remains standing on its head. This inverted reflex so long as it is not recognised for what it is constitutes what we call ideological conceptions. That it is able to set up a counteraction on the economic basis and within certain limits to modify it, seems to me to be self-evident. The foundations of the law of inheritance, corresponding stages in the development of the family being presupposed, are economic. Nonetheless it would be very hard to prove that, for example, the absolute freedom of testamentary disposition in England, and the strongly restricted right in France, in all particulars have only economic causes. Yet both methods react in a very significant way upon the economic system in that they influence the distribution of wealth.
And now as concerns those ideological realms which tower still higher in the clouds – religion, philosophy, etc – they all possess from pre-historical days an already discovered and traditionally accepted fund of – what we would today call bunk [Blödsinn]. All of these various mistaken ideas of nature, of the creation of man, of spirits and magical forces have as their basis, in the main, negative economic grounds. False ideas of nature are supplementary to the primitive economic development of the pre-historical period; but in places they are often conditioned and even caused by economic development. However, even if economic need has been the chief driving force in the advance of natural knowledge, and has become even more so, it would be altogether pedantic to seek economic causes for all this primitive original superstition. The history of science is the history of the gradual elimination of this superstition, that is, its replacement by new, but always less absurd, superstitions. The people who supply it belong again to a special sphere in the division of labour and imagine that they are working in an independent domain. And in so far as they constitute an independent group within the social division of labour, their production, inclusive of their errors, exerts a counter-acting influence upon the entire social development, even upon the economic. Nonetheless they still remain under the dominant influence of economic development. For example, in philosophy this is easiest to demonstrate for the bourgeois period. Hobbes was the first modern materialist (in the sense of the eighteenth century) but an absolutist at a time when in the whole of Europe absolute monarchy was enjoying the height of its power and in England had taken up the struggle against the people. Locke was, in religion as in politics, a son of the class-compromise of 1688. The English Deists, and their more consistent followers, the French materialists, were the genuine philosophers of the bourgeoisie – the French, even of the bourgeois revolution. In German philosophy from Kant to Hegel the German philistine makes his way – now positively, now negatively. But as a definite domain within the division of labour the philosophy of every age has as its presuppositions a certain intellectual material which it inherits from its predecessors and which is its own point of departure. That is why philosophy can play first violin in economically backward countries; for example, France in the eighteenth century as opposed to England upon whose philosophy her own was based; and later Germany as opposed to both. But in France as in Germany, philosophy and the general outburst of literary activity of that time, were a result of an economic upswing. The final supremacy of economic development even in these realms is established but it takes place within the conditions which are set down by the particular realm; in philosophy, for example, through the effect of economic influences (which again exert influence through disguised political, etc, forms) upon the existing philosophical material which our philosophical predecessors have handed down. Of itself economics produces no effects here directly; but it determines the kind of change and development the already existing intellectual material receives, and even that, for the most part, indirectly, since it is the political, jural and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest direct influence upon philosophy.
I have said what is necessary about religion in the last section of my Feuerbach. [2]
If Barth [3] imagines that we deny all and every counteraction of the political, etc, reflexes of the economic movement upon that movement itself, he is simply contending against windmills. Let him take a glance at Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire, which almost restricts itself to the treatment of the special role that political struggles and events play, naturally within the sphere of their general dependence upon economic conditions; or in Capital, for example, the section on the working day, where legislation, which certainly is a political art, operates so decisively; or the section on the history of the bourgeoisie (Chapter XXIV). Why are we struggling for the political dictatorship of the proletariat, if political power has no economic effects. Force (that is, the state authority) is also an economic power!
But I have no time at present to criticise the book. The third volume must first come out, and besides I believe that Bernstein can do the job quite well.
What all these fellows lack is dialectic. They see cause here, effect there. They do not at all see that this method of viewing things results in bare abstractions; that in the real world such metaphysical polar opposites exist only in crucial situations; that the whole great process develops itself in the form of reciprocal action, to be sure of very unequal forces, in which the economic movement is far and away the strongest, most primary and decisive. They do not see that here nothing is absolute and everything relative. For them Hegel has never existed.
Yours, etc
* * *

II: Engels’ Letter to J. Bloch
London, 21 September 1890
Dear Sir
Your letter of the 3rd inst was forwarded to me at Folkestone; but as I did not have the book in question there, I could not answer you. Returning home on the 12th I discovered such a pile of important work waiting for me, that only today have I found the time to write you a few lines. This in explanation of the delay which I hope you will kindly pardon.
To Point I. [4] First of all you will please note on page 19 of the Origin that the process of development of the Punaluan family is presented as having taken place so gradually that even in this century marriages of brother and sister (of one mother) have taken place in the royal family of Hawaii. And throughout antiquity we find examples of marriages between brother and sister, for example, among the Ptolemies. Secondly, we must here distinguish between brother and sister deriving from the side of the mother, or deriving only from the side of the father; adelphos, adelphä comes from delphos, womb, and originally signified, therefore, only brother and sister on the side of the mother. The feeling had survived a long time from the time of the Mutterrecht that the children of the same mother who have different fathers are more closely related than the children of the same father who have different mothers. The Punaluan form of the family excludes only marriages between the first group (that is, children of one mother but of different fathers) but by no means between the second who according to the existing notion are not even related (since Mutterrecht rules). As far as I know the cases of marriage between brother and sister in ancient Greece are restricted either to those individuals who have different mothers or to those about whom this is not known, and for whom, therefore, the possibility is not excluded; nor is it in absolute contradiction to the Punaluan usage. You have overlooked the fact that between the time of the Punaluan family and the time of Greek monogamy there lies the jump from the matriarchate to the patriarchate, which alters matters considerably.
According to Wachsmuth’s Hellen. Althertümern, in the heroic age of Greece, ‘there is no sign of any concern about the too close blood relationship of husband and wife except for the relation of parent and child’ (III, p. 156). ‘Marriage with the leiblichen sister was not disapproved of in Crete’ (ibid., p. 170). The last also according to Strabo (Book X, for the moment however I cannot find the passage because of the absence of chapter divisions). By leiblichen sister I understand, unless there is proof to the contrary, sisters on the father’s side.
To Point II. [5] I qualify your first major proposition as follows: According to the materialistic conception of history, the production and reproduction of real life constitutes in the last instance the determining factor of history. Neither Marx nor I ever maintained more. Now when someone comes along and distorts this to mean that the economic factor is the sole determining factor he is converting the former proposition into a meaningless, abstract and absurd phrase. The economic situation is the basis but the various factors of the superstructure – the political forms of the class struggles and their results – constitutions, etc, established by victorious classes after hard-won battles – legal forms, and even the reflexes of all these real struggles in the brain of the participants, political, jural, philosophical theories, religious conceptions which have been developed into systematic dogmas, all these exercise an influence upon the course of historical struggles, and in many cases determine for the most part their form. There is a reciprocity between all these factors in which, finally, through the endless array of contingencies (that is, of things and events whose inner connection with one another is so remote, or so incapable of proof, that we may neglect it, regarding it as non-existent) the economic movement asserts itself as necessary. Were this not the case, the application of the theory to any given historical period would be easier than the solution of a simple equation of the first degree.
We ourselves make our own history, but, first of all, under very definite presuppositions and conditions. Among these are the economic, which are finally decisive. But there are also the political, etc. Yes, even the ghostly traditions which haunt the minds of men play a role albeit not a decisive one. The Prussian state arose and developed through historical, in the last instance, economic causes. One could hardly, however, assert without pedantry that among the many petty principalities of North Germany, just Brandenberg was determined by economic necessity and not by other factors also (before all, its involvement by virtue of its Prussian possessions, with Poland and therewith international political relations – which were also decisive factors in the creation of the domestic power of Austro-Hungary) to become the great power in which was to be embodied the economic, linguistic and, since the Reformation, also the religious differences of North and South. It would be very hard to attempt to explain by economic causes without making ourselves ridiculous the existence of every petty German state of the past or present, or the origin of modern German syntax, which reinforced the differences that existed already by virtue of the geographical separating wall formed by the mountains from Sudeten to Taunus.
Secondly, history is so made that the end result always arises out of the conflict of many individual wills in which every will is itself the product of a host of special conditions of life. Consequently there exist innumerable intersecting forces, an infinite group of parallelograms of forces which give rise to one resultant product – the historical event. This again may itself be viewed as the product of a force acting as a whole without consciousness or volition. For what every individual wills separately is frustrated by what everyone else wills and the general upshot is something which no one willed. And so the course of history has run along like a natural process; it also is subject essentially to the same laws of motion. But from the fact that the wills of individuals – who desire what the constitution of their body as well as external circumstances, in the last instance economic (either personal or social) determine them to desire – do not get what they wish but are sunk into an average or common result, from all that one has no right to conclude that they equal zero. On the contrary, every will contributes to the result and is in so far forth included within it.
I should further like to beg of you to study the theory from its original sources and not at second hand. It is really much easier. Marx hardly wrote a thing in which this theory does not play a part. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon is an especially remarkable example of its application. There are many relevant passages also in Capital. In addition, permit me to call your attention to my own writings, Herrn E. Dühring’s Umwälzung der Wissenschaft and L. Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutsche Philosophie where I give the most comprehensive exposition of historical materialism which to my knowledge exists anywhere.
Marx and I are partly responsible for the fact that at times our disciples have laid more weight upon the economic factor than belongs to it. We were compelled to emphasise its central character in opposition to our opponents who denied it, and there wasn’t always time, place and occasion to do justice to the other factors in the reciprocal interactions of the historical process. But just as soon as it was a matter of the presentation of an historical chapter, that is to say, of practical application, things became quite different; there, no error was possible. Unfortunately it is only too frequent that a person believes he has completely understood a new theory and is capable of applying it when he has taken over its fundamental ideas – and even then in an incorrect form. And from this reproach I cannot spare many of the recent ‘Marxists’. They have certainly turned out a rare kind of tommy-rot.
To Point I again. Yesterday (I am writing now on 22 September) I found the following decisive passage, in Schoemann’s Griechische Altertümer (Volume 1, Berlin, 1855, p. 52), which completely confirms the view taken above: ‘It is well known that marriages between half-brothers or sisters of different mothers was not regarded as incest in late Greece.’
I hope that the appalling parenthetical expressions which for brevity’s sake have slipped from my pen won’t frighten you off.
Yours, etc.
* * *

III: Engels’ Letter to Hans Starkenburg
London, 25 January 1894
Dear Sir
Here are the answers to your questions: [6]
I: By economic relations, which we regard as the determining basis of the history of society, we understand the way in which human beings in a definite society produce their necessities of life and exchange the product among themselves (in so far as division of labour exists). Consequently the whole technique of production and transportation is therein included. According to our conception, this technique determines the character and method of exchange, further, the distribution of the products and therewith, after the dissolution of gentile society, the relationships of ruler to ruled, and thence, the state, politics, law, etc. Under economic relations are included further, the geographical foundations upon which they develop and the actually inherited remains of earlier economic stages of development which have persisted, often through tradition only or vis inertiae, and also, naturally, the external surrounding milieu of society.
If the technique, as you properly say, is to a large extent dependent upon the state of science, how much more is science dependent upon the state and needs of technique. If society has a technical need, it serves as a greater spur to the progress of science than do ten universities. The whole of hydrostatics (Torricelli, etc.) was produced by the needs of controlling the mountain streams in Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We only acquired some intelligible knowledge about electricity when its technical applications were discovered. Unfortunately, in Germany, people have been accustomed to write the history of the sciences as if the sciences had fallen from the sky.
II: We regard the economic conditions as determining, in the last instance, historical development. But there are two points here which must not be overlooked.
a) The political, legal, philosophical, religious, literary, artistic, etc, development rest upon the economic. But they all react upon one another and upon the economic base. It is not the case that the economic situation is the sole active cause and everything else only a passive effect. But there is a reciprocal interaction within a fundamental economic necessity which in the last instance always asserts itself. The state, for example, exerts its influence through tariffs, free-trade, good or bad taxation. Even that deadly supineness and impotence of the German philistine which arose out of the miserable economic situation of Germany from 1648 to 1830 and which expressed itself first in pietism, then in sentimentalism and crawling servility before prince and noble, were not without their economic effects. They constituted one of the greatest hindrances to a progressive movement and were only cleared out of the way by the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars which made the chronic misery acute. It is not true, as some people here and there conveniently imagine, that economic conditions work themselves out automatically. Men make their own history, but in a given, conditioning milieu, upon the basis of actual relations already extant, among which, the economic relations, no matter how much they are influenced by relations of a political and ideological order, are ultimately decisive, constituting a red thread which runs through all the other relations and enabling us to understand them.
b) Men make their own history but until now not with collective will according to a collective plan. Not even in a definitely limited given society. Their strivings are at cross purposes with each other, and in all such societies there therefore reigns a necessity which asserts itself under the form of contingency. The necessity which here expresses itself through all those contingencies is ultimately, again, economic. Here we must treat of the so-called great man. That a certain particular man and no other emerges at a definite time in a given country is naturally pure chance. But even if we eliminate him, there is always a need for a substitute, and the substitute is found tant bien que mal; in the long run he is sure to be found. That Napoleon – this particular Corsican – should have been the military dictator made necessary by the exhausting wars of the French Republic – that was a matter of chance. But that in default of a Napoleon, another would have filled his place, that is established by the fact that whenever a man was necessary he had always been found: Cæsar, Augustus, Cromwell, etc. Marx, to be sure, discovered the materialistic conception of history – but the examples of Thierry, Mignet, Guizot, the whole school of English Historians up to 1850 show they were working towards it; and its rediscovery by Morgan serves as proof that the time was ripe for it, and that it had to be discovered.
So with all other accidents and apparent accidents in history. The wider the field we investigate, the further removed from the economic, the closer to the domain of pure, abstract ideology, the more we find that it reveals accidents in its development, the more does the course of its curve run in zig-zag fashion. But fit a trend to the curve and you will find that the longer the period taken, the more inclusive the field treated, the more closely will this trend run parallel to the trend of economic development.
The greatest obstacle to the correct understanding of the theory in Germany is the inexcusable neglect of the literature of economic history. It is hard not only to get rid of historical conceptions which have been drummed into one’s head at school but even more so to gather the material together necessary to do it. Who has even read, for example, old G v Gülick whose dry accumulation of material nonetheless contains so much stuff which explains innumerable political facts?
In addition I believe that the beautiful example which Marx himself gives in his Eighteenth Brumaire ought to give you considerable information on your questions just because it is a practical illustration. I also believe that in the Anti-Dühring, chapter I, 9-11; II, 2-4; III, 1, as well as in the introduction and final section of Feuerbach, I have already treated most of the points.
I beg of you not to weigh gingerly each separate word of the above by itself but to take the connections into account. I am sorry that I have not the time to work things out and write you with the same exact detail that I would have to do for publication.
Yours, etc.
* * *

IV: From a Letter of Engels to F. Mehring
14 July 1893
You have expressed the main facts admirably and for every open-minded person convincingly. [7] If I were to take exception to anything it would be to the fact that you ascribe more credit to me than I deserve, even if I include everything I could have possibly discovered in the course of time by myself; but which Marx with his quicker coup d’oeil and wider view, discovered much sooner. When one has had the good fortune to work together for forty years with a man like Marx, one does not during his lifetime receive the appreciation one believes he deserves. But just as soon as the greater of the two dies, the lesser is easily overrated. That seems to be true for me now. History, however, will take care of all that and by that time one is happily here no longer and cares nothing at all about it.
Only one point is lacking which Marx and I did not sufficiently stress and in relation to which we are equally to blame. We both placed and had to place the chief weight upon the derivation of political, legal and other ideological notions, as well as the actions which they led up to, from fundamental economic facts. In consequence we neglected the formal side, that is, the way in which these ideas arose, for the sake of the content. That gave our opponents a welcome occasion for misunderstanding. Paul Barth is a striking example.
Ideology is a process which of course is carried on with the consciousness of so-called thinkers but with a false consciousness. The real driving force which moves it remains unconscious otherwise it would not be an ideological process. It imaginatively creates for itself false or apparent driving forces. Because it is a thought process, it derives both its content and form from pure thought, either its own or that of its predecessors. It works with pure conceptual material which it unwittingly takes over as the product of thought and therefore does not investigate its relations to a process further removed from and independent of thought. Indeed it seems to be self-evident that since all activity is mediated by thought, it is ultimately grounded in thought. The historical ideologist (and historical means here political, jural, philosophical, theological, in short, all domains which belong to society and not merely to nature) – the historical ideologist is confronted in every scientific field by material which has been built up independently out of the thought of earlier generations, and which through the minds of these successive generations has undergone an independent development peculiar to itself. External facts from this or other fields may have contributed to determine this development, but these facts, according to the tacit presuppositions made, are themselves mere fruits of a thought process. And so we still remain in the realm of pure thought which has succeeded so well in digesting the hardest facts.
It is this appearance of an independent history of state constitutions, systems of law, of ideologies in every special field, which, above all, has blinded so many people. When Luther and Calvin ‘transcend’ the official Catholic religion; when Hegel ‘transcends’ Fichte and Kant; and Rousseau, indirectly with his social contract, the constitutionalist, Montesquieu – it is a process which remains within theology, philosophy and political science. It merely reveals a stage in the history of these intellectual domains and never emerges from the field of pure thought at all. Ever since the illusion of the eternity and ultimacy of the system of capitalist production arose, the refutation of the Mercantilists through the physiocrats and A Smith has been regarded not as the intellectual reflection of different economic facts, but only as a victory of thought, as a correct insight, won at last, into actual conditions existing always and everywhere. If only Richard the Lion-hearted and Philip Augustus had introduced free trade, instead of involving themselves in crusades, five hundred years of misery and stupidity would have been spared us.
This side of affairs, which I can here only indicate, we have all neglected, more than is necessary. It’s the old story. In the beginning the form is always neglected for the content. As already said, I myself have made that error and it has always been thrown up to me. I am far from reproaching you with it. As an older sinner in this respect I have hardly the right. But I wish to call your attention to this point for the future.
This is bound up with the stupid conception of the ideologists. Because we denied that the different ideological spheres, which play a part in history, have an independent historical development, we were supposed therewith to have denied that they have any historical efficacy. At the basis of this is the ordinary undialectical notion of cause and effect as fixed, mutually opposed, polar relations, and a complete disregard of reciprocity. These gentlemen forget, almost intentionally, that an historical factor, once it has been brought into the world by another – ultimately economic fact – is able to react upon its surroundings and even affect its own causes ...
* * *
Notes
1. Conrad Schmidt had written Engels that he intended to take over the commercial section of a Zurich newspaper.
2. Friedrich Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy. – MIA
3. Schmidt had called Engels’ attention to the book of Professor Paul Barth – Die Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels und seiner Nachfolger.
4. Bloch had asked how it came about that even after the disappearance of the consanguine family, marriages between brother and sister were not forbidden among the Greeks.
5. Bloch had asked how the fundamental principle of the materialistic conception of history was understood by Marx and Engels themselves; whether the production and reproduction of life constituted the sole determining factor or was only the foundation upon which all other relations developed a further activity of their own.
6. I: To what extent are economic relations causally effective, that is, are they sufficient causes or necessary conditions or occasions, etc, of social development? II: What roles do the factors of race and historical personality play in Marx-Engels’ conception of history?
7. The reference is to an essay of Mehring’s reprinted as an appendix to the first edition of his Lessinglegende. Mehring reprinted this section of Engels’ letter in his Geschichte der deutschen Sozial-democratie, Volume 1 (second edition, 1903), pp. 385ff.
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020



 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XVII: The Theory of the State)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XVII: The Theory of the State
In his very un-Marxian Studien über die Bewegungsgesetze der gesellschaftlichen Entwicklung, Karl Liebknecht, the heroic leader of German communism, attempts to revise the materialistic conception of history from a philosophical basis which he describes as ‘more sceptical than Hume’s scepticism, more critical than Kant’s criticism, and more solipsistic than Fichte’s solipsism’. His attempt to provide a new philosophical starting point for Marxism is more significant than his failure, for it raises the question of the degree of organic connection which exists between philosophical theory and political practice. How much of the general philosophical theory must one accept in order to be a communist? If a Marxist is committed to the philosophy of communism, does it follow that all who accept this philosophy must be Marxists? Certainly, from a conventional point of view, Karl Liebknecht, by virtue of his rejection of the Marxian theory of history and of the labour theory of value, was less of a Marxist than men like Hilferding and Kautsky; and yet while he sealed his devotion to the cause of communism with his own blood, these others launched bitter attacks against it. There have been so many other cases in which philosophical heresy has been combined with revolutionary sincerity, that there is a crying need to distinguish between the essential doctrine and the unessential interpretation.
That there is a unity between larger questions of theory and the general direction of practice is indisputable. Every major deviation from the revolutionary practice of the international working class has sought to ground itself upon new philosophical premises or upon some pre-Marxian system – properly cut and trimmed for its purposes. But it is an altogether different matter to assert that every political difference must entail a philosophical difference and vice versa. For an attitude of this kind overlooks the empirical fact that human beings are never aware of the full practical implications of their beliefs. [1] Moreover – and this is the crux of the matter – it mistakenly assumes that Marxism is a systematic theory of reality which starts out from self-evident first principles about the nature of being, and rigorously deduces all its other theories and programmes – even when the latter are specifically social. A disagreement anywhere along the line would have to express itself somewhere else as well. Such a metaphysic, however, is absolutely incompatible with any naturalistic view which regards the world as developing in time, and which views man as an active historical agent. This is a metaphysic which in the past has been associated with mechanistic rationalism or theological idealism. In either case, it involves fatalism.
Marxism is primarily a theory of social revolution. It has wider implications – logical, psychological and metaphysical – which constitute a loose body of doctrine commonly referred to as the philosophy of dialectical materialism. But although Marxism implies a general philosophical position, for example, the beliefs in the reality of time, in the objectivity of universals, in the active character of knowing, etc, its social theories cannot be deduced from its wider philosophy. For they are not logically necessitated by any one philosophy. One may accept the Marxist evolutionary metaphysic and not be forthwith committed to its theory of social revolution. At most one can say that Marxism is incompatible with, or rules out, certain philosophical doctrines. Because A presupposes B, it does not follow that B presupposes A; although it is legitimate to argue from non-B to non-A. If space permitted, it could be shown that many of the propositions of dialectical materialism are merely generalised expressions of the findings of the physical and biological sciences, and that of them, one cannot even say that they are presupposed by Marxism, but only that they are compatible with Marxism. This leaves it an open question whether the opposites of these particular propositions are incompatible with Marxism. One may, for example, with good Marxist conscience substitute relativistic conceptions of space and time for Engels’ unclear absolutistic views.
The same considerations apply in the realm of social theory. Although the social doctrines of Marxism possess a much more organic character than the body of its philosophical implications, still, not all doctrinal beliefs are equally relevant to the immediate political issues of revolutionary practice. Certainly, one may call into question Engels’ literal acceptance of Morgan’s scheme of unilateral and universal succession of family relationships and his theory of the nature and extent of private property in primitive communities – theories which modern critical anthropologists have completely discredited – without necessarily being compelled to abandon such important leading principles as the class character of the state.
In strict logic one may go even further. The nature of the state in class society – especially in contemporary bourgeois society – may be submitted to analysis in relative independence of the cluster of problems which surround the historic origin of the state. Whether the state arose in the course of the expansion of the productive forces of society and the division of labour which this entailed, whether it resulted from the military conquest of one people by another, whether, together with the division of labour, it already existed in some primitive tribes before the existence of private property in the means of production – are questions which must be decided by examining separately the evidence for each case of transition from primitive to class society. The highly controversial disputes of contemporary anthropologists and sociologists indicate not only that the evidence is not overwhelming for one theory or another, but that the disputants are working with different conceptions of what constitutes a state. It is all the more important, then, that we know what it is we are talking about before we embark upon questions as to how and when it arose. What the state is can be discovered in the same way that Marx, long before he read Morgan, discovered it, viz., by examining its structure and function in bourgeois society and using the outcome of that analysis as an hypothesis in approaching the state organisations of the past. It can be categorically stated – despite the idealistic Hegelian logic of some Marxists – that the validity of Marx’s analysis of the nature of the state today, and the revolutionary consequences which flow from it, are completely independent of any conclusions anthropologists may reach about the origin of the state three thousand years ago. For the purposes of intelligent political action, it is much more relevant to inquire into the function and behaviour of social institutions in the present than into their presumable first origins.
A first step towards clarity may be made by distinguishing between three fundamental concepts which are often confused – society, state and government. For Marx as for Hegel, a society is any group of human beings living and working together for the satisfaction of their fundamental economic needs. Government is the administrative mechanism by which these economic needs are controlled and furthered. The more primitive the society, the more rudimentary the forms of government. Sometimes the government is nothing more than the order of succession of personal leadership enforced by the spontaneous activity of the group. In modern society, however, with its enormously specialised division of labour, the government is a complex institution with separately delegated powers. The state is a special organised public power of coercion which exists to enforce the decisions of any group or class that controls the government. Where the government represents the needs and interests of the entire community, it does not need a special and separate coercive force behind it. In that case it is no longer a specific, political mechanism but an administrative organ, coordinating the economics of production and distribution in both its material and cultural phases. It is extremely important to distinguish between the state and government even though, as in modern societies, the government serves the state, and even though some individuals combine in their very person the social functions of government and the repressive functions of the state. For example, the policeman who directs traffic and gives information, and the teacher who imparts the rudiments of knowledge to his pupils, are workers performing the administrative, governmental services necessary in any complex society. Were the state to be overthrown and another state established, were the state even to disappear, this work would still have to be performed. The same policeman, however, who clubs striking pickets, and the same teacher who inculcates the ideology of nationalism, are servants of the state. Wherever the state exists, it perverts the administrative function of government to its uses. The distinction nonetheless remains.
The actual or potential exercise of coercion is a necessary constituent element in the existence of the state. But coercion is not its differentiating character. It is the locus and form of coercion which express the characteristic feature of the state. No society is possible, least of all one in which there is a complex division of labour, without the operation of some kind of pressure to strengthen certain modes of behaviour and to prevent others. The coercion need not be physical. It may be exercised through public opinion. But so long as there is a recognised difference between conduct which is permitted and conduct which is not permitted, some coercion is being applied. For example, among the Andaman Islanders, where no special state power exists, a man who commits murder is not overtly punished by his tribesmen. He loses standing and is socially ostracised – which is regarded as a severe form of punishment. Among other primitive tribes, although there is nothing corresponding to our police force, physical punishment is meted out to offenders of public morality either by the family of their victims or by the entire community.
In a strict sense, we may speak of a state only where a special public power of coercion exists which, in the form of an armed organisation, stands over and above the population. It is only where a separate organisation exists, ostensibly to keep peace and order by the imposition of penalties, that the distinguishing character of state coercion will be found and with it the clue to the role and function of the state in society: ‘The state presupposes the public power of coercion separated from the aggregate body of its members.’ [2]
Why is it necessary that a special coercive power exist – separate and distinct from the physical and moral force of the collectivity – to enforce peace and order? Obviously because of the presence of conflicts and struggles in society, and because the organisation of society is such that these conflicts, when not actual, are potential, and therefore must be guarded against. What kind of conflicts and struggles makes the existence of the state necessary? Sometimes it is the struggle between nations for territory. But the state power exists and functions within the national territory as well as without; its organisation is such as to make it as readily available against its own citizens as against others. What internal conflicts, then, make necessary the existence of the whole apparatus of state power? The hypothesis of Marx and Engels is that the state is an expression of the irreconcilable class antagonisms generated by the social relations of economic production. Their subsidiary hypothesis is that wars for territorial expansion are a secondary consequence of the development of the mode of economic production. Where there are no classes, there is no need for specially organised instruments of physical coercion. Where there are classes, there is always the danger that the existing property relations, which give wealth and power to one class at the cost of another, may be overthrown. ‘Political power properly so-called’, wrote Marx in the Communist Manifesto, ‘is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing another.’ [3]
For evidence of the class character of the state, Marx went not to the philosophical concept of the state but to history and experience. Significantly enough, he started out as a believer in the Hegelian theory of the state, but was compelled to abandon it just as soon as he sought to square what Hegel called the notion of the state with actual political practices. The abandonment of the Hegelian conception of the state marked a striking turning point in his intellectual biography. It is worth dwelling upon in some detail – all the more so because the specific historical occasion which provoked the shift in Marx’s views has striking contemporary analogues.
Like all other Young Hegelians, Marx started out with a firm belief in Hegel’s characterisation of the state as ‘the realisation of the ethical idea’, as the expression of Reason in which the real and reasonable wills of individuals – as distinct from their capricious wills – were taken up in a systematic and harmonious whole, sometimes called the ideal community. Since the state was above man, it was above classes. It expressed the universal and abiding interests, needs and ideals, not of this man or that, nor of this class or that, but of all men and all classes. Without slighting the needs of the living, it claimed to represent the ideal interests of those who had gone before as well as those who were to come after.
Hegel had said that the Prussian state was the perfect fulfilment of the ideal state. The Young Hegelians knew it was not. They asserted that in his heart, Hegel, himself, knew it was not. But they thought they could save Hegel’s theory of the state by distinguishing between the truth of the ideal and the necessary imperfection of the real or existent. The actual state uses were in their eyes abuses of the ideal; their task was to bring the actual in line with the ideal. They were confident that this could be done by agitation for a democratic, politically free state. The more daring ones called themselves republicans.
When Marx became editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, he was obliged to comment upon the day-by-day activities of the government. He soon realised that his views on the nature of the state were hopelessly inadequate. Even before he resigned from his post to study French socialism and English economics, he came to see that political equality – which the Young Hegelians aimed at introducing – was a condition, not a guarantee, of social equality; and that without social equality, all talk about the community of interests and the divinity of the state was empty rhetoric. Where there was on social equality, the state was an instrument used by one class in society against another. It was not an expression of the common ideals of the whole of society. For there were no common ideals. There was only a common verbal usage which obscured fundamental class differences.
The occasion upon which this was brought home to Marx was the debate held in the Rhenish Provincial Assembly on the wood-theft laws (Holzdiebstahlgesetz). The legislators were intent upon putting teeth into the law which made the appropriation of dead wood from the forest a crime. The small landed proprietor was amply protected by the fact that his holding was small. Since he himself lived on his land, he could stop trespassing. The large landed proprietor could not use his wardens to defend his woods unless wood stealing was declared a penal offence and the law enforced. A great deal of ado was made in the Landtag about protecting the large landholders as well as small since, as citizens of the community, both classes were entitled to equal rights of protection. Marx seized upon this principle and hurled it at the heads of the members of the Landtag, barbed with the following question: What protection was the state giving to the poor, the paupered wood-stealers themselves, who were also citizens of the political community? The poor were not stealing wood in order to sell it. They merely made sporadic raids on private forests in their vicinity in order to gather fuel for their cottages. The stringency of the winter and the relatively high price of wood had intensified the practice. And as a matter of fact, the poor had always enjoyed the immemorial rights (conveniently forgotten by the historical school of law) of carting off dead wood. But now on the pretext that sometimes injury was done to living trees, the poor were to be prohibited from taking any wood. The state had stepped forward to defend the property of one class of its citizens. But it did nothing to defend the welfare, indeed, the very life, of a still larger class – those that had no property. If the state was, as it claimed to be, an organisation standing above classes, beyond reach of privileged economic interests, its protecting zeal would extend to all sections of the population. Judging it, however, by the specific activity of its courts and legislatures, it appeared very far from being the incarnation of impartial reason which Marx in the first flush of his Hegelianism had regarded it.
The debates on the wood-stealing laws marked the definite abandonment on the part of Marx of the Hegelian theory of the state. The state, he now declared, was rooted in a soil other than the self-development of the logical idea. Its voice was the voice of reason, but its hands were the hands of economic privilege. ‘The organs of the state have now become the ears, eyes, arms, legs with which the interests of the forest owners, hears, spies, appraises, defends, seizes and runs.’ [4] The more closely he studied the behaviour of courts and legislatures, the stronger grew his belief that the moving force, ground and motive behind the enactment of any law which affected conflicting interests of different classes, was not an impartial theory of justice but the private privilege of a dominant class whose selfishness and greed were concealed, sometimes even from itself, by juristic rationalisations and mouth-filling phrases about personal rights and liberties. ‘Our whole exposition’, wrote Marx in concluding his discussion, ‘has shown how the Landtag has degraded [herabwürdigt] the executive power, the administrative authorities, the existence of the accused, and the very idea of the state to material instruments of private interest.’ [5]
When Marx wrote this he was not yet a Marxist. He speaks of the poor and not of the proletariat, and of private interest without linking those interests with the social relations of production. But in subsequent essays and especially in those chapters of Capital which deal with primitive accumulation, capitalist accumulation and the expropriation of the agricultural population, he deepens his analysis by showing that private property in the instruments of production must necessarily carry with it – and always has – political power over those who must live by the use of those instruments. Without the state power there can be no private property, for the legal right to hold private property is nothing but the might of the armed forces of the state to exclude others from the use of that property. The very continuance of production demands the existence of the state, since the immanent logic of the bourgeois system of production intensifies the opposition between classes. It therefore becomes necessary for the state to set itself up as a nominally impartial arbiter working through law and education to dissolve the antagonisms which threaten to wreck society. The state thus insures that the processes of exploitation proceed uninterruptedly.
The fact that the domination of the state is coextensive with that of private property in the instruments of production wrecks not only Hegel’s political philosophy but all others, notably that of Lassalle’s, which separate bourgeois society from the state, and appeal to the state, as the presumable representative of all classes, to correct the abuses of bourgeois society. Sometimes it is even expected that the existing state will gradually abolish capitalism and introduce socialism. This dangerous illusion disappears once it is realised that the existing state cannot be dissociated from the existing economic society. At any given time, the state is a natural outgrowth of the productive relations, and implicitly pervades the whole of society even when its institutional forms appear to be independent. The economic order is a political order and the political order is an economic order. Against those who asserted that these two were separate and distinct, Marx claimed that the historical record proves that the logical distinction drawn between ‘property power’ and ‘political power’ corresponded to no difference in fact, that in social life, property and political power were but different aspects of the same thing:
How ‘money-making’ is turned into ‘the conquest of power’, and ‘property’ into ‘political sovereignty’, and how, consequently, instead of the rigid distinctions drawn between these two forces by Mr Heinzen and petrified into dogma, they are interrelated to the point of unity, of all this he may quickly convince himself by observing how the serfs purchased their freedom and the communes their municipal rights; how the citizens, on the one hand, enticed money out of the pockets of the feudal lords by trade and industry, and disintegrated their estates through bills of exchange, and on the other hand, aided the absolute monarchy to victory over the undermined great feudal lords and bought off their privileges; how they later exploited the financial crises of the absolute monarchy itself, etc.; how the most absolute monarchs became dependent upon the Stock Exchange Barons through the national debt system – a product of modern history and commerce; and how in international relations, industrial monopoly is immediately transformed into political domination ... [6]
Since the forces of political authority serve to support the power of the dominant economic class, and since the mode of economic production determines not only the character of the state but tends to determine the form of the state as well (constitutional monarchy or democratic republic), we can understand Marx’s meaning more completely when he writes in the Communist Manifesto: ‘The modern state power is merely a committee which manages the common business of the bourgeoisie.’ [7]
Does not Marx contradict himself when he speaks, in one place, of the state as a separate public power, and in another, of the state as pervading all the institutions of society and involved in their functioning? No, for the existence of special instruments of oppression is a naked and formal expression of the material system of oppression, that is, of the mode of economic production. The history of the state – the succession of its special forms and organisation – can best be grasped as an aspect of the history of the economic system. As capitalism develops from the crude competition and duplications of laissez faire to the relatively highly organised forms of monopoly, there takes place a corresponding improvement in the organs of state power. They become more centralised and efficient. Functionally the state enters more and more into business and the armed public forces of the state become, so to speak, the private detective guard of the business plant. The growing pressure of class antagonisms compels the employers to see to it that some special public force is always at hand and that no other special force exists in the bulk of the population which can be used against the public one. At the same time and in the interests of functional efficiency, the organisation of the state machine seems to be independent of the organisation of business. The concentration of armed forces offers a deceptive plausibility to the claim that the state stands outside of business and merely exercises governmental functions of regulation on behalf of the whole community. When the state takes over whole industries like the railroads, telegraph and post office in the interests of efficient total production, it conceals this under the euphemism of ‘social service’. As a consequence, the ideology of state neutrality and supremacy is strongest just when – as under monopoly capitalism – the state is serving the bourgeoisie most efficiently.
The era of finance capital and imperialism reveals this dualism between the actual function of the state and its professed philosophy most clearly. But by the last third of the last century Marx had already discerned the tendency of the state to assume a national form in bureaucratic organisation and in official philosophy precisely at those moments when its repressive functions came most openly into play. With broad strokes he summarises the development of the state from the days of the absolute monarchy to the days of the Paris Commune:
The centralised state power, with its ubiquitous organs of standing army, police, bureaucracy, clergy and judicature – organs wrought after the path of a systematic and hierarchic division of labour – originates from the days of absolute monarchy, serving nascent middle-class society as a mighty weapon in its struggle against feudalism. Still, its development remained clogged by all manner of medieval rubbish, seigniorial rights, local privileges, municipal and guild monopolies, and provincial constitutions. The gigantic broom of the French Revolution of the eighteenth century swept away all of these relics of bygone times, thus clearing simultaneously the social soil of its last hindrances to the superstructure of the modern state edifice raised under the First Empire, itself the offspring of the coalition wars of old semi-feudal Europe against modern France. During the subsequent regimes the government placed under parliamentary control – that is, under the direct control of the propertied classes – became not only a hotbed of huge national debts and crushing taxes; with its irresistible allurements of place, pelf and patronage, it became not only the bone of contention between the rival factions and adventurers of the ruling classes; but its political character changed simultaneously with the economic changes of society. At the same pace at which the progress of modern industry developed, widened, intensified the class antagonism between capital and labour, the state power assumed more and more the character of the national power of capital over labour, of a public force organised for social enslavement, of an engine of class despotism. After every revolution marking a progressive phase in the class struggle, the purely repressive character of the state power stands out in bolder relief. [8]
The crucial test of the validity of Marx’s theory of the state must ultimately be found by analysing the day-by-day activities of the legislatures, the courts and executive bodies of the country. The state is what it does and what it does is revealed by experience not by definition. This methodological principle must be kept firmly in mind whenever we approach any body of law as well as the reasons offered for a judicial decision. No law and no agency of the state will openly proclaim that human interests are to be sacrificed for property rights, or more accurately, that where there is a conflict of claims, the interests of the possessing classes take precedence over the interests of the non-possessing classes. Indeed an open admission that this is the case would constitute a violation of the expressed legal principle that all are equal before the law; in theory, such an admission – although truthful – would be illegal. Nonetheless, even with no more knowledge of the law than what it says of itself, one can show that its implicit end is security of property and not justice in its distribution. And as for the law’s concern with rights of persons, one need only point to the trivial but highly symbolic fact that in Anglo-American law the punishment for abstracting a small sum of money from a man’s pocket is much severer than it is for beating him to within an inch of his life, to illustrate its immeasurably greater concern for the rights of property than of personality.
That all law is a direct expression of economic class interests no one can plausibly maintain. Much of it treats of technical commercial matters which are of interest only to private groups who own real property, play the market, etc. Some of it, especially in Anglo-American law, reflects the weight of tradition as in many features of the law of evidence. Some of it expresses the interests of the lawyers as a professional group – often in opposition to the interests of their clients – as in the laws of procedure. Some of it has the character of purely administrative ordinance as in the case of traffic regulation. Nonetheless, the fundamental class character of the law becomes as clear as daylight both in the manner in which it is interpreted and on the occasions in which it is enforced. Just as soon as there is a struggle between capital and labour, the court steps in to protect the interests of the status quo. Whether it is the use of injunctions and martial law in labour disputes, the blanket charge of conspiracy against labour organisers, the use of the undefined charge of disorderly conduct to break up a picket line, the arrest of those distributing radical hand-bills on the grounds that they are ‘littering the streets’, the thousand ways in which the phrases ‘inciting to riot’ and ‘constituting a public nuisance’ can be stretched to jail strike leaders – one underlying aim runs through court practice, that is, the preservation of the existing property relations. In fact, the courts do not hesitate to suspend the constitutional guarantees, which they are sworn to defend, just as soon as the exercise of the freedom of speech, press and assemblage threatens to be effective in organising militant labour.
The economic class divisions of society exercise a profound even if indirect influence upon the whole of criminal law. Paradoxical as it may appear, criminal law, although not so immediately concerned with economic interests and activities, is more overtly repressive and discriminatory than civil law. The purpose of civil law in the main is to regulate business transactions within the sphere of exchange and to make possible redress of business grievances by compelling guilty parties either to carry out their contracts or to make restitution in the form of services or money. That civil law can be turned in case of emergency into an instrument of class repression, is clearly illustrated by the use of damage suits against labour unions, eviction proceedings against the unemployed, etc. But the bulk of civil law has, as its objective, the private detail of the entrepreneur and the conflicts which arise with other entrepreneurs in the common quest for profit. The primary purpose of criminal law is punishment – punishment of any individual whose acts threaten to disrupt the ‘peace, order and security’ of the social system. These terms are undefined variables; but whatever meaning they have is determined by the interests which control those who make the laws as well as those who interpret and enforce them. Formally, the criminal law is laid down as binding upon the members of all classes. Actually its enforcement is selective wherever class conflict flares up.
Even where there is no selective bias in the enforcement of criminal law, punishment for the same criminal offence falls with unequal severity upon members of different economic classes. Where there is social inequality, the enforcement of any law – no matter how impartially administered – automatically reflects, in the degree and nature of the punishment, different class divisions. In other words, there can be no strict equality before the law where there is social inequality. Assume, for example, that in an ideal bourgeois society the law is impartially carried out according to its letter – that political favour and financial corruption have no influence upon the integrity of the court. A, a worker, and B, a banker, are separately arrested on charges of manslaughter. Since they are both formally equal before the law, bail is fixed at the same amount. A, who cannot raise the bail or even pay the premium on a bail bond, is confined in jail until his day in court comes; B, by virtue of his economic status, is at large twenty-four hours after he is booked. Both are brought to trial. A faces a jury, not of his peers, but of men hostile or indifferent to him and his entire class; B must meet only the mixed feelings of resentment and admiration which fill the breasts of the less well-to-do among the middle classes at the sight of those who have climbed higher. A is dependent for his exoneration upon the skill of an unknown and uninfluential lawyer often appointed by the court; B can hire the most eminent counsel in the country and enormously increase the probability of acquittal. At every step in the legal process, no matter how impartially administered, the worker is punished not merely for his crime but for his poverty. No exercise of judicial discretion can alter this fact, for it flows from the class nature of the social system of which the law is the expression not the cause. Indeed, wherever judicial discretion is introduced, the worker fares even worse, since the training and class origins of judges – not to speak of the mechanics of their selection – lead them, as a whole, to mistake their traditional prejudices and class passion for order and security into first principles of justice.
Ultimately, the sanctions behind criminal law are the sanctions behind all law. The sanctions behind all law – the whole array of repressive state forces – is an integral part of the process of production. The habit-patterns of complacency and tradition are not sufficient to keep production running in class society, and the methods of educational indoctrination have their limits. Sooner or later the conflicting needs and interests of different classes become focalised in consciousness and translated into action. No matter how our philosophy may try to escape it, where there are inarbitrable conflicts of interests, force decides which claim will prevail.
We can now return to the question which served as our point of departure. What doctrine is essential to Marxism in the sense that it can be used as a touchstone of allegiance to his thought? If the above analysis is valid, it can be categorically stated that it is Marx’s theory of the state which distinguishes the true Marxist from the false. For it is the theory of the state which is ultimately linked up with immediate political practice. The attempt made by ‘liberal’ Marxists throughout the world – even when they call themselves orthodox – to separate the existing economic order from the existing state, as well as their belief that the existing state can be used as an instrument by which the economic system can be ‘gradually revolutionised’ into state capitalism or state socialism, must be regarded as a fundamental distortion of Marxism. ‘Liberal Marxism’ and ‘gradual revolution’ are contradictions in terms. For Marx, every social revolution must be a political revolution, and every political revolution must be directed against the state. That is why it is more accurate to regard the German Social-Democracy as Lassallean rather than Marxian.
Nowhere does Marx state the relation between social and political revolution more clearly than on the final page of his Poverty of Philosophy, a work which contains the classic criticism of petty-bourgeois socialism with its theory of public works, fiat money, cooperative workshops, free credit, and a classless theory of the state:
... after the fall of the old society, will there be a new class domination, comprised in a new political power? No. The essential condition of the emancipation of the working class is the abolition of all classes, as the condition of the emancipation of the third estate of the bourgeois order, was the abolition of all estates, all orders.
The working class will substitute, in the course of its development, for the old order of civil society an association which will exclude classes and their antagonism, and there will no longer be political power, properly speaking, since political power is simply the official form of the antagonism in civil society.
In the meantime, the antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie is a struggle between class and class, a struggle which, carried to its highest expression, is a complete revolution. Would it, moreover, be matter for astonishment if a society, based upon the antagonism of classes, should lead ultimately to a brutal conflict, to a hand-to-hand struggle as its final denouement?
Do not say that the social movement excludes the political movement. There has never been a political movement which was not at the same time social.
It is only in an order of things in which there will be no longer classes or class antagonism that social evolutions will cease to be political revolutions. Until then, on the eve of each general reconstruction of society, the last word of social science will ever be: ‘Le combat ou la mort; la lutte sanguinaire ou le néant. C’est ainsi que la question est invinciblement posée.’ – George Sand [9]
The belief in the class character of the state is obviously not a theoretical postulate. It demands that forms of concrete activity be worked out in the struggle against the state power. The chief question to be decided in this connection is what methods and institutions are efficacious in the struggle for the conquest of political power. This introduces for discussion the meaning and function of the ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ in the philosophy of Karl Marx.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Despite his fierce polemics against all types of philosophical revisionism, Lenin had a lively appreciation of the fact that variant theoretical beliefs, although potentially a source of different political practice, were not always expressed as such. Even on such a burning question as the conditions of membership in a revolutionary party, he wrote: ‘A political party cannot examine its members to see if there are any contradictions between their philosophy and the party programme.’ (Lenin on Religion, English translation, p. 22. [V.I. Lenin, The Attitude of the Workers’ Party to Religion, Collected Works, Volume 15. – MIA]
2. Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884, English translation, Chicago 1902), pp. 115–16. [available here. – MIA
3. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto. – MIA
4. Karl Marx, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band I, p 287. [Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly, October 1842, available here. – MIA]
5. Karl Marx, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band I, p. 287 [Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly, October 1842, available here. – MIA]
6. Karl Marx, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band VI, pp. 306–07 [Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality, October 1847, available here. – MIA]
7. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto. – MIA
8. Karl Marx, The Paris Commune (New York Labour News Co, 1920), pp. 70–71. [The Civil War in France, available here. – MIA]
9. Karl Marx, Poverty of Philosophy (Charles H. Kerr, Chicago 1920, English translation by H. Quelch), pp. 190–91 [available at here; the quotation is from George Sand’s Jean Siska: ‘Combat or Death: bloody struggle or extinction. It is thus that the question is inexorably put.’ – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 26 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (IV: The Orthodox Canonisation)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter IV: The Orthodox Canonisation
The theoretical constructions of orthodox Marxism were built out of phrases and propositions drawn from Marx’s own works. Indeed, Kautsky, Hilferding and others denied that their orthodoxy constituted an interpretation. In their eyes it was a faithful exposition of the doctrine. Nevertheless, there was a definite shift in the fundamental character of their expositions. Marxism was no longer regarded as essentially the theory and practice of social revolution, but as a science of social development. The official theoretical emphasis implied that it was not so much a method of making history as of understanding it after it had been made. It was offered as something sachlich and free from value judgements, determining action in the same way that a mountain slope determines the movement of a glacier. It was objective and scientific in a strict sense. It carried the authority not only of power but of knowledge. It tried to prove its position by popularising the deductions from the labour theory of value in Das Kapital rather than by underscoring the revolutionary philosophy of the Communist Manifesto in which the labour theory of value in its distinctive Marxian form was not even mentioned.
The continued stabilisation and expansion of capitalism, together with the programmes of peaceful, evolutionary methods of social reform projected by the German Social-Democrats, made the conception of socialism as an objective science of social development not only plausible but an effective talking point in winning converts from the parties of law and order. Gradually, reliance upon ‘processes at work in the order of things’ became translated into the mythical language of the ‘inevitability’ of the development of capitalism into socialism. Human need, evolution and action, which Marx had taken as his starting points, now became theoretically – in strict logic but not in open avowal – a superfluous addendum to a self-contained system of social mechanics. Man was mortal; no less so the society in which he lived. And just as in one case human effort could only moderately influence the fatal day, so in the other. Cry out as the orthodox Marxists did against this interpretation of Marxism as a confusion of social determinism with social fatalism, it followed from their theories that the class struggle was a fact as objective as the force of gravitation, and that the social revolution was as ineluctable as an eclipse. Small wonder that this disguised natural necessity should have led to the characterisation of ‘orthodox’ Marxism as ‘astronomical’ socialism!
And now an amazing thing happened. It was no longer necessary, said the theoreticians, for a Marxist to be a socialist. Marxism was wissenschaft; socialism weltanschauung. Marxism was the science which proved that socialism as a state of society would come. All opposition and allegiance to socialism as an ideal were equally epiphenomenal. Socialism was coming! If you welcomed it, well and good – it might come a little sooner. If you did not, it would come anyway – perhaps a little later. In neither case would your attitude make a difference – or much of a difference. Into such a paralysing doctrine did this pan-objectivistic interpretation of Marx eventuate.
Here is a citation from a key work of one such orthodox Marxist, which reveals the incidence of this position. Rudolph Hilferding prefaced his important treatise, Das Finanzkapital, as follows:
The theory of Marxism as well as its practice is free from judgements of value. It is, therefore, false to conceive as is widely done, intra et extra muros, that Marxism and socialism are as such identical. For logically, regarded as a scientific system and apart from its historical effect, Marxism is only a theory of the laws of movement of society formulated in general terms by the Marxian conception of history; the Marxian economics applying in particular to the period of commodity-producing society. But insight into the validity of Marxism which includes insight into the necessity of socialism is by no means a matter of value judgements and just as little an indication to practical procedure. For it is one thing to recognise a necessity, and another thing to work for this necessity. It is quite possible for someone convinced of the final victory of socialism to fight against it. [1]
This was a strange revolutionary theory indeed. It could explain the past and predict the future but had no function in the present. Experimentally there was nothing to distinguish it from a theodicy which, refusing to fathom the divine ways in any present event, read all of past history ad hoc and predicted nothing in the future but the Revolutionary Day of Judgement. And thus this brand of ‘orthodox’ Marxism became to all who welcomed socialism a religion of consolation, and to those who opposed it, a doctrine of despair. It was the ideology not only of the German Social-Democracy, but of the Second International which the German party dominated. [2]
Until 1895 the official theoreticians sought to justify themselves by appealing to Marx’s closest collaborator and literary executor, Frederick Engels. It was Engels who during Marx’s lifetime interpreted his central doctrines and after his death edited his manuscripts. But this was no ordinary labour that Engels took upon himself. The exact intellectual relationship between the two men has yet to be adequately tracked down. Certainly there is no justification for the easy assumption made by the self-styled ‘orthodox’ that there is a complete identity in the doctrines and standpoints of Marx and Engels from the beginning of their friendship on. The indisputable fact that they were minds of different order would make that unlikely. Nor is there any more justification for holding with critics like Masaryk, Arturo Labriola and Mondolfo that there was an essential difference between them. The truth seems to be that Engels gave a characteristic emphasis to the doctrine of Marx – an emphasis, however, which had far-reaching consequences upon the development of the doctrine in the hands of the official party theoreticians. Already in his Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft (one section of which was written by Marx) we find a treatment of mooted problems of metaphysics, science and ethical practice from the point of view of a monistic system rather than of a unified method. But more important still, in bringing to completion and publishing the second and third volumes of Das Kapital Engels gave final currency to the notion that the economic theories of Marx constituted a hypothetic-deductive system of the type exemplified by scientific theories überhaupt, instead of being an illustration of a method of revolutionary criticism. In so doing Engels failed to develop the important sociological and practical implications of Marx’s doctrine of the ‘fetishism of commodities’. He devoted himself to the task of explaining how the law of the falling rate of profit could be squared both with the empirical fact that the rate of profit was the same irrespective of the organic composition of capital, and with the labour-power definition of exchange-value.
Nowhere, so far as I know, does Engels properly comment on Marx’s own words in the preface to the second edition of the first volume, that political economy ‘can remain a science only so long as the class struggle is latent or manifests itself only in isolated or sporadic phenomena’. [3] It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that Marx did not conceive Das Kapital to be a deductive exposition of an objective natural system of political economy, but a critical analysis – sociological and historical – of a system which regarded itself as objective. Its subtitle is Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Criticism demands a standpoint, a position. Marx’s standpoint was the standpoint of the class-conscious proletariat of Western Europe. His position implied that a system of economics at basis always is a class economics. An implicit value judgement becomes one of the abscissae in terms of which its analytic equations are written.
Engels’ interpretation of the economic doctrines of Marx as a closed deductive system was a matter of relative emphasis. It was controlled on crucial occasions by his revolutionary political instincts and corrected in his important letters on historical materialism. Engels, however, was living in London. And out of fancied political necessity the leadership was just as willing to revise him as to revise Marx. Indeed, Engels lived to see his very writings censored and distorted in order to make him appear to be supporting the party line. The revision of his introduction to Marx’s Klassenkämpfe im Frankreich, the last publication of Engels, is a case in point. Even his protest at being made out to appear as a ‘peaceful worshipper of legality at any price’ [4] was coolly ignored.
In philosophy a corresponding shift occurred from Marx’s naturalistic activism to a simplified materialism called dialectical but in reality mechanical. Here Engels’ own formulations lent support to a theory of knowledge which constituted a definite shift in emphasis from Marx’s own views as expressed both in the glosses on Feuerbach and Die deutsche Ideologie. In these writings Marx, true to his Hegelian tradition, pronounced crushing judgement on all mechanical materialisms which regarded man’s sensation and thought as the passive automatic result of the impact of the environment upon the animal organism. He claimed that the chief defect of all previous materialism was its inability to explain conscious activity in general, and cultural selectivity in particular. The political passivism of Feuerbach’s politics of love had one of its roots in his belief that sensations were literal images, knowledge-bearing, carbon-copy reports of the objective world. For Marx, sensations were forms of practical, sensory activity (praktische, menschlichsinnliche Tätigkeit). They were not knowledge but the stimulus to knowledge which completed itself in action. They could not be anything else. Otherwise the social interaction without which the world cannot be transformed becomes impossible. If men cannot react upon and change their conditioning environment, social revolutions can no longer be regarded as a form of human activity but are reduced to incidents in some scheme of rational mechanics or energetics. But all social action and change is mediated by ideas in the minds of men. Ideas, therefore, cannot be passive images; they must be active instruments. In his Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassichen Philosophie [5], Engels, in an attempt to safeguard the materialistic foundations of dialectical materialism, did not sufficiently stress the place and importance of this active practical element in the Marxian theory of knowledge. He accepted the crude formula of Feuerbach according to which sensations are images and copies (Abbilder and Spiegelbilder) of the external world without explaining how it is possible for ideas, if they are only reflections, to help transform or revolutionise things. Instead of taking sensations as the material clues to knowledge, he identifies knowledge with sensations, and defines truth as the agreement between these sensations and the external world. How human beings can escape the magic circle of their sensations, how they can determine whether their sensations correspond with the external world, how, in fact, they can know that there is an external world, becomes, on this hypothesis, a mystery.
True, Engels attempted to solve this mystery by appealing to experiment and practice. But since experiment, as he saw it, results in sensations which are again taken to be cases of immediate knowledge, Engels was no nearer a non-sensationalistic criterion of truth and existence than the modern followers of Hume, against whom he used the ‘argument from experiment’. In Marx the appeal to experiment and practice was legitimate, since as a close student of Hegel’s Phänomenologie des Geistes he had already discarded the belief in the immediacy of knowledge. He considered the chief contribution of German classical philosophy, as opposed to metaphysical materialism, to be its emphasis on the activity of mind and corrected its idealistic distortion.
In 1892, in the preface to the English edition of Socialism, Utopian and Scientific [6], Engels went back to Marx; he there takes a definitely experimentalist view in which his earlier theory of sensations is virtually abandoned. But the orthodox German socialists based themselves, in their theory of knowledge, neither on Marx nor on Engels’ final conclusions. They hardened into a systematic dogma the relative emphasis which Engels later abandoned. Their quotations are never from his last work. Instead of dialectical materialism, the materialism of the German socialists became sensationalist and mechanical, ignoring praxis.
And so the economics and philosophy of Social-Democracy became all of a piece with its politics. Only the revolutionary phrase remained as a foreign element in the new synthesis – an echo of the heroic days when Marx’s ideas were principles of action.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Rudolph Hilferding, Das Finanzkapital (Wien 1910), p. x, italics mine.
2. The position of Kautsky and other leaders of the Centre and Right was ambiguous and often contradictory. Not only did these contradictions crop up in theoretical writings but even in pamphlets devoted to questions of revolutionary politics. Kautsky, for example, could write in Der Weg zur Macht: ‘The socialist party is a revolutionary party but not a revolution-making party. We know that our goal can be attained only through revolution. We also know that it is just as little in our power to create this revolution as it is in the power of our opponents to prevent it. It is no part of our work to instigate a revolution or to prepare the way for it.’ (English translation by Simons, p. 50) [Karl Kautsky, The Road to Power – MIA] Later on Kautsky drifted more and more to the Right. In his criticism of the Gotha Programme, Marx had written: ‘Between capitalist and communist society lies the period of revolutionary transformation of one into the other. Corresponding to this there is a political transition period in which the state can be nothing else than the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.’ [Critique of the Gotha Programme – MIA] In 1922 Kautsky wrote: ‘Between the time of the pure bourgeois and the time of the pure proletarian democratically governed state lies a period of transformation of one into the other. Corresponding to this there is a political transition period in which the government as a rule will take the form of a coalition government.’ (Der Proletarische Revolution und ihre Programm (Stuttgart 1922), p. 196)
3. Karl Marx, Afterword to the Second German Edition, Capital, Volume 1. – MIA
4. Friedrich Engels to Karl Kautsky, 1 April 1895. – MIA
5. Friedrich Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy. – MIA
6. Friedrich Engels, Introduction to the English Edition, Socialism Utopian and Scientific. – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 28 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (XIII: Problems of Historical Materialism)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter XIII: Problems of Historical Materialism
A proper test of the claims of historical materialism could be made only by applying its propositions to the rich detail of politics, law, religion, philosophy, science and art. This would require not a chapter but an encyclopaedia. We must consequently restrict ourselves to a discussion of certain fundamental problems which arise in every field in which historical materialism is applied.
The upshot of the discussion will show that Marx’s historical method is organically connected with his revolutionary purpose and activity, that it does not attempt to explain all aspects of present and past social life but only those that have bearing upon the conditions, direction and technique of action involved in social change, that the explanations he does offer were never projected as final, and that the concept of causation which underlies the theory of historical materialism is practical and not theoretical.
For purposes of convenience the points around which the discussion will centre will be 1) the role of personality in history; 2) the larger question of objective chance and objective necessity which that particular problem suggests; 3) the importance of the admission of reciprocal influences between multiple factors; 4) the Marxian theory of the practical character of social causality which takes the place of a theory of measurement; and 5) the nature of historical intelligibility, that is, what it means to understand human behaviour in its historical aspect.
I: The Role of Personality in History: Because he opposed that ever-fashionable theory that all history is the biography of great men, Marx has been criticised for underestimating the significance of personality in history. His historical analyses, however, are full of brilliant characterisations of individuals, and in view of his constant emphasis upon the creative activity of man in history, it is a little hard to see why this notion should have arisen. Probably this is due to the all too common failure to distinguish between the contradictory of a proposition and its contrary, so that the two statements, ‘It is not the case that all history is the history of great men’, and ‘No history is the history of great men’, have been identified. But the chief reason for the misinterpretation, it seems to me, is that most of Marx’s disciples have actually agreed with his critics – not perhaps in so many words – but as far as the objective intent of their interpretation goes.
In terms of Marx’s philosophy of history it is easy to make short shrift of any conception such as Carlyle’s which sees in the development of civilisation nothing but the deeds of heroes and the thoughts of genius. We may begin with the crushing consideration that the very meaning of ‘greatness’ in social and political matters is not something fixed but is historically conditioned. Each society not only has its own economic organisation, its own law of population and its own art-styles; it has its own criterion of greatness. The saint of one age is the fool of another; the strong man of today may be the criminal of tomorrow. In politics and religion the ‘great man’ is the man who can get himself believed in. To get people to believe in him, he must in some way gratify or fulfil their need. The need and the possibilities of fulfilling it are often so patently present that no special endowment is required to mount from obscurity to renown. In such cases – and this is the stuff of which it is most often made – greatness is thrust upon a man; it is not achieved. A Charlemagne, a Mahomet, a George Washington or a Frederick II boasted the possession of no qualities so unique that other men could not have easily been found to lead the movements whose titular heads they were. Today the same can be said of Hitler or Gandhi. It is no exaggeration to maintain that if they had not been what they were, then, historically speaking, others would have been what they were. Now, if the stature of the great men of history were no higher than that of those enumerated, then we could hold that there would have been little appreciable difference in world history if they had never existed. Of all of them we could say as we can of Columbus: if he had not discovered America, someone else would have. ‘Every society’, writes Marx, ‘needs its great men, and if it does not find them it creates them, as Helvetius said.’ [1] Such men owe their greatness not to pre-eminent capacity but to historical necessity.
The crucial question, however, is whether all the great men of history are of this dimension. Could we say of Pericles, Caesar, Cromwell, Napoleon, Marx and Lenin what we have said of Mahomet or George Washington? Before we answer this question, let us turn to other fields where the relationship between individual greatness and social needs is a little different – the fields of science and art.
Looking at the history of science as a systematic organisation of knowledge (which, we are aware, is an abstraction but which we are justified in making for the purpose of analysis), can we say that if Archimedes, Galileo, Kepler, Newton, Clark Maxwell and Einstein had not lived, the history of science would have been substantially the same? He would be a rash man who would unqualifiedly assert it. Take Newton, from whom all the subsequent developments of science branch out. It is granted that he did not begin from the beginning, that many of his problems were common problems of his time, that neither his activity nor his results would have been possible without the existence of the permissive conditions of the society and politics of his day. But for that matter neither would his work have been possible without the permissive conditions of the weather, his own birth, and the existence of the world in general. There is no theoretical limit to the number of necessary conditions which had to be fulfilled before Newton could have achieved what he did. None the less all of these permissive or necessary conditions are irrelevant to the real problem at issue which is whether in the absence of Newton (supposing he had died of croup in childhood) his discoveries, which not only revolutionised theoretical science but profoundly influenced the development of industry and capitalism, would have been made by others. To retort that Leibnitz was the co-discoverer of the calculus and that no great scientific discovery has been made by one man is to reveal a pathetic inability to grasp the issue here. Any man who could have solved Newton’s problems had to be of the same intellectual stature as Newton. Let us grant, contrary to fact, that every one of Newton’s discoveries were independently made by other men. Let us assume that not only did Newton and Leibnitz discover the calculus independently of one another, but, for good measure, that two others did so too. The question at issue is whether if all of these four great men had not existed (a supposition not beyond the pale of probability), the calculus would have been invented anyhow. What possible evidence is available bearing upon this point? Only the fact that attempts had been made to solve certain problems of the circle and the cube from the time of Archimedes down, and that Galileo and Bernouilli puzzled over difficulties which involved functions. Loosely speaking, all we can say is that a scientific problem existed. And we can even grant that this and other problems were set, not only by the immanent development of mathematics and science, but by certain practical problems of warfare, industry and commerce. But by what mystical assurance can one assert that all these problems, no matter how and why they arose, must find solutions? This is not to suggest that any problem is insoluble or unknowable. It simply asserts that there is no logical, scientific or social necessity that every problem finds its solution. [2]
If it is true that the presence of great men has had an irreducibly significant influence upon the development of science, how much truer is it for the development of art and literature. Here, too, the social environment has provided both the opportunity and the materials for creation. In contradistinction, however, to the political illustrations considered above, society has not been able to bestow greatness but only to select it. Lacking a Shakespeare or a Goethe, mankind ‘would have been shorter by a head’. To object by saying that society ‘produced’ Shakespeare in one case, and Newton in another, is to use very confusing language. Unless it could be shown that the actual biological birth of Shakespeare was involved in the literary development of England in the sixteenth century, and the birth of Newton in the scientific development of the seventeenth, we cannot in any sense claim that these men were produced by their environments. But to assume such an organic connection between the realm of biology and the realm of society is on the face of it absurd. What ‘social’ or ‘literary’ necessity guided the union of the sperm and egg out of which the child Shakespeare was born? If Shakespeare hadn’t been born would someone else have been Shakespeare? Mystic connections of this sort can be asserted only by the philosophy of absolute idealism, not by dialectical materialism.
Men of art and science, it will be objected, no matter how great they may be, do not affect history. Very well, then, we return to the role of great personalities in social history and politics. Would the Russian Revolution have taken place in October 1917, if Lenin had died an exile in Switzerland? And if the Russian Revolution had not taken place when it did, would subsequent events in Russia have taken the same course? [3] Would the history of Europe have been different if Napoleon had lost his life in the first Italian campaign? If Cromwell early in his career had carried out his threat to sell his estate and quit the country, would the Roundheads have been victorious anyhow? If Sulla in addition to depriving Julius Caesar of his property and priesthood in 82 BC had not listened to the intercession of the Vestal Virgins and had proceeded with Caesar’s scheduled execution, would Rome have arisen to the heights of world empire? These questions cannot be answered dogmatically in the affirmative. They are ticklish problems and the historical evidence does not give determinate solutions. Instead of leaving those questions open to be decided by elaborate analysis of historical possibilities, most of the disciples of Marx have settled all the difficulties in advance by a rigid and mechanical application of historical materialism. We may begin with Engels:
That a certain particular man, and no other, emerges at a definite time in a given country is naturally pure chance. But even if we eliminate him, there is always a need for a substitute, and the substitute it found tant bien que mal; in the long run he is sure to be found. That Napoleon – this particular Corsican – should have been the military dictator made necessary by the exhausting wars of the French Republic – that was a matter of chance. But in default of a Napoleon, another would have filled his place; that is established by the fact that whenever a man was necessary he has always been found: Caesar, Augustus, Cromwell. [4]
Karl Kautsky, who has been called the ‘old war-horse of Marxian orthodoxy’, writes on the same theme:
Had it not been Cromwell or Napoleon, it would have been someone else. Due to the revolutionary origin of the armies which raised Cromwell and Napoleon to power, all the fighting instincts and capacities among the revolutionary sections of the population had been aroused, and at the same time a path was cleared to the highest places for those among the whole nation who were gifted in military matters. Everyone remembers the saying that every soldier of the revolutionary army carried a marshal’s baton in his knapsack. In this way there was built in the armies of the English and French republic a high-minded and superior corps of officers who would have easily selected another military dictator if Cromwell or Napoleon had not succeeded in coming to the top. [5]
Plekhanov [6], Cunow [7] and Bukharin [8], on this question, play the game of follow your master with amazing fidelity.
With all due respect, this position seems to me to be arrant nonsense. Its most intelligible expression would involve the abandonment of Marx’s naturalistic materialism and a surrender to idealistic mysticism. To argue that if Napoleon had not lived someone else and not he would have been Napoleon (that is, would have performed Napoleon’s work) and then to offer as evidence the fact that whenever a great man was necessary he has always been found, is logically infantile. For how do we know when a great man is needed by society? Surely not after he has arisen! The need for him must be antecedent to his appearance. But, then, did society need great men only at those periods when Caesar, Cromwell, Napoleon and others came to the fore? That would be like saying society needed great thinkers only when Aristotle, Aquinas, Kant, etc, lived. Would it not be truer to say that society always needs great men? Why then are not great men always at hand? Where was the great man at the time when the Tartar hordes overran Russia and arrested its development? Why did not a great man arise to unify India against foreign imperialism in the nineteenth century, and China in the twentieth? Where was the great leader hiding when Italy was objectively ready for revolution in 1921 and Germany in 1923? Was he not needed then? And granted that there was a need for a Napoleon, a Marx, a Lenin when they arose. What is the source of the assurance that that need had to be fulfilled, if not by these men, then by others fully as great as they? The pious Christian can fall back upon the will of God. But the militant revolutionist who permits the automatic, economic development of society to perform the same logical function in his system as the will of God in the system of the believer, has committed intellectual suicide. When, under pressure of the argument, he throws overboard the notion of the automatic development of society, he is logically compelled to surrender the notion that whenever a great man is necessary he must be found. There are no musts in history; there are only conditional probabilities.
Marx’s own view is more sober and Engels on other occasions was faithful to it. We shall discuss it in conjunction with the larger problem of the role of chance in history.
II: Chance in History: In a previous chapter we have examined and rejected the theory of wholesale chance in history. But to go from the denial that ‘not all history is a chance affair’ to the statement that ‘there are no chance elements in history’ is an altogether different matter. That is precisely what some Marxist historians have done. Pokrovsky, for example, in his History of Russia [9] states that ‘to appeal to chance in history is to exhibit a certificate of poverty’. In this simple way of disposing of the problem, he is at one with most bourgeois historians who have neglected the dialectical approach to the question of law and chance in history.
What is a chance event? This is both a metaphysical question and an historical question. Here we are only concerned with chance events in history. A chance event, first of all, is not merely an event of which we are ignorant. For a great many events of which we are ignorant may turn out to be historically determined. At one time we were ignorant of the causes of the First Crusade and translated that ignorance into the phrase un fait écclesiastique. That did not make the Crusades a chance event; an historian with proper knowledge of the social and economic history of Europe in the latter half of the eleventh century need not have invoked chance or the will of God in his account.
Nor is a chance event in history one that is uncaused. Whether all events, of whatever nature, have a cause, is a question outside of the province of the historian. His problem is whether all events which have historical effects have themselves historical causes. An earthquake is a natural event which has definite geological causes. It has, however, definite historical effects. An historian treating of the socio-economic development of a country would have to regard the occurrence of the earthquake as a chance event. Why? Because he could not deduce or explain its happenings on the basis of any of the historical and social material available to him. The causes of the earthquake are historically irrelevant; its effects are not, for the social consequences of an earthquake will be different in one economic situation from what it will be in another. A chance event in history is one which although it has historical consequences has no historical causes. The historian could no more predict an earthquake on the basis of historical data than the geologist could predict the social consequences of an earthquake on the basis of his geological laws alone.
Not all events which have historical effects are easily classifiable into those whose causes are purely physical or biological and those whose causes are purely social. The continued dependence of the relations of production upon the supply of natural raw materials, etc, preclude the possibility of drawing hard and fast divisions. But they do not exonerate the historian from trying to evaluate the degree of chance which is operating; and distinguishing chance events, whose effects and causes are historically irrelevant, from those chance events whose causes are historically irrelevant but whose effects are not. Marx, in a famous letter, pointed out the sense in which objective chance was present in history, and what the consequences were of denying it:
World history would indeed be a very easy thing to make were the struggle to be carried on only under conditions of unfailingly favourable chances. Its nature would have to be of a very mystical kind if ‘accidents’ played no role. These accidents naturally fall within the general path of development and are compensated by other accidents. But the acceleration and retardation of events are very largely dependent upon such ‘accidents’ among which must be reckoned the character of the people who stand at the head of the movement. [10]
Marx does not mean to suggest that the character of any leader is uncaused and that a biologist and psychologist could not offer a perfectly satisfactory explanation of its nature. He merely points to the fact that something, which the historian cannot altogether explain, may have a decisive influence upon a great historical event. It is in this way that Marx propounds the solution of the specific problem from which we started. The presence of a great man means the presence of great historical effects. Vide Marx himself. But is the presence of a great man the effect of an historical cause? Only partly. His biological endowment, from the historical point of view, is a matter of chance. The specific cultural expression of it is not. World history is the resultant effect of two relatively independent series of phenomena – the biological (or the physical as the case may be) and the socio-political in which the latter is more decisive because it supplies the content and materials of personal expression.
What does Marx mean by the statement that world history would have to be of a ‘mystical’ character were there no chance events? He means that, once chance were ruled out, all causal connections which were involved in an historical event, whether they were physical or biological, would have to be regarded as organically related in one meaningful historical whole. It would mean that if anything were different in this whole, everything would be different; that the particular conjunctions of series of events, no matter how trivial, are necessary, and could be deduced, if we had sufficient knowledge, before they actually occurred in time. This could only be true if the world were either one absolute totality outside of time, as Hegel conceived it to be, or one great complex machine in which all parts were given at once, as the metaphysical mechanists assumed. Both views are equally fatalistic and share the same theological prepossessions.
III: Historical Reciprocity: Once it is recognised that all historical events have chance aspects, which in most cases may be safely disregarded, the way is cleared for a consideration of the related problem of the reciprocal interaction between social factors. No process can ever be explained in terms of one factor. For all activity whether it be of man or nature presupposes some material to be acted upon. The character of both the activity and the material must be reflected in the resultant effect. Where the activity continues to be the same and the materials differ, differences in the result will be attributed, for all practical purposes, to the causal influence of the material; where the material is the same and the activities are different, differences in the result will be explained by differences in the nature of the activity. Now in a large sense, history in the making, that is, in the rich qualitative immediacy of the present, is a resultant product of one material and of one activity. That material is the whole complex of tradition and institutions which each generation finds at hand; the activity is the pursuit of ideals, conditioned by the traditional civilisation – an activity which results in changing those conditions. Closer analysis, however, shows that neither the material of history nor historical activity is one; the material has many aspects, the activity, many forms. It is the same civilisation which expresses itself in its architecture as in its songs, but a history of song is not a history of architecture, although there may be points of contact; the quest for truth in a laboratory and the quest for empire are both historical activities – but chemistry is not military strategy although they may, of course, be related.
The explanation of any specific situation, then, demands some conception of what is relevant and what is irrelevant to it. If all the material aspects of history and all forms of historical activity were related to every situation, then the explanation of one situation would be identically the same with the explanation of any other. Indeed, there would be no way of distinguishing one situation from another. The problem then is to discover what is relevant and what is irrelevant to any cultural phenomena to be explained. Just as it is possible to admit that the whole history of the solar system is involved in the existence of any individual on earth, and yet rule out the internal constitution of the sun as irrelevant in analysing the personality of John Smith (or for that matter even his anatomy), so it is possible to admit that the mode of economic production is involved in every cultural fact, and rule it out as irrelevant in an analysis of a specific work of art. In a total explanation, it would be relevant; but no one is interested in total explanations, and it is questionable whether the phrase has a meaning.
The problem of cultural reciprocity must be recognised by anyone who realises two things. First, that historical activity which includes all forms of social effort, although it arises from the conditioning social environment, reacts upon it in some concrete way. And second, that the different forms of historical activity – scientific, legal, artistic – will often influence one another by reacting upon their common social conditions. For example, a new invention in building materials, adopted as profitable, may give rise to a mass housing project and influence architectural style; the aeroplane made possible commercial airways which, in turn, necessitated new legal developments. The refusal or inability of some Marxists to do justice to cultural phenomena of this kind led hostile critics to maintain that historical materialism suffered from a primitive monism according to which all efficient causes in history were material, never ideal. Before he died, Engels was compelled to take the field against them:
The political, legal, philosophical, religious, literary and artistic development rests upon the economic. But they all react upon one another and upon the economic base. It is not the case that the economic situation is the sole active cause and everything else only a passive effect. There is a reciprocal interaction within a fundamental economic necessity which in the last instance always asserts itself. [11]
According to the materialistic conception of history, the production and reproduction of real life constitutes in the last instance the determining factor of history. Neither Marx nor I ever maintained more. Now, when someone comes along and distorts this to mean that the economic factor is the sole determining factor, he is converting the former proposition into a meaningless, abstract and absurd phrase. The economic situation is the basis. But the various factors of the superstructure – the political forms of the class struggles and their results, that is, constitutions, etc, established by victorious classes after hard-won battles, legal forms, and even the reflexes of all these real struggles in the brain of the participants, political, jural, philosophical theories, religious conceptions which have been developed into systematic dogmas – all these exercise an influence upon the course of historical struggles, and in many cases determine for the most part their form. There is a reciprocity between all these factors in which, finally, through the endless array of contingencies (that is, of things and events whose inner connection with one another is so remote, or so incapable of proof, that we may neglect it, regarding it as non-existent) the economic movement asserts itself as necessary. Were this not the case the application of the theory to any given historical period would be easier than the solution of a simple equation of the first degree. [12]
What all these fellows lack is dialectic. They see only cause here, only effect there. They do not at all see that this method of viewing things results in bare abstractions; that in the real world such metaphysical polar opposites exist only in crucial situations; that the whole great process develops itself in the form of reciprocal action, of very unequal forces to be sure, but in which the economic movement is far and away the strongest, most primary and decisive. They do not see that here nothing is absolute and everything relative. For them, Hegel has never existed. [13]
IV: The Marxian Theory of Social Causation: In all of the foregoing citations the phrase, ‘in the last instance’, is crucial. It is synonymous with the expressions, ‘the real basis of society’ and ‘the most decisive factor’. When it is declared that the mode of economic production is any one of these things, the natural question to ask is: What do these expressions mean and how can we test the truth of what they assert?
Whenever anything is characterised as in the last instance determining something else, it must be borne in mind that a certain point of view is involved from which the analysis is projected. The meaning of ‘in the last instance’ (or ‘in the last analysis’) is not something absolutely given and fixed for every point of departure. It depends rather upon the position we want to prove. And where social activity is involved, it depends upon the practical interest which lies at the heart of that position. Real and decisive in this connection are, also, relative to a contemplated programme of activity, and can only be tested in that activity. It is here that the direct connection lies between Marxism as the theory and practice of social revolution in the era of capitalism, and historical materialism as a theory of social change. What justifies Marx and Engels in holding that the mode of economic production is the decisive factor in social life is the revolutionary will of the proletariat which is prepared to act upon that assumption. It is a will strengthened by knowledge of the limiting conditions which affect the success of their effort. But it is the revolutionary act containing both the risk of failure and the promise of success which is essential not only to social advance but, at times, even to the acquisition of social knowledge. It is as necessary as any or all of the other limiting conditions. It is this faith in action which makes of Marxism a critical hypothesis, instead of a dead dogma or a romantic myth. It is only because we want to change the economic structure of society that we look for evidence of the fact that in the past, economic change has had a profound effect upon all social and cultural life. Because we want to change the economic structure of society, we assert that this evidence from the past together with our revolutionary act in the present constitutes a sufficient cause for believing that the general proposition, ‘in the last instance the mode of economic production determines the general character of social life’, will be true in the near future. In other words, the test of the truth of historical judgements about the past is to be sought in the concrete historical activities of the present, and their future results.
The real test of causal connection in the social realm – whatever may be the case for physics – is human activity. It is only in so far as we can produce things, or bring certain situations to pass, that we can conquer the well-known Humean difficulties about causation. What we want to produce, and when we want to produce it, cannot be derived from the general want or desire to action; for they are socially conditioned. But neither can the wanting or desiring be deduced from the actual or possible objects of desire; for human activity is an irreducible constituent of the social process. By its action it does not make or create laws but it helps to realise the conditions under which one of several possible types of causal connection operates.
Engels generalises this practical conception of causality to hold even for the natural world:
The first thing that strikes us when we consider matter in motion is the connection between the individual motions of individual bodies with one another, their mutually conditioned character. However, not only do we find that one motion follows another, but that we can produce a certain motion by establishing the conditions under which it occurs in nature. Indeed, we can even produce movements which do not take place in nature at all (industry), or at least not in the same manner, and we find that these movements can be given a definite direction in advance. In this way, through the activity of man is grounded the idea of causality – the idea that one movement is the cause of another. The regular succession of certain natural phenomena can indeed give rise to the idea of causality: for example, the light and heat associated with the sun. But this succession constitutes no proof and thus far Humean-scepticism is justified in saying that the regularities of post hoc (after this) will never prove propter hoc (because of this). It is only through the activity of man that the test of causality can be made. [14]
It is the practical reliability of causal connection which concerns man and not its rational necessity. Whoever responds that the reliability of causal connection upon which our action depends, and in social situations which our action helps to enforce, is itself conditioned by antecedent necessities in the nature of things, is converting probabilities into unverifiable certainties. This question is involved with the most fundamental problem of metaphysics and logic that one can raise, to wit, what does it mean to understand anything, what is the criterion of an intelligible explanation. The three great canons of intelligibility have been derived from the fields of geometry, psychology and history. Their explanatory categories have been, respectively, logical necessity, psychological plausibility, and successful action. For Marx and for those of his followers who have been faithful to his revolutionary ideal, it is history and action that are the matrix of intelligibility. There are some things that cannot be established as true merely by argument. ‘But before human beings argued’, wrote Engels, ‘they acted. Im Anfang war die That.’ [15]
To understand is to act. To act successfully means to construct.
V: The Nature of Historic Intelligibility: If practice and successful action are criteria of intelligibility, then critical intelligence may be defined as an awareness of the technique, procedures and instruments involved in all directed activity. There is no directed activity outside of the realm of history. All genuine problems become problems of ways and means, and although there is no assurance that they can be solved, the necessary conditions of their solutions are already known. With this approach the whole of life becomes secularised. Only difficulties remain, but no mysteries. For whenever we are confronted with a mystery, we have not yet become conscious of the rationale of our technique, we have not yet realised what we are doing:
All social life is essentially practical. All mysteries which cause theories to turn to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and in the awareness [Begreifen] of this practice. [16]
In so far as science is a part of human activity, Marx’s gloss holds true of all of its many ‘mysteries’ which have so often occasioned flights to theology and superstition. For science, too, is a practical affair. Not in a vulgar commercial sense but in that it involves, at crucial points, a changing and arranging of material things. When one looks for a solution of the many ‘mysteries’ (as distinct from the difficulties) which have multiplied with the contemporary analysis of the structure of the atom, resort must always be to the techniques by which certain empirical effects have been observed, to the apparatus and presuppositions of measurement, and to the methods of interpretation. From this standpoint it becomes forever impossible to bootleg transcendental and religious moonshine à la Eddington, Jeans, Millikan, et al., into the equations of mathematical physics.
In social and political life, it is more obvious that what is declared to be ‘inexplicable’ or ‘mysterious’, such as the source of moral and political obligation, or the origin of profit, is to be explained in terms of the actual way in which human beings behave. The task of the revolutionary philosopher is to bring social classes to an awareness of what it is they are doing and of the historical conditions of their activity. When a class attains consciousness of what it is doing, of the role it plays in production, it discovers the secret of the whole society of which it is a part. It can now understand itself and not wait for some future historian to distinguish between the real meaning of its acts and the fancied meanings which were the pretexts or excuses for action. Its ideology becomes a realistic philosophy. Because it understands itself, it is free. But full understanding and social freedom can come only after classes have been abolished. For only then will the fundamental dualism between social ideas and social conduct disappear:
The life process of society, which is based upon the process of material production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as a production by freely associated men, and is consciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. [17]
It is dangerous to close on the paradox that the history of class society can never be fully understood except in retrospect, and that only the history of classless society, because it is freely made, can receive complete rational explanation. It is dangerous because it suggests that the human freedom of the future will not be bound or conditioned at all. The truth is, however, that the very possibility of human history, and the range within which human history can be made, will always be conditioned by natural necessities in whose existence man can have but a minor part. Man’s freedom will lie in the conscious choice of one of the many possible careers set for him. That choice will be a unique and irreducible expression of his own nature. Marx, himself, puts this in a passage in Capital as follows:
The freedom in this field cannot consist of anything else but the fact that socialised man, the associated producers, regulate their interchange with nature rationally, bring it under their human control, instead of being ruled by it as some blind power; that they accomplish their task with the least expenditure of energy and under conditions most adequate to their human nature and most worthy of it. But it always remains a realm of necessity. Beyond it begins that development of human power, which is its own end, the true realm of freedom, which, however, can flourish only upon that realm of necessity as its basis. [18]
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Klassenkämpfe im Frankreich, p. 69 [Karl Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. – MIA
2. If it be claimed that a problem clearly stated is a problem implicitly solved, then what the above means is that there is no cosmic or social necessity that the problem be explicitly solved.
3. Compare Trotsky’s interesting discussion of this problem and his ambiguous answer: History of the Russian Revolution (English translation, Volume 1, pp. 329–30) [L.D. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, Chapter XVI – MIA
4. From his Letter to Bloch, cf. Appendix, italics mine. [Friedrich Engels to J. Bloch, 21 September 1890. – MIA
5. Karl Kautsky, Die Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung, Volume 2 (Berlin 1929), p. 703.
6. G.V. Plekhanov, Fundamental Problems of Marxism (New York 1925), pp. 68ff. [available at here. – MIA
7. H. Cunow, Die Marxche Geschichts-Gesellschafts-und-Staats-Theorie: Grundzüge der Marxschen Soziologie, Band II (Berlin 1923), p. 220.
8. N.I. Bukharin, Historical Materialism (New York 1925), p. 97. &dash MIA
9. Mikhail Pokrovsky, A Brief History of Russia, Volume 1 (New York 1933).
10. To Ludwig Kugelmann on the Paris Commune, 12 April 1871 [Karl Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, actual date 17 April 1871. – MIA
11. From Letter to Hans Starkenberg, cf. Appendix [actually Friedrich Engels to W. Borgius, 25 January 1894. – MIA
12. From his Letter to Bloch, cf. Appendix. [Friedrich Engels to J. Bloch, 21 September 1890. – MIA]
13. From Letter to Schmidt. [Friedrich Engels to Conrad Schmidt, 27 October 1890. – MIA
14. Dialektik und Natur, Marx-Engels Archiv, Band II, p. 164. [Friedrich Engels, Dialectics of Nature. – MIA
15. Friedrich Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific. – MIA
16. Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abteilung I, Band V, p. 535 [Karl Marx, Theses on Feuerbach. – MIA
17. Marx, Capital, Volume 1 (English translation, all references are to the Kerr edition), p. 92 [available here. – MIA
18. Marx, Capital, Volume 3 (English translation), p. 954 [available here. – MIA
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 26 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (VII: Lenin: The Return to Marx and Forward)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter VII: Lenin: The Return to Marx and Forward
Even before Sorel had elaborated his syndicalist philosophy, a counter-tendency to the official Social-Democratic reformism had made itself felt from another quarter. In Germany this tendency was represented by Rosa Luxemburg, in Russia by Ulianov-Lenin. It was free from anti-intellectual demagogy and yet quite sensitive to every manifestation of revolutionary sentiment among the masses. Its interpretation of Marx differed as much from Sorel’s as it did from Bernstein’s. It reproached the syndicalists for overlooking the fact that every class struggle is a political struggle, for their refusal to make revolutionary use of parliamentary activity, and for their fetishism of violence. It criticised even more severely the supine parliamentarianism of the socialist parties, their naive conception that every parliamentary debate was a class struggle, and their fetishism of non-violence.
As early as 1901 Lenin had taken the field against that variety of economism in Russia – ostensibly Marxian – which declared that the daily economic struggle must be left to produce simultaneously its own political activity and political leadership. As ‘tail-enders’ [1] they held that to attribute to a political ideology any directive power upon mass movements was inconsistent with the theory of historical materialism. The political consciousness of a country can be no riper than its economic development. Arguing against this underestimation of revolutionary intelligence, Lenin writes:
They fail to understand that an ideologist is worthy of that name only when he marches ahead of the spontaneous movement, points out the real road, and when he is able ahead of all others to solve all the theoretical, political and tactical questions which the ‘material elements’ of the movement spontaneously encounter... It is necessary to be critical of it [the movement], to point out its dangers and defects, and aspire to elevate spontaneity to consciousness. To say that ideologists cannot divert the movement created by the interaction of environment and elements from its path is to ignore the elementary truth that consciousness participates in this interaction and creation. [2]
In a similar vein, but not so clearly by far, after the experiences of the Russian Revolution of 1905 Rosa Luxemburg wrote in her Massenstreik, Partei und Gewerkschaften:
... the task of the Social-Democracy consists not only in the technical preparation and guidance of these strikes but, above all, in the political guidance of the entire movement. The Social-Democracy is the most enlightened, the most class-conscious vanguard of the proletariat. It cannot and must not wait with folded hands fatalistically for the appearance of the ‘revolutionary situation’ – wait until that spontaneous people’s movement may descend from heaven. On the contrary, in this case, as in all others, it must keep ahead of the development of things and seek to accelerate this development. [3]
The consciousness to which Lenin and Luxemburg appealed was not mystic intuition but scientific knowledge. But scientific knowledge was not merely a disinterested report of objective tendencies in the economic world but a critical appreciation of the possibilities of political action liberated by such knowledge. The spontaneity which the syndicalists exalted at the cost of reflection was not enough. Unless a militant ideology or theory directed that spontaneous will, its energies would run out in sporadic and futile strike tactics. The proper direction of the labour movement implied the existence of a special class of professional revolutionists – a part of that movement and yet distinct in function – to make whatever spontaneity arose more effective. Marx was such a professional revolutionist. It was the height of absurdity on the part of those who sought to be orthodox to expect the course of economic development automatically to produce socialism. It could only produce by its own immanent movement the presuppositions of socialism. Power is bestowed neither by God nor the economic process. It must be taken. When Marx spoke of communism as being a result of a ‘social necessity’, he was referring to the resultant of a whole social process, one of whose components was the development of objective economic conditions, the other, the assertion of a revolutionary class will. The task of a political party of professional revolutionists was to mediate these two interacting factors, to act as both vanguard and general staff of the revolutionary class struggle. The class struggle was not a simple, causal function of the tempo of economic development. That would mean fatalism. Economic forces and revolutionary organisation, Lenin insisted, are not related to one another as mechanical cause and effect but are independent components of a dialectical whole – a dialectical whole being one which is continuously developing and whose parts are interacting with one another. To minimise the efficacy of the revolutionary idea which anticipates in present action the future direction of things on the basis of what they were and what we, as conscious willing beings, are, is to fall a victim to a bourgeois ideology. [4] Far from being Marxian it epitomises all the policies of drift, compromise and caprice against which Marx waged war to the end.
Primitive economism has not reflected upon the real goal of the working-class movement. It has consequently confused means and ends. In so doing it has adopted the same passive attitude as the revisionists to the revolutionary class struggle. Theoretically the anarcho-syndicalist left and reformist-socialist right join hands. ‘That struggle is desirable which is possible, and the struggle which is possible is the one going on now’, wrote the Rabochaya Mysl, the organ of economism, in words which sounded quite similar to those of the ‘legal’ Marxists, the Russian variant of revisionism.
It was Rosa Luxemburg who delivered the classic attack against revisionism from the standpoint of dialectical Marxism. The attack was at the same time an implied indictment of the official doctrinal orthodoxy. She began her famous pamphlet, Reform oder Revolution, by pointing out that there was a shadow of justification for Bernstein’s refusal to take the professed goal of the socialist movement seriously. For after all how was that goal conceived by the ‘orthodox’? Generally as an economic collectivism of indeterminate organisational structure, with all sorts of features added by the private conceits of those who drew the picture. What organic connection, indeed, could exist between such Utopian constructions and the exigencies of the daily class struggle! No wonder that Bernstein confessed that the goal was nothing, the movement everything. The trouble was that both Bernstein and those who opposed him shared the same mistaken premise about the goal of the proletarian movement. That goal was not the organisation of a socialist commonwealth (whose problems could only be intelligently met when they arose) but the conquest of political power. Like Lenin she held that only the presuppositions of socialism are automatically generated by the processes of capitalist production. The active seizure of power, however, which in a revolutionary crisis would put the working class at the helm of state, depended primarily upon political intelligence, will and organisation. The revolutionary dictatorship of the working class, ruling in the transition period from capitalism to socialism – only that could be the realistic goal of the movement. Here was an end which was organically related to the means used in the daily struggle. The ends must be recognised in the choice and character of the means employed. And there could no longer be any serious dispute about the means; they could not be of a kind that hindered the fulfilment of the end. [5]
The consequence of this shift of emphasis from a future state of society to a present struggle for power was impressive and far reaching. At one stroke it cut the roots from under those who believed in a Kompensationspolitik. There had been Social-Democratic deputies who had been willing, as one reformist declared, ‘to vote appropriations for cannon in exchange for the people’s electoral rights’. And if the goal of the movement was socialism, regarded as an immanent phase of the economic development, there could be no objection to this exchange in principle. No matter how many cannon the Kaiser’s army had, no matter how strong the existing state was, it could do nothing against the inevitable march of events. Why the same logic did not militate against the demand for electoral reform was a mystery. But the suicidal character of such horse-trading tactics was not a mystery when, instead of the nebulous goal of socialism, there was substituted for it the conquest of political power and the dictatorship of the proletariat. If the state had to be captured, it was sheer insanity to begin by strengthening it.
The logic of the dilemma which Luxemburg and Lenin hurled at the official Social-Democracy was clear. If practical reforms are the be-all and end-all of the movement, emphasis upon the goal conceived as the conquest of political power is bound to get in the way. When such emphasis is taken as something more than poetic myth, it becomes an irrelevant intrusion into the specific tasks in hand. One cannot significantly relate a struggle, say, for a two cent per hour increase in wages or a Saturday half-holiday with the conquest of political power. Bernstein was right in claiming that he had given theoretical expression to the reformist practices of German Social-Democracy. If, on the other hand, the goal is the conquest of political power, reforms are to be regarded as the by-products of the class struggle. Immediate demands are not thereby stricken from the programme – this was one of the errors of Daniel de Leon, the most orthodox of American Marxists – but are made the springboards of political agitation. No issue then could be too small if it served to intensify the class struggle. But every class struggle must be regarded as potentially a political struggle. It is directed not only towards improving the condition of the masses – which is important enough – but towards wresting control of the state from the hands of the dominant class.
The work of Luxemburg and Lenin marked, so to speak, the beginning of the Marxian reformation. [6] The texts of Marx and Engels were to be read in the light of the original spirit behind them. In refusing to be ‘orthodox’ at any price, Luxemburg and Lenin claimed to be more faithful to the ideas and methods of the men who originally inspired that orthodoxy than the formula-ridden pedants who anathematised them as heretics. The course of events has contributed to bringing these two Marxian interpretations into sharp opposition. One group was responsible for the German Republic; the other for the Russian Revolution. So wide did the rift grow that it became possible for the leaders of the first group to boast that they saved Western civilisation from the chaos and barbarism advocated by the second; and for the leaders of the second to denounce the first as apostates to the cause of the working classes.
Historical accuracy demands, before we close this chapter, that we indicate some of the important differences which, for all their common opposition to Marxian orthodoxy, separated Lenin and Luxemburg. Lenin drew the proper logical conclusions from his rejection of the theory of spontaneity in so far as they bore upon the question of organisation. If the political party was to be the vanguard in the struggle for social revolution, it could not risk compromising its leadership by destroying its own organisational autonomy in relation to either the trade unions or the proletariat as a whole. Luxemburg demanded a form of organisation which would more democratically reflect the masses outside of the party. This was a justified claim in so far as it was directed against the bureaucracy of the German party which not only lagged behind the radical sentiments of its members and working-class sympathisers but acted as a brake on their movement towards a more revolutionary position. It was unjustified, however, in so far as it was universalised to hold for all countries, especially Russia, where such a form of organisation would involve the danger that the party might be taken in tow by unripe elements. Similarly, in her opposition to any alliance between the workers and the peasants in a revolutionary dictatorship, and in her slighting of the national question (for example, in her belief that in the era of monopoly imperialism national wars were no longer possible) there was revealed a too great reliance upon the theory of mechanical spontaneity. Perhaps her most significant difference from Lenin flowed from her analysis of imperialism. In her Akkumulation des Kapitals [7] she contended that, with the exhaustion of the home market, capitalism must stride from one colonial country to another and that capitalism could only survive so long as such countries were available. As soon as the world would be partitioned among the imperialist powers and industrialised, the international revolution would of necessity break out, since capitalism cannot expand its productive forces and continue the process of accumulation indefinitely in any relatively isolated commodity-producing society, no matter how large.
Lenin denied that capitalism would ever collapse in any such mechanical fashion. Whoever believed that capitalism, no matter how severe its crisis, had no way out, was being victimised by the fatalistic pseudo-science of orthodox German Social-Democracy. Without an international organised revolution, capitalism would never collapse unless it pulled the whole of civilisation down with it in bloody war:
Above all we must point out two widely-spread errors. On the one hand bourgeois economists represent this crisis simply as a ‘maladjustment’, as the elegant expression of the Englishman has it. On the other, revolutionists attempt to prove that there is absolutely no way out of the crisis. That is an error. There do not exist any positions from which there is absolutely no way out. [8]
Peculiarly enough Lenin overlooks the incompatibility between his political activism and its underlying dynamic philosophy of interaction as expressed in What Is To Be Done?, and the mechanical correspondence theory of knowledge – defended so vehemently by him in his Materialism and Empirio-Criticism. Here he follows Engels word for word in the statement that ‘sensations are copies, photographs, images and mirror-reflections of things’, [9] and that the mind is not active in knowing. He seems to believe that if one holds: 1) that mind enters as an active factor in knowing, conditioned by the nervous system and all of past history, then it follows that one must believe; 2) that mind creates all of existence including its own brain. This is the rankest idealism and idealism means religion and God. But the step from proposition 1) to 2) is the most glaring non sequitur imaginable. As a matter of fact, in the interests of his conception of Marxism as the theory and practice of social revolution Lenin must admit that knowledge is an active affair, a process in which there is an interaction of matter, culture and mind, and that sensation is not knowledge but part of the materials with which knowledge works. This is the position that Marx took in his glosses on Feuerbach and in his Deutsche Ideologie. Whoever believes that sensations are literal copies of the external world, and that of themselves they give knowledge, cannot escape fatalism and mechanism. In Lenin’s political and non-technical writings there is no trace of this dualistic Lockean epistemology; as we have seen above, his What Is To Be Done? contains a frank acceptance of the active role of class consciousness in the social process. It is in these practical writings in which Lenin concerns himself with the concrete problems of agitation, revolution and reconstruction, that his true philosophy is to be found.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Tail-enders were those who believed that the political struggle is an automatic reflection of economic development, that a political party should follow, not lead, a mass movement.
2. A Conversation with Defenders of Economism, Works, Volume 4, English translation, p. 67 [V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Volume 5, available here. – MIA]
3. Rosa Luxemburg, The Mass Strike. – MIA
4. ‘What Is To Be Done?’, Works, Volume 4, p 121 [VI Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Volume 5. – MIA
5. The organic unity of means and ends was a part of dialectical materialism. The proper analysis of the relation, distorted of course by an idealistic ontology, had already been made by Hegel (Encyclopädie, Section 212; Wissenschaft der Logik, Volume 2 (Lasson edition), p. 344), whom the Social-Democratic theoreticians, with the exception of Plekhanov, Lenin and their circles, ignored.
6. This figure of speech is merely a development of the metaphor which Engels himself used when he referred to Marx’s Capital as the Bible of the international working class. Cf. one of his reviews of Marx’s Capital, reprinted in Marx-Engels Archiv, Band II, p 445; Engels’ preface to the English translation, Volume 1 (Kerr edition), p. 30. [see here. – MIA
7. Rosa Luxemburg, The Accumulation of Capital, available here. – MIA.
8. An address delivered before the Second Congress of the Communist International, 1920, Works, Volume 25 (German edition), p. 420. [V.I. Lenin, Report on the International Situation and the Fundamental Tasks of the Communist International, Collected Works, Volume 20. – MIA]
9. Works, Volume 13 (English translation), p. 195 [V.I. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Collected Works, Volume 14. – MIA]
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 28 February 2020


 Hook: Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (II: On Historical Understanding)


Hook Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Understanding of Karl Marx

Sidney Hook
Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx
* * *
Chapter II: On Historical Understanding
The system of thought associated with Karl Marx, and which is loosely designated as Marxian, differs from all other social theories and methodologies in that it is the fighting philosophy of the greatest mass movement that has swept Europe since the rise of Christianity. [1] It cannot be neatly cut from its highly-charged historical context and examined exclusively in the light of its verbal consistencies. For it is not an armchair philosophy of retrospection, but a philosophy of social action; more specifically, a theory of social revolution. Developed in the course of a lifetime of social action on the battlefield of the class struggle, it bears evidence of the occasions which provoked it and the purposes which directed it. Marx began his adult life as a revolutionist, fought like one and was exiled in consequence of being one. And although he died of the effects of eating dust for so many years in the British Museum, during those years he never lost touch with the daily struggle of the working classes throughout the world. He had participated in the fighting of 1848, but his own best weapons were the weapons of dialectical criticism.
Not only were Marx’s doctrines developed in the course of the social struggles and experiences of his own lifetime; after his death they were taken up by others in the continuation of that struggle. A whole movement sprang into existence with Marxian slogans and arguments. More accurately, the existing working-class movement in Germany became in name, if not in fact, Marxian. This movement had a life greater than any member within it and a task to perform unique in the history of social revolt, viz, consciously to develop a philosophy which would aid it in winning its battles. This task demanded not a set of petrified dogmas but a revolutionary flexibility in theory and practice. There soon developed a literature, tradition and mode of analysis directly inspired by the writings and personality of Marx. The dangers of doctrinal orthodoxy in the early years, before the German Social-Democracy had won a free field for action, were not great. Marx was alive to guide it. Its problems were his problems. And after his death, Engels acted as its official mentor. But before many years had passed, the movement was confronted by new specific tasks and problems. They flowed naturally from the altered conditions – social, technical, national and psychological – which the expansion of industrial capitalism brought with it in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Active response to changed conditions was immediate, for no movement can live without flexible readjustment to a shifting milieu. Things were done first to meet the demands of the moment and justified later. The interpretation of the causes and consequences of such action was formulated in Marxian terms. No programme of action was so foreign that it could not be brought under Marxian formulas; no declaration of policy or principles so recondite that it could not be supported by some text.
What happened was merely this. Confronted by new conditions which generated new tasks and new conceptions of those tasks, followers of Marx decided upon the reasonable thing to do and defended it as the orthodox Marxian method of doing it. But what determines the policies which men, confronted by a common problem, regard as ‘reasonable'? When it is not a question of the logical fitness of means to ends, the ‘reasonable’ policy is derived ultimately from something they wish to do. That is to say, their purposes and values are logically, if not psychologically, prior to their immediate programme of action. It was natural, then, that with the development of different aims and purposes there should arise different interpretations of Marx. In almost every European country successive generations brought forth new attitudes and perspectives. Some few men like Bernstein in Germany, Sorel in France, and Struve in Russia developed within the span of their own lifetime conflicting conceptions of the nature of Marxism. Nor must it be imagined that all of these interpretations were unusually artificial or far-fetched. The very individuals who combated them in the name of orthodoxy, fell back upon a conception of Marx which was itself a selected portraiture, one which possessed many of the defects of the views opposed and few of their virtues. The defects were a failure to consider all the available texts and contexts, to evaluate their relative weight, to distinguish between the method employed and the tentative character of the results won by the use of that method, and most important of all, an inability to grasp the central importance of Marx’s class bias. The virtues were an openly avowed flexible policy to the passing events of the day, an attempt to steer a straight course in the new currents of science and philosophy, and a refusal to regard fundamental theoretical issues as finally closed.
These conflicting doctrinal interpretations of Marxism were not mere variations on one intellectual theme. There were different patterns of social response projected by different groups in a struggle to dominate the socio-economic scene. They were ways of making history, innocently paraded as methods of reading it. They told more about the orientation of these groups to the living issues which agitated them than they did about Marx.
Significantly enough, the history of Marxian interpretation offers a curious confirmation of the Marxian criticism of all cultural ideology: different social classes react differently to the same social object. These differences express themselves first, in disparate emphases of interpretation, then, in conflicting evaluation, and ultimately, in opposite modes of social action. Their class point of view becomes an objectified part of what they are trying to understand. But if this be so, one asks in irritated bewilderment, what is the common subject-matter of all these interpretations? What is the objective historical reference of these varying interpretations, and is objective truth about such reference possible?
Before we despair of attaining objective truth about social questions, which are of necessity viewed differently by different social classes, let us pause for a moment to point out that this situation has its logical analogue in the predicament historians find themselves whenever they seek to offer a definitive explanation of an historical event. It is a methodological commonplace today that the history of man is not something that can be automatically read off from a chronological record. It involves interpretation, selection and construction. Its criteria of what is probable and relevant are ultimately drawn from the present. [2] The consequences of this commonplace, however, are startling. For as we go from one period to another, interpretations of the past are altered. The meaning of the past seems to be a moving shadow of the wider experiences and purposes of the present. Not only is this true of events which do not carry their meaning upon their face; it is just as true of the thought of men who have left a corpus of writings behind them. No better illustration of this can be found than the history of Platonic interpretation. How many philosophical portraits of Plato have circulated in the world mart! And how unmistakably do these portraits display the lineaments of their painters! Plato as a Moses-speaking Attic, as a Christian Father, as a mystic Pythagorean, as a dramatist of the life of reason; the first Aristotelian, the precursor of Kant, of Hegel, of Cantor and the modern theory of continuity; ‘the father of all orthodoxy and the source of all heresy’ – these are only some of the guises in which Plato has appeared in the history of thought. Here, as elsewhere, historical recovery is not the unveiling of ready-made fact in the stream of cultural tradition in the way in which excavation is the unearthing of definite material from the site of Troy. It is a selective emphasis whose verification is to be sought in some forms of contemporary or prospective activity.
But to return to Marx. If historical interpretation is contemporary orientation to living issues, why, it may be asked, was it necessary for the leaders of the working-class movement in Germany and other European countries to profess to be Marxian at all? Why did they not turn their backs upon the quest for the ‘real Marx’ and devote themselves to fresh analysis of the problems at hand? Why did they insist upon calling themselves Marxist even when dissenters within the ranks called attention to their un-Marxian practice? In part the answer is to be found in the immense prestige which names and symbols carry in mass movements. New ideas introduce preliminary confusion even when they prove themselves to be instrumentally effective in realising purposes. They are more likely to be accepted when they appear in the guise of old masks and slogans. Radicalism, too, is bound by the natural conservatism of habit. It learns soon enough that a movement without the means of adaptation to a changing environment is without the means of survival; but in the process of adaptation it clings all the more steadfastly to the symbols of its past. For the past is that of which it generally has most reason to be proud. The old faith once sincerely militant is still celebrated in a ritual; ideas and terms which once had definite practical import, become fetishes.
There were other reasons, aside from the ‘truth’ of the doctrine, which contributed to keep alive the tradition of Marxism among socialists even when, as we shall see, their political parties were far from being Marxist in their practice. There was, first, the natural dislike to substitute one doctrine for another in the midst of the class struggle. ‘Never swap horses while crossing a stream’ is a maxim that seems as plausible in politics as in war. Bernstein had good reason to recall it when meditating upon the fierce opposition which his attempt to revise Marx had called forth. The German Social-Democratic Party almost voted his expulsion for what turned out later to be no more than terminological differences. In addition, there was the inflaming example of Marx’s single-minded zeal and incorruptible revolutionary integrity. His hard-headed personal idealism, which was never stained by opportunistic compromise (in contrast with Lassalle), or warped by sentimental fanaticism (in contrast with Bakunin), provided a moral and political ideal which was all the more precious for being so difficult to attain. There was, too, the assurance of his intellectual genius to which even his enemies were compelled to make grudging admission. And who does not desire the glow of emotional security which comes from having a genius on one’s side? There was, then, even on narrowly practical grounds good reason why those who sought to change the existing order – if only with a programme of social reform – should still invoke the name of Marx long after they had given up trying to determine whether they were carrying on in his spirit. But the public avowal of Marxism necessitated taking over, defending and interpreting his doctrines. Later we shall discuss the fidelity of the interpretations offered. The most significant aspects of these interpretations – just because they affected the question of meaning – was the way in which they invariably expressed a present purpose and an immediately experienced class need.
At the turn of the century a virtual war broke out among socialists as to the real spirit and meaning of Marx’s thought – a war as virulent today as ever before. The most influential of these contending positions must be stated and criticised before the import of the interpretation offered here can be grasped. The following chapters are not so much an historical excursion as an attempt to reveal the premises, purposes and intellectual constructions of the four great movements which claimed to be carrying on in the spirit of Marx.
* * *<&h4>

Notes
1. Marx himself says in The Communist Manifesto that the communist theories ‘only express in general terms the circumstances of an actually existing class struggle, of an historical movement going on under our own eyes’. They are not based upon ideas or principles set up or discovered by some ‘Weltverbesserer’. [See Communist Manifesto, Chapter 2. – MIA]
2. Cf. the writer’s A Pragmatic Critique of the Historico-Genetic Method, in Essays in Honour of John Dewey (New York, 1929).
 

Table of Contents
Last updated: 20 February 2020




NO ACCOUNT of the intellectual development of Marx would be complete unless it considered Marx’s relationship to an Influential group of German radical thinkers who called themselves “true” or “philosophical” communists. So important and dangerous did Marx regard their views that for years both he and Engels carried on a fierce polemic against them in the radical periodicals of the time. This was brought to a climax and finish in the special section of the Communist Manifesto devoted to Der deutsche oder der wahre Sozialismus (IIIc) in which after a short summary and refutation of their views, Marx accused the “true” socialists of being allies of the feudal reaction.
The understanding of the situation is complicated by the fact that the leading figures of “true socialism” stood closer to Marx and Engels than any other radical German group in the ’40’s. We know that Moses Hess, the chief theoretician of the movement, converted Engels to communism, and Zlocisti, Hess’ biographer, claims that Hess was not without influence on Marx, too. More interesting is the fact that Hess collaborated with Marx in writing Die deutsche Ideologie (1845); part of the manuscript is in his handwriting. Hess was also an ally of Marx in his struggles against Bruno Bauer, Ruge, Stirner, and Feuerbach. After the first critical writings of Marx and Engels against “true socialism” appeared, Hess avowed himself convinced by their arguments, forswore his past literary habits and plunged into a study of political economy (Letter to Marx, July 28, 1846). His essay – Die Folgen der Revolution des Proletariats (1847) – published before the Communist Manifesto was written, is Marxian in tone and analysis, save on some organizational issues. Yet the Communist Manifesto published early in 1848 unmistakably concentrates its fire on Hess, making allowances neither for the actual development of Hess’ views nor for his revolutionary integrity.
Another factor which has made it difficult for some to understand Marx’s criticism is the general acknowledgment that, personally, Moses Hess was a man of singular purity of character. He was sensitive to every form of injustice, passionate in his devotion to principles, and almost saintly in his everyday behavior. He was unable to hate even those who had harmed him. Although subjected to a life-long poverty, even more grinding than that of Marx, he never wavered in his allegiance to revolutionary ideals. He was very active in the First International where he joined forces with Marx against Bakunin. Early in life he broke away from his orthodox Jewish home and married a prostitute – “in order to atone for the evil society had done” – with whom he lived in happy marriage until his death. His friends nicknamed him “the communist rabbi”.
Both the vehemence and justice of Marx’s denunciation of the “true socialists” have been challenged by students of the period. Koigen, Hammacher, and Zlocisti [1] have maintained that Marx himself was at one time a “true socialist” (about Engels’ “philosophical socialism” there is no question at all), and that historically there is no more justification for believing Hess to be a precursor of Marxism than for accepting Marx’ characterization of him.
Mehring, Bernstein, and G. Meyer [2] do not maintain that Marx was a “true socialist” but they are unequivocal in stating that Marx and Engels did less than justice to “true socialism” in general and to Hess in particular. Riazanov takes a middle ground; but Lukacs [3] defends Marx in every particular and even asserts that far from being a “true socialist”, Marx was not even a genuine Feuerbachian.
For our purpose it is immaterial whether Marx was a “true socialist” or whether Hess was a forerunner of Marx. That they shared a great many positions together is indicated by their common derivation from Hegel and Feuerbach on the one hand, and their common struggles against other oppositional tendencies on the other. More important are the differences which manifest themselves between them. Even if it should turn out that Marx was a “true socialist” and that the views he argued against were those that he himself had earlier embraced, it would still be necessary, in tracing Marx’s intellectual biography, to consider his criticism of “true socialism” as self-criticism.
 
I
The Philosophy of Moses Hess
“In Frankreich vertritt das Proletariat, in Deutschland des Geistesaristokratie den Humanismus.” –  HESS.
“True socialism” was a pseudo-political tendency among a certain group of literary men, publicists and philosophers in Germany, all of whom had been influenced by Feuerbach. It was not a system of thought. In a sense, every “true socialist” had his own philosophy. Hess, Grün, Lüning, Kriege, Heinzen, each developed his position in his own way so that no general exposition can be an adequate account of all the “true socialists”. If one must choose a representative of this tendency, there is no choice but to turn to Moses Hess. He was the recognized leader of the group. By virtue of his unremitting activity in behalf of revolutionary ideals, he had already won the title of the “father of German communism”. Unfortunately, the philosophy of Hess is not a unified doctrine. It is futile to look for system or consistency in it. Hess was by turns a Spinozist, an Hegelian, a Feuerbachian, a Marxist, a natural science monist, and a combination of them all. It will therefore be necessary to select for exposition only those of his views which Hess held in the Forties and which were in large measure shared by his “true socialist” comrades. Marx’s criticisms will then be more intelligible.
 
1. The Social Status of the German Intellectual. It was Heine who first proclaimed that the Germans had succeeded in doing only in thought what others had already done in fact. This was a pointed way of saying that although the Germans were lagging behind other western nations in their social and political development, their philosophical theory from Kant to Hegel had already given an adequate ideological expression of the needs and ideals of bourgeois society. In Germany proper, however, the bourgeoisie had not yet come to power and the class relationships were obscured by a host of traditional, religious, sectional and political factors. The country was predominantly agricultural; the semi-feudal estates provided a food supply sufficient not only for the domestic market but for export. Political power was largely concentrated in the hands of the nobility. This power had been challenged by Napoleon in two ways. First, by a direct attempt to introduce democratic and constitutional customs in those parts of Germany which he had conquered; and second, by the indirect effects of the imposition of the Continental system, which by barring English manufacturers from Germany called into existence a German industrial class (cf. Engels, Der Status Quo in Deutschland, Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, Sec. I, Vol. 6, p. 231ff.). With Napoleon’s defeat the first danger was removed – (except for the promise of a constitution which the Prussian King had made in order to spur his subjects on against the invader). But the second danger remained. The German bourgeoisie which had grown strong enough to dominate the domestic market during the Napoleonic wars, continued to grow. Manufacturing, mining and shipping were developed on a wider scale. The bourgeoisie demanded a tariff-union (Zollverein) for all the thirty-nine German states and got it. It demanded a protective tariff for Prussia, and got that too. At every step, however, it encountered the opposition of the landed feudal interests whose wealth and power had been adversely affected, first, by the Napoleonic wars which had closed the French and English markets, second, by the English Corn Laws, enacted after the restoration of peace, and third, by overseas competition in agricultural and grazing products. The struggle between the rising bourgeoisie and the nobility was mediated by the monarchy which tolerated the bourgeoisie because it increased the national wealth and supplied new sources of revenue. Politically, however, the monarchy favored the landed nobility because it feared that the development of industry would force the surrender of absolutism and accelerate the national unification of Germany. Meanwhile, the consequences of the agrarian reforms of Stein had increased the number of independent peasant-proprietors who, together with the local hand-workers, small tradesmen, etc., constituted a class of petty bourgeoisie. Its interests were as much opposed to the large landlords as to the industrial capitalist. A small, inarticulate and newly created class of proletarians, which accompanied the growth of industry, suffered an intensive exploitation that often takes place when a country is first opened to manufacture.
In this confused social and political scene, government was possible only with the help of a great bureaucracy of officials who administered the complicated laws and regulations which grew out of the conflicts of so many different interests. In the course of time the bureaucracy began to consider itself an independent class with independent interests. But since by training and origin it was feudal in outlook, it was unsympathetic to the bourgeoisie. With growing resentment the latter found that the red tape, and the bribery necessary to break it, were interfering with normal industrial expansion and adding to the costs of production. Its economic interests demanded the overthrow of the absolute monarchy, but it was itself so strongly infected with the semi-feudal Staat-und Ständesphilosophie that it preferred to truckle to the nobility and bureaucracy rather than to risk an open fight. Its only possible allies were the proletariat and a part of the petty bourgeoisie. The first was too weak, and the second  –  in Germany – more royalist than the king. And so the German bourgeoisie hoped to win its much needed reforms not by open class struggle but by (1) involving the nobility in the net of its investment schemes, (2) by making the government dependent upon it for its finances, and (3) by petitioning the king and his bureaucracy for a liberal constitution in the name of “social progress”, “humanitarianism”, and “philosophy”.
It is against this background that the “true socialism” of the radical German intellectuals must be understood. They were acquainted with the great French socialist writers without having acquired a clear insight into the class stratification of their own country or a consciousness of the specific needs of the proletariat as a class. [4] As a group the intellectuals could only function either by direct or indirect service with the bureaucracy – which meant going over to outright reaction – or by expressing the demands of an opposition class. In the Thirties the Young Germans and the Young Hegelians had frankly adopted the point of view of the German bourgeoisie and had agitated for all the constitutional rights which England and France were enjoying. But with the disintegration of these schools of thought and with the dissemination of French socialist ideas, the German intellectuals lost their enthusiasm for the bourgeoisie. Instead of continuing with them in a common struggle against the absolutist monarchy, they turned all their weapons against bourgeois culture and politics, criticizing the social consequences of industrial production. In their most advanced phase they spoke in the name of the proletariat, but the only proletarians they knew were the ones talked about by the French Socialist writers. Or what was even more confusing, they sometimes proclaimed that “Das Proletariat ist die Menschheit” (the proletariat is humanity) so that it would appear, as Marx once caustically observed, that in struggling to abolish classes, the communists were striving to destroy humanity.
In fact, whatever revolutionary consciousness developed among the German intellectuals took place quite independently of the development of the German proletariat. Hess was not only unacquainted with the German working classes, he was even unaware of the existence of communistic groups among the German workers in Paris. “When I came to Paris,” he writes, “I was no more aware of the existence of communistic groups of German journeymen than they were of me.” (Sozialistische Aufsätze, ed. by Zlocisti, p. 122) And Engels in one of his letters to Marx, writing of the great interest in communism which he and Hess had succeeded in awakening by public meetings, admits that they were winning converts among all classes except the proletariat.
“All of Elberfeld and Barmen, from the money aristocracy to the épicerie, was represented. Only the proletariat was not there ... Things are going fine. Everyone is talking about communism, and we are winning new followers every day. Wuppertaler communism is une verité, yes, almost a force ... The dumbest, most indolent and philistine of people who are interested in nothing in the world are beginning to become enthusiastic [schwärmen] about communism.” (Gesamtausgabe, Sec. III, Vol. 2, p. 14.)
Engels, himself, had already perceived the limitations of a theory of communism which took its point of departure from abstract ethical principles without relating them to the concrete struggles of the working class. In the preface to his Condition of the English Working Class (1845) he admits that one of the aims of his book is to put an end to all communist “Phantastereien und Schwärmereien pro et contra” and to provide a factual analysis of the economic realities which were shaping the social destinies of the proletariat and determining the conditions of their emancipation. The majority of the radical German intellectuals, however, were insensitive to the existence and importance of social class divisions. Imbued with the ideals of a perfect society; they were unable to join the bureaucracy which administered present society. They also refused to make themselves a vehicle for the specific temporal demands of the bourgeoisie or proletariat. The only standpoint from which they passed criticism upon society was an allegedly classless ethics whose values expressed not the immediate need of this or that class but the essential needs of the whole of society. They felt themselves to be the prophets of the good society whose organization could be deduced from the “true nature” of man. They were concerned with the sufferings of the proletariat and the disparity which existed between their present life and their life as it ought to be. But they had no conception of what constituted the proletariat. The proletariat was identified with an abstract category of distress. The “true socialists” sympathized with the proletariat as they would sympathize with the cause of any underdog. They claimed to be socialists as much for the sake of the ultimate welfare of the nobility and bourgeoisie as for the sake of those whom these classes oppressed.
It should now be clear why such a position tended to strengthen the belief that it was possible to find an objective social philosophy which was valid for all classes of society.
 
2. Communism as Humanism. The philosophy of Hess was born of a desire to find fundamental principles of social organization which would make possible the elimination of all conflict between man and man, and class and class. Early in his career, as a follower of Spinoza and Hegel, he believed that valid principles of social order could be derived only from a knowledge of the metaphysical structure of existence. The good life is a life based upon the insight into the unity and necessity of all things. Virtue arises from the knowledge of our status and function in the all-embracing totality – called by both Spinoza and Hegel, God. Two difficulties, however, compelled Hess to modify his original Spinozism. First, its contemplative outlook upon life conflicted with his consciousness that a great many things had to be done, that problems were pressing for a solution which could not be found by viewing them sub specie aeternitatis. Secondly, a consistent Spinozism and Hegelianism seemed to imply that in the complete vision of the order and connection of things, everything was blessed with necessity, and that evil was non-existent. This would call into question the very reality of the social problems of evil and oppression which irked Hess’ sensitive nature and which had furnished the starting point of his whole philosophical enquiry. The practical upshot of this philosophical ethics was to identify religion with morality and to make the problems of daily life which confronted him, unimportant and unreal.
Hess’ task was now to find a philosophy which would justify the autonomy of moral activity. Like most of the Young-Hegelians, Hess turned to Fichte. The active personality of Fichte, his early enthusiasm for the French Revolution, and his apparent social and political liberalism had initiated a kind of Fichte Renaissance among the Young-Hegelians. Since it was from him that Hegel had taken over and developed the dialectical method, the Young-Hegelians could with good philosophical grace couple their allegiance to the hero of the Atheismusstreit with their school loyalty to Hegel, the philosopher of the restoration. About the same time that Hess was writing his pieces in the Rheinische Zeitung and his essay, Philosophie der Tat, Koppen, the close friend of Marx, published an article on Fichte und die Revolution in which he declared:
“Now that the impulse to free political development has again come to life in us Germans ... the voice of the purest, most determined, and strongest character among German philosophers will be better understood and will find a readier reception than ever before.” [5]
Hess, however, was more interested in grafting Fichte’s metaphysics of activity upon Spinoza’s doctrine of substance (something which Hegel had already done) than in Fichte’s explicit political doctrines.
“Not being but action is first and last ... Now is the time for the philosophy of spirit to become a philosophy of activity. Not only thinking but the whole of human activity must be lifted to a plane on which all oppositions disappear ... Fichte in this respect has already gone further than the most recent philosopher.” (Philosophie der Tat, Sozialistische Aufsätze, p. 37, p. 50)
In invoking the Fichtean principle of activity to supplement the Spinozistic doctrine of Substance, Hess was expressing in an esoteric way the conflict which he had already described in more popular fashion as the conflict between religion and morality. The religious outlook, he contended, was essentially one of acceptance – an acceptance of the order of the universe, whether it be called God, Nature, Reason, or Spirit, of which human beings were a part, and whose mysterious and purposive ways could only be dimly apprehended by faith and intelligence. The standpoint of morality, on the other hand, was one of assertion – an assertion of what ought to be and what is not, an imposition of a new order and not merely the recognition of an old. The root of religion was man’s feelings; the source of morality was the practical necessities of life. So long as human beings strive after ideals of perfection, there can be no completely irreligious men; so long as they live in society, they cannot be completely immoral. Irreligion is simply a word for other people’s religion; immorality, a term for behavior different from our own. The essence of religion is worship; the essence of morality, conscientiousness. (Religion und Sittlichkeit, ibid., p. 28)
The conflict between religion and morality, Hess went on to say, can only be avoided if both observed a proper division, of labor. Religion had no business in politics or with the concerns of the state. It is a private matter – an affair of the individual soul faced by the immensities of the cosmos. The field of politics belongs to ethics; its object is the general interests of mankind.
“Let religion educate, edify, and elevate the individual soul. Let it support the weak and console the suffering. But in public life let man show himself not in his individual but in his general character. Public life – the state – demands not weak but strong, courageous and independent men.”
But now Hess found himself confronted by even greater difficulties. If religion could not serve as a basis for social peace, how could ethics take its place? In affirming the Fichtean principle of activity, Hess was subscribing to the view that individuality is a brute metaphysical fact. Principles cannot act in time and be acted upon; only individuals can. In the social field, individuality expresses itself in the different personalities whose relationships constitute the social order. But, if virtue be no more than conscientiousness, if each individual is to fulfill the law of his own nature, what is the guarantee that social peace and freedom can be secured? Hess is asking how genuine social morality is possible. A social morality based upon convention or contact between personalities breaks down as soon as an individual or a group becomes sufficiently powerful to violate the compact with impunity. A social morality based on authority or revelation is compatible with the autonomy of moral action. Yet a social morality must be grounded on some objective order. It cannot be the order of nature. And at this point, Hess turns to Feuerbach. Morality must be grounded on the “true” nature of the human species – on Man viewed not as a series of isolated individuals or as one abstract universal – Humanity – but as a living unity whose different parts have developed from a common source and which are bound to-pether by a feeling of natural kinship. But man cannot live as man  –  and here Hess improves on Feuerbach – unless he recognizes that his human needs require new institutions; that all the social and political conflicts of the past and present have grown out of the root evils of private property; that money plays the same role in distorting man’s practical life that religion plays in distorting his intellectual life. Having read Proudhon and the Utopian French socialists, Hess tries to link up their conclusions with Feuerbach’s method:
“The essence of God, says Feuerbach, is the transcendent essence of man, and the real theory of the divine nature is the theory of human nature. Theology is anthropology. That is the truth, but it is not the whole truth. The nature of man, it must be added, is social, involving the cooperative activity of all individuals for the same ends and interests. The true theory of man, the true humanism is the theory of human society. In other words, anthropology is socialism.” (Loc. cit., pp. 115–116)
The logical corrolary of this position was that the struggle for human freedom and social security must be waged not in the name of the proletariat, but in the name of humanity.
 
3. Communism as the Ethics of Love. The specific content with which Hess filled this abstract humanism is not hard to guess. It was a variant of the Feuerbachian ideal of love. Although the full realization of communism depended upon the existence of certain social conditions (about whose nature Hess at this stage was rather vague), communism as an ideal was already implicit in every altruistic tendency which stirred within the human breast. The historical development of society, he held, may be legitimately viewed as a result of the conflict of two great passions – egoism, manifested in individual self-assertion against others, and love, as expressed in all action inspired by the consciousness of the essential identity of the individual with mankind. Egoism or selfishness is the final source of all social oppression and exploitation. Cruelty, fraud and robbery, feudalism, chattel and wage slavery, pauperism and prostitution are possible only because men draw a circle around themselves and their nearest of kin, and focus attention so strongly upon the field of their immediate vision that they become indifferent, and ultimately blind, to the interests and the very existence of those who live beyond the line. Social institutions are such as to place a premium upon selfish behavior. And although this behavior is hedged in by rules of law imposed by the state, these rules themselves represent the organized selfishness of dominant groups. Capitalism or “the system of free competition is the last word; of egoism”. It distorts and perverts every phase of culture – religion, art, education – by substituting for the ideals of the collectivity, private interest and private satisfaction as controlling factors.
Although the history of society has been the progressive replacement of the  “egoism of one group by the egoism of others, it is significant that all groups come to power by professing allegiance to theoretical principles of love and humanity, freedom and equality. The more altruistic their declaration, the more consistent – as the history of the English and French bourgeoisie illustrates – their egoism. The fact, however, that in order to move great masses into action, vehement lip-service to the ideals of love and humanity is necessary indicates that “the real nature of man” recognizes that these ideals alone are ultimately valid and yearns for their fulfillment. But they can only be fulfilled when private property and the arbitrary power which its possession gives over other human beings, is abolished. “Communism is the law [Lebensgesetz] of love applied to social life.” It is not enough to preach love to realize communism, as Feuerbach does; nor can it be brought about by preaching hate. Love must be organized into action; recognition of the identity of the real interest of all mankind must be carried over into every phase of personal and social life:
“You have been told that you cannot serve two masters at once – God and Mammon. But we tell you that you cannot serve either one of them, if you think and feel like human beings. Love one another, unite in spirit, and your hearts will be filled with that blessedness which you have so vainly sought for outside of yourselves, in God. Organise, unite in the real world, and by your deeds and works you will possess all the wealth, which you have so vainly sought, in money. So long as you do not strive to develop your own nature, so long as you strive to be not human but superhuman and inhuman creatures, you will become inhuman, you will look down contemptuously upon human nature, whose real nature you do not recognize and treat ‘the masses’ as if they were a wild beast. The beast which you see in the people is in yourself.” (Ueber die Not in unserer Gesellschaft und deren Abhilfe, Sozialistische Aufsätze, p. 149)
Hess left it unexplained how this belief in the essential unity of mankind could be reconciled with his characterization of those who did not share his belief. Perhaps it is too much to expect this of one whose first interest was not in social analysis – but, like the old Hebrew prophets, in social justice.
If anthropologically, communism was humanism, and ethically it was humanitarianism, it followed that the appeal to action would be framed not in terms of material interests but in terms of culture, creative activity, peace, honor, justice, and other ideal goods. The “true socialists” took the field against all those who pretended that the communist movement was exclusively or even primarily a movement of the proletariat, and who spoke as if its demands centered around the needs of the stomach. How could communists preach the ideal of classlessness and still appeal to one class against another? How could the ideal values of communism be regarded as the concern only of the proletariat when they really flowed from the real nature of man? Hess admitted, to be sure, that in France the movement was proletarian, but he explained this by saying that the French proletariat was communistic “not out of egoism but out of humanity”. The proletariat becomes communistic out of love of mankind. But why should one, asks Hess, who out of love of mankind is already a communist, regard himself as a proletarian? And in fact there are communists who are not proletarians and there are proletarians who are not communists. All that one can say is that since the proletariat suffers most from the effects of organized egoism (which Hess identifies with capitalism) it is more likely than any other group to feel and understand the unity of mankind, and the necessity of establishing communism to realize it. Hess makes a point of correcting Lorenz von Stein, an Hegelian of the center, whose book, Der Sozialismus und Kommunismus des heutigen Frankreich (1845) introduced, so to speak, the theories of French socialism to the German public. Despite his reactionary tendencies, Stein had made some surprisingly realistic analyses of the French revolutionary movement. He had grasped the importance of the class struggle in French history and had distinguished between the “proletariat” as an historical category bound up with capitalism and the “poor” and “unfortunate” to be found in any society. [6] Hess insists that Stein has given a misleading account of communism.
“It is an error – and this error is due to the egoistic narrowness which cannot rise to a truly human outlook – yes, it is an error diligently spread by the reaction, and by Stein above all, that socialism develops only among the proletariat, and among the proletariat only as a question of fulfilling the needs of the stomach.” (Sozialistische Aufsätze, p. 129)
Socialism is not a question of bread, although it may be that, too. It is in the first instance a question of man, of moral values, especially of human dignity. These values Hess formulates differently at different times. Sometimes it is simply truth which is the communist ideal; only under communism will social parasitism and the civilization of lies based on it disappear. Sometimes it is creative work in which effort and enjoyment will always be found together. Sometimes it is character or virtue, defined by Hess, as the “freedom to follow the law of one’s own life” (and which dangerously approaches the ideal of bourgeois freedom). But through the entire scale of ethical variations developed by Hess, there sounds one fundamental theme: the social revolution presupposes a moral revolution.
 
4. “True Socialism” as Reactionary Socialism. Had the “true socialists” restricted themselves to declarations of brotherly love, they probably would have been remembered only as another Utopian socialist sect. But they prided themselves upon having advanced beyond their master, Feuerbach. If thinking flowers in action, then political thinking must concern itself in the most intimate way with the contemporary issues of politics. As has already been indicated, the German bourgeoisie was struggling against the nobility and bureaucracy for the democratic rights already enjoyed by the bourgeoisie in France and England. The “true socialists”, posted on French communist theory, knew that in a bourgeois democracy the proletariat was exploited even more openly than in an absolute monarchy, that the formal rights of press, assemblage, trial by jury, etc., could not be effectively exercized where glaring social inequalities prevailed. Speaking, then, for the proletariat – for the future of humanity – the “true socialists” repudiated the demands of the bourgeoisie, attacked their spokesmen as hypocrites, and succeeded in confusing the intellectual strata of the petty bourgeoisie who had regarded the change from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional republic as genuine social advance.
In this crusade against bourgeois liberalism the chief offender was not Moses Hess but Karl Grün and after him, Otto Lüning. But Hess was not without faults. He paraded an indifference to the political program of the democrats and was quick to accuse them of compromise, insincerity and cowardice. Even communists were suspect if their origins were bourgeois. The badge of real ethical purity was proletarian.
“Most communists,” he wrote, “who stem from the bourgeoisie go no further than general phrases and attempts at compromise [between the older order and the new]; it is only the proletariat which carries things to a decisive break with the existing order.” (Rheinische Jahrbücher, Vol. II, 1846, p. 65)
Hess maintained that the real cause of social distress was economic and to agitate for political reforms was therefore a waste of time. All governments, except revolutionary ones, were indifferent to the welfare of the proletariat. Addressing German liberals, he wrote:
“Has the King of Prussia shown less concern for the misery of the poorer classes than the French Assembly or the French kirig? So convinced are we by reflection upon the facts and upon the real causes of social distress that this is not so, that all liberal political strivings appear to us as immaterial, even as downright disgusting” (förmlich zum Ekel geworden sind).
It was Karl Grün, however, the man upon whom Marx poured out the vials of his wrath, who formulated the anti-liberal attitude of “true socialism” most sharply. The promise of a constitution which the King of Prussia had made in 1815 was long overdue. At every opportunity, the bourgeoisie reminded him, his counsellors, and his successor, of his unredeemed pledge. Every incident of domestic unrest was capitalized by bourgeois and liberal opinion to point out that constitutional safety-valves of popular resentment were better than none. The clamor for a constitution became particularly strong after the revolt of the Silesian weavers. It was in answer to this that Grün wrote:
“Who in Prussia wants a constitution? The liberals. Who are the liberals? People who sit within their four walls, and some littérateurs who either themselves own property or whose horizon is bounded by the wishes of the worthy factory owners. Does this handful of owners with their literary hacks constitute the people? No. Does the people desire a constitution? Not in its dreams ... Had the Silesian proletariat a consciousness ... it would protest against a constitution. The proletariat has no consciousness but we ... act in its name. We protest.” (Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 98–100)
Lüning was more interested in awakening the proletariat to its great mission of social salvation than in drawing it into supporting the political demands of the bourgeoisie.
“There is only one way of making the proletariat conscious of its humanity, that is through the organization of education.” (Dieses Buck gehört dem Volke [a periodical], Vol. II, 1846, p. 102, quoted by Speier, loc. cit., p. 126)
And so the “true socialists”, each in his own way, helped the reactionary nobility in its struggle to retain sole political supremacy in Germany.
 
5. Communism and Nationalism. Hess was the first socialist of his day to link up the question of nationalism with the theory of communism. Nationalism is of two varieties, just as internationalism is of two varieties. True nationalism, which may be defined as pride in the distinctive character of local culture, has been perverted into the false nationalism of modern states by the institution of private property. So long as competition and war between individuals prevail within communities, it is inevitable that the same principles be applied by the organized groups which constitute states in their relations with each other. The struggle between nations takes more gruesome forms – wars, massacres, etc. – than the struggle between individuals within the nation, because there is no consciousness of common ties of local culture to diminish the cruelty towards others called forth by a conflict over the means of life. Just as it is necessary td find a rule to regulate the distribution of goods within the community in order to give each one an opportunity to develop his personality, so it is necessary to find a rule which will apply between nations so that each nationality will be able to develop its distinctive culture.
“The problem of the elimination of national hate is intimately bound up with the problem of egoistic competition. International war cannot cease until individual war, competition, ceases. All the problems, all the difficulties, all the contradictions which have arisen in this country, flow out of this fundamental question.” [7]
Commercial nationalism generally gives rise to a spurious renaissance of national culture. Everything becomes “national” and therefore the concern of the true patriot, e.g., “religion and a protective tariff for monopoly enterprises; freedom and cotton; mediaeval ruins and modern industry; gravestones and railroads.” In this way, national cultures which are the bearers of unique value, become claimants to total and exclusive value. They no longer are content to live peacefully side by side faithful to their own national genius and yet tolerant of others; they seek to impose their own culture upon others in the name of a militant and holy nationalism. They thereby destroy not only the unique value of other cultures but their own.
False nationalism breeds a false internationalism – cosmopolitanism. True internationalism recognizes the necessity of distinct cultures and nations. “But only the individual is real”, and nationality is the individuality of a people. It is no more possible for humanity to exist without particular peoples and nations than to exist without particular individuals.
Like most of his contemporaries Hess had a strong belief not only in the existence of national traits and character, but in their fixity. National traits may be an historical product, but the kind of development which is possible to each nation is determined by its essential nature. The German is essentially contemplative, the Frenchman passionate, and the Englishman practical. These traits will be found reflected in their revolutionary movements too. The German is a communist out of philosophy; the Frenchman, out of his strong feeling for justice; the Englishman, because of material interests. All three elements are necessary; but in the struggle for socialism, the Frenchman will give the signal for action. [8]
 
6. Transition to Realism. It would be a great injustice to Hess to close the exposition of his thought at this point. For his “true socialism” phase lasted only a few years. By 1847 Hess had already abandoned his appeal to humanity and the essential nature of man and had undertaken a study of political economy. His essay, Die Folgen des Revolution des Proletariat, no longer speaks of ideal presuppositions of communism but of material conditions, not in terms of the development of the spirit of humanity but of the development of productive forces. In this essay of Hess will be found, with a clarity and precision quite foreign to his other writings, the theory of the concentration and centralization of capital, the theory of increasing misery, the theory of overproduction to account for the periodicity of crises, the doctrine that the collapse of capitalism is inevitable, and the view that the development of revolutionary consciousness is a simple and direct outgrowth of economic distress – theories which were to receive classic formulation, together with a denunciation of “true socialism”, a few months later, in the Communist Manifesto. The change in tone and subject matter is so striking that mere paraphrase cannot convey it. I quote therefore some characteristic passages.
“A revolution of the proletariat presupposes before all things the existence of a proletariat – presupposes a struggle, not merely about abstract principles but about concrete and tangible interests, presupposes that the very existence of the great majority of the workers is threatened, that these workers know who the enemy is they have to fight, and that they have the means in their own hands to achieve victory ... It remains to ask what must social relations be in order to produce uniform oppression of the workers as well as the instrument of their liberation? ... We have already indicated how free competition – in the last instance free-trade – makes wages equal. But before free competition can reach the highest phase of its development ... a certain series of economic facts must precede it ... Machines must be discovered, instruments of production must be perfected and multiplied, work must be subdivided, more must be produced than consumed, business crises must arise as a result of overproduction and threaten to ruin an entire country in case the obstacles which remain in the way of industry are not removed ... Once social relations have reached this revolutionary height, nothing can stop the proletarian revolution. All measures to revive and develop private interest are at last exhausted ... It is large industry which, as we saw, in the last instance provides, the means and conditions for the overthrow of the existing social order based upon private industry, private trade, and private property. It is large industry which creates a revolutionary class and unifies it against the ruling bourgeoisie. It is large industry which makes the proletariat subjectively conscious of the necessity of shaking off its yoke in that it gives the proletariat a consciousness of its position ... What fetters production today? The business crises? How do crises arise? Through overproduction. Why is more produced than can be consumed? Have, then, all the members of society more than enough of what they need? By no means, most of them lack the barest necessities of existence, not to speak of everything else which man needs for the development of his natural dispositions and capacities ... Why, then, this overproduction, this distress in the midst of plenty? Well we have seen: the more progress private industry makes, the more capital accumulates in private hands, the more those who are propertyless are compelled to sell their personal labor power [Arbeitskräfte] in order to secure the necessary means of life. The worker, however, who is compelled to sell himself or his labor power, becomes a commodity. Its value obeys the same economic laws as other commodities.” (Sozialistische Aufsätze, pp. 215–216)
It remains to ask where Hess derived these views, especially since in some of his later writings, the echoes of his earlier doctrines are still to be heard. There can be no question but that Hess read Ricardo and the Ricardian socialists in the light of Marx’s views as expressed in the Anti-Proudhon. It is a legitimate inference that these views were developed for Hess by Marx in their last period of collaboration. As we proceed to Marx’s criticism of Hess, it is necessary to bear constantly in mind that for all his dislike of the personal characters of Marx and Engels, after 1847 Hess regarded himself as a Marxist.
 



The following letter was sent by Sidney Hook, well-known Marxist scholar, to the New Republic, which published only a small portion of it.
The Editors, New Republic.
In his attack upon Professor John Dewey in the columns of the New Republic (Jan. 12, 1938), Heywood Broun not only exceeded the limits of Narrenfreiheit but was guilty of irresponsible misstatement of Professor Dewey’s position.
Anyone who has examined the context of Professor Dewey’s remarks in the Washington Post – which Broun admittedly has not done – will see that they bore upon the implications of the Trotsky Commission report for America. They were illustrated by a direct reference to the use which the Communist Party and press were making of the Corcoran case in Minneapolis.
 
Dewey’s Warning
Professor Dewey did not say that Communist Party members should be barred from the C.I.O. or any other labor union because of their views. He warned against factionalism and against the familiar Moscow tactics of frame-up and slander as deadly to the unity of the labor movement.
In asserting that the Stalinists are striving whole-heartedly for the unity of labor, Heywood Broun shows that it is he who is behind in his homework, not Professor Dewey. Part of the public oath which all members of the Communist Party are required to take is “to drive the Lovestoneites out of the labor movement” and “to drive the Trotskyites out of the labor movement.”
 
Stalinists’ Real Aim
Since in effect anybody who opposes the Communist Party on important measures is labelled a Trotskyite, this means that every independent-thinking union member or leader is slated for railroading as soon as the Stalinists feel strong enough to get away with it.
It requires considerable cheek for Heywood Broun to ask whether Professor Dewey “seriously means to contend that certain workers should be barred from union membership because of their political or economic views.” This is precisely the view of the Communist Party, as the above-cited slogans prove.
Before Heywood Broun undertakes to whitewash the role of the Stalinists in the labor movement, let him explain the following:
 
Explain All This

The attempt of the Daily Worker to smear Minneapolis trade unionists of Local 544 by practically charging them with complicity in the assassination of Patrick Corcoran, on the ground of their alleged Trotskyist sympathies.
 
The use of phony affidavits by West Coast Stalinists in the C.I.O. to prove that Meyer Lewis, A.F. of L. representative, had hired R.J. Bell to kill Harry Bridges, despite the wire sent them by George Cole, regional director of the C.I.O., warning that Bell was “unreliable and no good.”
 
The resolution of the Sailors Union of the Pacific, condemning the Western Worker and the Communist Party for libelous assertions of gangsterism against its leaders and authorizing legal action for criminal libel against the Western Worker.
 
The resolution of the Central Labor Council of San Francisco, condemning the Stalinists for attempted frame-up tactics.
 
The Communist Party campaign against Homer Martin and the “Lovestoneites” in the Auto Workers Union.

These are only some of the more outstanding incidents. I, for me, am in favor of Broun’s suggestion that a neutral group of investigators be called together to consider how the Communist Party works for unity in the labor movement. Things have come to such a pass that it is impossible to expose the nefarious tactics of the Communist Party without Broun, its unofficial trouble-shooter, crying “red-baiting.”
If the Stalinists are red, then Roosevelt it a Trotskyist. If Heywood Broun sees fit to join the hue and cry of the Communist Party against Homer Martin, a C.I.O. leader, why is it forbidden to criticize, on the basis of authentic evidence, the machinations of those Stalinists in the C.I.O. whose first loyalty is to the Communist Party and not to labor ?



 
Jan. 12, 1938


Sidney Hook
 



 



MARX’S criticism of “true socialism” was motivated
primarily by his opposition to the political tactics of the “true
socialists”, the ultra-revolutionary strategy which controlled it, and
the philosophical rationalizations they offered in its support. We
shall not concern ourselves here with the special historical
circumstances of the political struggles but with the principles with
which Marx approached them—principles which have a scope and validity
much wider than the particular milieu in which they originally arose.
The philosophical constructions of the “true socialists” have shown a
greater vitality than their politics. Like most of the theories Marx
contended against, they have turned up again and again in different
historical situations, tricked out in new phrases and flounces, for all
the world fresh and unravished by criticism. Their systematic
exposition and analysis may serve to illustrate the Marxian criticism
of the type of view they illustrate. In any concrete case the
specific meaning of these doctrines depends upon the historical context
in which they function but the general logic of the argument can be
considered in relative independence of the particular historical
situation.
 
I. Intransigeant Theory and Reactionary Practise.
Despite widespread opinion to the contrary, Marx and Engels were never
doctrinaries. Clear about their principles, they never sought to force
them upon a movement if such action threatened to disrupt or paralyze
the forces which had been assembled for a common action. “Every step
towards a real movement,” Marx once wrote, “is more important than a
dozen programs.” More important not because principles are unimportant
— for without correct principles action is blind—but because
principles which were not taken up by mass movements and linked to
immediate interests are ineffectual. Behind this view was a deeper
conception of what a principle is. On many occasions Marx and Engels
maintained against those who talked nothing but principles that
“communism is not a doctrine but a movement. It starts not from
principles but from facts”. (Gesamtausgabe,
I, 6, p.294.) What they meant was simply that social and political
principles express the real situations in which men find themselves and
the needs of those situations. To transfer principles which express the
felt needs of masses of people from one historical situation, to
another in which class forces and relations are quite different, is to
make abstractions of these principles. No matter how revolutionary
those principles may originally have been, once they become
abstractions imported from without into a different
situation, they invariably help reaction rather than hinder it.
This was the case with the “true socialists”, many of whom were so
radical that for years they were the comrades-in-arms of Marx and
Engels. The revolutionary socialism of the French proletariat had
developed in the course of the struggle of the French workers against
the bourgeoisie which had been firmly entrenched in power since 1830.
In Germany, however, the bourgeoisie far from having attained power was
objectively the most dangerous foe of the existing government. The
ultra-revolutionary “true socialists”, however, had read the literature
of French socialism to some purpose. They attacked the German
bourgeoisie with the greatest vigor and in the name of socialism
opposed all the liberal reforms as half-measures designed to strengthen
the position of the bourgeoisie at the costs of the working class. In
Marx’s eyes they were obstructing a real mass movement against the
semi-feudal Prussian regime and lending objective aid and comfort to
the reactionaries. The reactionary press actually used their
denunciations of the bourgeoisie as evidence that the workers
themselves were opposed to “immoral” liberalism.
Marx and Engels did not of course believe that the bourgeoisie
should not be criticized and their theoretical hypocrisies exposed. But
they held that the chief emphasis of the criticism should fall upon the
reactionary status quo in Germany, and that the criticism of
the bourgeoisie should be of such a nature that none but those who were
more radical than the bourgeoisie could use it.
“Our attack upon the bourgeoisie,” wrote Engels,
“distinguishes itself as much from that of the true socialists as it
does from that of the reactionary nobility, e.g., of the French
legitimists or of young England. The German status quo cannot
exploit our attack because it is directed even more strongly against it
than against the bourgeoisie. If the bourgeoisie is, so to speak, our natural
enemy whose overthrow will bring our party to power, the German status
quo is much more our enemy because it stands between us and the
bourgeoisie and prevents us from coming to grips with the bourgeoisie.
That is why we do not in the least exclude ourselves from the
oppositional mass movement against the German status quo. We
constitute only its most advanced faction—a faction which through its
unconcealed arriere-pensée against the bourgeoisie
assumes a definite position.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 6,
p.234.)
In the course of their criticism of the “true
socialists”, Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasize the dangers of the
over-simple classifications which the “true socialists” made of class
forces and oppositions in Germany. As opposed to the “true socialists”
who saw only three classes struggling for power—the landed nobility,
the industrialists, and the workers—they stress the greater
complexity and diversity of social stratifications. They make not only
the distinctions indicated above but many others just as relevant to
the formulation of realistic political policy. They recognize the
social importance, because of the special interests involved, of the
landlords who have heavy holdings in industry, of the free peasant, of
the peasants still in feudal ties, of the officialdom, of the petty
bourgeoisie, of the handworker, and demonstrate that the demands of the
bourgeoisie, if granted, carry with them the possibility of a partial
and temporary fulfillment of the immediate needs of all
groups except the feudal landlords and bureaucratic officialdom. (Ibid.,
p. 243.) The bourgeoisie in the struggle for democracy against reaction
must be supported even by communists. Any other attitude, no matter how
principled it may appear and no matter how sincere its proponents, is
political madness which aids reaction.
 
2. Socialism by Education or Socialism by Struggle.
It was not only against the politics of the “true socialists” that Marx
and Engels took the field. They objected to the way they expressed the
ideals of socialism and the methods they stressed as necessary for its
realization. The “true socialists” believed that socialism could be
achieved by educational enlightenment and the dissemination of culture.
Socialism was presented as a cultural demand with only a casual
reference to the economic facts which made that demand both possible
and reasonable. The driving forces for the organization of socialists
were to be humanitarian, aesthetic and moral. Starting from the
proposition that “the true (or ideal) man is an harmonious creature”,
they deduced the organizational schemes of socialism—as well as its
right and might—from a knowledge of human nature. According to this
Platonic conception, social systems were to be judged by their capacity
to further the realization of self-harmony for the great masses.
Capitalism of course is condemned out of hand as a barbaric throwback
compared to which even feudalism is a human and sensible social order.
What are called the economic necessities of society and the needs of
economic development can only be understood as indicating the ethical
direction of social activity. A conscious and clearly formulated
ethical philosophy is, therefore, of primary importance for the
revolutionary movement.
The ethical ideals of socialism, supported on the fixed basis of
true human nature, are to penetrate the masses by organized educational
effort. “There is only one way,” wrote Lüning, “to make the
proletariat conscious of their humanity, that is through the
organization of education.” All the fundamental assumptions behind this
position were challenged by Marx and Engels—the assumptions
concerning human nature, the nature of morality, the character and
efficacy of education. A great many of the criticisms directed against
the “true socialists” on these points were intended for Feuerbach and
conversely. We shall therefore postpone detailed consideration of
Marx’s views until we discuss his relation to Feuerbach. But here a
brief indication of the drift and impact of their criticism can be
given.
First of all, Marx and Engels insist that the human nature to which
the “true socialists” appeal as the guide to social organization is an
historical variable. It does not explain society but society explains
its specific expressions. To understand human nature, then, at any
definite time we must understand the nature of the society in which
human beings live. When we do this we find that human nature is not
something homogeneous to which we can appeal for justification of any
concrete social proposal. Class divisions, interests, and values enter
as refracting and polarizing influences upon it. Failure to understand
this leads to an identification of the special psychological type which
prevails in a given society with the concept of “man as such”—a
familiar phrase in the writings of the “true socialists” and other
Feuerbachians. Politically, this failure to make the necessary
differentiations leads to the attempt to think in terms of the
“public”, “the community”, “the nation”, and blurs the clash of
interests in a vague formula interpretable in opposite ways. Whether
aware of it or not, the lucubrations of the “true socialists” which
they addressed to all classes really celebrated the virtues of the
progressive-peace-and-comfort-loving citizen. In the Communist
Manifesto, Marx accuses “true socialism” “of proclaiming the
German nation to be the normal nation and the German philistine to be
the normal man”. (Gesamtausgabe, I, 6, p. 552.)
Secondly, the arguments which Marx urged against: Stirner’s abstract
morality he turns against the “true socialists”. Where Stirner had
glorified selfishness, Hess and his followers had preached
unselfishness. Marx points out that selfishness and unselfishness are
in themselves neither virtues nor vices. The social context and content
of psychological impulses give them their moral quality. The concrete needs
of the working-class must be the point of departure for its morality.
Conventionally, this may appear to be selfishness but it is only
through its self-assertion as a class that a decent life can be won for
the individual members of the class, and ultimately, for all
individuals. Where the concrete needs are not sufficiently stressed the
invocation to selflessness, to humanity, weakens the immediate
struggles of the class, leads to concern over the enemy’s “soul” and to
despair about one’s own. Marx comments very bitterly on the religion of
self-abasement implied in Kriege’s words: “We have more important
things to do than to worry about our miserable selves: we belong to
humanity.” [1]
“With this infamous and disgusting servility towards
a ‘self which is distinguished and separated from ‘humanity’—and which is therefore nothing more than a metaphysical and even religious fiction—with this certainly ‘miserable’ slavish degradation, this religion like all others, ends. Such a doctrine which preaches crawling and self-contempt is perfectly fitted for brave—monks, but never for energetic men especially in times of struggle.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 6, p. 18.)
It was not the fact that the “true socialists” spoke in the name of morality which led Marx to oppose them but the nature of the morality they professed—a morality which was timeless and place-less, that dealt in injunctions which were never specific and turned men’s attention away from the determining social forces of human behavior.
Thirdly, when the “true socialists” spoke of the necessity of organizing the education of the working class they seemed to imply that socialism as a fully formed theoretical doctrine was to be carried into the working class from without almost in the same way in which the apostles brought Christianity to the women and slaves of Rome. Again, it was not their stress on education but on the kind of education which was at fault. And the kind of education they advocated followed from the kind of socialism they believed in. Since the realization of socialism was conceived to be the task of all enlightened people and not particularly the special job of the working classes, there was no provision for linking up socialist teachings with their daily life and struggles. Since the appeal was to the “good sense”, “reason” and “conscience!” of humanity, it “condemned the destructive tendencies of communism and proclaimed its impartial detachment towards all class struggles” (Marx). Since the social question was first and last an ethical question, the “socialist” education of the “true socialists” dwelt not upon the objective tendencies of social development, which Marx and Engels taught were the basis of revolutionary program and practise, but upon the miserable and inhuman consequences of capitalist production. It turned the attention of the German workers and petty bourgeoisie not to the mechanisms of social institutions but to the individuals who were most prominently identified with them. It dealt with the individual motives of the kings of politics and finance; it encouraged the hopes that their humanity would triumph over their greed for profit and power.
Already in his controversy with Bruno Bauer, Marx had settled with this kind of education but whereas Bauer was engaged in propaganda for social enlightenment in general, Hess and his friends were convinced that socialism as a specific form of social enlightenment could be effectively propagated in this way. Marx and Engels had the greatest respect for the French Utopians from whom the “true socialists” borrowed many of their arguments. But what was already a mistaken point of view in France was doubly mistaken when reasserted in a different country a generation later. Since “true socialism” was not only a political movement but a literary one as well, Marx and Engels were compelled to follow them into belles-lettres to expose the mis-education wrapped up in their fragrant metaphors. [2] Engels’ criticism of Karl Beck’s Lieder vom armen Mann may serve as illustration of the themes the “true socialist” poets selected, how they developed them and the point of view from which the critical analysis was made.
In his poems Beck sung about the cares and trials of “the poor man”, “the little man” and called the rich men—the Rothschilds of the day — to account for existing social misery. But there was no inkling of the real source of the trouble in any of his writings. Pitiful appeals alternated with empty threats to those whom Beck, together with the other “true socialists”, held personally responsible for the course of German economic life. A propos of Beck’s opening poem An das Haus Rothschild Engels writes:
“Right off in his ouverture, he reveals his petty bourgeois illusions that gold ‘rules according to Rothschild’s caprice’; an illusion which carries with it a whole series of fantastic misconceptions about the power of the House of Rothschild.
“The poet does not threaten the destruction of the real power of Rothschild, the social foundation upon which it rests; he merely desires that it be applied in a human way. He complains that bankers are not socialistic philanthropists, dreamers or purveyors of human happiness, but just bankers. Beck celebrates the cowardly petty bourgeois misere, sings of the ‘poor man’, the pauvre honteaux with his miserable, pious and inconsequential wishes, of the ‘little man’ in all his forms but not of the proud, threatening and revolutionary proletariat. The reproaches and threats with which Beck overwhelms the House of Rothschild ... rest upon childish illusions concerning the power of the Rothschilds, upon an entire lack of knowledge of the connection between this power and the existing situation, and a complete misconception of the means which the Rothschilds had to use to become and remain a power.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 6, p.33.)
Socialist education for Marx and Engels had to be based upon a knowledge of the fundamental economic tendencies which determined the social existence and conditions of life of the proletariat. Otherwise they were likely to be infected by all sorts of Utopian illusions peddled by “well-wishing” representatives of other classes. But more important, such education must be acquired in the struggles and battles of the class war. The class struggle is not a doctrine but the school in which doctrines arise, are tested and used or discarded. The working class not only becomes conscious of itself in these struggles, but it changes and reeducates itself by its revolutionary practise.
3. Nature, All-Too-Peaceful-Nature. The ethical ideals of the “true socialists” flowed from their conception of a peaceful and harmoniously developed human nature. The model for this human nature was physical nature, especially in its peaceful modes. A diluted and vulgarized Spinozism was propagated as the chief philosophical support of this ethical and social theory. The organic bonds by which the totality of existence was held together in a mystic unity could serve, once they are recognized, as the ties of social life. The feeling of natural kinship between man and world without, experienced when we recall the physical conditions of our origin and of our achievements, establishes its existence. That kinship is a metaphysical fact which holds, since men are part of nature, for human relationships, too. A false education has obscured this feeling and clouded our consciousness with artificial distinctions. We need only reflect, however, upon those qualities which have always been regarded as social virtues to see that they presuppose a fundamental unity between man and man, and man and nature.
All sorts of arguments were adduced by the “true socialists” to win support for this sugary natural piety. Even formal logic was laid under toll. For did it not teach that differences between species could only be made on the basis of a common genus? And that any distinction between man and nature therefore presupposed their fundamental unity? Was not this the central theme of Hegel’s expositions of the socially organized Absolute? Was it not the abiding spiritual insight of Christianity which stressed the brotherhood of man under the fatherhood of God or Nature? “See the lilies in the field!” And does not science bring daily proof that man cannot set himself up against nature or seek peace by flight to a supernatural realm?
“Has not man arisen,” asked the “true socialists” in the Rheinischen Jahrbücher, “out of a primal world, is he not a creature of nature like all others? Is he not built out of the same stuff and endowed with the same  general powers and qualities which animate all things?”
Marx’s response to this mysticism reduces itself to two simple points. First, he denies that nature is as peaceful as the “true socialists” seem to think and protests against the tendency to make of the term “unnatural” an ethical category. Strictly speaking, nature is what it is discovered to be and nothing can be dismissed as unnatural. Secondly, whatever the facts of nature may be which make social life possible, it is a mistake to regard man and man’s consciousness from the point of view of what they have in common with everything else. When this is done we get a false conception of man and his mind, with all the important things left out; human beings are considered to be natural bodies, and the self-consciousness of man is transformed into “the self-consciousness of nature”. This constitutes respectively the first steps towards mechanical materialism or absolute idealism. The “true socialists” take them both and the melange of materialistic Hegelianism and idealistic Spinozism is the philosophical result.  
A) That nature is not as peaceful as the kind-hearted “true socialists” believed, Marx has little difficulty in proving. In the face of the manifest facts of natural cruelty or rather the indifference of nature to peace or war, the illusions of the “true socialists” can be explained only as the pathetic fallacy of reading their ideals of what society should be into natural processes. “See the lilies in the fields!”
“Yes,” comments Marx sarcastically, “see the lilies in the field, how they are chewed by the goats, transplanted by ‘men’ to the lapels of their coats, and how they snap together under the unchaste lovemaking of the cow-girl and donkey boy.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 5, p.456.)
The psychological motivation of the apotheosis of natural peace and of the “true socialist” lament that no human society in the past ever modelled itself on the laws of nature, Marx explains as follows:
“Ideas were smuggled into nature which the ‘true socialist’ wished to see realized in human society. Just as earlier the individual man became the mirror of nature, so now the whole of society. From the ideas smuggled into nature conclusions were drawn bearing upon human society. Since the authors did not concern themselves with the historical development of society and satisfied themselves with this barren analogy, it is not hard to understand why society was not always a faithful picture of nature.” (Ibid., p.459.)
This is a significant passage because Marx has been accused of precisely the same intellectual procedure—reading his wishes into the natural world and then adducing the world, as so conceived, as evidence in behalf of his dreams. It is unlikely that any man as critical-minded as Marx would fall a victim to a type of thinking which he so often condemned. Marx’s emphasis upon the changing historical patterns of society and his stress upon the transformative effect of struggle show how little he shared the illusions of the “true socialists”.
“We would gladly believe that ‘all social virtues ... are derived from the feeling of natural human kinship and unity’. It is well to remember, however, that on the basis of this ‘natural kinship’ feudalism, slavery and the social inequality of all epochs, rested. In passing, let us also note that this ‘natural human kinship’ is an historical product which is constantly being transformed in daily activity. It is always something quite natural no matter how inhuman and unnatural it appears before the tribunal not only of ‘man’ but of a subsequent revolutionary generation.” (Ibid., p.464.)  
B) The attribution of what is true of part of nature to the whole of nature, as well as the inferences from one part to another, usually reduces itself to the logical fallacy of the undifferentiated middle-term. Everything that happens to man is in one sense a natural fact but it does not warrant drawing conclusions about Nature as a whole, or about other natural facts, unless an analoguous structure is observable. Social phenomena, for example, may suggest approaching certain natural occurrences with definite categories just as the division of labor observable in human societies may help us discover something about the organization of a colony of bees or ants. But such hypotheses are at best weak and conjectural, and even when they seem to be confirmed, closer examination will generally show significant differences between the behavior patterns of men and those of any other living or nonliving things. All materialistic and idealistic reductions of the totalities of experience to one set of categories whether it be of matter or mind ultimately rest upon the systematic neglect of difference, novelty and uniqueness. What Marx wrote of the “true socialists” in this connection is just as valid against numerous schools of idealism and materialism which have succeeded them. I give only a fragment of his interesting analysis. Speaking of the shift from the term nature in one meaning to nature in another, he writes:
“This whole prologue is a model of naive philosophical mystification. The true socialist takes his point of departure from the idea that the split between life and happiness must cease. In order to find a proof for this proposition he calls nature to his aid and tries to make it appear that such splits do not exist within it. From this he concludes that since man is likewise a natural body and possesses the general characteristics of bodies, this split ought not to exist for him. With much greater justification could Hobbes derive his bellum omnium contra omnes from nature, and Hegel upon whose constructions the true-socialist stands, see in nature the lewd [liederliche] moments of the absolute Idea and even refer to the animals as the concrete anxiety of God. After having mystified nature, our true socialist mystifies human consciousness in that he makes it into a ‘mirror’ of mystified nature. Of course, as soon as ideas which are nothing more than the conceptual form of pious wishes concerning the human relationships of nature, are smuggled into the expressions of consciousness, then it follows forthwith that consciousness is only a mirror in which nature sees itself. And just as it was previously established by considering the qualities of man as a natural body, so here by considering his qualities as a merely passive mirror [blosser, passiver Spiegel] in which nature comes to consciousness, it is proved that the splits which were read out of nature must be eliminated from the human sphere ... ‘Man possesses self-consciousness.’ That is the first fact which is expressed. The drives and powers of the particular natural creature are transformed into the drives and power of ‘Nature’. They then naturally ‘appear’ in this creature particularised. This mystification was necessary in order to establish later the union of these drives and powers of ‘nature’ in man’s self-consciousness. Herewith the self-consciousness of man was easily transformed into the self-consciousness of nature in him. This mystification undergoes the appearance of being dispersed by the subsequent fact that man takes his revenge upon nature, and because nature finds its  self-consciousness in him, he seeks his self-consciousness in it—a procedure through which he finds no more in nature than that he has put into it by the above described mystification.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 5, p.456-7.)  
4. Was Marx a “True Socialist”? We now turn to the comparatively unimportant question whether Marx himself was ever a “true socialist”—a question about which many scholarly disputes have been waged. As distinct from Engels he never called himself a “true socialist”. And if “true socialism” be defined politically, he was never within hailing distance of the doctrine. But neither was Engels. Marx on many occasions employed phrases which appeared in the writings of the “true socialists”. He did this, however, not only in the ‘40’s but throughout his life. For example, in the statutes of the First International which he wrote we read that the purposes of the International are: “to acknowledge truth, justice and morality on the basis of conduct ... towards all men, without regard to color, creed or nationality” (cf., Stekloff, The First International, p.446.). The use of such phrases was permissible, Marx explains in a letter to Engels, because the substance of the doctrine is not obscured by them and some people find their way to a revolutionary position through them. Suavitur in modo, fortiter in re, was the principle which guided him when he came into conflict with working class views which were similar to his own. Where he recognized, however, a fundamental difference in point of view, Marx was loath to compromise even on terminology, for fear of obscuring issues. That is why he called himself and his party communist, when the Manifesto  was written. And when there was a possibility that enemy groups might masquerade with the same phrases that the socialists of the time used, he scrupulously insisted upon the necessary qualifications.
For Marx the essence of “true socialism” was its abstract, classless morality. Neither in his Left-Hegelian nor materialistic phase, then, can he properly be regarded as having been a “true socialist”. His opposition to the “true socialists” would not have been so intense if he had not observed the way in which extreme reactionaries were making use of their slogans. The Rheinischer Beobachter, for example, a Catholic government sheet, was almost calling itself communist and using the phrases of the “true socialists” in criticizing bourgeois hypocrisy. And those whom Marx in the Manifesto calls feudal or tory-socialists were trying to capitalize upon the impressions which the literature of “true socialism” was making on the German public. Of this tory-socialism, Marx wrote:
“They waved the beggar’s wallet in their hand as a flag in order to get the people behind them. But as often as this took place, the people caught sight of the old feudal coat of arms upon their behinds and dispersed with loud and scornful laughter.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 6, p.646.)
It was Marx’s consciousness of the fact that the feudal socialists were waving the doctrinal flags of the “true socialists” which gave his words the sharp bite they had whenever he discusses “true socialism”. That many of the things he said of Hess were unjustified, Marx’s subsequent attitude towards him reveals clearly. But politically, Marx felt it was his revolutionary duty to oppose with all energy those who blocked the possibility of making any gains by the working class, no matter how small, in its struggle for liberation. He did not spare his friends any more than he spared himself. And although he was furious at stupidity, it was not out of intellectual hauteur  but out of a realization that if correct theories have practical consequences, mistaken theories have no less practical consequences. There were many things that he did not see; but he always saw the implications of doctrines, programs, and sometimes even the choice of words, for the class struggle. It is in this sense that the following passage which treats of the terminological sentimentalities of the “true socialists” must be understood:
“In the real world there exists, on the one side, owners of private property and on the other, a propertyless communist proletariat. This opposition becomes sharper day by day and is heading for a crisis. Consequently, if the theoretical representatives of the proletariat desire to accomplish anything by their literary activity, they must above all get rid of all phrases which weaken the intensity of this opposition, all phrases which glide over the opposition and which offer the bourgeoisie an opportunity, impelled by its sentimental quest for security, to approach the proletariat. All of these bad characteristics we find in the slogans of the true socialists ... We are well aware that the communist movement cannot be corrupted by a pair of German phrasemongers. But it is necessary in a country like Germany where philosophical phrases have for centuries had a certain power, and where the absence of the sharp class oppositions which prevail among other nations makes the communist consciousness less militant and decisive—to oppose all phrase-making which waters down and weakens still further the consciousness of the total opposition of communism to the existing world order.” (Gesamtausgabe, I, 5, p.453.)
 
Footnotes 1. “Wir haben noch etwas mehr zu tun als für unser lumpiges Selbst zu sorgen: wir gehören der Menschheit.”
2. Marx in Die deutsche Ideologie and Engels in a series of articles in the Deutschen Brüsseler Zeitung, entitled German Socialism in Verse and Prose.

