




Religious conservatism and sexual repression have gone hand in hand for generations in Ireland. Goretti Horgan explains the roots of Church power and argues that things are changing for the better



The fall of the Irish government as the result of a scandal about the cover up of a priest’s sexual abuse of children, brought to the surface many of the stereotypes about Irish people – priest ridden and sexually repressed the lot of us!
The power of the Catholic Church in Ireland and, in particular, its success in repressing sex and sexuality is indeed peculiar to Ireland. But this has nothing to do with ‘the Irish psyche’ or anything particularly religious about Irish people.
Up to the 16th century one of the complaints made by English commentators about the Irish was their ‘licentiousness’ and the lack of stigma which they attached to children born outside marriage. In the 6th century, when Ireland was supposed to be the ‘island of saints and scholars’, every heterosexual liaison was recognised as a type of marriage – even one night stands! Homosexual liaisons were seen as a problem only if they led to the men involved neglecting the sexual needs of their wives. The concept of illegitimacy simply did not exist.
The power of the Catholic Church over sexual matters in Ireland has nothing to do with the peculiarities of Irish people. That power has material roots which lie in the role played by the Church’s teachings on sexual matters in the development of capitalism in Ireland.
For centuries colonialism ensured that the Catholic Church was identified with the oppressed in Ireland. Britain had introduced penal laws in the mid-17th century, making Catholics second class citizens unable to rent, still less own, any sizeable tracts of land and unable to enter the professions. It was illegal to celebrate or attend mass.
This attempt at suppressing Catholicism didn’t work. As Wolfe Tone, the Protestant leader of the unsuccessful rebellion in 1798, wrote, ‘Persecution will keep alive the foolish bigotry and superstition of any sect’.
In the last half of the 18th century, and particularly in the wake of the French Revolution, the British government decided to change tactics and to try to build an alliance with the Catholic bishops. In 1795 it subsidised Maynooth College as a national seminary for Catholic priests. The Vatican was unsure about the usefulness of such an alliance but it was never developed.
Instead, the Catholic Church was to move towards an alliance with the emerging Catholic bourgeoisie. In the wake of the Great Famine of the mid-1840s sexual repression by the Church was to play an important role in promoting capital accumulation by this class, allowing it to become the new Irish ruling class. This role first gave the Catholic Church’s view of sexuality the kind of power it has traditionally had in Ireland.
The famine had decimated the rural poor, several millions of whom either died of starvation or were forced to emigrate. The tiny plots of land they had worked were taken over by the larger tenant farmers (holding over 15 acres). This tenant farmer class survived the famine intact and emerged as the strongest class in Catholic Ireland.
In 1841 only 18 percent of land holdings on the island of Ireland were of more than 15 acres. By 1851, 51 percent of holdings were over 15 acres. By 1891 this had risen to 58 percent. At the same time the numbers of holdings had fallen from 691,000 in 1841 to 570,000 in 1851 and 517,000 in 1891.
The large tenant farmer class was determined that the fate that had befallen the smaller tenant farmers during the famine was never going to happen to their class. In order to ensure this two things were necessary. First, the custom of dividing the land between all the sons in a family would have to be discontinued and the holdings passed on to one son only. Second, the number of children born to families would have to be limited.
It was here that the Catholic Church was to prove an important ally. The Church was, anyway, a natural ally to the large tenant farmer class. Most priests came from this class, which was the only Catholic class which could afford to educate its children. In 1808, of the 205 students in Maynooth, 78 percent were the sons of farmers. Only the larger farmers could afford to send their sons into the priesthood.
The large farmers, together with the urban merchant class, provided much of the money and personnel to run the churches, convents, schools and hospitals which sprang up all over Ireland following the end of the persecution of Catholicism.
The Church was crucial in providing the ideological basis for the sexual repression which ensured the pattern of late marriages and permanent celibacy which was to become the norm in Ireland.
Of course, the Church could become far more strict about sexual matters, preaching hellfire and damnation from the pulpits, and it still need not have made much difference in the privacy of bed had it not been for the third element in all this – the role of women.
Before the famine women had made an essential contribution to the family economy and as late as 1841 women accounted for more than half the non-agricultural labour force. Most of this economic independence was based on spinning wool, cotton and linen.
But the number of spinners fell by about 75 percent between 1841 and 1851. Only in the Belfast region, where linen became a factory industry, did this work survive the combination of industrial revolution and famine.
Women no longer had a clear economic role in the family. At this point the Church became involved in Irish family life, preaching the centrality of the family, the evils of all sexual activity not aimed at the ‘procreation of children’ and holding up the Virgin Mary as the model for women. Women, domesticated, became transmitters of Catholic ideology – a role they have played right up to the present.
In most countries of the world the religious head of the household is the man; in Ireland it is generally the woman. Women in the post-famine period were offered a role said to be the most important within society – bringing up children in the Catholic faith, with Catholic sexual morals, Catholic fear and Catholic guilt. The Church did not have to police the family – the Irish mother did it for them.
To some extent the women had little choice. There was nothing else on offer and in return for embracing the new morality they received a level of respect, of status, even of authority which they could not have expected given their changed economic role.
This period also saw a tremendous explosion in devotion to the Madonna, to the Rosary – which is a prayer to the Virgin – and all over the country shrines of devotion to Mary sprang up. The Virgin Mother was the model for Irish women who wanted to be accepted in society; the alternative was to emigrate.
About one third of emigrants from Europe as a whole between 1850 and 1950 were women, but from Ireland the proportion reached more than half. Most of the women who emigrated from Europe went as part of a family unit; well over half of Irish women emigrants were single and travelled alone.
For the women who remained the role of Virgin Mother was not always on offer. By 1926, about 25 percent of women remained unmarried at the age of 45, compared with about 10 percent before the famine. Late, arranged marriages meant that women, if they married at all, married men considerably older than them. Before the famine about 20 percent of husbands were ten years older than their wives. By the early 20th century the proportion had risen to about 50 percent.
Things weren’t exactly a bed of roses for the men either. Told that women were an ‘occasion of sin’ since the time of Eve, separated from them in school, church and social occasions, they were often frightened silly of their wives when their parents finally arranged a marriage – usually after the ‘boy’ had passed 45. The quadrupling of the official lunacy rate in Ireland between 1841 and 1901 probably says it all.
Emigration, late marriage and permanent celibacy did, however, stem the growth in population. The land was held together and the material and cultural level of Irish society rose. The Land Acts of the late 19th century allowed tenant farmers to buy their land and the conditions for the basic accumulation of capital necessary for the development of indigenous capitalism were all in place.
The strong tenant farmer class became the emerging capitalist class – with the tiny urban bourgeoisie they were the ones in a position to accumulate. They were fed up of being the middle man between Britain and the exploited classes in Ireland. They wanted to be bosses in their own countries so they joined in the nationalist cause.
Despite Republican mythology to the contrary, the Catholic Church was quite supportive of the nationalist cause in Ireland. Of course, the Church condemned people like Fintan Lalor and James Connolly who meant it when they said they wanted the land of Ireland for the people of Ireland. But when it came to the people who constituted their traditional social base – the large farmers and their children who had since become lawyers, teachers, doctors, civil servants and joined with the urban bourgeoisie – the Catholic Church was fully in support.
As it became clear to this group that independence was needed to advance their interests as a class, the Church moved with them. By the 1918 general election when Sinn Fein swept the board, Catholic bishops publicly endorsed them.
After independence the Church moved to protect the interests of its long time class allies and to legitimise the new ‘Free State’ as the South was then known. This legitimacy was vital in a country which had come to the brink of revolution in 1919–21.
In return, the new state made divorce illegal; banned even information about contraception; gave the chair of the Censorship of Films and Publications Committee to clerics and maintained the Church’s grip on education and the hospitals. In 1937 the constitution gave a special place to the Catholic Church and ensured the ban on divorce would never be lifted except by referendum.
Up to the 1970s the Church maintained its control, but changes in material conditions started to challenge that power.
Industrialisation in the 1970s produced job opportunities for women on a scale not seen in the lifetime of the state. The number of economically active women in the Republic increased by 50 percent between 1971 and 1991, while the number of active men increased by only 10 percent.
Right up to the 1970s it was assumed that once a woman got married she would give up her job (even before children arrived). In 1961 only 5 percent of married women were in paid employment. Today almost a third of married women work outside the home.
Economic changes gave women in Ireland an alternative to the role of domestic religious educator and moral police force. As women started to go out to work, they started to opt for the alternative. That meant a different attitude to sexual matters, more equal marriage relationships and a completely different view of sex outside marriage.
As early as 1979, surveys found that 75 percent of married couples used a form of contraception not approved of by the Catholic Church at some time in their marriage. The average family size has halved over a single generation. Women are no longer being forced into marriage because they find themselves pregnant; the number of ‘shotgun’ weddings of teenagers has fallen from 2,400 in 1971 to 600 in 1991.
Despite the ban on abortion, Irish women in their early 20s are as likely to have an abortion as women in Britain, and more likely than women in Holland. Single women who decide to continue their pregnancies usually opt to bring the child up themselves, rather than to give it up for adoption.
Of course, the Church has fought back. The abortion referendum of 1983 gave women equal status under the constitution with a newly fertilised egg. In the divorce referendum of 1987, 60 percent of voters opted to maintain the ban on divorce. Both of these showed that the Church could mobilise a backlash.
But the Church and its allies in the ruling class could not turn the clock back. When in February 1992 a 14-year-old rape victim was prevented from travelling to England for an abortion, all the contradictions within the Catholic position on abortion came to the fore. Over 10,000 people – mainly young men and women – took to the streets of Dublin demanding, ‘Let her go!’
People who had voted in favour of the anti-abortion amendment to the constitution phoned radio talk shows to say they never meant this to happen. The supreme court read the anger of the streets and, fearing riots if they did otherwise, announced their decision to allow her abortion. The decision was a political, not a legal one.
This became known as the X case and was the first of a series of events that have seriously eroded the power of the Catholic Church, particularly regarding sexual matters. Since the X case, Bishop Eamonn Casey – one of the most populist of preachers against pre- and extra-marital sex – was discovered to have a teenage son by an American woman.
The horrible truth about the abuse and degradation to which Catholic sexual morality subjected women and children has been slowly but relentlessly exposed. Institutions known as Magdalen laundries, where unmarried mothers were locked up for their entire lives and forced to work in slave labour conditions, were a subject for hushed conversation only. Then, when the land one of them was on was sold by the Church to property developers for several million pounds, there was an explosion of anger from relatives of women who had been incarcerated and tortured there.
Stories of physical, emotional and sexual abuse in Church run homes all over the island have become the regular diet of newspaper investigation. Journalists who expose one horror report that they are inundated afterwards with details of other more horrific stories of abuse.
The Father Brendan Smyth case, which led to the fall of the Reynolds government, was not unusual in any way in terms of his sexual assaults on children. What was different was the way in which the case exposed the frantic attempts by the Church and its allies in the ruling class to cover up what was yet another blow to Church authority.
The result of the attempted cover up has been the opening of the floodgates as generations of adults who had been abused by priests and nuns start to talk openly about it. And the present generation of children have also started to talk about the abuse that is still happening.
Every new allegation, every new conviction of a paedophile priest, exposes the hypocrisy of the Church. Women with eight or ten children who had been told that they cannot use contraception and must either stop having sex or continue having children are confused and angry.
There are clearly more changes and more revelations to come.
 



Across the world, where there is conflict or catastrophe, imperialism brings privatisation to help ‘reconstruct’ the country. Naomi Klein calls it ‘disaster capitalism’. From Aceh to Iraq, Nicaragua to Northern Ireland, the modus operandi is the same – get in quick, while the local population is preoccupied with other things, and sell off everything to the multinationals. Most of what people read about the North of Ireland concentrates on the political arena – for example, whether Ian Paisley’s Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and Gerry Adams’s Sinn Fein can really share power. This article confines itself to looking at what is happening under the radar of the peace process – at how disaster capitalism has invaded Northern Ireland and what this means for workers in the region.
 
Class or creed? Northern Ireland’s real divide
There is a growing gap between the rich and the rest in Northern Ireland. Recent UN development reports rank the Republic of Ireland as the world’s second most unequal developed country after the US. Yet the Poverty and Social Exclusion Northern Ireland Survey revealed that inequality in the North is greater. [1] Government figures for 2004–5 show more than three quarters of people living below the average income (after housing costs) in Britain. Some 36 percent of Catholic households are in poverty compared with 25 percent of Protestant. However, the gap between Protestants and Catholics is reducing – not because Catholics are becoming better off, but because Protestants are becoming worse off. While the gap between poor Protestants and poor Catholics is narrowing, the gap between the rich and the poor within each community is widening.
The other big divide in Northern Ireland is between those who have been affected by the conflict and those who have not. What we euphemistically call ‘the troubles’, when viewed proportionately to Northern Ireland’s population (1.7 million), could be characterised as a war in scale, intensity and duration. By the end of 2002, 3,352 people had died in the conflict. In addition about 50,000 have been injured – just over 3 percent of the population. Most of the deaths were concentrated in fewer than ten postal code districts. Over a third of those who died lived in five postal districts, all of them in North and West Belfast. These areas were, and remain, the poorest parts of Northern Ireland. Having suffered most from the conflict, they have now benefited least from the peace. A map of the areas where poverty is most concentrated matches very closely the map of areas where the conflict has been most intense. [2] In the Poverty and Social Exclusion Northern Ireland survey, half of all household respondents said they knew someone who had been killed in the conflict. [3]
 
Never had it so good?
Northern Ireland secretary Peter Hain and the Blairites – who administered through direct rule following the collapse of the Northern Ireland Assembly at Stormont in 2002 – want the world to believe that people in Northern Ireland have never had it so good. And true, if you are well off, it is probably one of the best parts of these islands to live. But if you are living on benefits or on low wages, it is one of the worst. Since 1990 Northern Ireland has had the fastest growing regional economy in the UK. [4] However, conflict undermines economic growth, and the much heralded rate of growth in the region over the past decade started from a very low base. Consequently, while the official unemployment rate is low, so is the proportion of people of working age who are in employment or seeking work. Further, the adult earnings in Northern Ireland, compared to those in Britain, were worse in 2004 than in 1995. [5] This is not surprising, since Northern Ireland is promoted to foreign investors as a low wage economy.
Policies forcing those on welfare back to work are an important part of the neoliberal agenda, and Northern Ireland has been subject to such programmes. But there is growing evidence that the legacy of conflict is making it even harder for those living in the poorest areas to get, or keep, a job. [6] Variation in the intensity of violence in different areas of Northern Ireland has been linked to differences in the level of psychological disorder. A report from the 1997 Northern Ireland Health and Social Well-being Survey indicates that people in poorer households were more likely to suffer significant health stresses and also more likely to have borne the brunt of ‘the troubles’. Recent research suggests that many people who were resilient during the conflict are now suffering psychological distress. [7] This prevents residents of areas such as North and West Belfast from taking up any jobs that might be going.
The fear that remains in areas that have taken the brunt of the conflict also helps explain their high levels of unemployment. A large-scale survey of the impact of fear on North Belfast’s ‘interface’ communities collected data on over 4,500 individuals. It revealed that just one in 12 worked in areas dominated by the ‘other’ religion. Some 48 percent would not travel through an area dominated by the other community during the daytime, due to fear. Between a third and two thirds said their jobseeking activities are limited by fear. [8]
 
Disaster capitalism – privatising peace
Following a war there are expectations of a ‘peace dividend’ where money previously spent on security is spent on improving public services. Successive British governments have blamed low levels of investment in public services in Northern Ireland on the cost of security. It was understandable, then, that social attitudes surveys found high hopes that a more ‘normal’ politics would emerge, where issues like the economy, health, education and employment would dominate, rather than the divisive sectarian issues that had overshadowed politics in the region during ‘the troubles’.
Before the 2002 collapse of the Stormont assembly, the administration had been anxious to repair the infrastructural deficit in the region, following 30 years of neglect by British governments. It accepted the Treasury’s edict that not all the capital projects required to do this could be undertaken with public money and that Private Finance Initiatives (PFIs) and Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) would have to be used for some. However, the level of opposition from trade unions and the public generally led to a search for a different model for PFI/PPPs, in particular one that would keep affected workers in the public sector. A report produced by an interdepartmental working group advocated limited use of PFI/PPPs, with a social partnership approach involving trade unions and the voluntary sector in decisions about which projects should involve the private sector.
Direct rule provided an opportunity for Tony Blair and Gordon Brown’s neoliberal dream to be pushed through while no one was looking too closely. This marked the rise of what Naomi Klein referred to in another context as ‘a predatory form of disaster capitalism that uses the desperation and fear created by catastrophe to engage in radical social and economic engineering. And on this front, the reconstruction industry works so quickly and efficiently that the privatisations and land grabs are usually locked in before the local population knows what hit them’. [9]
While there is a widespread awareness of the corporate takeover of Iraq, what the shock troops of neoliberalism have done in parts of Europe such as Kosovo and Northern Ireland is less well known. One of the few articles on Kosovo, by Neil Clark, appeared in the Guardian in September 2004. Clark argued that the Nato bombing of Kosovo was used to attack public sector enterprises and that the ‘reconstruction’ period has seen the corporate takeover of the country. The Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA), which operates under the jurisdiction of the UN Mission in Kosovo, was set up specifically to privatise industries, mines and services. Its internet homepage starts with this message:
The KTA has been established to preserve or enhance the value, viability, and corporate governance of socially owned and public enterprises in Kosovo. For Socially Owned Enterprises the KTA initiates ‘Spin-offs’ and Liquidation, its preferred procedures for privatisation ... The inaugurating Board meeting of the KTA took place on 25 July 2002. Since then, the KTA is operational, continuing the preparation of privatisation of the Socially Owned Enterprises and the administration of Publicly Owned Enterprises. [10]
 
The corporate takeover of Northern Ireland
The Strategic Investment Board, established under direct rule in 2003, is Northern Ireland’s expression of disaster capitalism and is modelled on the Kosovo Trust Agency. The Strategic Investment Board has become a vehicle for the active promotion of PFI/PPPs. Up to the end of 2003 the region had 31 PPP projects worth on average £11 million each. Over the next decade the Strategic Investment Board plans at least £3.2 billion in PPP projects. Eight of the latest projects in procurement have an average value of £110 million each.
As in Scotland [11], the education sector is firmly in the private sector’s sights. In 2005 there was a ‘consultation’ on ‘new procurement and delivery arrangements for the schools’ estate’. This proposed a ten-year programme to rebuild 15 percent of schools through PFI/PPPs. It planned the outsourcing all non-teaching education workers into the private sector, whether or not their schools were being refurbished by a PFI scheme.
These proposals are based on a 2005 report prepared by Price Waterhouse Coopers for the department of education and the Strategic Investment Board. They describe the proposals as ‘partnering friendly’, which indeed they are. Every effort is made to ensure that private contractors are ‘incentivised’, i.e. the effort put into making it easy for private contractors is the same as the effort put into making it difficult for workers to keep their jobs and services in the public sector. While Price Waterhouse Coopers provides guidance for potential investors, trade unions are denied basic information about what is going on and barred from the consultation process. [12] Meanwhile, having shaped the policy, Price Waterhouse Coopers is also ‘currently seeking to build a number of these partnering consortia to exploit the next wave of projects moving to procurement’. [13]
New Labour has been described as fixated with partnerships. But its ideological drive to privatise as much of Northern Ireland’s public services as possible before the restoration of devolution meant it ignored the devolved administration’s determination to involve social partners in decisions about PPPs. In preparing its report, Price Waterhouse Coopers was to consult with ‘education partners’. According to the Unison union ‘this was deemed to include private companies who were potential strategic partners’ but not the unions representing education workers. Strategic Investment Board chief executive David Gavaghan spelt out the nature of these strategic partners in the PFI Journal. He told readers that ‘a lot of partners’ were involved in ‘encouraging investment in education’ in the North, and named three from whom there had been ‘a very strong response’ – Amey, Bilfinger Berger and Hochtief. Amey, owned by the Spanish construction company Ferrovial, holds contracts for maintaining London Underground and owns a number of airports. Bilfinger Berger is a German-based construction company. Hochtief became a partner in schools development here when it acquired the PFI operations of Jarvis for £1 – the price reflecting Jarvis’s fall from grace following its role in the Potters Bar train disaster. While the involvement of trade unions in social partnership in the Republic of Ireland has been disastrous for workers and did nothing to stop the race to the bottom, New Labour’s unwillingness to even ‘consult’ unions speaks volumes.
So what are the prospects of mounting a serious challenge to the privatisation spree? We have to note, first, that the reason local politicians don’t challenge the Blair/Brown agenda is not only that they are focused almost exclusively on sectarian issues. It is also because they have bought into neoliberalism. They either fully accept it – the position of most of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and Ulster Unionist Party – or believe it is futile to oppose it – the position of Sinn Fein and the SDLP. While they argue at the top of their voices about who should run the North, they give the neoliberals the nod to get on with it. The parties have revealed their true colours where they have already had some power – in relation to the council-owned City of Derry Airport, for example. The DUP, Sinn Fein and the SDLP (the Ulster Unionist Party is effectively defunct in Derry) all gave full backing to Ryanair’s demand for the eviction of families near the airport in order to facilitate expansion required by its new fleet of Boeings.
The parties’ September 2006 submissions to the economic subgroup of the ‘preparation for government committee’ tell us a lot. The DUP said, ‘Northern Ireland needs a serious dose of introspection within its government department’s [sic] vis-ß-vis their relationship with the business community and the promotion of a genuine partnership between government and business with government taking on the role of facilitating entrepreneurial opportunity.’ Sinn Fein said, ‘We should say yes to goal driven tax incentives which increase R&D activity, aid new product and process innovation, enhance worker training and development, help our entrepreneurs break into new markets and aid environmental improvements.’ Either statement could fit comfortably into a policy statement from the Confederation of British Industry or an election appeal from the Tories.
 
Water: a privatisation too far?
One privatisation that is well known and faces almost 100 percent opposition from public and local politicians alike is water privatisation. The publicly owned Water Service is to be scrapped and a government-owned private company – known as a Go-Co – is to be set up. The Go-Co will mean full privatisation. The company will be incorporated the same as any other private company. It will have shares, which will, initially at least, be owned by the government, and it will be subject to the same rules and regulations as other private companies. The private consortium that conducted a review of the water service said that the reason for not moving directly to full-scale privatisation was that this ‘would not be practicable nor sufficiently acceptable in the short term ... The position will, however, be reviewed in 2008.’ In other words, ‘We might not get away with it in one go, so let’s hang on a year.’
The review allocated the Go-Co an opening valuation of ‘not less than £1 billion with zero initial debt’. The proposal is, then, that a billion-pound-plus public asset will be handed over to private interests between now and 2008, its debts discharged with public money. Private interests will then be guaranteed a revenue flow sufficient to meet all expenditure and allow for profit by means of water charges levied by law on the public. An estimated 700 local jobs will be destroyed in the process.
In Northern Ireland, as elsewhere, there are many with no strong views on the principle of privatisation or the idea of charges, who nevertheless draw the line at water being handed over to private interests. Water is not a consumer choice but a necessity of life. The idea that access to a water supply should come at a price set by profiteers strikes many non-ideological citizens as plain wrong. Some are inspired by the defeat of water-privatisation plans in places as far apart as Bolivia and the South of Ireland. While slow to move to defend threatened jobs and public services, the trade union movement finally woke up in 2006, with the largest union, the Northern Ireland Public Sector Alliance and the Transport Union voting at their conferences to support the campaign for non-payment of charges. Even the Irish Congress of Trade Unions’ Northern conference voted to ‘adopt and support’ non-payment as the best means of defeating privatisation and charges.
Meanwhile, the four main parties have all insisted on their detestation of the plans for water privatisation. But none advances a strategy to stop the plan. None of them are willing to back a mass campaign of non-payment – partly because this would mean mobilising people on a basis that has nothing to do with the community they come from. There is no way that water privatisation can be defeated on a Unionist or Nationalist basis. So there is no way any party could demonstrate that it was the better representative of its own community vis-a-vis the other side. That is, a campaign on water charges would not fit into the pattern of politics on which the four main parties are founded.
For those who can maintain optimism of the will in the face of the pessimism that Northern Irish politics breeds, mass non-payment of water charges offers the best hope of tilting the political axis away from community and towards class, to the benefit of the entire working class. It opens up the prospect of a future no longer dominated by sectarian hostilities and of a real challenge to disaster capitalism in the North of Ireland.
+ * *
Notes
1. P. Hillyard et al., Bare Necessities: Poverty and Social Exclusion in Northern Ireland (Belfast 2003), found that Northern Ireland has a Gini coefficient of 0.42, compared to 0.36 in the South. The Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality ranging from zero (complete equality) to one (complete inequality).
2. M.T. Fay, M. Morrissey and M. Smyth, Mapping Troubles-Related Deaths and Deprivation in Northern Ireland (Belfast 1998).
3. P. Hillyard, W. Rolston and M. Tomlinson, Poverty and Conflict: the International Evidence (Dublin 2005).
4. In the decade to June 2000 gross domestic product per capita rose by 53.5 percent compared with 46.4 percent in the UK generally, the number of employee jobs increased by 16.7 percent and manufacturing output expanded by 26.2 percent compared with only 2.8 percent in the UK generally.
5. In 1995 workers in Northern Ireland earned 89.3 percent of average earnings in Britain. In 2004 the figure was 86.5 percent.
6. E. Cairns and R. Wilson, Stress, Coping and Political Violence in Northern Ireland, in J.P. Wilson and B. Raphael (eds.), International Handbook of Traumatic Stress Syndromes (New York 1993); D. O’Reilly and S. Browne, Health and Health Service Use in Northern Ireland: Social Variations (2001).
7. E. Cairns, Coping with Political Violence: Lessons from Northern Ireland. [Note by ETOL: This version of the arcticle has a different title: People Less Resilient Since Decrease in Violence.]
8. P. Shirlow, Ethno-sectarianism and the Reproduction of Fear in Belfast, in Capital and Class 80 (2003).
9. Naomi Klein, The Rise of Disaster Capitalism, The Nation, 2 May 2005.
10. http://kta-kosovo.org.
11. Lynne Poole and Gerry Mooney, Privatising Education in Scotland? New Labour, Modernisation and “Public” Services, in Critical Social Policy 26 : 3, pp. 562–586.
12. Unison, Response to DE/SIB Consultation on New Procurement and Delivery Arrangements for the Schools’ Estate in Northern Ireland.
13. C. Tenner, Partnership for Regeneration, in Public Service Review: the PFI Journal 49 (2005).
 



In Search of a State: Catholics in Northern Ireland
Fionnuala O’Connor
Blackstaff Press £8.95
In Search of a State is a powerful argument for class
politics as the only way to end sectarian division and violence in
Northern Ireland. It doesn’t set out to offer a class analysis. Its
author, Fionnuala O’Connor, leans to the left but dismisses the
idea of working class unity as a dream that ‘a few cling to’. In
spite of this, she presents powerful evidence of class as the main
divide in Northern Ireland today.
While Catholics are still under-represented in many high status,
well paid jobs, O’Connor shows how, since direct rule by Britain
was introduced in 1972, there has been a steady rise in the number of
Catholics holding these jobs.
About 30 percent of managers and administrators in both private
and public sectors are Catholics. The civil service, the North’s
biggest employer and once a byword for discrimination, is now 35
percent Catholic at management level.
This new Catholic middle class likes to flaunt its new found prosperity.
For these people, the argument about the Northern state is largely
over. They are happy with the status quo economically and
socially. Culturally and politically they still have some problems.
They don’t like the continuing Britishness of formal occasions and
their implied second class citizenship at such times. And they’re
very clear that they’re not going to accept a return to Stormont –
the pre-civil rights days when Unionist domination was secured by
gerrymandering and discrimination.
But these problems are not seen as insurmountable. There is a
strong consensus among middle and ruling class people of all
religions that the future lies in some kind of Joint Authority or
federal Ireland within the European Community.
Sir George Quigley, chairman of the Ulster Bank, the Northern
Ireland Economic Council and many top civil servants have already
argued the need for ‘an island economy’ which ignores the border.
John Hume insists that a ‘Europe of the Regions’ will solve the
problem of partition without too much pain. Even Sinn Fein, who used
to be implacable opponents of the EC, recently opened a permanent
office in Brussels.
But for the overwhelming majority of working class Catholics,
there has been little change apart from improved housing. What
worries them is grinding poverty, the prospect of seeing their
children join them on the dole queues and continuing harassment by
the British army and the RUC. They still support the Provos and look
to a united Ireland.
Some of those O’Connor talked to said they were struck by the
similarity with the growth of the black middle class in the US and
the growing gulf among Northern Catholics between the new rich and
those left in the ghetto, ‘who now see themselves as victims twice
over – in Northern Ireland first, discriminated against by the
Unionist state, and next abandoned and then criticised by people
whose rise they believe is largely a result of a campaign of protest
about disadvantage they themselves still suffer.’
More than one of O’Connor’s interviewees made the point that
the Catholic middle class had ‘made it on the shoulders of the
poor’ and now criticise those left in the ghetto because they
continue to support Sinn Fein and the IRA.
Yet all the evidence points to unemployment and poverty as the
main causes of support for the IRA.
O’Connor points out that the 80 local government areas where
unemployment is lowest are exclusively or predominantly Protestant.
Of the 50 wards where unemployment is highest, 45 are Catholic,
including the top eight. Catholic men remain 2.2 times more likely to
be unemployed than Protestant men and 67 percent of the long term
male unemployed are Catholics.
But more and more Protestant workers are being dragged into
poverty as the economic crisis cuts deep.
The traditional areas of employment for Protestant workers have
all but disappeared. And when Protestant workers look for an
explanation of the changes that have happened over the last 20 years,
what they see is the conspicuous wealth of a new Catholic middle class.
In the absence of any other – socialist – explanation, many
Protestant workers accept that their growing poverty is caused by
growing Catholic prosperity. So they continue to support the Unionist
parties and to look to the United Kingdom.
It isn’t that Protestant workers are the dupes of Loyalism or
Catholic workers are the dupes of nationalism.
There is a growing realisation among Catholic and Protestant
workers alike that going back – to a capitalist united Ireland, or
to the days when Britain wanted the Union – is no longer an option.
What is clear from In Search of a State is that, whatever the
settlement reached over the coming year or two, it could work for the
middle class but will do nothing to end the sectarianism which causes
the violence.
Giving equal recognition to the two ‘traditions’ or identities
will solve the cultural and political grievances of the Catholic
middle class. But it would put Protestant and Catholic working class
communities in competition with each other for ever scarcer
resources. And that is a recipe for festering sectarianism and
continuing violence.
What the book doesn’t contain is a hint of the deep anger felt
by workers on all sides at the continuing attack on their living
standards. If that anger is channelled into a fight against the
Tories instead of against fellow workers, things could be very
different. It could allow another ‘identity’ to emerge – a
working class identity that cuts across the two communities and
unites workers in defence of their interests as a class.
 



Anyone visiting the North of Ireland these days cannot drive through any city, town or hamlet there without finding part or all of it bedecked with massive union flags. From December 2012 into the early months of 2013, to the time of writing, Belfast and all of the North has seen almost daily protests about the union flag, some ending in riots; all featuring vicious sectarianism on the streets.
The protests started on December 3rd after a vote in Belfast City Council to fly the union flag over City Hall only on 18 designated days a year; the Queen’s birthday etc. Sinn Fein had wanted the flag taken down altogether, but in the end supported the ‘designated days’ compromise put forward by the ‘moderate’ Alliance Party. A loyalist protest outside City Hall erupted into violence minutes after the motion was passed. Rioting also broke out in east Belfast. The protesters had come onto the streets in response to 40,000 leaflets slamming Alliance, distributed across Belfast in a joint operation by Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) activists.
The leaflets accused Alliance of: ‘backing the Sinn Fein/SDLP position that the flag should be ripped down on all but a few days’. It urged people to tell Alliance: ‘We don’t want our national flag torn down from City Hall. We can’t let them make Belfast a cold house for Unionists.’
 
Background
The focus on the Alliance Party arose not just from the City Hall vote but because Alliance’s Naomi Long had defeated DUP leader and First Minister Peter Robinson in the 2010 election. The shock result had little to do with flags but reflected disgust at newspaper revelations about the ‘Swish Family Robinson’s’ luxury lifestyle at the taxpayers’ expense. Peter Robinson and his now-disgraced wife, Iris, who was also an MP, had claimed over half-a-million pounds a year in salaries and expenses from Westminster, and had tried to claim twice for the same expenses on a regular basis. Peter Robinson had claimed £755 for a briefcase and Iris Robinson had tried to claim for a £300 fountain pen. Working-class DUP voters suffering the brunt of austerity measures were fuming.
There had also been a raft of revelations about broader corruption in DUP-controlled councils, particularly Castlereagh in east Belfast where the Robinson family had close, lucrative ties to property developers. These revelations came after Ian Paisley, senior and junior, had been shown to have profited from links with property developers.
The loss of east Belfast was traumatic for the DUP. They set out to use the flags issue to stir up Protestant hostility to Alliance. While Alliance Party offices – and even councillors’ homes – were attacked by mobs at the start of the protests, loyalist paramilitaries weighed in behind the DUP/UUP – inspired protests and changed tack towards more generally disruptive tactics, like the rash of road-blocks.
 
Loyalist Paramilitaries Death Squads of the British State
While today’s loyalist paramilitary gangs emerged in the mid-1960s as a reactionary response to the civil rights movement, the roots of sectarianism go right back to the plantations of the 17th century, when racist depictions of the native Irish as ‘savages’ were employed to justify seizing their land. At the end of the 18th century, there were frequent clashes between Irish (Catholic) peasants and the English (Protestant) landlords. The landlords then promoted an alliance between themselves and Protestant yeomen (independent farmers) against the Catholics – with the Orange Order as the main mechanism for cross-class integration. As industry developed, the Orange Order (or ‘Orange Lodge’) moved into the towns and into Belfast where it operated to tie Protestant workers to Protestant bosses and encourage them to look down on their Catholic fellow workers. The Orange Lodge became the place to secure a skilled job – so such jobs were only open to Protestants. From time to time, the British government armed the Orangemen to put down rebellions.
The Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) was (re)formed in 1966, in response to commemorations of the 1916 Rising; before the year was out, it had killed two civilians – a Protestant and a Catholic. The other large loyalist paramilitary group, the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), was formed in Sept 1971. In its first year, it killed more than 30 Catholic civilians. Loyalist paramilitaries are not, as they claim, a Protestant equivalent of the IRA. They are pro-imperialist and pro-state; gung-ho supporters of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, for example. From their inception, there have been allegations of collusion with the forces of the state. Since the peace process, clear evidence has emerged that the relationship went further than collusion: loyalist paramilitaries were actively promoted by the State as they went about their grisly sectarian business.
In July 1972, the British Army’s GOC (General Officer Commanding), General Harry Tuzo, dispatched a paper to Home Secretary, William Whitelaw, suggesting that the growth of loyalist paramilitaries should be quietly promoted. The wording of the paper implied the creation of a ‘second front’ against the Provisional IRA. ‘Vigilantes, whether UDA or not,’ Tuzo wrote, ‘should be discreetly encouraged in Protestant areas to reduce the load on the Security Forces.’
This suggestion wasn’t entirely new. A month earlier, up to 8,000 masked UDA men armed with iron bars and cudgels confronted British troops in the Shankill Road area. The British commander of land forces, Major-General Robert Ford, arrived to negotiate with the UDA in the back of a Saracen armoured car; they struck a deal whereby the UDA and the British soldiers conducted joint patrols of the area.
The same paramilitaries, with the help of British army intelligence and the arms and expertise of the part-time Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR), carried out a proxy war, assassinating targets like solicitors Pat Finucane and Rosemary Nelson and over 1,000 other innocent civilians. Unsurprisingly, they have always had links with fascists; first with the National Front and Combat 18, then with the BNP and lately the English Democrats. One link between the BNP and the English Democrats is Jim Dowson, who fell out with the BNP over money, became a leader of the ED, and has addressed a number of the flag rallies. Dowson moves between Scotland, Northern Ireland and England setting up anti-abortion and fascist groups.
Despite the peace process and the ‘Patten reforms’ – which saw the effectively all-Protestant Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) change name and badges to the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) for weeks the loyalist protesters were given an easy ride by police. This showed the extent to which Northern Ireland remains a sectarian state. In contrast to protests by students or anti-war protesters, police stood by and allowed main roads to be blocked by small groups of teenagers.
 
Secret and Political Policing: ‘The Policing You Don’t See’
The devolution of policing and justice powers was to be the end of the argument about the need to end the Northern state – when the essential power of the state, its ‘bodies of armed men’, came under the control of the people of Northern Ireland. But, a state built on sectarianism cannot just leave it behind. Apart from the fact that the devolution of policing and justice is merely a return to the status quo ante of the years when Stormont ruled ‘a Protestant state for a Protestant people’, the devolution of policing and justice leaves the political aspects of policing in the hands of British intelligence agency (or ‘Security Service’) MI5.
The ‘Committee on the Administration of Justice’ (CAJ) recently published: The Policing You Don’t See: Covert Policing And The Accountability Gap. Researched and written by CAJ’s deputy director, Daniel Holder, it contains a shocking indictment of the extent to which the secret Security Service – implicated in past abuses – remains unaccountable to any politician or court, despite being involved in the North in a highly important area of mainstream policing.
The report reminds us of the overwhelming evidence from official inquiries of many abuses in covert policing in the past. As a result, the Patten report on policing reform recommended that the Special Branch be downsized and integrated into the PSNI, where it would be overseen by an independent board rather than a government minister. However, the St Andrews Agreement included a ‘Memorandum of Understanding’ whereby Special Branch was to be run by a parallel police force – ‘a force outside a force’ – answerable only to ‘direct rule’ Ministers. Since the Chief Constable has said that MI5 would focus only on dissident republicans, this means that two different covert policing regimes, in terms of operational techniques, standards and oversight, are now in place for republicans and loyalists.
The CAJ research shows that in the UK oversight of MI5 is ineffective. Policy documents, which have been released to CAJ under Freedom of Information, rather than encouraging safeguards actually appear designed to limit accountability. The documents discovered for the report show an obsession with keeping anything with the label ‘national security’ secret from politicians, lawyers, media and the public.
After St Andrews, Tony Blair gave assurances that PSNI officers working with MI5 would be ‘solely accountable’ to the Chief Constable and the Policing Board; in contrast, the CAJ report shows that PSNI officers, up to and including the Chief Constable, working on national security matters are not accountable to anyone but Westminster. Political policing remains.
The director of CAJ said: ‘MI5 – secret, unreformed and unaccountable – is now running one of the most sensitive areas of policing. This is a disaster waiting to happen to confidence in the rule of law and our peace settlement. CAJ wants a full, independent review with the aim of bringing covert policing here in line with human rights standards.’
In any case, the PSNI are doing their best to ensure that they continue to be seen as a sectarian force. Their use of Section 44 stop-and-search powers has been entirely in working-class areas but mainly Catholic working-class areas. These searches have risen year on year from over 2,000 in 2006 to over 22,000 in 2010/11.
 
Re-invigorated Loyalism: The Ugly Face of Inequality
Loyalist paramilitaries have delighted in telling their Facebook audience that they ‘haven’t gone away, you know’ (echoing Gerry Adams’ 1995 quip about the IRA). They are using the anger incited by the DUP/UUP leaflets for their own purposes. These include recruiting young people to paramilitarism and gaining funding for their ‘community projects’ – aka jobs for the boys.
Most community groups in Catholic working-class areas have for years been firmly controlled by Sinn Fein – in part, a pay-back for the Provo ceasefire. Loyalist paramilitaries aim at a similar situation in ‘their’ areas. While Sinn Fein has used manoeuvring and political influence to gain control over community groups, loyalists have tended to use intimidation. For historical reasons, linked to their loyalty to the state, community organisation in Protestant areas is less developed than in Catholic areas. So, fewer jobs for the boys – unless rioting can bring millions into the area to ‘restore peace’ and deal with ‘Protestant alienation’.
There are good reasons for working-class Protestants to feel alienated – but none likely to be helped by the flag protests. One of the most striking features of poverty in Northern Ireland over the last 20 years has been the way Protestant working-class areas have steadily climbed up the deprivation figures. So, while Catholic areas were highly overrepresented in the 10 percent most deprived areas 20 years ago, today about 40 percent of the most deprived areas are Protestant. There are many reasons for this: the engineering and other manufacturing jobs that used to provide relatively well-paid, secure employment in Protestant areas have gone.
And educational disadvantage hits the Protestant section of the working class, especially boys, hard. All children in the North are poorly served by a selective education system; but all the nationalist parties are against selection. Sinn Feeins Education Ministers abolished the Eleven Plus but failed then to get rid of the grammar schools or to push through the NI Assembly a new non-academic form of transfer from primary to second level, because both the Unionist Parties support academic transfer. A taskforce on Protestant educational disadvantage was set up by Dawn Purvis while she was still an MLA. It identified a range of shocking statistics: Just 8.5 percent of those on Free School Meals (FSMs are a proxy for poverty as they are only available to the poorest children) in Protestant non-grammar schools achieved two A levels, compared with 21.2 percent in Catholic non-grammars. A catholic pupil from a poor background on FSMs will have a one in five chance of going to university while a similar child in a Protestant school has a one in ten chance. Shirlow points out that there was only one unionist MLA (besides Dawn Purvis) at the launch of this report, while there were three Sinn Fein MLAs including the Deputy First Minister. [1] Despite their own working-class constituents being so badly impacted by selection, the unionist parties continue to defend it.
So, Protestant young people are less likely to get a minimum-wage job in the many call-centres that have come to Northern Ireland than their better-educated Catholic counterparts. Agency work is often the only option – jobs that earned £12 an hour 10 years ago but now attract only the minimum wage and offer no security. Even before the recession, median wage levels in the North generally were just 85 percent of those in Britain – over £15 a week less than the next lowest-paid region of the UK, the North-east of England.
Thus, Protestant working-class areas have been moving up the deprivation ‘league’, but not because Catholic areas have seen poverty levels reduced. The convergence is the result of the wages for all workers being pushed down. Northern Ireland is marketed across the world by the DUP and Sinn Fein as a low-wage area. More than half of Northern households are dependent either on benefits or working tax credits, while about a quarter are doing very well and can still afford foreign holidays and second homes.
This lack of concern by unionist politicians for working-class Protestants stretches back in history. The Ulster Unionist Party was known as the ‘fur coat brigade’ and, despite the Orange Lodge being supposed to bring all Protestants together, the fur coat brigade looked down their noses at the working class. The DUP was supposed to replace the fur coat brigade and cater for working class Protestants. That fiction did not last very long; as seen in its relationship with property developers across the Six Counties and its determination to cut the living standards of all working-class people through privatisation and welfare reform. Historically, there has been much sharper class stratification on the Protestant side – big landowners, industrialists, the professional classes, skilled workers, labourers, the jobless – all bound together in their British identity, but each knowing well enough his or her own place within it. Now DUP Ministers echo the anti-working-class rhetoric of Cameron and Osborne, looking down their noses at the ‘strivers’ and ‘shirkers’ on whose votes they depend for power.
In his study of the psychosocial impact of class, The Impact of Inequality, Richard Wilkinson points out that, statistically, people who live in highly unequal societies and feel looked down on are much more likely to be violent and have racist attitudes. The ‘fur-coat brigade’ of the unionist elite has long looked down on workingclass Protestants. Working-class Protestants are more likely than Catholics to live in deprived areas that are surrounded by wealth pockets of poverty among plenty. While the new Catholic middle classes tend to get out of the working-class areas as quick as they can, they are less likely to be able to openly look down on working-class Catholics. They might live on the Malone Road or the Culmore Road, but they are only one generation away from Ballymurphy or the Bogside.
This abandonment by the unionist parties means that many people looking in from outside Protestant working-class communities see loyalist paramilitaries as ‘community representatives’, as the voice of the Protestant working class. But this has never been the case. In election after election, political parties associated with loyalist paramilitaries have failed to get more than derisory votes. The only time the UDA’s political wing got elected was when there was a list system with a very low threshold for representation. The Progressive Unionist Party (PUP) did get elected for a short while but lost its electoral position when it was seen to be returning to feuding. This is precisely because loyalist paramilitaries are not the voice of the Protestant working class; they are a parasite on that class and rule their areas through fear and intimidation, often with the collusion of the police.
 
Institutionalised sectarianism
What’s happening on the streets was predictable. The 1998 Belfast (or Good Friday) Agreement was a recipe for institutionalised sectarianism. This is seen best at Stormont, where all Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) have to declare themselves ‘Unionist’, ‘Nationalist’ or ‘Other’. The First Minister is always from the largest unionist or nationalist party, the Deputy First Minister from the largest party on the ‘other side’. Every election consists of two parallel contests to elect the party seen as the best champion of ‘their own’ community. If you decide you’re ‘Other’, your role in politics is automatically diminished – when it comes to voting in the Assembly on issues requiring ‘cross-community support’, for example. Either unionists or nationalists can trigger this mechanism, which means that a measure has to be passed either by weighted majority, when at least 60% of all MLAs who vote support the motion, including at least 40% designated unionist and 40% designated nationalist. Or it may pass in accordance with the parallel consent formula, when at least 50% of members who vote support the motion, including at least 50% unionist and 50% nationalist.
This way of running things has had a poisonous effect, as sectarianism trickles down towards the street.
In Belfast you can see in the built environment the visible growth in sectarianism. The number of ‘Peace Walls’ has more than doubled since the Agreement. The level of fear, and not just in interface areas, has not fallen. In interface areas, it has increased. The fear is of physical attack, not just a generalised fear of the ‘other side’. Now, as sectarianism is again ratcheted up, fear grows that we are headed back to ‘the bad old days’. In spite of all the talk of ‘moving forward’, politics is gridlocked, with the DUP effectively in charge. The DUP is openly neo-liberal, a party in which Sarah Palin would feel rightly at home. It opposes gay rights, is virulently anti-abortion and doesn’t think there’s any poverty in Northern Ireland. A good proportion of its MLAs and government Ministers are members of the Caleb Foundation – an Evangelical umbrella group that promotes creationist views, urges its politician members to ‘implement god’s law’ and ‘jokingly’ calls itself ‘the Caleban’
In early January, while the flag protests raged, the DUP’s Minister for Social Development, Nelson McCausland, announced the abolition of the Housing Executive, one of the Civil Rights Movements most important legacies and, with it, the privatisation of all public housing and the certain loss of hundreds of public sector jobs. McCausland is also pushing the Welfare Reform Bill – already passed at Westminster – through the Assembly, introducing Universal Credit, the Personal Independence Payment and the ‘bedroom tax’ on top of cuts to benefits and tax credits. This represents a massive assault on working-class living standards. Sinn Feein is going along with it. Like the Lib Dems, they ‘oppose’ the cuts but then vote for their implementation.
The cuts affect Protestant workers as well as Catholic. These are the issues we need to see people on the streets about. The presence of a united working-class voice has been sadly missed. Two rallies for peace at Belfast City Hall attracted around 2,000 people each. The numbers could have been much bigger if the political basis had been different. The trade union movement organises more people – Protestant and Catholic – than all the Loyal Orders and comparable Catholic groups put together. It has the capacity to organise the overwhelming majority in Northern Ireland who are in despair over the latest eruption of sectarianism, but so far has failed to do so. So, while there is an alternative to the vicious cycle of sectarianism – the tradition of Protestant and Catholic workers uniting to fight as a class against the bosses – it can be hard to see the evidence that it still exists. It is the task of socialists to defend the principle of working-class unity against sectarian bigotry and to seek out ways of making that unity more visible. The fight to defend jobs and tenants’ rights, by stopping the abolition of the Housing Executive, provides the sort of issue and opportunity needed to bring workers together, to show that an alternative does still exist to the growth of sectarianism.
* * *
Footnote
1. Shirlow, P. (2012), The End of Ulster Loyalism?, Manchester University Press.
 

