

Senator Joe McCarthy
Richard Rovere
Methuen. pp. 217. 18/–
A biography of a demagogue which deals only with the man and not with his times, his environment and his sources of power, is most unsatisfactory. Richard Rovere has sketched a portrait of McCarthy and completely whitewashed the background to his picture. Nevertheless a few stark features show through the watery layer of apologetics.
The author admits that, in the main, Big Business financed McCarthy, who quickly squandered the takings from his hysteria-raising crusades. The Lustron Corporation paid his gambling debts, Texas oil millionaires bought his Cadillacs, and Pepsi-Cola and Seaboard Airlines both enriched him in return for much McCarthy manipulation of the sugar-rationing laws and of the state-run Reconstruction Finance Corporation. By the time the Senate investigating sub-committee had discovered all this, they were too much in fear and trembling of denunciation to reveal it.
All this, however, cannot be considered as abnormal in American post-war politics nor a source of devastating power to a demagogue. Perhaps public fear and ignorance were his greatest supports but the question of why they existed and why he was allowed to exploit them, remains. Here the author spreads the whitewash on thickest and the part played by the mass media and its controllers is ignored or excused. In a footnote to a remarkable passage explaining why the whole press gave such prominence to his utterances, this statement appears:
“... for I suspect that there is no surer way to a corrupt and worthless press than to authorise reporters to tell readers which ‘facts’ are really ‘facts’ and which are not.”
Facts, in inverted commas, because it was a ‘fact’ that McCarthy said that General Marshall was a traitor.
The author, himself seems to fall victim to a common theme in McCarthyism – the changing of the meaning of words. This can be the only explanation of his statement that McCarthy was not a reactionary, because he believed in state housing – an argument reminiscent of the admirers of the man who made the trains run to time, in a previous era.
 



Clyde Binfield et al. (eds.)
The History of the City of Sheffield 1843–1993
Volume 1: Politics
Volume II: Society
Volume III: Images
Sheffield Academic Press 1993
Manuel Castells
The City and the Grassroots
Edward Arnold, London 1983
Stuart Lowe
Urban Social Movements – The City After Castells
Macmillan, London 1986
The prospect of Labour in power is once more before us. It is a good moment to look at Labour’s rule in Sheffield this century. Two essays in the Binfield history, William Hampton’s examination of the optimistic period between 1951 and 1973 and Pat Seyd’s final essay in the first volume, are especially interesting. [1] Their claim is that the politics of Sheffield’s council were shaped by the interaction of ‘spontaneous’ urban social movements ‘outside the structure of the mainstream political parties’ [2] and the ‘new urban left’ dominated by the ‘new professional classes’ who decided council policy. The responses of Sheffield’s citizens to these administrators gave rise to the movements that, in the Thatcher years, came under the control of the new urban left. [3]
 
Strategies for struggle in Sheffield from the 1950s to the 1990s
Hampton and Seyd’s new social movements produced blueprints for radical projects to create alternative employment as a substitute for the jobs lost in the real factories and workshops that were being shut down by land hungry capitalists, eager to replace Sheffield’s traditional industries with shopping malls and entertainment arenas. The energies of some skilled workers were thus diverted from the struggles that took place against factory closures. In order to implement alternative schemes, co-operation with local capitalists seemed to hold out the best source of finance. Workshops were developed for retraining workers, apparently deskilled by new technologies, and for the advancement of women and ethnic minorities. The town hall professionals designed projects for civic regeneration, the new urban leaders popularised them in the ranks of the Labour Party and, in the words of Hampton, the resulting ‘discourses set the pattern for Sheffield’s political future.’ [4]
Seyd monitors the confrontation between Sheffield’s new left and the Thatcher government which attacked these strategies for a local ‘socialist’ economy, in favour of giving private capitalists a completely free hand. He shows how, firstly, the old style local government officers in Sheffield town hall were replaced by radical professional planners. Convinced by the new left that alternative strategies were viable, local campaigning groups were persuaded to substitute consultation with the council for confrontation with the employers. Many working class activists, particularly the recently unemployed, wished to take the struggle against the company closures and redundancies back into the factories. These tactics were rejected by the new left. [5]
Seyd does not record the trade union struggles against redundancies that led the councillors to reject these calls. General support for the right to work campaigns and for such trade union actions as the ‘People’s March for Jobs’ was based in the City Council’s newly formed Centres Against Unemployment, that were partly funded by the government’s Manpower Services Commission. [6] The MSC threatened to withdraw its proposals to fund the retraining of redundant workers if the Labour council endorsed the calls for campaigns and strikes against further redundancies that came from the Unemployment Centres. The councillors then applied pressure to expel right to work campaigners from the centres, though a small number of these who had organised under the banner of the official trade unions for the ‘People’s March for Jobs’ were given administrative jobs in the unemployment centres and in the various policy units created by the council.
Seyd acknowledges that the Labour left in Sheffield, under the leadership of David Blunkett, conceded to the right wing in the party and abdicated from the struggle. He argues that mistakes over funding could have been averted, had the left at an earlier date joined the public-private partnership, the popular front, or ‘leadership alliance’ coalition for growth and civic renewal that is the present strategy of Tony Blair’s Labour Party. [7] In this Seyd is wrong. The policies of the council accepted the role of the MSC in promoting collaboration at the very beginning of the rise in unemployment, but this only enabled local businessmen to close down their factories more rapidly on the false promise that retraining would bring in alternative work. Popular front strategies were anticipated by the Castells school of urban political studies in 1977 and continue to be endorsed by his disciples, but in practice in Sheffield they led to the defeat of organised workers. [8]
Entry into these coalitions was made eventually by the Labour council in Sheffield through membership of the Urban Development Corporation and through the World Student Games which provided three weeks of games but left £147 million of debt. Seyd agrees that in political terms the cost to the Labour left was even higher. The Labour council was faced with the prospect of being starved of their main sources of income, which came from local rates and central government subsidies from the Tories. In response, the council, Sheffield’s biggest employer, announced a no-redundancy policy to try and offset the massive job losses from surrounding industries. This policy ran the council into deficit, which it tried to overcome by refusing to set the Tory government’s ‘ratecapping’ reduction in local revenues. Seyd reports that, despite a two to one majority in the local Labour parties in favour of defying the Tories, the new left capitulated in May 1985, insisting that a new realism prevailed under which no new government laws should be broken. Left Labour opposition in general to the 1984 Rate Act, under which local government expenditures were fixed below the levels required to meet the needs of local workers, was thus broken by the same elected representatives who had called for a fight against the act in the first place. Seyd, accepting the logic of this new realism, pinpoints this collapse as the end of the new left in Sheffield but he fails to explain how committed socialists, who fought and continue to fight against racism and sexism, and who believed in the central role of the organised working class, failed to build the counter-attack against Tory policies on the great wave of struggles that took place in the city and in its surrounding regions from the 1960s to the mid-1980s. [9]
A factual history of the period 1951 to 1993 would record the scale and frequency of these struggles. They started in the 1950s and 1960s with a large number of small strikes led mainly by Communist Party dominated shop stewards’ committees. As the employers counter-attacked, vital strikes took place, two to three weeks long, to protect the stewards’ organisations at Millspaugh’s and at Shardlow’s in 1965 and 1966. Then came the massive local and national miners’ strikes of 1969 and 1972–1974 which used flying pickets, followed by longer strikes and mass pickets against the sackings of Betty Holden and Sylvia Greenwood, union convenors at Footprint and Presto lighter tool factories. Widespread factory occupations in the heavy forging and engineering sectors in the mid-1970s reached a peak in the massive rally in Norfolk Park, at which Tony Benn, the minister for industry, supported the workers’ sit-in at the River Don Steelworks. These are only the most significant events in an entire period of struggle. It continued defensively but determinedly with the steel workers’ and miners’ strikes of 1980 and 1984–1985, up to the huge wave of protests in Sheffield against the poll tax that helped to bring down Thatcher’s premiership, in a mood of popular anger against the Tories, that continued, through the massive public outrage against pit closures in 1992, to this day.
By omitting these events the editors of the Binfield history did not set out deliberately to falsify history. Their main purpose in preparing these volumes was to record Sheffield’s leadership of the ‘counter-national tendency’, which ‘protects individuals from despotism’ with the aid of the churches, the magistrates, the universities and the town corporations. [10] But these organisations failed to achieve unity against ‘despotism’ in the years of Thatcher. One example was the row between the new left on Sheffield Trades and Labour Council and Sheffield University when in July 1984 the university registrar, Dr John Padley, rented student accommodation and provided early breakfasts to highly paid strike breaking police squads who were mounting baton charges against the pickets of striking miners defending their jobs at the Orgreave coking plant.
 
The new left and the Sheffield Communist Party
One obvious example of the failure of a popular front strategy was the attempt at economic and civic regeneration through productivity agreements, made by the late George Caborn, leading Communist Party member and Sheffield district secretary of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers. He signed productivity deals between the unions and the employers which led inevitably to cuts in the labour force and to reductions in take home pay for workers. But this capitulation to the employers, endorsed by the CP’s new left partners in the Broad Left, failed to secure the reinvestment by private capitalists in Sheffield industries that most full time union officials believed would follow.
The failure of the popular front strategy was starkly demonstrated in the steel industry. When the right wing Iron and Steel Trades Confederation leader, Bill Sirs, unilaterally brought to an end the three month old national steel strike in 1980, he endorsed the drive of the nationalised British Steel Corporation for internationally competitive levels of labour productivity by signing away 100,000 jobs in the industry nationally and 20,000 locally. None of these details appears in the Binfield history of Sheffield, in which Sidney Pollard writes about the labour movement and Geoffrey Tweedale writes about the steel industry.
Seyd, covering the last 20 years of the left in Sheffield, looks at the claims that fostered ‘the myth of the Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire’. He refers to schemes for the replacement of the declining steel and tool industries (nearly 20,000 toolmakers lost their jobs between 1970 and 1991 and the heavy forgings industry declined from 13,000 workers in 1973 to 5,000 in 1983) with workers’ co-operatives financed out of local state capital. [11] His statistics show the extent of their failure. Over 53,000 more jobs were lost in coal, manufacturing and construction than were gained in the service industries from 1971 to 1989. [12]
Other campaigns were advanced. Sheffield became a nuclear free zone and peace centre. It was among the first to take up the challenges raised by the Labour government’s social contract after 1974, when, in return for the TUC’s agreement to implement wage controls and productivity bargaining, the rank and file of the unions were offered the Employment and Industrial Tribunals Acts, the Health and Safety at Work Act of 1974, the women’s Equal Pay Act of 1975 and the Sex Discrimination and Race Equality Acts of 1975–1977.
Units to implement most of these legal enactments were soon in place in the city’s administration. Seyd describes how the defence of these innovations after the Thatcher election victory in 1979 threw the city council into political confrontations with central government. But in reality the freedom of action of the ‘Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire’ had already been undermined by the financial squeezes imposed by the Labour governments of Wilson and Callaghan between 1974 and 1979, which had also set up the MSC that fostered the myth of retraining.
 
Housing, the keystone for Labour
Hampton gives much attention to council housing, the bread and butter issue for any Labour council in the two decades after 1945. He examines the city council’s move into high rise housing development. He describes how the rural ratepayers’ movement in the village parishes around Sheffield in the 1950s and early 1960s fought to keep the council from swallowing up the surrounding green belt, thus depriving it of building land for council houses. He claims that the resultant shortage of land forced it to build high rise blocks, with special grants from central government to meet the extra costs. But this explanation does not exonerate the Labour council from its decision to accept the low cost, high density building techniques that accelerated the premature deterioration and early demolition of over 3,000 high rise dwellings. The decisions in the late 1960s to house working class families as cheaply as possible were not opposed by the new left. In Sheffield they led to the grotesque Laurel and Hardy solution to the resulting inner city housing decay, in which the graffiti covered city centre pedestrian underpasses and concourses were filled with rubble from the once acclaimed but now demolished 18 storey Hyde Park complex of ‘streets in the sky safe for children to play in and the elderly to stroll’. [13]
The policy of council house sales, which was Thatcher’s ‘flagship’ solution to housing shortages, was used to break the hold of Labour councils over the public housing rental market. Sheffield’s Labour council owned 45 percent of the local housing stock in 1981. [14] However, the policy of selling off this stock was introduced by the right wing leadership of Sheffield City Council in 1965. After over a decade of tenants’ struggles it was eventually taken up nationally by the left wing housing minister, Peter Shore, in the Callaghan Labour government, two years before Thatcher came to power. Labour’s commitment in 1977 to expand owner occupation and to undertake the sale of council houses to ‘enhance housing choices’ thus laid the ground for the abandonment of council housing as a public service which for generations had been the keystone of working class support for Labour. [15] Seyd shows how council house sales were not resisted politically in Sheffield by the left but held back instead by a strategy of bureaucratic discouragement. Given the absence of so many of these facts from the Binfield history, what can be learnt from it?
 
The relevance of urban social movements
As Hampton calls on the ideas of Manuel Castells to explain the strategies of the new urban left in the 1970s and 1980s, Castells’ theories must be looked at more closely and applied to what actually happened, particularly in the battles over rents. In his major study, The City and the Grassroots, Castells documents as ‘urban social movements’ many of the struggles that have led to important and major changes in the lives of city dwellers. They range from the comunidades of Castille in the 1520s, the 1871 Paris Commune, the Glasgow rent strike of 1915 and the US inner city revolts of the 1960s to the struggles of the gay community in San Francisco, the squatter camps of the Third World and the Madrid citizens’ movement that arose in the final years of the Franco dictatorship. Hampton, with the aid of Stuart Lowe, adds the Sheffield rent strike of 1967–1978 to this list. [16]
Originally, Castells kept within an academic Marxist framework, using ideas from Althusser and Poulantzas to describe the part played by the state in urban development. The state is necessary, in this view, to act as the mediator of urban development and change, outside the struggles between the classes. The state encourages planning as a way of avoiding the conflicts that take place between city inhabitants over the consumption of available spaces and services. For Hampton, planning is the priority of local state elites or qualified professionals who work under democratically elected councillors to set the ‘discourses’ between conflicting parties. Both these views of the state ignore the Marxist understanding of the state as the enforcer of the legal system that capitalism requires to exercise control over the classes under its rule. Local government acts ultimately as a branch of the central state. As a consequence, planning is subordinated to the needs of capitalists, despite all the ‘discourses’ of public participation and official inquiries.
Castells’ work goes through a number of phases. At first, he recognises the importance of class struggle as the motor of social change. But he insists that labour power is reproduced by the collective consumption which takes place in cities. Marxists would argue to the contrary, that town and city development is shaped by the concentration of labour in the production process dominated by capital. Cities, like capitalist enterprises, are removed from the collective control of workers by the institution of capitalist property rights and operate through competition for the right to control the land and air spaces in them. Thus cities appear not as the spatial organisation of workers’ consumption of the means to life, but as the constriction of their lives by the bricks, mortar and highways of capitalist production. In his later works Castells drops any attempt to relate city growth to class conflict. He makes almost no reference to property rights or to competition. In his most recent writings, cities become the location of informational, not of industrial production. [17] Cities become the historical establishment of social and tribal identities, subject, for example, to the conflicts that arise from the replacement of male manual labour by female service labour in the job market.
Thus urban social movements are reduced, from the powerful motors for structural social change of his earlier works, to the level of territorial street confrontations over the occupation of meaningful space, between the business corporations’ monopoly of ‘beauty and tradition’ and the ‘urban counter-cultures making a stand on the use-value of the city’. Optimistic hopes for social transformation change to a pessimistic anticipation of ‘structural urban schizophrenia’. But the theory that predicts a future of urban madness is based upon the misinterpretation of history.
 
Rent strikes: class struggles or urban social movements?
As documented by the followers of the Castells school the 1915 Glasgow and 1967 Sheffield rent strikes lose their significance as confrontations with capitalist property. In the interpretations of Hampton and Lowe, they are seen instead as vain appeals to the state for the moderation of the impact of the market upon social and private housing provision. Emphasis is given in these struggles to women who are, apparently, outside the class struggle. They are ultimately let down by the lack of concern of male workers for the domestic burden of rent paying which makes trade unionists indifferent to anything but an economistic struggle against the power of capital, thus playing into its hands.
The real picture shows exactly the opposite potential. Even in Castells’ own description of the thousands of ‘black faced’ workers who surrounded the rent offices in Glasgow in 1915, forcing the repayment by landlords of excessive rents to the tenants, we see the potential of workers’ power to control and redistribute wealth, in the strike action that brought them onto the streets. Some employers, because they were anxious to get the munitions workers back to work and to maintain their war profits, supported state imposed rent controls, yet Castells argues that the ‘rent strike can hardly be considered a struggle against capital, in that it did not oppose the capitalists’. [18]
Stuart Lowe, using a similarly negative argument, assumes that, because women on the Sheffield council housing estates called the first protest meetings against differential rent increases in early 1967, the organised rent strike movement that followed was a ‘spontaneous social movement’, not a class struggle. [19] Further, as the immediate opponent of the rent strikers was an elected Labour municipal authority, no capitalist interests were at stake. [20] To the contrary, the motive force behind the Labour council’s decision to raise the rents lay in its legal obligation to balance the housing revenue account at a time when the rising cost to local councils of servicing its borrowings from capitalists added to its expenses in managing the growing council housing sector. Following the economic crisis of the mid-1960s, higher rents were the direct result of higher interest charges made by finance capital. Lowe insists also that the gains of the Glasgow rent strike, that enforced 50 years of rent controls by the state on the class of private landlords, ‘did not succeed in challenging the fundamental power of the dominant class’. [21] Both Lowe and Castells thus fail to recognise the part played by the working class in the reform of the capitalist system, let alone in its overthrow.
Hampton, Lowe and Seyd all record how the rent strike enabled the new left to unseat the aldermanic old guard regime of the Labour right wing in Sheffield. Tenants’ candidates intervened in the 1968 local elections and allowed the Conservatives to take power for one year, only the second time they had been in office for a 12 month period since 1926. The Tories opportunistically lowered council rents and the left Labour succession continued to do so. Many tenants’ leaders and association members came to the tenants’ committees from previous activity in the Trades and Labour Council in Sheffield and from well organised engineering factories like Ambrose Shardlow’s. They were reacting not only to their worsening conditions as tenants but to the introduction of productivity bargaining at the workplace which had reduced their powers to demand more pay on enhanced piece-work earnings, as a means to recover the money they lost to rent increases. Given these historical facts, the rent strike was indisputably a central part of the wider class struggle.
Those who see such actions as urban social movements ask why the council tenants failed in the long run to protect public housing from the pressures of the market. The answer lies in Labour’s retreat from the commitments it made in 1962. At the Labour Party conference in that year Anthony Greenwood, speaking for the NEC as Labour’s shadow housing minister, said, ‘We are living in an absurd and squalid system of society in which it is possible for some people to hold others up to ransom and to charge us £12,062 for a twelfth storey flat in a tower block which originally cost only £3,254.’ When he took office under Wilson, he went on to support the very system that allowed such absurdities to continue. Only the mass movement of tenants and workers showed how such a squalid system could be abolished in favour of one that gives priority to the needs of the mass of city dwellers against the state and the speculative giants of the property markets who presently dominate urban living. For Castells, occupying space in a city and using its services is a form of social consumption that is separate from the production of commodities that subordinates workers to the needs of capitalism in the growth of towns and cities. However, this separation in theory leads to the separation of urban social movements from workers’ struggles in practice, with the consequent result that both are considerably weakened.
 
Conclusion
In the present decade movements continue to arise to confront the absurdities emanating from the unregulated sprawl of city growth, with all its damaging consequences. Campaigns against motorway extensions, road tolls, noise and environmental pollution join up with New Age travellers, squatters and ravers to demand some rational improvement in social living. If all these movements fail to link up into a generalised struggle against those who exclusively exercise economic power, then their failures will far outweigh their successes. In practice and in theory, the new left in Sheffield, at best, created castles in the air; at worst, they accelerated defeat for its workers who continue to suffer the consequences. But the restructuring of capitalist production in Sheffield still leaves the road clear to major social change through class struggle, organised through the continual confrontations workers in cities have with the owners of property, state or private.

Notes
1. P. Seyd, The Political Management of Decline 1973–1993, The History of the City of Sheffield, Vol. 1 (1993), pp. 151–185. Seyd’s previous work on the Labour left was The Rise and Fall of the Labour Left (London 1987).
2. W.A. Hampton, Optimism and Growth, 1951–1973, The History of the City of Sheffield, Vol. 1 (1993), p. 121.
3. The phrase was originated by J. Gyford, The New Urban Left: a Local Road to Socialism?, New Society, 21 April 1983.
4. W.A. Hampton, op. cit. (1993), Vol. 1, pp. 120–121 and 200, footnote 2. Michael Foucault is quoted on discourses and the ‘unique’ qualifications of professional managers to ‘deal with these problems’.
5. P. Seyd, op. cit. (1993), Vol. 1, p. 170.
6. S. Pollard in his essay on Labour in Sheffield (1993) in The History of the City of Sheffield, Vol. 11, pp. 260–278, describes the Unemployment Centres as giving social, educational and informational facilities and a voice to the unemployed.
7. P. Seyd, op. cit. (1993), Vol. 1, p. 162.
8. “‘Urban’ social contradictions ... are of a ‘pluri-class’ nature ... ‘urban politics’ is an essential element in the formation of class alliances, in particular in relation to the petit-bourgeoisie.” Quote from M. Castells, The Urban Question – A Marxist Approach (London 1987), pp. 432–433. Seyd does not use this concept though he advocates ‘The public-private partnership’ to make ‘pluri-classism’ a reality. See also S. Lowe, Urban Social Movements – The City After Castells (London 1986), for a critique of the use of this concept, while supporting the movements arising from it as ‘seeds of the new politics in the womb of the old,’ p. 202.
9. P. Seyd, op. cit. (1993), Vol. 1, p. 168.
10. C. Binfield, Introduction to The History of the City of Sheffield, Vol. II, p. 6.
11. G. Tweedale, The Business and Technology of Sheffield Steelmaking, The History of the City of Sheffield, Vol. II, pp. 188, 192.
12. P. Seyd. op. cit. (1993), Vol. I, Table 1, p. 153.
13. The quote is adapted from Ten Years of Housing in Sheffield (Corporation of Sheffield, April 1962), pp. 42–47, and A.D.H. Crook, Housing Policy After 1914, in The History of the City of Sheffield, Binfield et al. (1993), Vol. II, p. 83. Crook describes the ‘streets in the sky’ concept as ‘a romanticisation of working class life by the architects’.
14. A.D.H. Crook, op. cit. (1993), table 8, p. 96.
15. Housing Policy, Cmnd 6851, HMSO (1977), quoted in D. Maclennan, Housing Economics (Longman 1982), p. 141.
16. See footnote 8, S. Lowe, op. cit. (1986), p. 94.
17. M. Castells, The Future of the City, New Left Review, No. 204 (March/April 1994), p. 18.
18. M. Castells, op. cit. (1983), p. 35. Castells calls on the work of Joseph Melling for support for his views on the Glasgow Rent Strike and provides a bibliography on p. 397, fn 62.
19. W. Hampton, Democracy and Community in Sheffield (London 1970); S. Lowe, op. cit. (1986), p. 113. Reports of the rent strike from the Sheffield IS group appeared in International Socialism, Series 1, No. 31, Winter 1967–8, p. 6. Rent strikes and tenants campaigns in London, York, Newcastle, Leeds, Glasgow and Birmingham are covered in the same issue and by I. Macdonald, Housing – The Struggle for Tenants’ Control, International Socialism, Series 1, No. 33, Summer 1968, p. 7.
20. S. Lowe, op. cit. (1986), p. 112.
21. Ibid., p. 37. Lowe also argues that the building society movement of the 1920s was more radical in its consequences than the events in Glasgow in 1915.
 



Nicholas Howard writes: ‘A real victory for trade-union sovereignty,’ was how Bert Ramelson, the Communist Party industrial organiser, described the bitter betrayal that ended the seamen’s strike. Since the unofficial disputes in 1960 the rank and file of the National Union of Seamen had given every indication that they at least had established sovereignty. The birth of two unofficial reform movements in the union, despite the imprisonments and finings used against them in 1960 and 1962, and the deaths of two lying and collaborationist general secretaries created a strong working-class union out of 50 years of near company unionism. Changes in the executive and changes in the union rules, both the result of pressures from below, plus a drastic decline in the competitive position of British shipowners produced the intransigent situation of 16 May 1966. Despite their previous support for the incomes policy, the union with optimistic solidarity took on single handed a fight for a 40 hour week that inevitably became a fight against the Labour Government, the ruling class and the bureaucracies of the TUC, the whipped NUR and Cousins’ T&GWU, among others. The failure of Cousins to resign from the Government during the strike should, incidentally, dispel any misconceptions about the nature of his fight against the incomes policy. After Wilson’s fireside chat and the State of Emergency, the NUS leaders still innocently protested that they had no quarrel with the state. Not so innocently, the Communist Party backed them up by insisting repeatedly that such talk was nonsense. With an eye on their Parliamentary image the CP’s role in the strike was thus intentionally to de-politicise it by calling for the impossible, Government action against the ruling-class power of the shipowners. It was, equally, opportunist, since by putting themselves in the vanguard of the whip-rounds for the strike fund they were able to benefit from the tremendous sympathy for the seamen among both industrial workers and others in the low wage brackets.
Communist leadership among the unofficial Portworkers’ Liaison Committees was hesitant and confusing. Nine days after the strike began, Jack Dash warned dockers not to take irresponsible action, but to express their sympathy through their full-time officials. The very next day these officials of the T&GWU and those of the NUS signed an agreement allowing shore gangs to move ships in port. This agreement probably fatally weakened the strike for it enabled the port authorities to avoid and forestall the port congestion which both the dockers and the seamen were hoping would bring the employers to heel. In the event congestion was so slow in building up, that, despite two declarations of emergency, not a single member of the armed forces was brought into the docks throughout the seven weeks of the strike. The congestion argument had also been used by Dash to convince dockers that sympathetic action was unnecessary, for if they struck unofficially they’d receive no strike pay, whereas if they waited for congestion to do its work they’d be laid off on attendance pay. The Communist leadership in the Victoria and Albert seamen’s dispute committee persuaded their angry members to accept the agreement, but to try and reverse it constitutionally. In fact the cautious constitutionalism of both the CP and the Labourite leaders of the NUS weakened the early strength of the strike. Inevitably, when nearly three weeks later both the union executive and the CP leadership in the docks called for the blacking of British ships in sympathy, confusion arose in London, Hull and Liverpool docks and failure was immediate. The rank-and-file docker had no idea whether all ships should be blacked and cargo work stopped or whether the call applied only to ships with cargoes destined previously for British ships. The unofficial committees, having failed to give a clear lead, and the NUS, which had constantly said that it did not want loading and unloading stopped, could hardly expect a port-workers’ strike, the only way to victory for the NUS, particularly when all were urging that action should be along the stultifying official channels. The reality of the Communist role in the strike makes ironic Wilson’s Parliamentary McCarthyism which, with a BBC TV inquisition, touched off the debacle at the end. Three days after all branches had voted for continuation of the strike, against the biased and puny offerings of the Pearson committee, and two days after the third ‘last offer’ by the now desperate and weakening shipowners, the ten men of ‘guts’ that Wilson had sought to impress turned their backs on the rank-and-file seamen. Together with the twelve full-time EC members and seven remnants of the era of Yates, they provided a majority that excused itself out of a strike it had never wanted on the grounds that it was causing hardship to the citizens of Britain. The hardship is yet to come, for the working class. So inefficient are British shipowners, that 55 per cent of all imports now arrive in foreign ships, so shortages were not felt and food prices remained stable during the strike. But so much was conceded by the seamen in terms of the incomes policy, a 15 per cent increase lost, as against five per cent this year and four per cent next year gained [1], that the breakthrough against this wage freezing policy will have to be made by some other not so well placed group of workers. The lesson for the working class is clear. Strike action to raise the standard of living by sections of workers needs the sympathetic action of other groups if it is to benefit all workers. Buying out of this responsibility by paying conscience money to strike funds will not do. There are other lessons for the rank and file of the NUS. With the late heroes of the reform movements having had to urge their angry brothers back to work, the fight against the shipowners and the incomes policy now becomes a fight for the constitution of the NUS. It is very doubtful if they will win, to regain in 1967 the Sundays at Sea leave agreement which they have lost, a loss of five days’ paid leave on average per man per year, for no extra money. More likely is that the bureaucrats of the TUC will move in on the officials of the NUS and show them how to do what the officials of the AEU, the ETU, the TGWU and the NUM, BISAKTA and all, have pioneered so well: namely, the art of running a union regardless of the class interests of their members. And the 1894 anti-combination law still stands for use against those Merchant Seamen who are on voyage.

Footnote
1. These figures are those of the Pearson Committee. Their accuracy depends upon the individual shipowners’ policy towards overtime, which in the stringent aftermath of the strike is likely to be extremely mean.
 



The Steelmasters of Britain have been, throughout the history of the steel industry, quite consistent over three areas of activity, two of which have been marked by success and the third by failure. First, they have always succeeded in dominating the unions, both rank and file and (even more so) the union leaders. Second, they have always been able to determine how the State shall intervene in their operations in a way that has been consistently to their own advantage. Third, they have failed regularly to reinvest in the most modern techniques on a scale sufficient to make their prices competitive on both the home and world markets.
The two volumes under review [1] hardly do justice to these theses, not surprisingly since Ross’s book is in the quite useful but generally a-political school of journalist’s reporting, while Keeling and Wright have written a company history for the British Iron and Steel Federation, the industry’s private management committee. Both provide short but incomplete introductions to a field renowned among socialists as a commanding height, but both are quite barren in terms of socialist theory. This and subsequent articles will attempt to remove the deficiency.
The domination by management of the steel production workers’ unions dates back from their very inception in the 1870’s and 1880’s, and contrasts greatly with the birth struggles of the American and German unions. Early recognition by such prominent managerial industrialists as David Dale, chairman of Consett Iron and Steel Co, enabled the senior skilled workers, highly literate and affluent labour aristocrats, to dominate the union organisation through the constitution and with full-time organisers. The rank and file were a volatile group, many of them only recently farm labourers. These were often the men, who as their skills and experiences increased with the rapidly growing industry, were responsible for the strikes against the arbitration boards which Dale and John Kane, first General Secretary of a successful production workers’ union, pioneered in 1869. ‘Arbitration with John Kane as our advocate is a costly and disagreeable farce,’ wrote one such group in 1874. The strike which they had led resulted in their expulsion from the union by Kane, who ignored the rule in his own Constitution that men could only be expelled with the agreement of two-thirds of the members in a ballot. Other rank-and-file revolts led to attempts to form independent branches based on the works with funds controlled locally. Kane’s response was to set up a tightly controlled central organisation while the men, frequently laid off for long periods in the depression of the 1870’s, drifted away from the union, whose membership declined from 36,000 in the mid-seventies to 2,000 in 1888. Faced with a rank and file which preferred to vote with its feet against a union which urged its members at all costs to avoid strike action and which urged above all the, formation and recognition of Boards of Conciliation and Arbitration (even in the face of the many employers who still refused to recognise the union) the executive carried out a manoeuvre which had a lasting effect on steel production workers. After invoking the new law of 1871 (in ‘protection’ of Trades Unions) against a few recalcitrant officials, they simply convened a conference of favourable officials and formed another union. In so doing they were able to exclude the rank and file from any discussion on the rules and policy of the new union, the Associated Iron and Steel Workers of Great Britain. The old union, the National Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel, Tin, Blastfurnace and other Workers, had contained several rules, adopted before the capital intensification of the steel industry in the late 70’s which allowed the workers considerable control of workshop practices in those firms from whom they could win recognition. Included among such rules was one which prohibited Sunday working. The resultant rule book after 1888 strengthened the union executive, whose General Secretary, Edward Trow, had been General Secretary of the old union and secretary of the North East Arbitration Board, in a way which continues to the present day. All rules relating to the job were excluded and rules which irrevocably strengthened the executive were added. The new union’s rule book dominated subsequent revisions made by the executive in 1916, when the present Iron and Steel Trades Confederation was formed by legal memorandum, by which a newly formed British Iron, Steel and Kindred Trades Association became the Central Association. Again the executives, this time of three trades unions, found it easier to sidestep the members, two thirds of whom were required constitutionally to vote on the issue of amalgamation.
BISAKTA today has power to make agreements with the employers at executive level without the involvement of a national delegates’ conference since no such conference is provided for in the rule book. Then if individuals or branches disavow such agreements it has power to expel and dissolve them. The enforced merging of branches or their splitting is the tactic more frequently used by the present executive. In 1947 several branches [2] refused to accept the agreement with the employers which made the war-time Sunday working the normal system. They were called to heel by their own union under threat of expulsion. Despite the oligarchical autocracy of their union, many militant members consider that one feature of the union has enabled the rank and file, if so minded, to keep greater control of workshop practices than management and union executive are willing to concede. This is the continuing organisation of the branches on a shop-floor basis. In cases of dispute branch solidarity is almost always very strong and any executive attempt at dissolution can frequently seriously embarrass the executive by making them responsible in the eyes of management for any walkouts; the heavy hand is not always possible, depending upon the militancy of the lay officials involved. However the existence of some thirty branches in the larger steel works has the effect of making disputes extremely sectional and – as in other continual process industries – presents each branch with the almost impossible task of winning the support of branches further down the line whose grievances are unlikely to be identical. It is this, combined with the constant collaboration with management throughout the history of the union, that has made the industry relatively immune from widespread stoppages. The rise of the craftsmen’s unions in recent years (1956 and 1962) in major stoppages due to widening differentials will require a further article.
The subordination of the supposedly neutral British State machinery to the skilled manipulation of steel employers has been accomplished, regardless of the government in power, by conceding State control bodies to the high ranking personnel of the industry itself. Failing this, such bodies faced with the non-cooperation of the industry have invariably had to comply with the major decisions of either the individual firms or of their representative body, the BISF. One such example is the 1930s Import Duties Advisory Committee, which in return for a ten per cent tariff imposed against the imports of European steel attempted to enforce the rationalisation and relocation of individual firms. It failed to get the industry to develop an integrated mill in the depressed town of Jarrow, and though it gained acceptance of some price controls, the purpose of these was vitiated by the setting up within the industry of a system of Spread-over-Funds, Scrap Levies and Ingot Levies. Through controlling the price structure IDAC had hoped to force the inefficient firms into modernisation plans, or out of business. The levy system promulgated by the BISF under Sir Andrew Duncan enabled the high cost firms to stay in business by spreading their costs among the efficient low cost producers. IDAC’s feeble response was to allow the levy charges to be passed on to the consumers as part of increased prices. Other examples of the way State control bodies became used to protect the industry can be cited in the way the Ministry of Supply’s Iron and Steel Control Department was manned during the war. Of the 46 posts in the Control, all but one, the Director of Transport, were held by personnel seconded from private firms or associations of firms. [3] Deficiencies in crude steels during the war were made up from US imports amounting to between 15 and 25 per cent of requirements while home producers concentrated on the more remunerative production of high quality steels. The government invested £60 millions in the development of these products during the war while supplementing the industry’s capital with subsidies. Rates of profit ran at a steady 11 per cent during the war, maintaining the pre-war levels despite the drastic increases in ore costs, freight and labour and the re-employment of obsolete plant.
Ross details the post-war obstructions placed by the industry in the path of Labour’s half-hearted attempt at nationalisation. The bosses’ strike against the nationalised Iron and Steel Corporation, in which they were joined by Sir Lincoln Evans, General Secretary of BISAKTA, enabled the real authority in the industry, the BISF, to continue developing its control in accordance with the firms’ wishes by raising funds to cover the costs of continuing inefficiencies. One such fund remunerates firms who have to transport pig-iron, ores and ingots over uneconomic distances due to the haphazard location of their plant. The Steel Company of Wales has only just announced a scheme to redevelop Port Talbot where ore freighters of a mere 10,000 tons can just squeeze in on exceptionally high tides. Only one British port can handle ore cargoes in excess of 25,000 tons. In Europe it is rare to find an ore berth developed to handle less than 35,000 ton cargoes. The list of inefficiencies in British Steel production can be extended indefinitely. The ‘Continuous Casting’ method of forming finished and semi-finished steel products straight from the smelting process, thus eliminating costly stages of storage, transport and reheating was developed in 1947. 20 years later only one twenty-fifth of production is handled by this method.
The indictment of the present industry for its failures is enabling the Left wing of the Labour Party to build up a case for nationalisation. BISAKTA, whose lukewarm attitude at the top contrasts with the growing enthusiasm for nationalisation among the rank and file, can point to its 1931 memorandum declaring in favour of such a policy. However since the wages system in steel production was then geared to a sliding scale based on the selling price, a scheme introduced in 1879, what BISAKTA really sought was increased protection and raised prices as a collaborationist method of raising wages while unemployment in the industry exceeded 30 per cent. Workers’ control did not enter into the memorandum. It was further rejected when advocated by the union’s Scottish Divisional Conference after the last war. It will almost certainly be rejected by Sir Harry Douglass, the present General Secretary and by J.H. Davies, his expected successor in 1967. Under the initiative of Ian Mikardo pressure is being brought to bear on the government to form a Steel Industry Investment Board to achieve rationalisation and prevent private obstructionism before the State takes over.
On the form described in this article it is more likely that the industry will don the State cap, make it fit, and wear it as the steelmasters have always done. The union will be left to discipline the workers, as they have always done, while the rationalisation needed under the pressures of world competition is put in hand. This time voting with their feet will be made impossible by the intervention of the State through the machinery of the law. The rank and file, permanently militant, will have to seek other methods and goals.

Footnotes
1. George W. Ross, The Nationalization of Steel, Macgibbon and Kee, 30s.; B.S. Keeling and A.E.G. Wright, The Development of the Modern British Steel Industry, Longmans, 25s.
2. Keeling and Wright, op. cit., p.124, and Men of Steel by One of Them (Sir Arthur Pugh), p.581.
3. Keeling and Wright, op. cit., p.34.
 



PHIL MARSHALL (Dec. SWR) argued that the SWP should now support Iran in the Gulf War in view of the increasing intervention of the US and its allies against Iran.
Have we now replaced revolutionary defeatism with an anti-imperialist policy of support for lesser imperialisms against dominant ones?
Khomeini’s regime actively tries to export Islamic fundamentalism so as to increase its power in the Middle East. It also exercises brutal repression against Kurdish and other minorities and suppresses all forms of independent working class activity. The Iraqi regime provides a mirror image to the Iranian regime, but without religious fundamentalism.
In peacetime we would urge workers to follow socialist internationalism. The Gulf War does not change this analysis. Lenin advocated in 1914-18 that workers on both sides, whether in uniform or in the workplaces, should turn against their own ruling classes.
The belated intervention of the USA in 1917 did not change Lenin’s position to one of support for Germany’s lesser imperialism. In fact, not even Germany’s invasion of the Ukraine and the defeats which it imposed upon the Soviets directly, caused Lenin to abandon the policy of revolutionary defeatism.
Why then do we now call for the ending of revolutionary defeatism in the Gulf War? Why would we now oppose strikes of Iranian workers that damage Iran’s war effort? Surely all strikes against the Iranian ruling class would weaken its ability both to send masses of young men to the slaughter and to repress its working class and minorities.
The Western powers’ limited naval intervention does not amount to a full scale attack on Iran. In fact, they continue to send arms to both sides in the war and to facilitate the oil commerce with both countries that pays for these arms. No Western power has sent troops on the ground to aid Iraq.
Surely we must support those workers on both sides who by desertions and strikes sabotage the efforts of their ruling classes, whether or not they have revolutionary Marxist parties to organise them and whether or not we can offer them practical support.
As it is probable that the war will end without a clear victory for either side and that this may create more prospects for revolution in the Middle East, we have to remain in favour of independent working class activity against both Islamic nationalisms and imperialism.



 


Nick Howard
Sheffield



 



Nick Howard joined the merchant navy at 16 and his 10 years travelling around the world politicised him







My friend Nick Howard, who has died aged 83, witnessed revolution around the world in the 1950s when he served in the merchant navy for 10 years.
Born in Marylebone, London, the son of Thomas, a clerk of works, and Tusha (nße Bravo), who worked at one of the first Marie Stopes clinics, Nick was a war evacuee, leaving Munster Road primary school in Fulham to attend a village elementary school near Guildford, Surrey. He then went to Royal Guildford grammar school on a scholarship, before joining the merchant navy aged 16.
In 1956, he was working as a ship’s officer and navigator sailing in the Suez Canal on the day the Egyptian leader, Nasser, nationalised it. “Gentlemen, you’re now working for Colonel Nasser,” Nick recalled an Egyptian officer telling the crew. Nick refused to serve on a British government supply ship after war broke out. On an earlier trip his ship docked at Buenos Aires in Argentina just as huge crowds were turning out for a mass rally in support of Eva Perón. A further ship he served on was “arrested” during a US-backed rebellion against President Sukarno in Indonesia.
Such events politicised Nick. He left the sea after taking part in a strike by members of his seafarers’ union over conditions. In 1961 he returned to the waves by signing up for a Greek ship travelling to Havana, where he met Che Guevara and other leaders of the Cuban revolution.
Nick then worked in a maritime library before studying at the London School of Economics, where he joined the International Socialists, the forerunner of the Socialist Workers party. After graduating in 1964, he got a job teaching in Sheffield, where he was tasked by Tony Cliff, a founding member of the SWP, to build a branch of the International Socialists. Nick became involved in a council rent strike in 1967 and helped draw miners to the IS during the strikes of 1972 and 1974. Working as a tutor and lecturer in adult education at Sheffield University until 1997, he introduced Marxist politics to a generation of miners and steelworkers on day-release courses.
Nick also carried out research in to the maritime industry, which took him to Rio de Janeiro, Lisbon, Cádiz, Hamburg, Helsinki, Rostock and Warnemünde. He also wrote essays on the history of the steelworkers’ unions, the puddlers’ (ironworkers’) unions in the 1860s and a study on teaching art therapy. The Nick Howard Papers, held by Sheffield University, include documents and sound recordings relating to his research on the blockade of Germany after the first world war, as well as contributions to programmes for BBC Radio Sheffield on the history of the labour movement. In later life he was an active member of the Sheffield Pensioners Action Group.
He is survived by his wife, Jenny, and by his children, Rachel, Rebecca and Luke, from his marriage to Ann Howard, which ended in divorce.
 











Nick Howard on board ship from his little book Slow Boats to China 1957–1959



Nick Howard, an inspiring revolutionary socialist for six decades, has died a few days after his 83rd birthday.
In an extraordinary life, Nick was an eyewitness to revolution around the world in the 1950s. Serving in the Merchant Navy for ten years became a tour of political hotspots.
“I always happened to be somewhere where things were going off,”; Nick said in an archive interview.
He was working as a ship’s officer and navigator sailing in the Suez Canal the day Egyptian leader Gamal Abdul Nasser nationalised it. “Gentlemen, you’re now working for Col. Nasser,” Nick recalled an Egyptian officer telling the crew. Nick refused to serve on a British government supply ship after war broke out.
Another ship he served on was “arrested” during a US-backed right-wing island rebellion against President Sukarno in Indonesia. Such events politicised Nick. He left the sea after taking part in a strike over conditions.
He worked in a maritime library then won a scholarship to the London School of Economics where he joined the International Socialism Group, later known as the International Socialists (IS), forerunner to the Socialist Workers Party, around 1961–62.
After he graduated from the LSE in 1964 he got a job teaching in Sheffield where he was tasked by SWP founder Tony Cliff with building the IS branch. Key activities included involvement in a council rent strike in 1967. He also helped draw rank and file miners to the organisation during the strikes of 1972 and 1974.
He even met Che Guevara and other leaders of the Cuban revolution in 1961 after putting his navy service to political use to sign up on a Greek ship travelling to Havana.
Nick is fondly remembered for introducing Marxist politics to a generation of miners and steelworkers through working as a tutor and lecturer on adult education day-release courses at Sheffield University from 1964 to 1997.
He carried out maritime research which took him to Rio de Janeiro, Lisbon, Cádiz, Hamburg, Helsinki, Rostock and Warnemünde. Other works include the history of the steelworkers’ unions, a study of the Puddlers’ Unions in the 1860s and a study on teaching art therapy.
The Nick Howard Papers, kept by Sheffield University, contain a wide-ranging body of documents and sound recordings relating to Nick’s research on the blockade of Germany after World War I and the influenza pandemic. They also have his interviews with Wilhelm Necker, financial director of the Bauhaus, and contributions to a series of radio programmes for BBC Radio Sheffield on the history of the labour movement in the Sheffield region.
 
Argued
Nick had his own ideas, always argued his own position and stuck to his guns whatever the circumstances. His active participation in Sheffield Pensioners’ Action Group in the face of political opponents is just one example of that.
You could not fall out with Nick. He was as generous in discussion as he was as a comrade and friend. Politics was his life until the end. He hoped to live to see Jeremy Corbyn re-elected as Labour leader.
As Sheffield comrades know only too well, he would politely ignore whoever was chairing a meeting to make his point. In his memory this article should probably go on longer, like his always insightful, but lengthy, contributions. That kindly, passionate influence will be sadly missed.
Commiserations from Sheffield comrades to his partner Jenny, daughters Rachel and Rebecca and son Luke.
 



Nick Howard writes: Part of the general attack on working-class standards, aimed at achieving a higher rate of private investment and a higher rate of profit, takes the form of rent increases in the public housing sector. Labour politicians, raising the banner of ‘More Efficient Capitalism,’ argue that Council and Corporation housing should be financed more by working class tenants and less by government subsidies and less by local rates fund subsidies. Less in subsidies to the public housing service means more in subsidies to private investment. These already run at 45 per cent of the cost of plant or machinery in development areas and are part of a long-term trend in which the tax on net capital formation was reduced from 15 per cent in 1954 to 9 per cent in 1964. In the same period public housing expenditure as a percentage of all public expenditure fell from 9.5 per cent of the total to 7.3 per cent.
The financing of Council-house building not only includes meeting the spiralling costs of privately owned land and paying the profit margins set by the lucrative private house-building companies; it also includes raising loans to meet the cost of the two previous items. The loans system to local government was fixed by a Parliamentary Committee in 1902 and laid down that loans should be over 60 year periods at the current rate of interest. This today trebles the cost of Council house building.
The bulk of such loans come from the private sector and the debt charges levied by finance capitalists swallow up the bulk of the revenue local Councils receive from rents. Their future building programmes require the raising of further loans and the debt burden on the tenants gets heavier and heavier. Quoting an example from Salford, where flats in a fifteen-storey block cost £3,254 to build, but cost £12,062 after loan charges, the present Housing Minister, Greenwood, fulminated against the class responsible (Labour Party Conference, 1962): ‘We are living in an absurd and squalid system of society in which it is possible for some people to hold others up to ransom.’ Greenwood in 1967 has done nothing to identify ‘some people’ nor to curb their financial and political power. Instead, his Government has offered a Land Commission, which, in the words of its estate agent chairman, will operate as a national property-dealing company. So far it has not had any reducing effect on land prices. On interest rates, Greenwood’s administration has concocted a Housing Subsidies Bill; after November 1965 building loan charges are apparently pegged at an effective 4 per cent. In the words of Sheffield’s City Treasurer,
‘... at the time when the proposed subsidies were announced, the effective rate of interest charged in the housing account after deduction of Government grants was 3.83 per cent. In other words the tenant has paid less by way of interest than the legislators think is now reasonable.’
In other words, the working class has been taxed to subsidise some money-lending people, since Government grants are charged to the Exchequer.
The Housing Minister’s latest effort has brought the working class in some cities into the closest confrontation with the financier class since the 1915 Glasgow Rent Strike. Greenwood’s Ministry has issued a circular detailing the policy of rent rebate schemes which they have already successfully urged on some half of all local authorities. Brought in by Labour Councillors to the frenzied applause of the Tories, with heart-rending appeals that we should apply the old Marxist slogan (misquoted and out of context), ‘From each according to his ability; To each according to his means,’ the schemes have had a dramatic effect on working-class political consciousness.
Rent rebate schemes impose drastic rent increases on the majority under cover of regulation-bound promises of lower rents for the poorer paid. At the same time rate fund contributions, which are a local tax on property and private enterprise, are slashed if not completely abolished. Thus a redistribution of income occurs entirely within sections of the working class, with the higher rents charged to piece workers subsidising the slightly lower rents rebated for time workers, or small older families aiding large younger families. The rich, through an unchanged financial system, get richer, and the poor and not so poor, get poorer.
The confrontation between the classes, obscured by demands to vote out the Councillors, or to lobby Parliament, has come with the mobilisation of the tenants into militant Tenants’ Associations. Some 25,000 in the Sheffield area alone are now enrolled. The legalistic and bureaucratic nature of local government housing administration and the undeniable ‘home-centredness’ of many of the tenants make a tenants’ struggle the most obscure, slow and uncertain form of class conflict. Socialists must assist these struggles patiently and unselfishly, to help them become political and to help them avoid the parliamentary formalities of the existing political parties. A rent strike against a rent rebate scheme could mark the biggest post-war shift in working-class consciousness away from the sickness of Labourism. Even a defeated strike would represent a great breakthrough towards the politics of revolutionary, social and Socialist change.
 



[Politics of Continuity:] British Foreign Policy and the Labour Government 1945–46 [1]
John Saville
Verso £34.95
How did Britain in 1945 under a Labour government get involved in
a Cold War for nearly 40 years? John Saville shows how little it had
to do with the ‘Soviet Menace’ and how much it was the
responsibility of the ruling class.
When Labour’s Prime Minister Attlee put Ernest Bevin in charge
of foreign policy, he omitted to throw out the public school trained
first division civil servants who administered Britain’s foreign
and colonial policies. Sir Alexander Cadogan, head of the Foreign
Office under the Tory Anthony Eden, was kept on the team in the same
job under Bevin, and wrote of another Labour minister, the left
winger Aneurin Bevan, ‘He and his kidney are mere barnacles on the
bottom of the “ship of state”. In any decent country they’d be
bumped off. To that extent am I “Fascist” and proud of it!’
Cadogan and others like him maintained great influence over the
direction of the Labour government’s foreign policy.
Bevin’s stupidity comes across clearly in Saville’s book. Only
seven weeks after the war Bevin told the Russians that their policies
resembled Hitler’s. Millionaire imperialists had worked on Bevin
before the war, taking him on world cruises and convincing him of the
need for Britain to continue to extract cheap raw materials and oil
from its colonies. After the war, Bevin agreed with his Tory advisers
that the Arab Countries threatened to cut the empire in half, and
Britain should continue to keep bases in Egypt, Iran and Iraq. Bevin
and his advisers thus set in motion the policies whose failure
resulted in the expulsion of the Palestinians from their homeland,
helping to create Israel as the only state that would protect
Britain’s claim to cheap oil and a safe route to the empire east of Suez.
From Saville’s history, it is clear that Britain’s ruling
class was able, under Bevin and Attlee, to extend its claim to a
position as a world power. British imperialism continued even more
successfully than before the war to bleed the wealth of the Third
World into the banks of the City of London.
Saville graphically describes one outcome of Labour’s
anti-Communist strategy. British intervention on behalf of French
imperialism sparked off the bloody 28 year long struggle of the
Vietnamese for their independence. In the final days of the Japanese
occupation, the Vietnamese leaders under Ho Chi Minh thought that in
Japan they had gained an Asian ally against the return of French
control of the region. However after the defeat of Japan, a united
force was set up under British control of French, Japanese and Indian
forces to suppress the people’s struggle for independence in Laos,
Kampuchea and Vietnam. Japanese troops, at that time being reviled in
Britain for war crimes, fought a short and bloody war, alongside the
British and the French, to put a corrupt and racist group of
colonialists back into power.
As a series of essays in the exposure of British hypocrisy about
the aims of the Second World War and on the origins of the Cold War,
Saville’s book is excellent. However, he doesn’t make clear that
it was the policy of the Communist Party that led to the failure of
the working class to support Vietnamese liberation in 1945. The right
of self-determination, clearly advocated by Lenin during the First
World War, was abandoned by the parties loyal to Stalin after the
Second World War.
Thus the French Communist Party supported the resumption of French
power in Vietnam after the defeat of the Japanese invaders. The
movement for Vietnamese independence was led in Saigon by Trotskyists
and was under way before the British landed in September 1945, to
take over power from the Japanese. The Vietminh, led by the
Communists, crushed the Saigon workers’ uprising, arrested and
killed the Trotskyists and imposed order with the help of the
Japanese occupation forces until the British arrived.
Saville argues correctly that Britain’s policy under Labour was
strongly determined by its economic dependence upon the United
States. Labour sought to rebuild trade with the empire on terms that
would favour the sale of its raw materials to the US in order to pay
off the debt Britain incurred during the war. The US made this policy
unavoidable for British capitalism when it withdrew Lease-Lend aid to
Britain on the very day that Japan surrendered. In 1944, Churchill’s
war time coalition accepted the US demand that all British overseas
trade should be conducted in pounds freely convertible to dollars.
Thus the US was well on the way to opening up the British empire to
US capital, even before the war was concluded. In return, British
capitalists were able to convince the Americans that any insurrection
in the British colonies would open up the way to Communist expansion.
The origins of the Cold War lay in the great global crisis that
came at the end of the Second World War. In the US in 1946, war
production dropped suddenly from 41 percent of the nation’s output
to 9 percent. The effect on living standards was dramatic. Workers’
wages fell by 10 percent as employers tried to save their profits by
inflating prices by 16 percent. A huge wave of strikes broke out,
which the employers attacked as a Communist plot. But far from being
in a position to take power, the Communist Party in the US faced an
overwhelming onslaught headed by mass sackings and witch-hunts.
The Stalinist rulers in Eastern Europe meanwhile were faced with
the outbreak of massive opposition. Stalin forcibly moved hundreds of
thousands to Central Asia, and sent equal numbers of ethnic Russians
into the areas demanding self-determination. In all the East European
countries later to be incorporated into the Warsaw Pact by the force
of Russian tanks, measures were taken under pressure from Moscow to
incorporate the workers’ parties into coalitions with the remnants
of the bourgeois parties, many of whose members had collaborated with
the Nazis during the war. Stalin’s occupation forces denied workers
the right to independent unions or to the use of the strike weapon in
their own interests.
Saville, despite the breadth of his analysis, ignores the totality
of this global attack on workers and peasants, east and west, during
which the Labour government acted to advance the oncoming Cold War.
Even in countries like Italy and Greece, Stalin helped the British
and American armies to crush workers’ power, or by directing the
powerful Communist led movements into accepting ministerial offices
in coalition governments.
American capitalism’s greed for an open door to world markets
forced its Russian competitors to set up an iron curtain to keep
American goods out and the refugees in. But the view of the Americans
as the most powerful initiators of the Cold War was used, not to
build working class resistance east and west to US expansion, but to
justify the building of the Berlin Wall with all the exploitation and
oppression that went on behind it. The Cold War was the product of
the vicious competition inherent within capitalism and state
capitalism worldwide.
Though he unrealistically suggests that patient negotiation with
Moscow might have created a different outcome to the Cold War, and
does not extend his analysis to the causes of the crises that forced
all the contending powers into 40 years of wasteful military
competition, John Saville has given us valuable insights into the
realities of history that created the disastrous state of today’s world.

Footnote by ETOL
1. Due to a sub-editing error the title of the book (within the square brackets) was omitted and only the subtitle was given in the print version of the magazine.
 



SETH HARMAN is wrong to belittle Alexander Berkman’s account of the decline of the Russian Revolution (January SWR).
Berkman was not a mere political tourist who came late to anarchism as a way of resisting the necessity for a revolutionary party. His response to the assassination of Tsar Alexander II was to espouse nihilism while still a schoolboy in Russia. On his arrival in America he joined the movement around the anarcho-syndicalist newspaper Freedom.
The judicial murder of the four strike leaders who were framed for the Haymarket bombing in 1887 led Berkman to the conclusion that bosses who perpetrated murder should pay with their lives.
When Frick ordered the Homestead massacre during the steel strike of 1892, Berkman put his beliefs into practice. He was a bad shot however, and survived 12 years of solitary confinement to be welcomed in Bolshevik Russia as a serious representative of the class struggle in America.
As such he and Emma Goldman were asked to mediate in the Kronstadt rebellion. Only after they failed were they given the job of collecting revolutionary archives. The other mediators, except for Victor Serge, were arrested by the Bolsheviks.
We should take Berkman’s anarchism more seriously at a time when we are being told that workers’ direct action in the Eastern Bloc is leading today’s revolutionary movement into anarchy.



 


Nick Howard
Sheffield



 

