


Burnham, like his Machiavellian predecessors, has more than general scientific considerations in mind when he puts forward his theories. [1] As much as if he were proposing a formal program, he is concerned with political problems – not the specific immediate problems of our society (he has little to say about war or unemployment or fascism), but rather about the more general political problems of modern society. He is most concerned with the “problem of power.” While in our first two articles we showed the psychological premise which underlies the Machiavellian assumptions, in this article we shall discuss the dual argument which Burnham puts forward: the argument from organization, which can be made without psychological premises. It is this argument – the theory that the complexity of modern society makes impossible the achievement of a truly democratic action – which has been seized upon most eagerly by many of the ex-radicals.
It is on Michels that Burnham leans most heavily in this connection. Of all the Machiavellians, Michels is the most interesting writer. His study of political parties contains a vast amount of fascinating material even if its theoretical conclusions are insupportable.
The socialists may triumph but socialism never will, said Michels. In this phrase is concentrated the theory of Machiavellianism with regard to power, and it has received powerful support – in the minds of many – from the experiences of the Bolshevik Revolution. Men may start with noble ideological motives; their quest for power may have had its origin in profound humanitarian goals; but the very struggle for power, with its inevitable mechanisms and corruptions, engenders a desire for power as an end in itself; it supplants the professed goal and is transformed from a means to an end. The party, from being an instrument for the achievement of goals, is transformed into a sacred object, incapable of wrong-doing, and beyond question. It is in this manner that all idealistic movements end in tyranny.
 
A General Problem of Power
Clearly enough, this political theory presumes the existence of a general problem of power extending through all societies and criss-crossing all conditions. Even if, however, we remove its inevitability quotient – its claim to universality – by destroying the psychological premise which must necessarily underlie such a claim, we have still not disposed of the entire problem. For certainly it cannot be denied that the power complex has been a potent historical factor and that it will present a major problem for a future socialist society, certainly a far more difficult one than that of technological organization. Nor can it be denied that there have been many points of similarity, even congruent patterns between different social movements for power. So that even if on the theoretical plain we force Machiavellianism out of its “inevitability” bastion and prove that it cannot even claim to speak in more than terms of probabilities, we must still face the problem of power.
Yet we can make no progress at all toward its solution if we do not insist on its rigorous integration into specific historical contexts. No problem of power can be considered as an abstract syllogism; Lord Acton’s famous maxim that “power corrupts” may be a fairly valid, though by no means conclusive, summary description of previous historical experience, it may even serve as a valuable warning for the future; but it cannot serve as a social law. For that purpose we must always give a contextual setting: the Stalinist bureaucracy developed as a result of certain very specific historical circumstances and many members of the old Bolshevik vanguard fell prey to the degenerative process, but what was basic to the split in the ranks of the Bolshevik Party was a class issue and the personalities of the participants determined at most the class allegiance of a particular individual, though often enough that allegiance too was “predetermined” by a whole set of antecedent political and psychological conditions. In a word, we must insist that all problems of power are specific, that they are engendered not by any alleged super-social laws of political functioning applicable to all societies, but rather by a given historical situation. Once this is granted, it becomes impossible for anyone to assert a priori the necessary transformation of a socialist revolution into a quest for power by a bureaucratic minority. [2]
Nonetheless, if all problems of power are specific, there are certain crucial points of similarity between them which makes it necessary to consider them as an independent series. It is unquestionably true, as Michels has said, that each newly-triumphant revolutionary movement tends to attempt a consolidation of its power, a sort of closing of the floodgates to the very social waves which have swept it into power – or that at least, it has been so in most cases. But how are we to explain this fact? We have already shown the invalid character of the attempt to explain it by psychological theories. A glance at recent history will demonstrate, we believe, that seemingly parallel formal patterns have their origin in similar social conditions. Thus, for instance, one might say that both Robespierre, in his suppression of the Hébertists, and Cromwell, in his suppression of the Levellers, were demonstrating the validity of Michel’s Iron Law of Oligarchy. But is it not rather more fruitful to see that as bourgeois revolutionists both Robespierre and Cromwell faced the necessity of not merely destroying the old order but also the extraordinarily difficult task of simultaneously propelling the masses into revolutionary action on behalf of the bourgeoisie and cutting off any attempt to extend the revolution beyond the stage desirable to the bourgeoisie? The simplistic Machiavellian approach is shown as further inutile when it is remembered that it is even questionable, despite our sympathies, whether in the circumstances it was not to the deeper interests of the French revolutionary masses to support Robespierre – in view of the social immaturity of the then incipient French proletariat – rather than the more radical Hébertists. [3]
 
Formal Similarities in the Power Quest
Thus we may reach the conclusion that what appears to be a series of formal similarities with regard to the quest for power in itself and the suppression of dissident revolutionary minorities is often rather a mere surface outline of a deeper series of class struggles of parallel types. Under those conditions, there is no cause for surprise if there is a prevalent pattern of political development. In fact, one could easily demonstrate that all bourgeois revolutions have had such an overall pattern precisely because they have had to meet the same social problem (viz., Marx’s writings on France and Germany).
But there are still further social considerations which shape the formal pattern of the power problem. With the exception of the Bolshevik revolution, all previously successful revolutions have had as their perspective the substitution of one form of class rule for another, even if they have hidden this claim under the veil of grandiose programs for universal equality. Under the historical circumstance, this was quite inevitable and it is worse than useless to berate Robespierre for not understanding the French Revolution in the terms which we do today. But this same limitation meant that even the greatest of revolutionists were subject to the limitations of the classes they represented: their morality and ethics. Is it any wonder then that none of the bourgeois revolutionists was immune from the degenerative power process which Michels describes? How, under the circumstances, could they be?
But, often enough, what the Machiavellians could see only as the beginning of another substitution of power as an end in place of the professed political goal was really an insidious and subtle commencement of counter-revolution. Of course, the indiscriminate blur which their theory of the elite produced on their political vision prevented them from seeing that what they thought was merely a shift within a bureaucracy based on the rearrangement of power relationships, was really the incipient form of class struggles that rock nations. That is why the Machiavellian interpretation of the rise of Stalinism is so banal, with its reduction of the most complex of all historical events to a mere struggle between the ins and the outs of a bureaucracy consolidating its power. For if, according to the popular fable, “Bolshevism produced Stalinism” (we leave aside the incredible semantic imprecision of this and similar formulations) the Machiavellians and their friends have never yet explained why it was necessary for Stalinism to exterminate the whole Bolshevik generation and why no compromise could be reached. Or why for that matter, the Thermidorians had to exterminate the Jacobins.
 
The Rôle of the Individual Leader
But what about the individual leaders of revolutions? Can they not, do they not, become drunk with power? Unquestionably, such things occur. But it is only within certain situations that such thirsts can be satisfied. Stalin may have had the same thirst for power in 1920 as he was to demonstrate later; but the individual qualities which later enabled him to personify a social movement would have meted him only scorn and ridicule had he dared act upon them in the early years, of the revolution.
Even more illuminating in this connection is the history of Nazism. One can hardly think of a movement in recent history so openly power-crazed as the Nazi Party, nor of a leadership so frank in its quest for power. Nonetheless, this very Nazi bureaucracy, despite the apparently limitless extent of its internal power, has never dared or even desired to abolish bourgeois property within Germany, thereby showing a profounder understanding of its own historical rôle and limitations than many anti-Nazi theoreticians.
For the personal characteristics of leaders of power-hungry movements are also subject to social conditions, though indirectly. What was once thought of as the unqualified lust for power, a psychological phenomenon unexplained and viewed as an end-result, is now looked upon by more perspicacious thinkers as a more ambivalent complex. The power craze is now seen as symbiotic, that is, a compound of masochistic and sadistic elements, a result of desire for strength to overcome keenly-felt weakness, on the part of frustrated elements of the petty bourgeoisie. This type of analysis has been fruitfully conducted by Erich Fromm, a psychoanalyst who has borrowed from both Freud and Marx, in his book, Escape from Freedom, which applies this approach to the Nazi movement. As the bounds of human knowledge gradually broaden, it is discovered that even what was once thought as being such a seemingly irreducible psychological element as the power complex is increasingly explicable in terms of human, social experience. And if we are to grant the possibility of removing certain of the social causes which generate these presumably inescapable human attitudes, we must accordingly grant at least the possibility of removing the attitudes themselves.
All past history has been the history of class struggles; it is therefore readily seen why power relationships have had many analogous patterns, why it has been possible for Machiavellian theoreticians to abstract these patterns and develop therefrom the “Iron Law of Oligarchy.” But never yet has humanity faced a situation in which it was possible to build a society of plenty; until a relatively few years ago, such a society was an economic impossibility. What, then, is the possibility of this law exerting itself with regard to the socialist revolution? Is that too doomed to degeneration? Here, after all, is the decisive question; the Machiavellians may write about the past but they are most concerned with the future.
Although the Russian Revolution is thus far the richest source of experience which the revolutionary movement has, it can by no means be considered conclusive in any respect. If we can imagine the future socialist scholar investigating this very same problem, he would no doubt look upon the Russian Revolution as an aberration that is, one which faced a situation untypical of the problems faced by the workers of the major capitalist countries of the world. Even if the socialist revolution in Europe were, a few years hence, to have its inception in as wracked and economically tortured lands as France and Germany, it would still be. tremendously ahead of the Bolsheviks. We have no intention here to polemize with those who see in the history of Bolshevism a series of mistakes culminating in the biggest mistake of all: Stalin. They are people who find historical analysis easy because they view it from the perch of elevated, if delayed, moral judgments, rather than in terms of reconstructing actual historical situations and weighing the real possibilities of action within them.
 
Socialism and Bureaucratism
In a country such as America, a socialist society could so rapidly and successfully establish a society of plenty that the peculiar economic basis of each previous society for a ruling class would not be able to appear. Bureaucracy is not nourished on thin air; it requires the more material sustenance of economic inequality and insufficiency. The tremendous surge of activity, self-assertion, self-confidence, and social awareness which a socialist revolution would generate in masses of a Western power – see how much it generated in the Russia of Czarism! – would also serve as the subjective check toward any usurping tendency to derail the democratic engine of the revolution. It is sometimes difficult for us – so used to oppression and manipulation, falsehood and terror as conventional means of political control – to envisage the possibilities which a genuine mass democratic movement toward socialism possesses.
If capitalist society is overripe economically for a transition to socialism, it is that very fact which will, however, place certain difficulties in the path of socialism. Who can doubt that the possibilities of bureaucratic degeneration in, say, a German socialist revolution are greater today than they would have been twenty years ago? The horrible scars which fascism has left on the European people, the difficulty of fully erasing the effects of the present nightmare from their minds, will be a problem of consequence for the socialist revolution long after its economic problems are solved, just as the problem of race relations in this country will occupy a similar position. As capitalist society degenerates, and the advent of socialism is frustrated, the transition will become more difficult: the debasement of humanity under capitalism will exert its penalty on socialism. So that even in connection with the seemingly general problem of power attitudes under socialism, we must again return to the historical conjuncture. The problem in general need hold no terrors for us. When he was still a Marxist, Sidney Hook wrote very sensibly on the question:
That personal abuse of power will always be possible is undeniable. But what Michels overlooks is the social and economic presuppositions of the oligarchical tendencies of leadership in the past. Political leadership in past societies meant economic power. Education and tradition fostered the tendencies to predatory self-assertion in some classes and at the same time sought to deaden the interest in politics on the part of the masses. In a socialist society in which political leadership is an administrative function and, therefore, carries with it no economic power, in which the processes of education strive to direct the psychic tendencies to self-assertion into ‘moral and social equivalents’ of oligarchical ambition, in which monopoly of education for one class has been abolished, and the division of labor between manual and mental worker is progressively eliminated – the danger that Michel’s Iron Law of Oligarchy will express itself in traditional form, becomes quite remote. (Toward the Understanding of Karl Marx)
The economic foundations of the oligarchical tendency which Michels observes will be removed under socialism; the psychological characteristics by which the Machiavellians explain these tendencies are largely fictitious; and the supposed incompetence and inertia of the masses which allow these tendencies to continue interminably and only occasionally checked, are themselves merely manifestations of class societies and they too can be replaced by the qualities of assertiveness and awareness.
 
A Conscious Process of Social Experimentation
What the Machiavellian critique does do, however, is to impel us to reassert once more what should never have been submerged: the fact that the transition to socialism is a conscious process of social EXPERIMENTATION: there is nothing inherent in the economic mechanisms of either the socialist state or the transition to it which guarantees a democratic structure. (In general, people who seek guarantees should be more at home in the insurance business than in politics.) The Stalinists and those whom they have influenced (the most theoretically disastrous result of that influence is the theory that Stalinist Russia, while counter-revolutionary remains – in its Platonic essence, so to speak – a workers’ state) have emphasized precisely the opposite.
If there are no guarantees, there are, however, likelihoods. They are the factors previously listed which make a successful transition to socialism likely: the growth of the productive forces and the flourishing of genuine mass education. What is new in this problem is the fact that the second of these factors, mass education, will become increasingly more difficult as capitalism is allowed to continue its degenerative course. That is where the major difficulty in the transition comes in: the old habits, the old traditions, the old psychology, the old morality – what sociologists call “cultural lag.” Admitting this problem, and admitting further that there is no necessary guarantee for success, can anyone say that there have yet been placed in our path any insurmountable theoretical barriers to the socialist position?
We have thus far not discussed what many anti-socialists see as a possible source of tyranny under socialism: the centralization of administrative functions and the unification of the means of production into gigantic apparatuses. Certainly enough, this is an interesting problem; the proposals that have been made for possible checks on administrative mechanisms and decentralization of political and economic functions merit discussion. But here we shall confine ourselves to another aspect of this theory, which is a favorite of the Machiavellians: the “balance-of-forces” theory.
Says Burnham: democratic rights are largely preserved as a result of the struggle between more or less evenly balanced social forces, or classes. So long as there is struggle, so long as there is disagreement, then there will also be a certain free arena for the expression of those disagreements and struggles. Remove the struggle of contending social forces and the field is free for the tyranny of the victor. There is more than a little deviltry in this theory. First of all, it ignores the little fact that at present one can hardly speak of a balance of social forces but rather of the domination of one class by another, and that whatever freedom exists has not been granted by the bourgeoisie but wrested by the proletariat; and that, furthermore, as soon as crises multiply and become intolerable, the bourgeoisie has as its main aim the destruction of even the precarious “balance” that exists today. Certainly as realistic a thinker as Burnham cannot believe that the struggle within the democratic arena can continue indefinitely; he knows full well that the issue must reach a climax of relation sooner or later.
But there is still another aspect to this problem. Why should one assume that socialism would abolish conflict in human life? All that socialism claims is that it will abolish the economic competition of capitalism and its disastrous results; if, of course, one should equate that with a “balance of social forces” then the above assumption is true. But is it not more likely that under socialism, the conflicts of life could be lifted to a higher, more constructive plane than that of the capitalist market and the capitalist political arena? One can readily imagine serious and organized disputes over vital issues in a socialist society, disputes over important problems. Of course, the problems which would be important to a socialist society would hardly appear so to theoreticians of capitalism today whose main concern is painting all past and future history with the colors of their own pallet. In reality, the exposition of the balances-of-forces theory proves more about its supporters than about socialist society: they are so utterly confined to the thought and morality of the society of capitalism that they cannot even conceive of any other.
 
The Problem of Organization
Machiavellianism is left with one major prop: the argument from organization. That takes two forms: (1) the impossibility of democratic government because of the complexity and size of the societal unit; (2) the tendency of parties toward bureaucratic usurpation. The first argument need not long detain us. As Burnham uses it, all that he proves is that the old Town Hall form of direct local self-government is no longer possible (an observation which two and perhaps even three writers have previously made ...). By a rather childish sleight of hand he “proves” the impossibility of democracy in complex society because of the necessity of deputation of administration; once the voter deputizes the representative to act in his behalf he surrenders his sovereignty. Very well, then, in the confined sense in which Burnham uses it, “democracy” is impossible. But surely Burnham is driving at something else. He is really repeating the old petty bourgeois, anarchistic prejudice against centralization, though he is sufficiently perspicacious to realize that it is by now an inevitable tendency in modern society – at least until there appears a society capable of conscious planning in behalf of the common good. But, although centralization obviously does have certain inherent dangers, it is the prerequisite for planning and construction.
As Sidney Hook, in his Reason, Social Myths and Democracy, describes the approach of Michels:
Political power in behalf of any ideal, no matter how exalted, can be won only by organization. All organization, no matter how democratically conceived, inevitably involves the emergence of a leadership which in the last analysis controls the organization. If it is defeated, it is replaced, not by a functioning democracy, but by a new leadership. All democratic movements are therefore self-defeating. They are doomed by the iron law of oligarchy. According to this law, the majority of human beings, in a condition of eternal tutelage, are predestined by tragic necessity to submit to the domination of a small minority, and must be content to constitute the pedestal of an oligarchy.
In so far as this repeats in another form the Machiavellian conception of power, there is no need for additional comment. But there certainly is a special problem of the party and bureaucratism apart from general considerations of power relationships in society. It is a fact that, in a certain sense, parties and leaderships are necessary evils. (At the present moment, incidentally, the emphasis should be applied most heavily on the “necessary” – it was the absence of the necessary evil of a revolutionary party in Europe which led to the present catastrophe.) For to organize under capitalism means that, to a large measure, one must organize according to the morality of capitalism. Even revolutionary morality, diametrically opposed to capitalism, is based on it; it is not a morality of an entirely different social order as feudal morality was or as socialist morality will be.
Concretely, socialists abhor the use of force; their ultimate perspective is unquestionably pacifist. Nonetheless, they realize that the very fact that we live under capitalism means that a socialist party strong enough to challenge the status quo would have the entire force of the ruling apparatus hurled at it; it must, therefore, be prepared for such an eventuality. But though this is certainly correct politics, it is also unfortunately a necessary adoption of attitudes which we wish to abolish. Resultantly, it becomes clear that a socialist party becomes prone to adopt such attitudes, not merely as passing necessities, but as generally valid categories. Not only is this true of the comparatively conscious process which has been described above, but also of far less conscious processes whereby the revolutionists have adopted as their own precisely the mores they struggle against, often against their own wishes and often to their own amazement and horror when the fact is made clear to them.
Unquestionably one can foresee a situation where a workers’ state which is gradually emerging into a socialist society would face the possible need of challenging the revolutionary – and therefore class-conscious and, at that stage of the game, reactionary – heritage and methodology of the “Old Bolsheviks.” (The jest that has often been made by revolutionists about there being no place for them under socialism contains a profound, if rather sad, kernel of truth.) More immediately, it is clearly obvious how the heritage of capitalist methodology and, more generally, the heritage of a world history of oppressive class societies could mar the transition from capitalism to socialism. In his Historical Materialism, Bukharin writes of “the period of proletarian dictatorship [as being] far more difficult. The working class achieves victory, although it is not and cannot be a unified mass ... There will inevitably result a tendency to ‘degeneration,’ i.e., the excretion of a leading stratum in the form of a class-germ. This tendency will be retarded by two opposing tendencies: first, by the growth of the productive forces; second, by the abolition of the educational monopoly.” And it must be opposed by still a third force: conscious, wary, most advanced socialist elements on guard against the usurpation of power.
We have said before that the socialist revolution is a conscious process of social experimentation. The rôle of the party is the most vital variable in that process. While the general setting is undoubtedly determined by antecedent conditions, the revolutionary consciousness of the vanguard, together with the increasing awareness of the mass, must serve as the conscience of the revolution. No supra-human force – whether they range from Paretian residues to pseudo-Marxian belief in the “inevitability” of socialism – can serve as a substitute.
All that the Machiavellian protestations and whining about the party can do is to make us more conscious of the fact that once humanity is to enter the period of conscious and deliberate history when it will have its own destiny in its hands, it will have to guard, too, against any debasement or degeneration of that destiny. Who, however, except a conscious or misguided defender of the status quo, would urge that fact as an argument against the attempt of humanity to take its destiny into its own hands?
*
In our articles against Machiavellianism we have attempted to reply to its anti-socialist arguments in a spirit of scientific detachment and without any emotional or sectarian overtones. The degree of our success is for the reader to judge. We cannot end, however, without a word about the role of James Burnham in this matter. He, who once loftily deigned to correct Marxism from the pinnacle of modern science, has now entered the lists as the champion of every outmoded, shop-worn prejudice against the struggle for human freedom. What he has paraded as the last word in scientific realism is nothing more than a pretentious elaboration of the backward, primitive prejudice and notions of the small-town, cracker-barrel philosopher who spits his jawful of tobacco juice into the stove of the village general store as he utters sage profundities about human nature. Burnham certainly is not a fascist, if only because he is too jealous of his right to write books like The Machiavellians. But it cannot be gainsaid that his latest contribution to political thought adds its bit to the degenerative and demoralized atmosphere of the period of capitalist decay which smooths the road for fascism. This is certainly not Burnham’s intention. But then, as Eliot has noted, “Between the idea and the reality ... between the conception and the creation ... falls the shadow.”

Footnotes
1. The Machiavellians, by James Burnham.
2. The Polish theoretician, Makhajski, and his followers have attempted to prove an analogous proposition on economic grounds, namely, that the socialist revolution is a seizure of power by the intellectuals in order to exploit the workers. The methodology of this approach is, in contrast to the Machiavellians, quite permissible since it deals in concrete social categories, though Marxists cannot accept the content of its theories. When, however, Makhajski and his American disciple, Max Nomad, extend their ideas into a general category to assert that all revolutions must end with the revolting class supplanted in power by an intellectual minority or elite, they are adopting the Machiavellian approach, even if – for some strange sort of romantic reasons of their own – they urge that the workers make these foredoomed revolutions nonetheless.
3. For a fascinating discussion of this point, see Mathiez’s history of the French Revolution.
 




In our first article, we demonstrated that the Machiavellian approach [1] is grounded on the tacit foundation of a theory of human nature as immanent and static; and that once the latter theory is disproved, the Machiavellian assumption has its main prop kicked from under it. Nonetheless, we think it valuable to discuss the Machiavellian sociological approach in terms of its own propositions – again, if only because they are so much in vogue at present – reserving for our third and final article the political conclusions of Machiavellianism.
Burnham derives almost completely from Pareto in the realm of sociology. His mind is attracted by the system-making quality of Pareto’s fuzzy dialectics: the formally rigorous logic of his classifications, the occasional instances of brilliant but strictly secondary analysis, the pious adherence to “science.” Especially appealing to Burnham’s present mood of blasé cynicism is Pareto’s theory of “non-logical action” which is both a socialized restatement of the human nature theory and the major operational concept of his sociology.
According to Pareto, there are two types of human action: logical and non-logical. Logical action is that in which the subject considers his needs and position, selects a certain goal as desirable and realizable on the basis of that consideration, and resultantly chooses adequate means to attain that goal. The action is logical in that the result corresponds to the motivation of the activity. Non-logical or irrational activity, on the other hand, contains goals and means which do not correspond; possibly the goal is unrealizable in the context of the situation in which it has been chosen and the means are therefore necessarily futile; or the goal is realizable and the means may be improper. In any case, it is the non-logical activity which comprises the prevalent social life of the great bulk of the masses and only a tiny, self-conscious minority – the manipulators of history, the elite – is capable of logical activity. It is obvious, of course, that there are innumerable irrational activities in both individual and social life. [2] The entire science of psychoanalysis is dedicated to the attempt to discover the significance of these non-logical activities in individual behavior; it labels them as neuroses, actions “to escape an unbearable situation. The strivings tend in a direction which only fictitiously is a solution” (Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom). The social group acts irrationally, not merely out of a desire to escape an unbearable situation, but out of an immature or inadequate attempt to solve a pressing problem. But to state that such activities exist is not to solve the problem.
 
Non-Logical Activity in Historical Context
Why are there certain non-logical activities at a certain time and another kind at another time? Out of what ingredients is the myth of the social group (or the neuroses of the individual) formed which composes the basis of the non-logical action? Pareto, and Burnham after him, make no attempt to answer this question. In this, they betray their non-historical approach. The primitive tribe which worships a totem pole and hopes thereby to be blessed with a bumper crop is engaging in a non-logical activity; when the European working class, as a result of an entire series of concrete experiences, continues to place its faith in its Stalinist betrayers, it also thereby engages in a non-logical activity. One can, if so inclined, construct a profound theory of history – with even a new vocabulary to gloss over its platitudinous ancientness – on this type of observation. But it contributes nothing to an understanding of either totem worship or the European working class.
One must attempt to explain, on the basis of a specific, unique historical analysis, what were the factors in the life of the primitive tribe which led it to totem worship. What was their cultural level which made it possible for them to believe that the worship of a totem pole would have efficacious results in as disparate a field as agriculture? What in their background let them to link the two experiences into a miraculous totality? How had their religious life developed in relation to their tribal organization, their mode of production, their geographical position? What contact with other groups, if any, helped enshrine the totem worship? These questions, placed in the concrete context of the social situation as it is (that is, inductive analysis together with theoretical construction on the basis of the knowledge gleaned therefrom and compared to similar inquiries) indicate the means by which to discover the relationship between the rational and irrational; not a mere a priori generality gleaned from a predilection about “human nature.” The Machiavellian approach is concerned, however, not with analyzing the relationship between the logical and non-logical action, but merely in establishing the dichotomy. There it demonstrates its non-utility as a means of historical inquiry and its social bias as well.
 
The Class Determination of Social Activity
For it is obvious enough that not only is the relationship between logical and non-logical action historically determined in the sense of being a resultant of specific historical situations, but it is also class-determined in that it is, within a given period, the resultant of class points of view and perspectives. When Burnham writes of logical activity as comprising a proper adaptation of means to end, he is dealing not with some neutral problem in abstract logic, but with the major societal problem of contemporary life. What one considers the proper means to reach a given end is largely determined by one’s class outlook. Is the Leninist method proper for achieving socialism? No one can answer that question as if it were a problem in calculus or physics. Such questions can be answered only from a position, as must all questions involving means and ends, social activity and class outlooks. [3] The social bias in Burnham’s conception of non-logical actions is in his equation of the elite with logical action and the non-elite with non-logical action – of course, once again asserting at the beginning that which he is supposed to prove at the end.
But not only is the Machiavellian concept of non-logical action without either historical or class reference; it is, as posed, contrary to elementary scientific methodology. The specific form in which Pareto poses his theory of non-logical action is illustrated by his most notorious sociological distinction, that between “residues” and “derivatives.” Residues consist of the common underlying psychological element in different actions; they are invariable and incapable of further explanation. Social life is determined by a considerable number of these unchangeable entities which themselves have neither a function nor a meaning nor even an origin; they are simply there! Burnham lists as among Pareto’s residues: the instinct of group-persistence, the sexual expression, the tendency of human beings to manipulate elements of their experience into systems, the need for expressing sentiments by external acts, and similar platitudes. From these basic causal factors come most of human activity; it is therefore non-logical. When men begin to develop rationalizations – what Pareto calls “the work of the mind in accounting for residues” – they are the derivatives. Though Burnham tries to wiggle out of it, Pareto clearly identifies his residues with “instincts” and thereby admits the psychological basis of his theory.
 
Does Science Have a Place?
But the question arises: If the origin, meaning and development of the basic factors causing social habits is not deter-minable, then how can one speak of using the experimental, scientific method in sociology or history? If we must always refer to the unknown and unknowable – as in religion – then of what value are Pareto’s (and after him, Burnham’s) scientific pretensions? Science is concerned with cause, with explanation of one series of phenomena or sequences in terms of another. Pareto’s method is directly contrary.
As the psychologist, Carl Murchison, very correctly says:
If Pareto means that human actions and thoughts are lawless and do not consist of events that follow inevitably from other events under restricting conditions, he has made a statement entirely unsupported by experimental science and impossible of verification. No lawless event can ever be verified, either experimentally or logically. (Journal of Social Philosophy, October 1935.)
In other words, the profound discovery of Pareto and Burnham consists in the idea that the great mass of human actions are beyond the scope of scientific investigation. If that is true, there is – this is the sole consolation – little need for their tomes.
There are other appalling weaknesses in the Paretian construction. How does one prove the causal sequence from residue to derivative if the former is so hazy and vague and the latter so arbitrary in its development? How does one explain the vast sequences of change in human history? And what right do Pareto and Burnham have to rail against the rationalists who believed in the permanent goodness of mankind? For Pareto shares with the rationalists the belief in the essential identity of morals, religion and so forth throughout mankind, with the sole difference that the rationalists choose to give an optimistic bias while the Machiavellians strike a pessimistic pose. Neither has much relation to science. But if they are to be compared, the rationalism of Rousseau is quite preferable to the negative rationalism of Pareto, if only because of the contrasting uses to -which they have been put.
 
“Real” and “Formal Meanings”
Behind all the metaphysics about logical and non-logical actions, residues and derivates there lies a very vital historical problem. That is what Burnham calls the distinction between “real” and “formal” meanings. As he uses this distinction, it is a wiseacreish means of debunking rather than a weapon of analysis. His book is full of exposés showing that people didn’t act out the motives they believed were behind their actions and of exposés showing that the ideological program of a social group was camouflage for diverse or contrary ends. But this kind of exposé has slight historical value; for the sophisticated student, aware of the fact that men do not always act out the motives they proclaim, it has no real value.
Burnham, for instance, cites the struggle between Dante and Machiavelli. Dante, though speaking in terms of the most noble platitudes, really represented feudal reaction; while Machiavelli, despite his cynical realism, spoke for the progressive town elements desiring a unified Italian nation. Dante then, hid his “real” meaning behind his “formal” one; Machiavelli expressed both congruently. But Burnham here again fails to use a historical approach. It is true that Machiavelli represented progressive forces [4] in comparison with Dante; but it is only when the phrase “in comparison” is used that the sentence has meaning. To do so is to admit that the entire question of real and formal meaning is historically conditioned. Then it descends from the clouds of permanent residues and enters the reality of historical relations. For though there is a greater scientific value to Machiavelli’s political writing than to Dante’s, the former’s are by no means free from “ideology.” Machiavelli too appeals to generalized conceptions such as “justice” – only he can afford to be much more concrete than Dante since the cause of rising capitalism which he championed was more akin to the interests of humanity as a whole than was Dante’s feudal society. Every rising, revolutionary class speaks in the name of humanity as a whole, in addition to championing its own interests; and this is not merely a device, it is almost always a genuine belief. It is there that the Marxian concept of “ideology” plays such an illuminating role – in demonstrating the concrete relationship between the true meaning (the class interest) and the formal meaning (the appeal to and in the name of humanity). The Machiavellian concept is little more than a sophisticated refurbishment of the old Platonic duality between substance and essence, between the phenomenon and the ideal; it is a form of statement rather than explanation.
 
The Marxian Concept of Ideology
The Marxian concept of ideology, on the contrary, is historical and relativistic in its approach. It sees in each historical situation, ultimately in the mode of production, the major though by no means exclusive determining force for the rise of an ideology; it destroys the duality between real and formal meaning and establishes the concrete connection. A vivid description of the ideological process has been given by Engels:
Ideology is a process accomplished, to be sure, by so-called thought but with a false consciousness. This process does not know the actual motive forces behind it, otherwise it would not be an ideological process. Being a process of thought, it derives its content as well as its form from pure thought, either on its own part or on that of its predecessors. It works with mere mental material, which it assumes and accepts as the product of thought and for which it does not seek any more remote process that may be independent of thought, and all this is self-evident to this process, for it regards all action, since it works through thought, as also in the last instance based on thought ... This illusion of an independent history of national constitutions, legal system, ideological conceptions in each special field of knowledge, is the element which leads most people astray mentally. (Letter to Mehring, July 14, 1893.)
The fact that a social group speaks in terms of generalized welfare in its formal platform and really represents a special interest does not necessarily disqualify it as either scientific or progressive, in the context of its times. The real test is: How much closer do the formal and real meanings coincide in the case of one class or group than in the case of the other? Social life is a problem in choice, within necessary limits. There is more scientific truth in Voltaire than in a defendant of the Bourbon monarchy, even though Voltaire speaks in the grandiose generalities of rationalism; Danton comes a little closer to scientific understanding of the historical process in which he acted than Voltaire; and in turn Robespierre more so than Danton.
The relationship between real and formal meaning, then, depends on the class relationships which they express and on the historical level within which they function; the reason for the particular configuration of the real-formal relationship is always specific, historical, relative. The Machiavellian attitude, on the contrary, merely establishes the dichotomy as a pernicious constant, pats itself on its back for not indulging in such fantasies, and attempts no explanation. The result is that Burnham’s understanding of history is limited to a monotonous chant: “They didn’t really mean it ...” And not only that; he falls into an ideological trap which is supposed to be the special province of Marxism (in reality, of its vulgar traducers). He ascribes to the formal element a completely negative rôle: “the entire formal meaning, which has told us nothing and proved nothing ...” (page 19). But this is precisely the vulgar approach of denying the importance of what Marxism calls the ideological superstructure in historical causation. It is not true that the formal meaning tells nothing or proves nothing; quite the contrary. In actual historical research, we must often proceed from the formal back to the real meaning; the former provides endless clues to the latter, and it often plays a great retroactive rô1e in influencing the real meaning of a historical movement. Who would dare deny that the humanistic aura of the French Revolution was an important factor, even though it was basically a bourgeois revolution? Or any one of a million other instances. Burnham, driven by idealistic metaphysics of Paretian sociology, winds up with an extraordinarily mechanistic historical approach.
 
The Theory of the Elite
We have dealt so laboriously with this whole matter of logical and non-logical actions, real and formal meanings because it is basic to the conception of the elite which is the central point in Machiavellian sociology. The concept of the elite, as used by the Machiavellians, is far from rigidly defined and contains considerable elements of confusion. Since Pareto and Burnham refuse to accept the Marxian analysis of a ruling class as a social, historically limited, relationship based on a specific mode of production, and since they likewise refuse to accept any rationalist or normative wish-fulfilling theories, they must necessarily resort to one of two approaches: definition by external description or by an endowment of the elite with superior native qualities. Strangely enough, they utilize both. Typical of the first approach is Pareto’s definition of the elite as consisting of “individuals who directly or indirectly play some considerable part in government.” Mosca’s definition is hardly more illuminating:
Political power always has been and always will be exercised by organized minorities, which have had and will have the means, varying as the times vary, to impose their supremacy on the multitude.
These tautological definitions form the basis for one of the two approaches which the Machiavellians have toward the elite conception. But the ground is shifted when Pareto sets up his “index of efficiency” as a means of distinguishing between elites and non-elites. For, dearly, to say that “X has a high index number of efficiency in some field of activity” is not the same as saying that “X is high in the social scale” ... unless one attempts, as does Pareto (but Burnham shies away from this!) a correlation between the curve of stratification of society in intelligence, and the curve of distribution of income. But this assumption is patently unprovable, since the curve of income has changed in, say, the last two centuries in any number of ways, while the biological endowments with which elites are presumably blessed must have remained constant. It is not difficult to see the moral sanction afforded to the status quo and its elite by the theory that the governing elite is endowed with a high “index number.” (The quaintness of phrasing is Pareto’s, not ours.) They are on top because they’re smarter; they’re smarter because they’re on top: is that a vulgarization?
Burnham, however, confines himself to the descriptive, tautological approach. He lists vague qualities which fail to clarify. Does the elite include the politicians, the managers, the capitalists, the landowners, the state bureaucracy? If so, what is the relationship between them? Who rules and who administers? Who drives and who is driven? But Burnham never once attempts to give substance to his definition of the elite by considering such questions ... It might even lead him back to the old Marxian concept of classes, from which he recently had such a narrow escape. All we are told is encompassed in the profundities: the elite ... is the rulers. The rulers ... are the elite.
We are given no indication of how the dynamics of a given society, its tensions and conflicts, its character and transformation, may determine the rôle and composition of a ruling elite. As Franz Borkenau remarks in his book on Pareto:
As art cannot be explained by the fact that there is a large differentiation in artistic talent between the members of a community, so political domination cannot be explained by the fact that different individuals are suited in varying degrees for exercising domination. Domination must be explained as a social need and not as a desire or intention of the elite. If the necessity for domination is understood, then and then only the function of the dominating group can be made intelligible ...
Pareto treats domination as a natural, quasi-biological fact arising out of the existence of a group specfically talented for domination ... [Consequently] the elite must have some natural features characteristic of rulers in common, which are lacking in the mass of mankind. If domination is mainly the result of natural biological differentiations, then the rulers must represent some sort of higher race.
 
Why Do Elites Degenerate?
But – and now we reach the crux of the problem – if elites, by definition, are endowed with superior qualities, why, then, in the course of history, do ruling groups so conspicuously degenerate? On this crucial question, as on every other. Machiavellian theory is unable to explain change in history. And if you can’t explain change, what can you explain?
Pareto himself is puzzled by this problem. He writes that “aristocracies do not last. For one reason or another (our emphasis), after a certain time they disappear.” This sentence, which Burnham does not quote in his book, reveals the complete helplessness of Machiavellianism before the factor of history. It can draw up long catalogues of surface similarities between different historical epochs; it can debunk idealist movements without understanding their significance; it can “explain” hosts of diverse actions under fuzzy categories; but it is helpless to explain change, that is, history.
Burnham attempts to wriggle out of the dilemma by dragging in Pareto’s auxiliary concept of “circulation of elites.” There is a change in the elite’s makeup when the old elite has become stultified, corrupt and softened from power, and unwilling to admit new, fresh elements. Resultantly, a change of elites takes place. But there are here several contradictions. If, as Pareto claims, there is a constant correlation between the curves of social stratification and biological endowment, why should a free circulation of elites be desirable? Then, presumably, it would be desirable to keep the elite closely confined ... to avoid, shall we say, racial poisoning. Secondly, how does the new, fresh elite that is to “circulate” itself (what a fantastic euphemism for revolution!) into the place of the old one, come by the qualifications required of the elite? Let us take the French Revolution as an example. Both the courtiers of Louis XIV and the cabinet of Robespierre constituted, in different ways, elites. But to lump them together under the one general heading clarifies nothing about the French Revolution. What were the residues that Robespierre possessed which made it possible for him to triumph where Mirabeau failed? Could it just possibly have had something to do with the class fluctuations, the rôle of Robespierre as a representative of the most revolutionary section of the petty bourgeoisie? When confronted thus with an actual historical situation the theory of the elite can serve no function except to offer the incredibly sage statement that the Bourbons and Jacobins both were elites, and the Jacobins acquired more of the necessary qualities needed by a successful elite than did the Bourbons, and therefore triumphed. This is what Lenin once called the “enrichment of history.”
The question applies with even greater force to the present day. Why does the German elite (incidentally, who, according to Burnham, would be the German elite: the Nazi bureaucracy, the army leaders, the capitalists, or all of them jumbled up together?) show such greater durability and toughness than its Italian cousin? A Marxist would suggest that a glance at the industrial potentials of the two countries and their relation to the world market might supply a clue to the answer.
If the elite concept cannot explain past history, does it give any due to the future? All that it can contribute on this score is the barren formula that elites are inevitable and classless societies impossible. Since our final article will concern itself with this question, we shall not discuss it here, except to note that it is the same James Burnham who broke with Marxism because he said it contained a philosophy of optimistic inevitability who is now trumpeting this inevitability, but in a socially retrogressive form.
In summary, then, the concept of the elite is of no particular theoretical or political value since:

it is too vaguely defined to be of operative use and, in the Machiavellian scheme, has at least two exclusive definitions;
 
there is no evidence to demonstrate any natural endowment making for a social elite;
 
it makes impossible any explanation of change in history;
 
it fails to explain why certain elites are relatively more durable and successful than others and why all elites that history has known thus far have sooner or later disappeared from the scenes.
 

The Interdependence Theory of History
All that remains to complete our discussion of the general concepts of Machiavellian sociology is a consideration of its formal theory of history. [5] We have deliberately left this for last, since it plays a secondary rôle in Burnham’s book. Formally, he adopts the popular theory of historical interdependence: a multiplicity of historical factors interact and the resultant is history. But the theory ends where it should begin. Granting that there is an interplay of historical forces – so what? The theory has no means of measurement or comparison. Why do certain historical factors play a decisive rôle and others a secondary one? Which provides the power and which cools the engine? To note that there are many factors in history is merely to create confusion unless one also provides a means of evaluating them. Historical materialism is one such means; it is a means of measurement (of at least an approximate nature) and evaluable. The simple interaction theory, however, provides no such tools; it is a means of evading historical analysis rather than indulging in it. To say “pluralism” is not to wave a magic wand, even if it gives the author a roomy feeling and relieves him of the requirement of historical specificity in his analysis.
But this is merely the formal historical theory of Burnham. In reality, he seldom uses it. His real historical theory is incredibly crude and mechanistic, for it is nothing else than a refurbished version of the force theory of our old friend, Herr Eugen Dühring.
Throughout his book, Burnham stresses the rôle of force as an arbitrary determining factor in history. “Force and fraud” – these are the means by which elites maintain their power and the latter is used primarily as a kind of substitute for force, which always stands in the background ready to exert its sovereignty. In Burnham’s approach, the force theory – much as with old Dühring – is abstracted into a universal determinant, without any ties to existing historical institutions and hence without historical limitations. That an elite may exist because of a certain set of productive relations rather than because it is in possession of the means of forces does not occur to Burnham. As Engels so appropriately wrote of Dühring:
Superior force is no mere act of the will but requires very real preliminary conditions for the carrying out of its purposes, especially mechanical instruments ... In a word, the triumph of force depends upon the production of weapons, therefore upon economic power, on economic conditions, on the ability to organize actual material instruments.
 
Force in Social Life
Surely everyone knows that force has been an unremittant ingredient of social life, but we still must ask what has shaped this socially neutral means of action, what has bent it in one direction or the other? To say that force has always existed is to say that there has never been social equality, which is what the historical investigator begins with, rather than ends with. The very mechanisms of force are historically conditioned; the uses to which it is put are obviously so.
Writes Engels:
... Force is only a means to further an economic interest ... In order to be able to keep a slave one has to be superior to him in two respects, one must first have control over the tools and objects of labor of the slave and over his means of subsistence also ... Especially where private property arises it appears as the result of a change in the methods of production and exchange in the interests of the increase of production and the development of commerce and therefore arises from economic causes. Force plays no role in this. It is clear that the institution of private property must have already existed before the robber is able to possess himself of other people’s goods, and that force may change the possession but cannot alter private property as such. (Anti-Dühring)
But for Burnham, as a true Machiavellian, such historical considerations are not to be noticed; one reiterates constantly that force has always been used in social life, it is the ultimate determining factor in social struggles, and that it will always be so. Thus, from the “flexible” and “pluralistic” interaction theory of history, we come to a rigid, vulgar theory of force. This development is not unique. It is the outstanding characteristic of Machiavellian theory: the would-be anti-rationalists turn out to be rationalists. The champions of “science” turn out to be champions of metaphysics. The crude, unrelenting empiricists turn out to be sheer idealists. In a word, to use Burnham’s argot, there is no relation between the real and formal programs of Machiavellianism.
* * *
In the third and final article of this series, we propose to discuss the political conclusions of Machiavellianism, namely, the so-called Iron Law of Oligarchy, the problem of bureaucratic degeneration of organizations, and the possibility of achieving a classless society.

Footnotes
1. A number of readers have brought to my attention the possibility that in accepting Burnham’s usage of “Machiavellianism” as the label for his theories, I allow to go unchallenged his identification of his theories with those of Machiavelli. It goes without saying that I do not accept such identification but use the term as Burnham does merely for lack of another handy label. We are really dealing with a form of pseudo-Machiavellianism or perhaps neo-MachiavellianIsm, but that is clearly too clumsy, so I’m afraid we’ll have to tag along with “Machiavellianism” as the label for Burnham’s approach, if for no other reason than convenience.
2. The observant reader may wonder at the continued reiteration in both this and our first article on tbe distinction between individual and social life. For surely they are intertwined and retroactive! This we would be the last to deny. We are, however, compelled to affect what at times may seem to be an overly fine distinction between the two because of the continued Machiavellian practice of congealing them, of failing to note the vital distinctions in analytical approach necessary to the individual psyche and the social class, even though no one could possibly deny that they are interdependent.
3. Does this mean that objective investigation into history is impossible, that historical truth does not exist outside of class interests? This question, always posed by the anti-Marxists, is here irrelevant since we are dealing not with investigation but with activity, and no one has yet demonstrated the existence of any major social activity – logical or not – which is not in some way influenced by class interests (using the word “interest” in the broad sense Marx always did).
4. It is extraordinarily noteworthy that Burnham utilizes the concept of historical progressivism in relation to Machiavelli and Dante – and with quite valid results – but completely “forgets” about it when discussing the modern Machiavellians. But if it is proper to place Machiavelli and Dante in their class contexts, why not do so for Pareto and Mosca? Why not also examine the social use and the social purpose of their theories? Would the result be embarrassing?
5. Burnham disposes of the Marxian theory in brief. “Social and political events,” he writes, “of the very greatest scope and order – the collapse of the Roman Empire, the rise of Christianity, the advance of Islam – have occurred without any important correlated change in the mode of economic production; consequently, the mode of production cannot be the sole cause of social change.” In one brief sentence, Burnham has succeeded in accumulating the platitudes of a century of academic effort – and the dishonesty as well. To wit: (1) Marxism has never claimed that every social and political event must be “correlated” by a change in the means of production; (2) on the contrary, the belief in a one-to-one relationship between the mode of production and social and political superstructures is one against which Marxism has constantly polemized; (3) Marxism has, as a matter of fact, explained social and political changes such as those Burnham mentions as the results of rising new classes which challenge the existing mode of production, or as a result of modifications within the mode of production, such as the change from industrial to finance capitalism; (4) Marxism has never claimed that the mode of production (does Burnham mean changes In the mode of production?) is the “sole” cause of social change; (5) Marxism has examined at least the first two of Burnham’s examples in great detail, notably in Kautsky’s Foundations of Christianity, with such success that subsequent historians have liberally borrowed from it, without, of course, acknowledging their source. Marx himself paid considerable attention to the rise of Christianity, as did his co-workers among the “Young Hegelians,” during his early period; as witness the interest aroused by the publication of Strauss’ Life of Christ, an early attempt to explain Christ’s life in natural, historical terms (see Mehring’s Karl Marx).
But, most important, why does Burnham have to go back twenty centuries to prove the inapplicability of the Marxian historical method? Why not attempt to offer evidence from somewhat more recent historical experience? Or is it easier to “disprove” Marxism by vague references to the rise of Islam than by references to contemporary capitalist society?
 




War Diary
by Jean Malaquais
Doubleday-Doran. 246 pages, $2.50.
This diary of a young Polish-French novelist was written during the months immediately before the fall of France. It contains his personal record in an army labor battalion, random literary reflections, personal reactions to army life and occasional statements of a political attitude toward the war. Its author has already written a novel of considerable power, Men from Nowhere, and is of general leftist, anti-Stalinist political persuasion. After recording the above data, there is only one more important thing to say: War Diary is the first work to come out of this war which is of major significance, which is true to the very core and which should under no conditions be neglected by any intelligent person who is sensitive to the atomizing, concrete effects of the war. It goes without saying that for a socialist it is indispensable.
The reception which War Diary met in the “leftist” and “liberal” press could be considered scandalous were it not expected. The pious heroes of the liberal book sections have pretended to be shocked at the fact that when Malaquais met up with French peasants he found them filthy, vulgar and debased by the barracks routine. They accused Malaquais of not “loving humanity,” of being a snob. Even Victor Serge, who, as with so many other matters, should know better but apparently doesn’t, dished out the same spoonfuls of twaddle in his review in Politics.
The liberals, of course, see no political or moral discrepancy between their overflowing love for humanity and their support of British, American and Stalinist imperialism in the war. But they point righteous fingers, sticky with the goo of complacent humanitarianism, at Malaquais and innocently ask: How can he reconcile his revolutionary socialist opinions with his revulsion against the peasants with whom he had to live in the army? It is only with a feeling of impatience – and a bit of shame, too, that our “leading critics” should smear this true, fine and beautiful book with such preposterous shysterism – that one points out that most elementary fact: only those who understand how contemporary civilization debases humanity, only those who see that capitalism drags people down into the gutters of vulgarity and baseness, of filth and the stupor of routine, fruitless existence; only those can truly understand and passionately struggle for a new and better society.
On the other hand, it is the liberals who, despite the rubbery protestations about their belief in the “ultimate” need for a new society, always manage to find a modus vivendi within the present one; it is these liberals who find it convenient to cloak their political supineness with Populist chatter about the glories of man and his spiritual beauty. But if man as he is today – we do not speak of those occasional flashes of potentiality which are the promise of the morrow but are ground down by the pestle of today – this man who is molded by the mores and conventions of capitalist society, is truly such a glorious creature, then why is there any need for a new society? Yes, yes, the issue is as simple as all that: either capitalist society debases mankind, and that is the main reason for desiring socialism; or it does not, and in that case socialists would be better off listening to chamber music, or playing handball ... or something.
Malaquais is a talented observer, but that really isn’t so important, because there are other talented observers. But Malaquais is an honest and courageous man, and that is something for which to be profoundly grateful. When I mention, in addition, that he has – one glimpses from his few occasional remarks on politics; especially from a wonderful sentence in which he remarks that “Only a few creators, a few artists, a few revolutionaries, will discover within themselves enough reserve strength to survive the avalanche” – a deep, passionate hatred for all that is rotten in our society; that he is a true, complete, unregenerate rebel and that he sees the war for the lie it is, you can understand why the book provokes somersaults.
Malaquais has exposed the consuming boredom, the irretrievable waste of time, of barracks existence to the point where those who have, or are now, undergoing similar experiences will be tempted to shout out loud: “Yes, yes, here is a man who gives the truth, whole, simple, unvarnished truth.” And if anybody thinks I may be a little naive in returning again and again to this simple little fact that an honest book has been written, let him list some other honest books about this war.
There are many jejune passages in the book, immature “reflections” which, were they the product of deliberate, considered composition, might make the author blush. But it is to be remembered that War Diary is ... war diary and was not polished over by loving hands in a peaceful summer home. Anyone who has had to exist in a barracks in the Second World Bore will know that even these passages are true, as true as the fine and the beautiful passages; no sensitive or intelligent man subjected to military routine is immune from occasional spasms of self-pity, of pretentious philosophizing. So when you read the book, take that as it comes also.
This review could be much longer if some of the wonderful passages from War Diary were quoted – and they are very quotable. But I feel that the book is a total experience, and any attempt to break it into bits would be unjust. Well, there we are. If you want to discover how a man feels in an army (which in some ways is more important than and certainly distinct from how a man feels in battle), read this first honest and intelligent book to come out of this war.
 



The unusually interesting discussion on whether Communists should be allowed to teach in American colleges, seems now to be reaching an end. It is therefore convenient to venture an estimate of this discussion, particularly of some of its neglected political connotations. By way of introduction, I might say that while opposed to restrictive legislation or procedures that would prevent Stalinists from teaching in the schools, I do not consider the question quite so open-and-shut as the civil libertarians seem to think it. No problem involving the Stalinists can be viewed in the traditional categories, for the Stalinist movement is a new, unprecedented factor in political life. But of that, more later.
 
The Position of Sidney Hook
The point of view of those who would prevent CP members from teaching in the schools has been most forcefully presented by Professor Sidney Hook, a teacher of philosophy at New York University, in his articles in the New York Times of February 27, 1949, the Saturday Evening Post of September 10, 1949 and Commentary of October, 1949. For a fruitful discussion, it will be necessary to summarize Hook’s view in some detail.
The discussion by Hook and others was originally provoked by the now-famous incident at the University of Washington, in which three professors were discharged and three placed on probation because of alleged membership in the CP. Commenting on this incident, Hook rightly observes that for the first time teachers rather than universities are being accused of violations of academic liberty. The charge against these teachers is that, by virtue of membership in a political party which insists on an unbreached intellectual discipline, they are unable to function freely and honestly in the classroom; they express, not their immediate opinion, but whatever the CP line happens to be. For, he writes, “any doctrinal impositions, no matter what their sources, which set up limits beyond which the professor cannot go, affect him as a scholar and a teacher.” Such a teacher, held in leash by an external discipline, is unable honestly to consider ideas contrary to his own. He is obliged automatically to reject alternative ideas as “bourgeois,” “Trotskyist,” “Titoist” or whatever the momentary label of opprobrium may be.
To support these assertions Hook quotes from The Communist, official CP magazine, of May, 1937: “Marxist-Leninist analysis must be injected into every class.” And, says, Hook, this “party line is laid down in every area of thought from art to zoology.” Thus, when the CP calls Roosevelt a social-fascist one year and a progressive the next, the Stalinist history professor will obediently “instruct” his student accordingly. These designations, however absurd, would be tolerable if they came from the professor’s own mind, but they do not; they are simply the consequence of party need and imposition.
Stalinist teachers, continues Hook, do not establish honest intellectual relations with their colleagues or students: “Communist party teachers are fearful of exposure and quite aware that their practices violate accepted notions of academic freedom.” They hold secret fraction meeting at which decisions are made – or more often, conveyed – on how to influence the thought of students, capture control of university institutions, shape the curriculum, etc.
While not in favor of the expulsion of Stalinist teachers under all circumstances, Hook believes that such expulsions are justified in principle. He rejects the argument that to expel CP teachers is to hold them guilty by association, for, he says, when a teacher joins the CP he is committing a specific act which destroys his ability to function as a free intellectual. To propose, as do some people, that Stalinists be expelled from faculties only if found guilty of specific violations of their academic obligations is, says Hook, dangerous because it must lead to a system of spying on teachers and difficult because there may be no clear line of demarcation between the behavior of a fellow-traveller and that of a CP member. (Hook is against the expulsion of fellow-travellers.) Finally, he proposes that any action taken against Stalinist teachers be decided by the faculties, rather than administrations or boards of trustees.
I hope the above adequately summarizes Hook’s views; he has counter-arguments which I shall discuss in the course of my rebuttal below.
 
The Social Context of the Question
It is important to note, at the outset, the manner in which the question is posed in Hook’s articles: Shall Communists Be Allowed to Teach? is the title of his first article. To put the matter this way is implicitly to assume that there is some general community, some “we” faced with the problem. But that is highly doubtful. The problem, if such it is, is faced only by those who, in or out of the universities, enjoy social power – i.e., the generally reactionary or conservative forces which dominate American educational institutions. For liberal or radical teachers, it is usually a problem of what to propose or counterpose or advise. To put the question as Hook does is, in effect, to deny it its actual social context, to ignore what must in discussion of public policy always be a central question: who employs social power? Nor is this an academic point, for from it flows a whole series of consequences: why do trustees want to expel Stalinists? is it in the interest of anti-Stalinist teachers to align themselves in any way with such trustees? what possibly disastrous results may follow from such expulsions?
What may seem abstract in the previous paragraph becomes decidedly concrete in light of the events at the University of Washington. It is quite significant that in all his articles Hook avoids taking a position with regard to the expulsions at that University. In fact, he conspicuously avoids discussing the question in the concrete, i.e., in terms of the one major incident in which his position may be tested. But the actual events at Washington are of great importance, helping us to place our discussion in a here-and-now context.
 
The University of Washington Cases
Six faculty members at the University of Washington, some of whom had taught there more than 20 years, were brought up on charges: Professors Butterworth, Phillips, Grundlach, Ely, Ethel and Jacobs. The charges, heard before the Faculty Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom, fell into two groups: 1) that the six were CP members, and 2) that they had violated faculty rules of behavior. After a time, it is important to note, the second group of charges was completely dropped – with the exception of Grundlach, whose expulsion was recommended on grounds irrelevant to this discussion. Against the other five, the only charge was membership in the CP. The Faculty Committee split into several fractions in its recommendations, but a majority opposed the expulsion of the five, while a differently constituted majority proposed a change in faculty rules which would make such expulsion possible in the future.
However, the Board of Regents chose to ignore the Faculty Committee’s recommendations, and discharged Grundlach, Butterworth and Phillips, the latter two self-admitted CP members since the mid-1930’s. The other three teachers who admitted to previous but lapsed CP membership and who refused to identify publicly members of the CP, were placed on “probation.”
Nor did these events occur in a social vacuum. They followed a one-and-a-half-year inquiry conducted by a state legislative committee which, in the words of Robert Lampman, a liberal member of the University’s Economics Department, “was a roadshow company version of a Martin Dies production.” (The Progressive, May 1949.) In other words, the action taken against these six professors was the consequence, at least in part and very probably in full, of a reactionary drive by a small-minded legislative committee which created an atmosphere of fear and hysteria.
When these facts are borne in mind, several questions arise with regard to Hook’s argument:

Why, in all of his articles on this subject (which must total 	15,000 words), has he quite failed to portray the social context, 	the immediate situation in which the problem was first raised – 	i.e., the atmosphere created by the Legislative Committee at 	the time the six professors were punished? [1] 	Surely a philosopher so committed to the concretely-placed and the 	actually-limited investigation, must realize the great relevance of 	such facts.
 
What position does Hook now take toward the firing of the 	three professors? Since he has stated that faculties should have 	decisive power in such matters, he must presumably oppose the 	firing. If so, has he publicly made that clear ? If, on the other 	hand, he believes the discharge of the three valid, then he must 	face the accusation that he would have faculty decide such questions 	only when he agreed with its decision.
 
What is Hook’s view on the punishment of the other 	three teachers? Is past membership in the CP grounds for punishment? 	Is a refusal to “finger” members of the CP who might 	thereby be deprived of their livelihood grounds for punishment? Will 	Hook write a fourth article on these aspects of the problem of 	Stalinist teachers?

Hook, of course, is quite right in saying that doctrinal impositions, whatever their source, affect adversely the work of a teacher. But then we must notice that doctrinal impositions are the work not only of Stalinist teachers but of a great variety of other teachers: Catholics, NAM economics teachers, etc. Hook counters this view by saying that there is “no evidence whatsoever of the operation of Catholic cells in non-sectarian universities,” as there is of CP cells. Hook’s statement is true but irrelevant, for doctrinal imposition is not contingent on the existence of party cells: one can exist without the other.
It is true that the Catholics have no cells in the universities; they long ago abandoned such crude methods of operation. (I suppose, however, one could maintain that their cells meet regularly every Sunday morning.) The Catholic teachers generally don’t need the spur of cells, their intellectual discipline and coherence being products of centuries-long tradition and training. This intellectual discipline – or more accurately, as Hook puts is, doctrinal imposition – is often as extensive and severe as that of the Stalinist movement. (I speak of the genuine believers, not the fellow-travelling “sleepers” of the faith.) And this doctrinal imposition is no less real because Catholic teachers in any given university never hold “fraction” meetings.
 
Catholics and Stalinists
Surely, Hook must know that a Catholic teaching French history is no more likely to be objective about Voltaire than a Stalinist teaching Russian history will be about Trotsky. Surely he knows that a Catholic historian is no more likely to be objective about the role of the Vatican in modern politics, birth control, companionate marriage, contraceptives and Marxism than a Stalinist about Titoism. And is it likely that a Catholic philosopher will be more objective about “atheistic materialism” than a Stalinist about pragmatism? Of course, in practise, there are probably quite a few Catholic teachers who do discuss Voltaire, birth control and materialism with at least enough objectivity to give their students a reasonably accurate notion of the views with which they disagree (more than that one cannot ask of any teacher). But in practise there are also some Stalinist teachers of whom this can be said. In fact, so long as there is even one CP teacher known to be intellectually fair to opposing ideas in his classroom, then any proposal for the outright expulsion of all CP teachers invokes guilt by association.
Hook must decide which it is he objects to: doctrinal imposition or party cells. If the former, then many non-Stalinists teachers can be shown to be as guilty as Stalinists; if the former, then Hook faces the obligation of drawing a usable line of distinction between doctrinal imposition and the sincere and vigorous expression of an opinion. But if he objects to party cells, then Hook is raising another question, namely: do teachers have the right to form branches of a political organization on the campus ? Hook would undoubtedly reply that they do, but that he objects to conspiratorial organizations, a point which I shall discuss shortly. One thing should be clear: there is no necessary connection between doctrinal imposition and party cells; a fellow-traveller or CP member not functioning in a cell may express the party-line more faithfully than a CP member in a cell.
Consequently: non-CP members may be as guilty of doctrinal imposition as CP members and if Hook is to propose the expulsion of any teacher for such imposition he must, in fairness, propose the expulsion of all teachers, in or out of the CP, guilty of such behavior. Such a proposal, if carried out, would create a serious unemployment problem in the academic profession.
In actual life, it is impossible to prevent such imposition by teachers, and one may doubt whether it would be advisable to do so even if it were possible. If the university is to be a genuine intellectual center, it must confront the student with a variety of opinions, more or less reflecting those he will later meet in the outer world. The student must be taught to evaluate opinions, but he should not be insulated from any, even those of CP members.
In practise, what is the status of the Stalinist teacher? Here we reach the heart of the problem, and here Hook almost makes a convincing case.
If intellectual freedom involves the right to investigate and hold ideas without inhibition, then it must involve the right to act on those ideas; consequently, it is a violation of academic freedom to expel any teacher merely for belonging to a political party, no matter which. Difficult though it may be for Hook, or me, to understand how an adult intelligence trained in serious methods of inquiry can become a Stalinist, we must acknowledge not only the possibility that such may happen but the fact that it has. And, if I understand Hook correctly, he is saying that the mere fact that a teacher reaches Stalinist opinions, believes, say, that Stalin is fighting to save the world peace or to build socialism in Russia, is no reason to take punitive measures against him.
But then Hook makes another point which is important: namely, that when a teacher joins the CP, even if as a consequence of sincere and serious investigation of political possibilities, he surrenders his right and ability to think and speak freely in or out of the classroom. In this, Hook is partly right. And it is important to be clear as to just where he is right and wrong.
 
The Concealment of Affiliation
He is wrong when he says that Stalinist teachers violate academic freedom because they meet secretly and “are fearful of exposure.” Surely he must know that radicalism, or what is commonly taken for radicalism, has always been suspect in most American universities; that for a professor to admit to serious and committed radical views has meant and still often means to endanger the possibility of his winning tenure, promotions, research funds and social acceptance. There is consequently understandable reason and often considerable justification for Stalinists (who, no matter how wrongly, are usually taken to be radicals in the universities) to be “fearful of exposure.” When, during the recent war, they were tolerated and accepted in American life more than ever before or since, they functioned on the campus with very considerable openness now, of the cold war, they are being harried. To denounce Stalinist teachers for veiling their affiliations would be appropriate only if there were an intellectual atmosphere in the universities making for free and unpunished expression of all views, and only if this atmosphere were in turn sustained by a corresponding intellectual tolerance in the outer world. But to denounce Stalinist teachers for veiling their affiliations at a time when acknowledgment of them means possible loss of employment, is surely a rather dubious business.
Yet we must grant that Hook raises one highly serious point: that by the very nature of Stalinist discipline the teacher who joins the CP is unable to express himself freely. The mere fact, I would say, that he joins the CP does not mean that he is not acting as a free intellectual, for he is free to join or to quit whenever he wishes. But the discipline of the CP is such that it prevents the teacher from expressing himself critically (or at least tries to) on any segment of the CP line; in fact, it requires him to advocate the party line in its entirety regardless of his own opinions. Hook correctly says in this connection:
“Usually, he [the CP teacher] squares this to himself with the reflection that the point on which he feels the party line is wrong is comparatively unimportant. But it is precisely this subordination to his total commitment, and his evaluation of what is important or unimportant in the light of a political objective, that makes it impossible for him to exercise the free criticism he would engage in were he loyal to the principles of scientific inquiry.” (Emphasis in original).
 
An Important Distinction
Now here a distinction is necessary. There are occasions when an organization has the right to insist that its members publicly refrain from criticizing its policy, even if they disagree with it. When a union decides to call a strike, it has the right to demand that those of its members who believe the strike unwise still quit work; otherwise, they would be violating the union’s central reason for existence. When a political party runs candidates for office, it usually has the right to demand that its members not support the candidates of an opposing party; otherwise, there no longer really are political parties. To take a more grandiose example: when, just before the Bolshevik Revolution, Zinoviev and Kamenev divulged the Bolshevik perspective of a quick ascent to power, Lenin had the right to urge their expulsion, though being a wise man he didn’t.
But such problems of political discipline rarely, if ever, arise in a classroom. The distinction between a strike struggle and a discussion of genetics, materialism or the historical role of Roosevelt is perfectly clear, and in almost no conceivable circumstance does a political party have the right to demand of teachers that they follow in the classroom the kind of discipline sometimes necessary in the world of social struggle. Thus, a teacher who actually behaved as the CP resolution quoted by Hook insists he behave – that is, for example, defend Lysenko in a classroom while privately convinced Lysenko is wrong – would obviously be surrendering his intellectual independence.
So we must grant Hook’s claim that when a teacher joins the CP, knowingly the kind of universal intellectual discipline it demands, he is, at least formally, surrendering his intellectual independence. But this does not yet provide us with an answer to the question: should Stalinist teachers be expelled? We have still to ask ourselves several questions:
Is this kind of surrender of intellectual independence different in kind from that indulged in by other, non-Stalinist teachers?
Do, in practise, Stalinist teachers behave in the way the party resolution bids them to?
And even if they do, would the consequences of expelling them from the universities be more harmful to intellectual freedom than the consequences of permitting them to continue teaching?
Now it is clear, I think, that the behavior of a Stalinist teacher in the classroom, in so far as intellectual freedom is concerned, is not qualitatively different from that of Catholic or reactionary or sometimes even liberal teachers. Doctrinal imposition that is not the product of immediate organizational dictation is not necessarily better than doctrinal imposition that is the product of such dictation. Hook has compared the teacher’s signing of a CP card with an economics teacher’s accepting money from the NAM for propaganda in the classroom, but I think the comparison invalid. In the latter case the economics teacher is guilty of venal behavior, though in practise he may not say anything different from what is said by another professor who propounds the NAM line out of sheer love. But the teacher who sells himself for money should be expelled while the teacher who expresses the NAM point of view because he believes it should not be expelled. Now when another teacher joins the CP he does so with no expectation of personal gain; quite the contrary, he can only face personal discrimination and hardship. In almost every case, the CP teacher holds to his views out of deep conviction; he actually believes in the CP line by and large; and even if he does refrain from criticizing it here and there in his classroom (which, of course, is insupportable) he does so for intellectual reasons, out of intellectual convictions. That, alas, is the way his mind works; and no teacher of standard competence should be expelled for the way his mind works.
 
How Stalinist Teachers Behave
How do Stalinist teachers actually behave? It is hard to say in any generalized way, for there seem to be wide variations. But it is quite certain that they are seldom the party-line automata the CP resolution quoted by Hook directs them to be and as Hook assumes they are. It must be remembered that many CP teachers are men quite competent in their fields, with a certain training in the methods of free intellectual inquiry. They are not ordinary Stalinist hacks. At the Washington hearings one of the accused professors, an anthropologist, said that, while a CP member, he had differences of opinion with the CP on “certain points in scientific doctrine.” Whether or not this is true doesn’t matter; what matters is that this teacher could make this statement publicly. In the U.S., the CP is not in a position to enforce the kind of intellectual discipline from its teacher-members that Stalinist movements can in those countries where it has state power. And since the CP knows this it allows its teacher-members a greater degree of latitude in the expression of opinion than it does other members. (I recall that when the well-known Stalinist Morris Schappes taught in a New York college, he usually – with what inner resentment I neither know nor care – had to adhere to the rules of intellectual freedom in his classroom.) And often, too, some CP teachers will go out of their way to show their independence by criticizing the party line. Perhaps this is insincere, but the very fact that it can happen undermines the view that a teacher, merely because he joins the CP, is never in a position to do anything but parrot the party-line. And once the possibility is admitted that a CP teacher might still be able to act with a certain simulacrum of intellectual independence, then clearly the criterion for expulsion can no longer be mere membership in the CP but must be the actual behavior of individuals.
 
The Threat to the Campus
Yet it would be absurd to deny that teachers who join the CP usually cease to function as free teachers should. To keep them in the faculty of a school means to risk the possibility that they will convert a few students, perhaps capture a little pocket of power here and there, etc. But is this, at present, a serious danger? Is it Stalinism which threatens intellectual liveliness and independence on the campus today? Of course not; the power of the CP on the campus is now infinitesimal, a power largely sustained by those who conduct – not political – but punitive campaigns against it.
Hook writes:
“If removal of Communist Party members were to be used as a pretext by other reactionary elements to hurl irresponsible charges against professors whose views they disapprove, a case might be made for suspending action.”
For a man whose mind is as cogent and realistic as Sidney Hook’s, this statement is quite extraordinary. Were not the Washington expulsions the direct consequence of reactionary elements hurling irresponsible charges ? (One of the charges was against a teacher, Melvin Rader, who, it has been conclusively shown, had no  
connection with the CP; he was forced to go to great pains, losing much money and time, in order to “clear” himself.) And isn’t there at least an “atmospheric relationship,” if not a direct causal one, between the Washington case and the subsequent expulsion of an Oregon professor for defending Lysenko’s genetic system? But, most important of all, one must be wilfully indifferent to the potentialities of one’s proposals if one sees no serious danger in expelling teachers for being Communists at a time when the cold war becomes increasingly warm.
 
Reasons for Dismissal
There are, of course, instances in which it is quite proper to propose the discharge of a Stalinist teacher. Suppose a Stalinist who is assigned to teach physics devotes himself exclusively to discussing the wonders of Russia in his classroom. Or suppose a Stalinist teacher visibly discriminates against an anti-Stalinist student in grading. Or suppose, again, that a Stalinist teacher refuses his students the normal rights of discussion and conducts his class as if it were a local of the fur workers’ union. In such instances, these teachers should be discharged, not because of their political views, but because they are not properly performing their duties as teachers – i.e., because of their individual behavior.
Hook offers two objections to this proposed procedure: it would involve spying on teachers and it would be difficult to distinguish CP members from fellow-travellers. If it is necessary to “spy” on a teacher to find out if he is misusing his classroom, then the overwhelming likelihood is that he is not; consequently, there is no reason to discharge him. When teachers act as petty tyrants, the news travels very quickly in the universities. (But what about those teachers who are subtle and clever in spreading the CP line? Whoever asks that question is clearly determined to expel teachers merely for their opinion.) As for Hook’s second objection, it is meaningful only if one’s premise is that the automatic elimination of all CP members from the campus is desirable. But if one judges teachers by their individual behavior, then it is quite conceivable that a fellow-traveller might merit expulsion while a CP teacher might not. The essential criterion is: how does this teacher behave in the classroom, not what does he think.
In his articles Hook continually makes the comparison between fascists and Stalinists. If, he says, people do not object to the expulsion of a fascist teacher, why then object to the expulsion of a Stalinist? Which is true, but irrelevant.
Teachers holding fascist views should not be discharged merely because of those views. If a man like Lawrence Dennis were a competent member of a faculty, it would be most unwise, particularly in the present atmosphere, to advocate his discharge. The expression of fascist opinion in intellectual terms should not be prohibited. But if a teacher taunts Jewish students with anti-Semitic remarks, thereby directly humiliating and preventing the growth of a reciprocal relationship between himself and the students, he should be discharged. Thus, the problem in the Knickerbocker case at CCNY was not whether Knickerbocker held fascist or anti-Semitic opinions but whether he had made anti-Semitic remarks to his students. (If the mere holding of anti-Semitic opinions were enough to warrant the expulsion of teachers, there would have to be a considerable cleansing of the American universities – as Hook must certainly know.)
The comparison between Stalinist and fascist teachers is invalid for yet another reason. Stalinism is today attacked as if it were part of the radical movement. To advocate punitive measures against the CP is to advocate suppression which in the public eye is directed against radical dissidence – which, in turn, makes it somewhat easier for the persecution of actual radical groups, e.g., the recent Attorney General’s “subversive list.” It is here necessary to understand that the CP is not merely a totalitarian organization, though it is that, but that it is also a movement which peculiarly bases itself on and exploits the legitimate dissatisfactions of workers and intellectuals. And those power agencies which today attack the CP have no particular reason to distinguish the pseudo-radical from the genuinely radical. To support such suppression is to help strengthen the adherence to the CP of those of its followers who should be won away from it – for the best CP supporters, the most sincere and idealistic ones, will draw closer to it when it is persecuted, only the middle-brow riff-raff will run in fright.
Two political aspects of this discussion remain to be mentioned, which while they do not directly affect the problems discussed tell us a great deal about the context in which they are raised. First, one wonders why this issue has suddenly become so vital at precisely this moment. Is the discussion based on a high- minded desire to keep the universities intellectually clean, or is it the product of the rather less academic cold war? To put the question in another way: why was not the dismissal of Stalinist teachers proposed during the years when the U.S. and Russia were war allies ? Surely, the Stalinist teachers were then no different, no less treacherous. Or is it as the Stalinists themselves like to say, that conditions have changed?
Perhaps most depressing, however, in this entire discussion is what it reveals about the intellectuals of the “anti-Stalinist left.”
The truth seems to be that most of these intellectuals are rapidly losing their capacity for political action on any issue but opposition to Stalinism. When the opposition committee to the Stalinist Waldorf conference was formed last spring, scores of intellectuals who had been politically mummified for years suddenly sprung to excited life. Good: it was necessary to fight the Stalinists. But it is questionable whether many of these people could be roused to action on any other issue. I do not mean to say that the intellectuals of whom I speak do not despise Jim Crow or that they do not believe in civil liberties. But their political orientation and social values are such that they have lost the capacity, for the most part, to act on those domestic social problems which once agitated so many American intellectuals. They may and do recognize that there are dangers in this country other than Stalinism, but in their deepest feelings, in those feelings which are the true focus of their existence, these other dangers no longer stir them. Only Stalinism rouses their feelings, only Stalinism can jolt them into making an occasional political response.
And this is a great danger – not least of all because it is so certain a way of helping Stalinism
*
Footnote
1. Hook’s only remark that might be construed as such a reference is curious. In his Commentary article he violently attacks Professor Helen Lynd, who, in the Spring 1949 American Scholar, wrote that she had private information from several people who attended the Washington Legislative Committee’s hearings that Representative Albert Canwell, head of the Committee, had stated: “If anyone insists there is discrimination against Negroes in this country, or that there is inequality of wealth, there is every reason to believe that person is a Communist.” Hook quotes from a letter from Canwell denying that he ever made such a statement. How, asks Hook, can a reputable social scientist like Helen Lynd make such serious charges against Canwell merely on the basis of hearsay, and why did not Lynd ask Canwell directly if he had made the alleged statement?
We may grant that Helen Lynd should have checked her information with Canwell, though Canwell’s denial does not necessarily mean that he actually did not make the statement. In fact, if Canwell’s denial is conclusive, why has he not sued Helen Lynd for character misrepresentation? Why was his denial contingent, as it apparently was, on a request from Hook that he speak up?
There is no more reason to credit or discredit Canwell’s denial than the charges of Helen Lynd’s unnamed informants. No stenographic record of the hearings was kept, and in the absence of such a record there are obvious reasons why either side should wish to distort the facts. But even if Canwell did not make such a hair-raising statement, the atmosphere created in Washington was not one conducive to fair treatment of the accused. The sheer fact that such a legislative committee held hearings points to the presence of intimidation. For is not intimidation the very raison d’être of such committees?
 



Seldom has the American press devoted so much space to a “cultural event” as the Stalinist-sponsored “Cultural and Scientific Conference for World Peace.” If there was very little about “culture” in the press reports, there was hardly any more in the conference itself. For the truth is that both the conference and the press reaction were political events, part of the chilly war between the U.S. and Russia. Only in terms of that simple fact can the conference be understood.
After having sat through two days of turgid Stalinist, semi-Stalinist and neo-Stalinist oratory (I shall later distinguish among these various kinds), I think it reasonable to conclude that, from the Stalinist point of view, the conference was a failure. The conference lacked the “quality folk” names from the literary and scientific worlds which previous CP-staged conferences had had in America; it did not run smoothly; it met with serious opposition from among its delegates; and it had to witness the humiliating and shameful spectacle of seeing a Russian Stalinist bureaucrat attacked from the floor and not be able to send his critics to corrective labor in Siberia! This last was the most stunning blow of all.
 
Opening Beset by Difficulties
The conference opened with a dinner at $10 a plate at which some of its more important intellectuals from the U.S. and abroad spoke. Here it ran into its first snag. Norman Cousins, editor of the Saturday Review of Literature, had previously been invited to speak at this dinner and had refused. I have it on good authority that emissaries, probably unofficial, of the State Department urged Cousins to attend the dinner and attack the conference. He did. But Cousins, be it remembered, is both a muddle-head politically and a middle-brow intellectually. Consequently, his attack was ineffectual; he confined himself to noting that the American CP was disliked by most Americans (hear! hear!) but said nothing about the role or nature of Russian Stalinism.
For his remarks he was roundly and semi-hysterically rebuked by Lillian Hellman, the cat-sharp party-liner, who told him that it was not polite to insult one’s hosts. (By that line of reasoning, it was impolite of the Russian delegates to attack the U.S. government, which had allowed them to enter this country.)
At the dinner a great to-do was made about the refusal of the State Department to permit the delegates from England and France to attend the conference. This proved to be one of the sustaining feelings of those who participated and showed how stupid and reactionary was the State Department’s refusal of visas. Its argument had been that the Stalinists from Eastern Europe represented state regimes while those from Western Europe represented no one but themselves – as if the fact that a Stalinist has state power makes him more attractive than when he has not! By refusing visas to the English and French delegates, the State Department not only violated democratic standards but played into the hands of the Stalinist spbnsors of the conference.
When the conference itself opened on Saturday morning, March 26, at Carnegie Hall, hundreds of Catholic War Veterans and various nationalist Ukrainian organizations picketed in the streets. They carried some signs that were rather clever: “Shostakovitch, Jump Out of the Window” and “Shostakovitch, We Understand.” But most of their signs were distinctly reactionary in political character.
Simultaneously, another opposition group was working in the hotel. The “Americans for Intellectual Freedom,” headed by Sidney Hook and George S. Counts, opposed the conference from a liberal democratic point of view. The propaganda of this group varied in quality. Some of it, pro-U.S. government, was pretty dubious – as for example its questioning of a scientist speaker on the grounds of “loyalty.” Some of its propaganda, such as its attack on the denial of visas to the French and English delegates and its exposure of the Russian delegation, was quite effective.
At the opening session, it was possible to make several important observations. First, the Stalinists have run out of genuinely impressive intellectual figures. At past conferences they were able to parade such important men as John Dos Passos; now at their opening session all they had was a broken-down retired bishop from Utah who rambled on endlessly about religion and “values”; Ted Thackrey, publisher of the New York Post, who is hardly a man of intellectual preeminence; and O. John Rogge, a lawyer.
The political line which they, and the conference chairman, the distinguished astronomer Harlow Shapley, adopted was also important. They indulged in no mere unqualified encomiums of Russia. Whether through guile or cynicism, the speakers at the opening session all used the following approach: they would begin by noting that they were in favor of peace, were not Communists and saw faults in both sides. Then would come a quickly muttered paragraph attacking Russia, a totalitarian country, as many of them said. After which (the audience meanwhile nervously quiet), they would launch into a detailed attack on U.S. policy from a Stalinist slant. Then the audience would respond with great enthusiasm.
I have said before that in addition to Stalinists there were semi- and neo-Stalinists at the conference. In point of fact, these latter probably predominated among the “prominent sponsors.” Their fear of war had led them to favor the crudest appeasement of Stalinism. Unable to think of social forces other than the Russian or the U.S. governments, they identified themselves with BOTH simultaneously. For while criticizing Russia, they spoke of “we,” that is, the American social system. And while criticizing the U.S., they slid into the Stalinist line. This curious and all too characteristic shuttling between identification with both Stalinism and capitalism was the major political characteristic of the conference.
 
Sponsors Confounded at Writers’ Panel
After the first plenary session came panel sessions. The only one worth reporting in detail is the writers’ panel. Here again it was possible to see how much the Stalinists have lost in the intellectual world. The only distinguished figure from “highbrow” literary circles present was F.O. Matthiessen, the Harvard professor and critic. Otherwise, there were such CP-line hacks as Albert Kahn, Howard Fast, Richard Boyer and Agnes Smedley.
At this panel session a number of anti-Stalinists, most of them not connected with the Hook opposition committee, took the floor to attack the Stalinist sponsors. A highly tense and dramatic situation developed. The first speaker was Matthiessen, who made a platitudinous talk about “the American tradition” and the “democratic heritage” of Thoreau, Melville and Whitman. Then came Boyer, who spoke openly as a Stalinist and gave a strictly party-line talk. When questions and remarks were permitted from the floor (for two minutes each), Dwight Macdonald, editor of Politics, addressed several extremely pointed questions to Alexander Fadayev, head of the Russian delegation:

Where are such Russian writers as Pasternak, Babel, Zostchenko, Ahkmetova, Katayev and Pilnyak? “Are they alive or dead? Are they in concentration camps or free?”
 
Is it true that, because of criticism in Pravda, Fadayev had agreed to rewrite his novel, Young Guard, after it had been a public success?

When Macdonald finished, there was a hurried consultation among the Russians on the podium. Surprisingly, Fadayev agreed to reply. Of the six writers mentioned by Macdonald he referred only to two. Zostchenko, he said, had published a novel in 1947 – which was hardly to the point, since the attack on Zostchenko came after 1947. And Pasternak, he said, was translating Shakespeare – which was again irrelevant, since reports from Russia had it that Pasternak was translating Shakespeare because he felt unable to write freely himself. As for himself, said Fadayev, it was true he had agreed to add some chapters to his novel but he had not yet had time to do so. In the meantime, his novel was still being circulated in Russia. When, at one point, Macdonald interrupted Fadayev from the floor, the Russian turned toward him with a look of the most brutal hatred – and one could not but wonder if he was thinking about what he would do to Macdonald if he could only get hold of him in Russia.
From then on the polemic became still fiercer. Mary McCarthy asked Matthiessen if he approved of Fadayev’s answer to Macdonald, and the Harvard professor debased himself sufficiently to say that he did. McCarthy further asked him if he thought his hero, Thoreau, would have a chance to preach civil disobedience in Russia today as he had in America during the 19th century. Matthiessen lamely answered that Thoreau would be no more tolerated in Russia than would Lenin in America.
Jean Malaquais, the French novelist, took the floor to remark that the kind of reasoning Matthiessen used was quite irrelevant, since Russia claimed to be a socialist and democratic country while most of those present at the conference condemned America as a capitalist country. He further pointed to the treatment André Gide had received from the French Stalinists after criticizing Russia as evidence of the totalitarian outlook of the people running the conference.
Robert Lowell, a brilliant young American poet, took the floor and declared that he was both a Catholic and a conscientious objector who had been in a CO camp during the war. He asked one Russian, Pavlenko, what were the laws about conscientious objection in Russia. Pavlenko replied that he did not know but that HE was willing to fight for his country!
Lowell also asked Shostakovitch a question: How has the criticism of the Russian government helped his music? Shostakovitch had been sitting nervously and, one would guess, unhappily on the podium and when asked to reply, uttered a one-sentence answer: Russian criticism “helps my music go forward.” He did not say “forward” to what. Then he sat down. One felt deeply sorry for this poor man, who is apparently uninterested in politics and would wish nothing better than to be left alone to compose his music.
 
Mailer Break Shocks Stalinists
Then came perhaps the most surprising and exciting event of the panel. Norman Mailer, author of The Naked and the Dead, arose to speak. The Stalinists cheered madly, but Mailer’s first sentence turned them cold. He had come, he said, as “a Trojan horse.” He did not approve of such conferences. “I am afraid,” he continued, “that both the United States and the Soviet Union are moving toward state capitalism. There is no future in that. The two systems approach each other more clearly. All a writer can do is tell the truth as he sees it.”
The Stalinists were shocked. They arose from the floor to make “more in sorrow than anger” remarks about Mailer, urging him not to be a “pessimist.” Mailer then took the floor again to say that he believed the only solution to the world’s problems was through socialist revolution and that he did not note any revolutionary spirit at the conference. From then on the references in the Stalinist speeches to Mailer were harsh. Mailer’s speech was an honest, if halting, effort to grapple with the truth. Under the circumstances, and in view of the fact that he had been playing ball with the Stalinists, his remarks were particularly courageous.
It was interesting to observe that the Stalinists had few competent people at hand to answer the opposition. Their speakers from the floor included such distinguished intellectuals as a representative from the Wallace publicity committee and a delegate from the office workers union. All they could do was to reiterate endlessly “peace” – as if the mere incantation of the word would bring peace closer.
The second day of the conference proved less important than the first. Apparently dissatisfied with Shostakovich’s cryptic reply to Lowell’s question, the Russian delegation may be assumed to have pressured him into speaking up at greater length. He came to the panel on “fine arts” with a long speech full of the usual idiocies about how the Russian criticism of his music had helped him divest himself of his “formalism.” It was strictly Pravda style and one may doubt very much if Shostakovich himself wrote it.
 
Middle Class, And Middle Brow
Several conclusions can be drawn from the conference:

The Stalinists are no longer in a position to run such affairs blatantly. For a time at least, they must permit such neo-Stalinists as Rogge and Frederick Schuman (who spoke on the second day) to take the forefront. Such people are ready to make the most hair-raising admissions about Russian society, but favor a top-level rapprochement with it on a completely reactionary basis.
 
Mailer’s remark about the absence of revolutionary spirit was, to put it mildly, accurate. None of the American speakers even presumed to be speaking from the standpoint of socialism. Their constant line of attack was to point out how advantageous it would be to American capitalism to make a deal with the Russians.
 
The Stalinist movement in the U.S. is by now a predominantly middle-class affair. It has suffered serious defeats among the workers and the serious intellectuals. Its present major base of strength is among the middle brow professionals – thus, one of its stronger representations to the conference was from Broadway. These people, largely ignorant of the elementary facts of politics, cannot be appealed to from the reactionary standpoint of the Catholic pickets. But one cannot doubt that the radical approaches of Malaquais, Macdonald and Mailer, whatever inadequacies one may note in them, did succeed in making a dent in at least some minds. Had there been a more strongly organized radical anti-Stalinist opposition at the conference, the Stalinists might have been completely routed.

 



To the Editor:
Two issues ago in Labor Action I had an article on Sidney Hook and his statements about the Catholic Church. Were I to write about that matter again, I would refrain from two errors of interpretation and taste which I made. I did not make clear that what Hook was writing about was the problem of political relationships to the church, and thus might have given the impression that he proposed some sort of intellectual alliance with Catholicism. That is not true. Secondly, I wrote with unnecessary nastiness of tone, a manner of writing that is always to be deplored. Precisely because I think the political point of the article was essentially valid do I regret these two lapses.
R. Fahan
 



The most interesting civil liberties case since the frameup of Trotskyists in Minneapolis during the war has arisen in the University of Washington. The issues involved are several: academic freedom, the nature of the present academic climate, the right of Stalinists to teach, the role of anti-Stalinists in the universities. Before discussing these, however, I should like to present a few facts.
What actually happened at the University of Washington? Three professors – Herbert Phillips, Ralph Grundlach and Joseph Butterworth – were fired by the university’s Board of Regents for being members of the Communist Party, Phillips and Butterworth having admitted their membership. Before the Board of Regents acted, the matter was discussed by two other bodies: the Faculty Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom and the Joint Legislative Fact-Finding Committee on Un-American Activities of the State of Washington. (These facts are taken from an excellent article by Ralph Lampman, a member of the university’s economics department, in the March Progressive.)
The Faculty Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom voted to dismiss ONLY Grundlach, for reasons quite irrelevant to the present case. It did NOT vote to dismiss Phillips and Butterworth. The Faculty Committee acted AFTER a year and a half long investigation by the local version of the Dies-Thomas Committee, which had hailed professors to its chambers to pry into their political beliefs. Phillips, Grundlach and Butterworth had refused to answer questions on constitutional grounds. Three other teachers – E. Harold Eby, Garland Ethel and Melville Jacobs – admitted to having been members of the CP, said they had since dropped out, but refused, when urged by the committee, to divulge the names of other members of the CP.
Please keep clear in your mind the fact that the charges were filed by the university AFTER the legislative committee’s hearing against the above six teachers. You will see why that is important as we go along ... especially when we get to Professor Sidney Hook, ex-Marxist and doubtful democrat.
 
Charges Fall into Two Categories
The charges against the six were of two general kinds: One, that they were members of the CP and that membership in the Communist Party is incompatible with intellectual and academic freedom, since they now subscribe, as Raymond Allen, president of the university, said, to “the doctrines and dogmas of a political party which admits of no criticism of its fundamental principles and program.” The second group of charges: that the accused had committed specific acts representing academic dishonesty, incompetence and neglect of duty, such as failure to observe proper standards of objectivity in classroom work and failure to respond satisfactorily to questions put by the legislative snoopers.
Now notice that as soon as Butterworth and Phillips admitted to CP membership, the college administration dropped the second group of charges and concentrated on the first one: CP membership pure and simple.
This is the way the 11-member Faculty Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom voted. Five felt that under the existing tenure code the professors could not be fired, because they were being tried on an ex post facto basis, that is, they were being tried for “crimes” which had not previously been specified as such. They believed, however, that the tenure provisions should be reversed to allow CP members to be fired. Three other members were against firing CP members. Three other members were for it.
How to interpret this split of opinion? A majority of the Faculty Committee was in the immediate situation, against firing Butterworth andPhillips. But President Allen claimed that a majority of the committee favored firing CP members “in principle.” Both interpretations may be right, but the fact remains that the Board of Regents rejected the SPECIFIC advice ot the Faculty Committee. Furthermore, be it noted that the majority of the Faculty Committee declared Butterworth and Phillips academically competent.
 
The Socio-Political Context of Case
These are the facts; now, the issues.
Articles have been written by Professor John Childs and Professor Sidney Hook, the former a Liberal and the latter a Social Democrat, approving the firing of the CP people. Their argument can be summarized briefly: The CP is not a political party in the usual sense of the word; it is a conspiratorial organization loyal to a foreign power and equivalent to a spy society; it exerts the kind of unquestioning intellectual discipline – from art to zoology, says Hook – which makes it impossible for them to be honest teachers. What is not involved, they say, as President Allen of the U. of Washington has said, is the right of teachers to hold Marxist views. Only party membership counts.
Now there is a good deal of truth in SOME of these remarks. But the totality is a dangerous argument.
The CP is a conspiratorial organization of the kind Hook says it is; it is an agent of a foreign power. But it must also be remembered that it is being attacked on the grounds, inaccurate though they are, that it is a “RADICAL” organization. And it must be remembered that the fired professors are being charged with belonging to a “radical” organization, and that the charges against them are the consequences of a long session of legislative committee “investigating” – with all the reactionary, anti-civil liberties implications of that fact. And it is more than curious that. Hook in his article does not mention this fact; he writes as if Butterworth and Phillips were fired simply as a result of a calm, reasoned discussion of the faculty, even though exactly the contrary is the truth.
Now it takes no special brilliance to realize that, there is today a general attack on civil liberties in the making; that the reactionary forces which are attacking the Stalinists are quite ready to attack, as well, anti-Stalinists. Hook himself is a little worried about this. He writes: “If removal of Communist Party members were to be used as a pretext by other reactionary elements to hurl irresponsible charges against professors whose views they disapprove, a case might be made for suspending action.” That “IF” is beautiful. Doesn’t Hook know about the Olivet case, the case of the Oregon professor fired, not for being a member of the CP, but for believing in Lysenko’s genetics, And above all, doesn’t he know that the action of the U. of Washington is the DIRECT consequence of the snooping of the state legislative committee? That should show that there are reactionary elements involved.
For us, this is the first consideration, the prime consideration: in what social and political context, in what climate of intellectual opinion, is the firing taking place? I would say that the indisputable fact is that the firings are taking place in an atmosphere of general repression of intellectual freedom – a repression that is not yet extreme, that has only begun but is nonetheless evident. And from that central point of view, it is necessary to oppose the firing of Butterworth and Phillips.
 
Can Stalinists Present “Truth”?
But let us look at a few of the general arguments on the question of Stalinist teachers. We are told they cannot present the truth, because they belong to a disciplined organization. But that raises some interesting questions. It would be false to equate the Catholic Church with the Stalinist movement, but the church is as INTELLECTUALLY, if not organizationally, disciplined as the CP. Suppose a Catholic teacher is discussing birth control? Can he – tell us, Professor Hook! – tell “the truth”? Suppose a Catholic teacher is discussing the role of the Vatican in a history class? Can he tell the truth? And suppose, again, that a professor of one of the usual business schools is talking about the labor movement; can he present the truth?
The answer is obvious. There are innumerable biases in universities, biases as stubbornly clung to by people outside of the CP as inside it. There are many professors in whom we have no greater confidence to tell the “truth” than in Stalinists. The problem cannot be posed as if the university is some sort of abstract body, completely apart from capitalist society. The university is part of capitalist society, susceptible to its pressures, usually doing its bidding; and only by extremely persistent efforts is it possible for any kind of oppositionist views to retain their standing in the university. To assume that Stalinists should be expelled because they cannot tell the truth is to lay the way open for the most appalling sort of repressions.
But there is another question. Who is to tell which truth is the “real” truth? If the university were somehow exempt from the criss-cross of opinions in the modern world and could, by some stroke of intuition, reach the truth, then perhaps it could pretend to judge. But that claim would be ludicrous. Hook and Allen speak as if they have the truth tucked away in their back pocket. We agree that the Stalinists don’t have the truth, but we say that to fire people because we think THAT is to turn to the methods of the inquisitor.
In any case, if the university is to serve as a genuine intellectual preparation for life, it must confront the student with a variety of opinions, more or less reflecting those to be met in the outside world. Those who want to defeat Stalinism should realize that, especially since it attracts, often enough, the most sincere and radical elements among the students, it is necessary to use intellectual, political arguments against it, rather than police clubs. Hammer away at them in the classrooms; defeat them in debates; isolate them intellectually – good. But do not stoop to Stalinist methods to fight the Stalinists – if only because you thereby help the ‘Stalinists.
Hook argues that in joining the CP teachers commit an intellectual ACT which disqualifies them to teach. That is sophistical argumentation. By a specific act that would disqualify a Stalinist professor, one could mean: giving lower grades to anti-Stalinists than their work deserves; discriminating against anti-Stalinists in the faculty, etc., etc. If such charges can be proved, then let the Stalinist teachers be fired. But it is significant – is it not, Professor Hook? – that these charges were DROPPED in the Butterworth and Phillips cases.
It may be argued that one can tell in advance how a Stalinist will behave. There is truth in that. (After all, we are not trying to say that it is, GOOD to have Stalinist teachers; we are saying only that it is WORSE to fire them.) But it must be remembered that academic Stalinists may often be different from others. One of the six teachers in Washington, a teacher of anthropology, testified that he had disagreed with the CP on certain points of “scientific doctrine.” That may seem unlikely – but it is not impossible. Fortunately for human beings, we are not all completely consistent. A Stalinist teacher cannot necessarily be assumed to be dishonest and unfair to anti-Stalinist colleagues or students. If he is, oust him – on SPECIFIC academic charges. But no expulsion by association.
 
A Few Questions to Prof. Hook
We wish finally to say a word about Hook’s article. Hook says that he thinks the whole problem would be solved if the faculties were allowed to make decisions on such cases, rather than boards of trustees or regents. Within limits we agree with that. (Why not provision for student participation in such decisions?) In that case, however, we would ask him a few questions:

Since the majority of the Faculty Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom voted AGAINST expelling Butterworth and Phillips, why do you not stand with them?
 
What is your opinion about the action of the Board of Regents in placing on probation for two years the three teachers who HAD been CP members but were so no longer? After all, Prof. Hook, other people could be put on probation for reasons like that.
 
You say that you would allow faculty bodies to decide on Stalinists and that you favor firing of Stalinist teachers because they cannot teach honestly. Good. We should like to see you argue that such Stalinists (it does not matter if they are CP members) as Burgum of NYU’s English department or Struik of MIT should be fired for incompetence as teachers. Would you be willing to try that? Would you be willing to urge Burgum’s dismissal on the ground that he changed his opinion of Andre Malraux since Malraux quit the Stalinists?

That Hook is on weak grounds, and not too happy about them either, is seen in a letter he sent to the New York Times protesting the firing of a professor from Oregon State University for supporting the genetics of Lysenko. Hook tries to distinguish between firing a scientist for surrendering “his freedom to inquire into the truth by virtue of Communist Party membership” and firing him for coming to erroneous scientific conclusions. But doesn’t he see that the former leads to the latter by creating certain climates of opinion?
This question is not simple. Stalinists as teachers create much damage. But in the university as elsewhere there is only one way to fight them: political exposure and intellectual defeat.
 



The low vote received by Norman Thomas in the last election, the general decline of the Socialist Party over the past decade, the beckoning temptations of jobs and prestige in both the union movement and the governmental apparatus that have led so many leaders of the SP to abandon “socialism in our time,” the overall political demoralization that has beset the political left in America – these, together with other factors, indicate that the Socialist Party of Norman Thomas, pale, fragile ghost that it is, is not long for this world.
Geared intellectually and emotionally for electoral activity alone, lacking any sustaining programmatic strength and completely disoriented by recent history, the SP is now in the process of debating how best to bury itself.
No socialist in his right mind can view this fact with mere glee. Were it the consequence of a turn to the left by American socialists, were it the prelude to a new, lively political formation such as the RDR in France, the disappearance of the SP would be cause for satisfaction. As it is, its present dilemma (once one leaves aside factional considerations) must be seen as part of the GENERAL decay of the socialist movement in America.
Today, the SP is debating several variant proposals: shall it surrender its traditional electoral role? shall it continue as a party? shall it merge with the Social Democrats? But more important, it is debating what its POLITICAL view should be: shall it become, even more than it has thus far been, a mere “critical” defender of Western capitalism?
One issue that is agitating the SP is the question of what attitude to take toward the Atlantic Pact: unconditional or “critical” support. Norman Thomas is reportedly on the “left” in this dispute! To such depths has American socialism sunk.
 
Proposes Suicide
In an interesting article in the January 1949 Modern Review, Daniel Bell discusses the future of the SP in America. Bell is a young Social Democrat with a touch of academic sheen and sophistication; he is intelligent and realistic – oh, terribly, terribly realistic. His proposal, in effect, is that the SP officially and frankly commit suicide, so that its people and supporters can engage, without impediment, in old-party politics.
The amusing thing about Bell’s article is the vocabulary with which he dresses up his none too remarkable proposal. The SP, he says, has always fluctuated between being a POLITICAL and an ETHICAL movement. Listen to Bell’s distinction:
Society, he says, “is an organized system for the distribution of tangible rewards and privileges. Within that frame, ethics deals with the ought of distribution, involving a theory of justice. Politics is the concrete manner of distribution involving a power struggle between organized groups to determine the allocation of privilege ... if there is a genuine commitment to politics, as a means of implementing the ethical ideal, then one must accept the hazards of evil that are implicit and shun utopianism. Politics then becomes the acceptance of the relevant alternative.”
Here is something queer indeed. A Social Democrat defines ethics as being the equivalent of a revolutionary approach to politics – though we had thought that for the Social Democrats ethics was a perennial monopoly and that it was the revolutionists who were unethical. Politics, however, means being realistic, accepting the “relevant alternative” – that is, accepting the capitalist status quo. In other words, says Bell to his friends in the Socialist Party, stop being socialists! Be reformers, be ADAers, be left-wingers in the Democratic Party – but don’t try to build for independent class politics or independent Marxist thought.
Bell is frank enough: “compromise after compromise is necessary.” He sneeringly points to the record of the SP “left wing” which had passed “revolutionary” resolutions in the late 30s and a few years later was plumping for Roosevelt. He is for “independent labor action” but not for an independent labor party. Socialists, he thinks, should work in the Democratic Party primaries, acting as “intellectual catalysts” (read: intellectual stooges) of the labor leaders. (Bell thus has the honor of codifying in theory what has been taking place in fact: the shameful history of such once “revolutionary” figures as Gus Tyler, Jay Lovestone and Will Herberg in becoming the “think men” of labor bureaucrats.)
But Bell is not content with mere pragmatic motivation; he has a theory, too. First, the trade union movement today is committed, not to overthrowing capitalist society (hear! hear!), but to assuring itself a better place within it. Second, as a consequence of recent economic policies in capitalist countries – deficit spending, managed economy, labor-capital partnership – it is unlikely that violent depressions will break out. Hence, the problem for socialists is one of increasing labor’s share of the “take” and not worrying about eventual goals.
*
A few words are in order on these notions. First, the theory. One wonders: what world is Daniel Bell living in? Has he ever heard of such matters as war economy, the preparation of America for war, and the economic consequences of that preparation?
Implicit in Bell’s article, is the assumption that the present uneasy “prosperity” will continue in America indefinitely, that somehow capitalism will succeed in stabilizing itself. It follows on an economic theory, or rather notion, that by virtue of tight governmental regulation of economy and the creation of what C. Wright Mills aptly calls the “garrison economy” in preparation for an active war, capitalism will be able to avoid cyclical depressions. This is a theory about which one may be properly skeptical, but even if one decides to accept it, that hardly means that any sort of genuine stabilization will follow. (Bell speaks of the workers having a “settled” feeling. What feeling of the workers is settled, except their fear of unemployment?) For what the theory implies is that war and war economy have become so natural, so unavoidable under capitalism that there is no “room” for the classical short-run cyclical capitalist development. In other words, the worst aspects of capitalism will completely replace its “normal” line of fluctuation.
Let us grant that. But then what follows? Is it possible for such a war economy indefinitely to grant the labor reforms which Bell believes are the only consequential matters for the labor and socialist movement? Will there not, must there not arise a fundamental clash between the war machine and the reform tendencies of the garrison state, even though these reforms (mostly, by the way, quite hypothetical, in the bush rather than in the hand) be politically necessary for the militarized state in order to keep labor docile. Such questions do not concern Bell – which shows that he is writing not about America as it IS but America as it is imagined in the editorial offices of the New Leader.
And even if, as he implies, there will not be an immediate large-scale depression with millions thrown out of work, will there not also be an increasing “hidden” economic hunger? Can the pride of war wastage be indefinitely postponed? Who will pay? Will not the workers, even if working regularly, find that they are being squeezed increasingly? And will this not lead to an intensification of. the class, struggle? (The class struggle, Daniel Bell, is something one can observe in practice, in life; it is not a myth concocted by “ETHICAL” socialists.)
 
The Simple Truth
Bell is correct about one thing: that the labor unions are being forced to commit themselves increasingly to politics and that, in the present situation, they are being increasingly integrated into the capitalist state apparatus. But from labor’s point of view, or at least from ANY sort of socialist point of view, that is a great DANGER. For the more the labor leadership is drawn into the garrison state, the more it becomes the junior partner (assigned to the task of running errands at election time) of the capitalist class, the less desirous and able is it to fight for labor’s rights. The “statification” of the labor leadership is proceeding quickly, but that is a hindrance to the workers, not an aid.
Bell’s political advice ... He should have listened in at the political action session of the recent UAW conference in Milwaikee, where delegate
after delegate (not socialists, not members of the WP or any other party) got up to tell the same story. The story goes something like this: “We worked our heads off for the Democratic Party when no one thought it had a chance. We provided the manpower, the drive, and a lot of money. We elected their leaders. As soon as the Democrats win, all the old-time party hacks, smelling jobs, came rushing back and gradually began to crowd us out. In effect, we revived their party – FOR THEM.”
In those simple words is the truth about the proposal to work in the Democratic Party. Bell himself, being a realist, remarks that when the socialists before the First World War entered the Democratic Party, “they won a party but lost their socialism.” That doesn’t seem to bother him, and if one were malicious one might say he doesn’t have too much socialism to lose. But now, in 1949, what can be lost in the Democratic Party is not merely socialism, but simply labor militancy. What are the glorious consequences of “labor’s great victory” at election time? What has been won? What will be won? Is any labor leader sanguine about Congress? Isn’t there a reason for Philip Murray’s recent attack on the Truman administration for boggling the “fight” against the Taft-Hartley bill? Is the great consequence of working in the Democratic Party the program advanced in Congress by leaders of both parties to build some 700,000 homes ... by 1955?
Of all these things, Bell has little to say. Nor does he have anything to say, incidentally, about the dangerous trend to squeeze civil liberties that is evident throughout the country.
For in truth Bell is not talking about America as it is, and as it is BECOMING. (Were we not fearful of being accused of being amoral Bolsheviks, we would say he is not talking dialectically.) He sees no war economy, no problem for workers in that economy, no futility in tying up with the Democratic Party, no pattern of repeated betrayal of labor by Democratic Party leaders (including the liberal ones). Though he calls himself a socialist, he makes no effort to place America in the general pattern of capitalist development, to see it in decline and in a death- struggle for existence. Instead he envisages an endless vista of social peace in which labor will snuggle into the state a bit more happily, get itself a few more reforms ... indeed, the mind of a reformist is a cozy apartment.
*
It is very possible that a majority of the Socialist Party leaders will take kindly to Bell’s article. For them his article may well represent “realistic” thinking. And it is more than likely that his proposal will, in one form or another, become the policy of the SP. If so, that means that there
will be left on the socialist scene only two groups – both tiny, both insignificant numerically and in terms of influence. Those groups will be the Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party (Cannonites).
And this raises an important problem which we would draw to the attention of whichever members of the SP or its youth affiliate still think as class-conscious socialists. On the one hand, the SP is to surrender its ghost, either by depoliticalization or by merging with the Social Democratic Federation. On the other hand, the SWP becomes increasingly the wretched shadow of Stalinism. Is there not a need for a socialist group which will continue to speak for independent socialism, against a fatal dependence on either Washington or Moscow?
 
The Magnets Pull
The Bell course, with which a majority of SP leaders will probably agree, means to become a pale left wing of the ADA – that is, to stop being socialists and become liberals. It means supporting a series of liberal candidates and thereby moving closer and closer to the atom bomb war. On the other hand, the SWP is unable to break itself off from Stalinism – e.g., its preposterous, fatal, incredibly stupid line on China (that the Stalinists are insufficiently decisive in their fight against the Chinese bourgeoisie).
The magnets pull. The magnets of America and Russia pull apart the socialist movement. But are there not still socialists who see the tragic consequences of allying oneself with either side? Are there not socialists who see that supporting either Stalinism or capitalism is a form of political and moral suicide?
To those who see this, we would say the following: whatever criticisms you may have of the Workers Party, it remains the only alive, democratic center of socialist rebellion in the United States, the only party free of encumbrances with either of the two major power blocs. To those who want – not to become oppositionist liberals supporting the capitalist status quo or harried shadows of Stalinism – but to persist in the struggle for independent class action and the rebuilding of an independent socialist movement, come with us toward the WP.
The magnets pull. But who will have courage and wisdom enough to resist them, to realize that resistance means merely the life of socialism itself?
 



About four years ago, the present writer was a silent bystander at an informal discussion between Sidney Hook and Max Shachtman. The subject under discussion was the war question. At the time Hook was expressing himself very strongly on the subject of the threat to intellectual liberties represented by the Catholic Church; he had acquired a considerable reputation as a polemist against Catholic spokesmen.
In a turn of the conversation that seemed at the time an almost deliberate attempt to shock, Shachtman said that, despite Hook’s many polemics against the Thomists and other reactionary Catholic philosophers, Hook would before the end of a decade find himself a political partner of the Catholics. Hook laughed away the remark, saying it was a typical Trotskyist exaggeration – how could anyone conceive of him, an ex-Trotskyist, a pragmatist, a violent opponent of all forms of mysticism and irrationalism, making a political alignment with the Vatican? Impossible.
But Shachtman persisted. Hook, he said, had abandoned a primary concept of independent revolutionary socialism: the concept that socialists could not become apologists for or defenders of an imperialist government, in either peace or war. He had further abandoned the idea, at least in practice, that a working-class socialist movement alone could bring peace to the world. Having aligned himself with Western capitalism against the Stalinist world, Hook would soon realize – continued Shachtman – that he had few reliable allies. The bourgeois governments would show themselves notoriously inept in political strategy against the Stalinists; the Social-Democrats could not be taken seriously except when it came to handing out cabinet posts; and what did that leave? Only the Catholic Church; the church would continue, from its point of view, opposition to Stalinism in Europe – even after politicians made their peace.
Consequently, concluded Shachtman, Hook and the others like him, having abandoned the perspective of independent socialism, would soon be forced to ally themselves, however regretfully, with the church.
Shachtman erred, as Marxists are prone to err, in his timing. He gave Hook ten years. He could have cut his estimate in half.
 
Hook’s New Revelation
For while his prediction has not been fully proved – not, at least, as yet – there is already enough evidence to show that he knew whereof he spoke.
In an article in the March Partisan Review, Sidney Hook reports on a philosophers’ congress in Europe, which he attended. The article is interesting for Hook’s usual lucid and intelligent presentation of the behavior of Stalinist intellectuals, in this case philosophers. A struggle broke out at this conference between philosophers of the East and West. The latter introduced a resolution in defense of freedom of thought.
Writes Hook:
“One of the most dramatic moments in the discussion was the impassioned speech of the Catholic philosopher and logician, Father Bochenski of Switzerland, in support of the resolution. It followed hard upon the eloquent remarks of Professor Frondizi, the philosophical exile from Argentina, who urged the meeting to adopt the resolution because in his country no philosopher could hold a university post who did not subscribe to the Thomist philosophy. To my surprise I discovered that some of the clerical philosophers at the Congress, deriving from orders not conspicuous for their defense of philosophical freedom in previous centuries, were among the strongest advocates of the resolution. Indeed, throughout the Congress, on every issue which involved intellectual and political freedom, these philosophical priests lined up solidly with the democratic forces. One sensed that their experience in the various resistance movements combined with their defensive position on the Continent, so different from their position in the United States, had produced a new awareness of the dangers of authoritarian institutional controls to the integrity of the philosophical life.” (My emphasis – R.F.)
On this quotation, a few remarks:

The italicized phrase “in previous centuries” is precious. It can only imply that while the Catholic orders were not conspicuous for their defense of freedom for the first 19 centuries of Christendom, something different has been the case for the 20th century. Please specify, Professor Hook, not merely with evidence that Catholics voted for certain resolutions but with evidence of how they behave in the countries where they have either state or educational power.
Were there, perhaps, any Spanish “philosophical priests” voting together with Hook’s “democratic forces”? Has the “new awareness of the danger of authoritarian institutional controls” spread south of the Pyrenees? Why not? Or is Hook forming an intellectual bloc only with the Swiss Catholics?
Does this, then, mean that Hook has discovered a break in the totalitarian structure of Catholicism? Has he discovered what might be called Swiss exceptionalism?
What consequences in practice – what, if you please, operational consequences – will follow from the “new awareness” which he hails? Will the Catholics permit free secular education in Italy and France? Will they tell their dictator friends in Spain and Portugal to restore political freedom? Or will they merely read Hook’s article and have themselves a few laughs?

To show that this is no temporary aberration, Hook has simultaneously published the article in the N.Y. Times which I discussed in these columns two weeks ago. That article is about the firing of the professors from the University of Washington. In it, he rejects the argument that Catholicism can be compared with Stalinism with regard to intellectual freedom on the campus.
Now we are quite aware of the differences between Catholicism and Stalinism. It is, also true, as Hook says, that the Catholic Church does not exert the kind of organizational control over its followers that the CP does over its members. But the intellectual discipline of the church is at least as rigid as that of the CP. A teacher who belongs to the church with genuine fervor will be as firm about birth control, say, as a teacher who belongs to the CP will be firm about Russian foreign policy. It may be argued that the former is not as important a subject as the latter; perhaps. But Hook’s exoneration of the Catholic discipline is something else again.
One of these articles might be passed by as an accident. But two of them?
Where are you going, Sidney Hook? Why such haste in fulfilling Shachtman’s prediction?
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. Two weeks later Fahan [Irving Howe] published a letter in Labor Action slightly modifying his criticism of Sidney Hook.
 



This book [1] is the most comprehensive and probably the best biography yet written of Eugene Victor Debs. It is full of intimate historical detail, it is warm and sympathetic and it has been written by a man who obviously knows something about the problems besetting the socialist movement at the time Debs was its leader. But, best of all, the author has absorbed something of Debs’ rebellious spirit; he does not pretend to some unattainable and hardly desirable objectivity, that chimera with which liberal historians so often delude themselves. He writes with passion and commitment. And that is the best thing about this book.
Debs began his career as a conservative craft unionist in a railroad brotherhood. He preached the doctrine of class collaboration, denied that there was any necessary conflict between labor and capital and even ran as a candidate of and held office for the Terre Haute Democratic Party: His political shifts to the left were all based on his personal experience; he did not abandon a position until the most bitter experience had proved it to be indefensible. As a consequence, his political career took on the aspects of the classical pattern sketched out by Marxism, to which only a few people rigorously adhere in practice. He began as a conservative unionist; when he saw the impracticability of craft groups he helped form the American Railway Union, one of the first industrial unions in the U.S.; and when, after the bitter Pullman strike of 1894, he saw that unionism, even the most militant unionism, was not enough for the workers, he reluctantly and hesitantly moved toward socialism. Once he was a socialist, his revolutionary spirit constantly deepened; he never succumbed to the soft conservatism, the comfortable nostalgia which has characterized so many of the leaders of the American Socialist Party in their later years. Till the day of his death in 1926, he remained a revolutionist.
Because of this pattern in Debs’ career, Ginger’s book is rather dull in its beginning. Too much detail is devoted to his activities as a conservative union leader. But it quickly picks up in interest and pace, moving to an impressive climax in Debs’ imprisonment during the First World War. Ginger is at his best when he describes Debs’ role in the Pullman strike of 1894 and the “Red Special” electoral campaign of Debs and the Socialist Party in 1908. Then, his writing takes on body and flavor, is quick with feeling and conviction. It is good that this book has been written by a man who obviously is some sort of socialist or rebel, who does not condescend to Debs from the superior wisdom of post-New Deal “liberalism.” A fighting man deserves a fighting book.
 
What Did Debs Really Believe?
Ginger’s book raises certain interesting problems about Debs and the American socialist movement. What, first of all, did Debs really believe?
In his review of Ginger’s book in the New York Times, Sidney Hook writes that “Although Debs belonged to the more militant wing of the Socialist Party, he was really an American populist who spoke in the Marxist idiom.” Hook’s statement is open to serious challenge. To say that someone was a populist means that he thought in terms of “the people” versus “the trusts” or “Wall Street,” that he based himself primarily on agricultural sections of the population and that he either thought of reforming capitalism or did not believe the capitalism-socialism opposition to be meaningful.
But none of these statements holds for Debs. As early as 1899, when the Union Reform Party was organized, Debs wrote: “I am not in favor of such a party as is proposed, which, in the nature of things, must be founded in compromise and cannot long survive the internal dissensions which swept its predecessors from the field.” (The Union Reform Party was, by the way, considerably more radical than the ADA or the Liberal Party of today.)
Debs explicitly declared that he believed that the working class was the major force on which the socialist movement should be based; in fact, a good deal of his activity was concerned with his repeated campaigns for the formation of industrial unions. Probably his major contribution in the realm of ideas to the socialist movement was his conception of the role of industrial unions in the U.S. Debs wrote: “It is either socialism or capitalism – complete freedom or total slavery. I am a socialist without a shadow of concession or compromise.” These are hardly the words of “an American populist who spoke in the Marxian idiom.”
Yet the question may not be quite settled; perhaps what is involved is not what Debs publicly said or thought he believed but the deepest, most instinctive patterns of his thought. Debs was certainly deeply involved in the American tradition – his greatest hero was John Brown. He could not help being deeply affected by the populist movement, for he grew up at a time when it was beginning to stir.
But the point is that he had made the transition from mere populist radicalism to a coherent and conscious socialist view; he said so many times over and, more important, he behaved so – from his electoral campaigns to his endorsement of the Bolshevik Revolution, from his anti-war stand during the First World War to his very last breath. True, he was hardly a Marxist theoretician or scholar, but he did consciously and rigorously function according to a central political doctrine of Marxism: the theory of the class struggle. The mere fact that he had subsumed strands of the American tradition in his thought and speech, that he had absorbed the most rebellious qualities of populist feeling, made him no less a Marxist. He did not, it is true, write scholarly works on the origins of Marxian thought or the meaning of Marxian ideas, but he did something that is perhaps not very much less important: he lived and fought for those ideas.
All of these things are made quite clear in Ginger’s book. The problem of Debs’ attitude to the Bolshevik Revolution is also clarified. Debs was instinctively enthusiastic about the revolution and remained friendly to it through the last years of his life. At the same time, he refused to join any of the Communist groups in the U.S. and remained a dues-paying member of the Socialist Party. He was friendly to the Communist groups, though critical of their sectarian attitudes on a number of questions; he was also critical of the SP leadership while remaining a member of it. There may seem to be some inconsistency in this, and perhaps there is. But the fact is that by the 1920s Debs was a very tired and worn old man who was only intermittently active in politics. His ideas were much as before, and had he actively intervened in SP affairs he undoubtedly would have clashed very sharply with its right-wing leadership. On the other hand, had the early Communist groups been a little more intelligent and flexible in their behavior, Debs would have been drawn closer to them.
 
A Man of Heroic Aspect
But the central problem that emerges from Ginger’s study is that of Debs’ personality. In his relations to the external world, to American society as a whole, Debs assumed a heroic aspect that only a few men had ever done before him. The comparison with Lincoln immediately strikes one and though inaccurate in many ways if taken as an objective measuring of two personalities, it is useful if seen in terms of mass response to them. Both had that strange charismatic power which the humble leader seems to hold over Americans, and had not Debs been a socialist he probably would have become as popular a figure in American life as Lincoln. The American people seem to prefer their heroes half saints and half simple fellows; half promiscuous and pantheistic lovers of all living things and half crude, callow, poorly educated, folksy characters. Like Lincoln, Debs seems to have had that rare capacity for loving almost all men (except Gompers; there he drew the line), and again, like Lincoln, he could be a rather coarse small-town philosopher.
Quite apart from what must have been his extraordinary technical competence as a speaker (a talent he consciously and guilefully cultivated), Debs had a far rarer gift: he could charge an audience with his own emotion, and could communicate that emotion even through the most cliché-ridden phrases. That is why, as one reads his speeches now, one is astonished at how threadbare, how devoid of intellectual body and subtlety they are; but the test is not a fair one, for Debs was one of the few natural leaders America has ever produced, a man whose ties with the masses were based on far deeper and less tangible forces than mere words.
 
His Relations with the SP
Perhaps it was his singleness of being, his unity of personality, the fact that he lived and thought as he spoke, that so impressed his listeners. Still, it is necessary to remember that the gifted leader came at a time when the socialist movement, both in the U.S. and in Europe, was on the uprise, when the effects of industrialism were first beginning to be felt in the U.S. and when the political scene was unclouded by such complicating and demoralizing factors as Stalinism and fascism. Much of the growth of the socialist movement was due to Debs’ personal status, but that status could hardly have been attained if there had not been fertile conditions for the movement’s growth.
In his relations with the Socialist Party, Debs’ peculiar role as a leader caused continuous difficulties. He never had much sense of party discipline, even of the most general kind; he attended only one Socialist Party convention in his whole life, presumably on the ground that he did not want to get involved in factional battles. Debs felt himself to be in direct contact with the masses of workers and socialists (as, of course, he was) and did not seem to think that he had a direct responsibility to the party he led. Many of the right-wing leaders of the SP attacked him for this attitude, and while we would sympathize with Debs against them politically, we could not deny that in terms of formal relations between a leader and his party the right-wing criticism had merit. For a leader who takes the attitude of remaining above the party battle, when there is one, is behaving undemocratically; he is refusing to subject himself to the political and intellectual conditions that the members must face. And he thereby also helps perpetuate a myth about himself – a myth that, while the other leaders squabble inside the party, he rises above such petty considerations and works for it in the outside world.
In Debs’ individual case, the dangers of this sort of behavior were mitigated by his genuine extensive contact with the rank and file, his actual scrupulousness in dealing with all factions of the movement, and his personal kindliness which made it impossible for him to attack sharply even those comrades with whom he disagreed. But the distasteful consequences of such leadership habits can be seen in Debs’ successor as the leader of the SP, who has repeatedly used his personal prestige to edge the party into policies it might otherwise not favor.
What remains ultimately in one’s memory of the story of Debs is the portrait of an extraordinarily heroic and rebellious man – one with limited intellectual powers, uncultivated cultural responses, somewhat one-sided personal attitudes, but infinite compassion and courage. We lay no monopolistic claim to his memory; we do not know what he would think or do if he were alive today, nor do we think it possible for anyone else to know. But we believe that his quick sense of rebellion against injustice, his untiring loyalty to his own beliefs and values are extremely relevant today. Perhaps the example to be drawn from his life is even more important than the precise determination of his ideas, for while other socialists have thought and written better, none has lived and fought better.
*
Footnote
1.
The Bending Cross, by Ray Ginger. Rutgers University Press. $6.00.
 

t Biography of Stalin Gives a Balanced Portrait by Irving Howe 1949


Irving Howe 1949
Newest Biography of Stalin Gives a Balanced Portrait
Source: Labor Action, 3 October 1949, signed R Fahan. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
Isaac Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography, Oxford University Press, $4.00.
Except for a very poor final chapter on the social role of contemporary Stalinism, this book is an impressive achievement. In essential respects, it adds little to either Souvarine’s or Trotsky’s biographies of Stalin, but it is a carefully documented book, solid and thorough if not original and brilliant. It is also distinguished by what is for these days an important virtue: it does not succumb to the anti-Bolshevik hysteria and, in fact, punctures a good many of the anti-Bolshevik legends.
Written from a generally Marxist point of view, Deutscher’s book leans heavily, though not uncritically, on Souvarine and, to a still greater extent, Trotsky; but at the same time it provides a more balanced and credible portrait of Stalin than either of the other two more incisive biographies. To Marxists, the book will seem largely derivative but nonetheless valuable. And while written with neither Souvarine’s patience nor Trotsky’s acuteness, it is stylistically competent.
Deutscher places the young Stalin against his social background in much the same manner that Trotsky does. He too emphasises the backwardness of the Georgian setting, the family heritage of serfdom, the half-education inflicted by the Tiflis Seminary and the sense of intellectual inferiority bred in Stalin during his early relationships with educated Marxists, an inferiority he could never quite shake off. Deutscher diverges from Trotsky on an interesting but minor point: he thinks there is no evidence for Trotsky’s assertion that Stalin was a probably a Menshevik at the beginning of his political career.
A Balanced Portrait: The portrait of Stalin that emerges from Deutscher’s book seems to this reviewer more balanced and credible than Trotsky’s, though in many respects based on it. Deutscher admits that there is great difficulty in finding personal information about Stalin, that his personal life spreads across the century like a grey film. In fact, in his book there is only an occasional comment on Stalin’s personality. But that too adds up to a picture of the man, the ‘committee man’ who followed Lenin with slavish shrewdness and scorned the intellectuals in exile while working in the Russian underground; the wretched writer and stumbling speaker whose clumsy sentences betray the slowness and poverty of his mind; the crafty factionalist thriving in a period of bureaucratisation, using the shibboleths of ‘party loyalty’ to win the support of all the party ‘machine men’ and appealing to the most primitive of prejudices and the most backward of minds.
Stalin’s personality is nonetheless seen by Deutscher as a rather complex one  –  once, that is, no attempt is made to think of him as a thinker or intellectual. While serving in a czarist prison in Baku, he would watch fellow prisoners be led away to the gallows and then ‘fall sound asleep, astonishing his comrades by his strong nerves, or else he would go on with his unsuccessful attempt to master the intricacies of German grammar’. For him, as Deutscher neatly puts it, Marxism became a labour-saving gadget, a simple mechanism for providing ready-made formulas.
At the same time Deutscher is careful to point out that Stalin seems to have been a highly capable organiser, a man of undoubted devotion to the Bolshevik cause during its most trying years, and a secondary leader ready to suffer extreme hardships and punishments for that cause.
It is curious, and significant, that in Stalin’s clumsy socialist rhetoric there always creeps in a semi-religious note, inherited from his early seminary training; for him, socialism is always ‘the promised land’. And in his devotion to the movement there is much of the believer’s zeal  –  so vivid a contrast to the thought-out commitment of the other Bolshevik leaders.
Not a Mere Mediocrity: Deutscher, I think, quite adequately disposes of Trotsky’s view that Stalin was a mere mediocrity, as well as his unfortunate and introspective speculation that Stalin poisoned Lenin. Of course, there is a great deal of semantic legerdemain behind the dispute as to whether Stalin was a mediocrity. No one could seriously say that he was more than a mediocre thinker or writer; but as an organiser, a party manipulator, a leader who could exact fear and loyalty from his followers, be they of his faction or later of the entire state machine, Stalin undoubtedly had a touch of genius, a perverse sort of genius if you wish.
At a time when most of Lenin’s most brilliant associates, in the post-1905 period, seemed to be wavering, Stalin stood firm in the party; he was the reliable bureaucrat who clung to his post because it meant more to him than anything else. That he was a man of ‘unscrupulous rancour and insensible spite’, as Deutscher says, does not in the slightest detract from this estimate of his remarkable talents; to the contrary, rancour and spite were useful qualities for the kind of talent he had.
Deutscher’s description of Stalin occurs in his section on the forced industrialisation of the first Five-Year Plan: Russia ‘was lured, prodded, whipped and shepherded into that surrealistic enterprise by an ordinary, prosaic, fairly sober man, whose mind had suddenly become possessed by a half-real and half-somnambulistic vision, a man who established himself in the role of super-judge and super-architect in the role of a modern super-Pharaoh’.
There is one gruesome incident in Stalin’s career, as reported by Deutscher, which reveals everything about him: 
His own wife, Nadia Alliluyeva... began to doubt the wisdom and rightness of his policy. One evening, in November 1932, Stalin and his wife were on a visit to Voroshilov’s home. Other members of Politbureau were there too, discussing matters of policy. Nadia Alliluyeva spoke her mind about the famine and discontent in the country and about the moral ravages which the terror had wrought on the party. Stalin’s nerves were already strained to the utmost. In the presence of his friends he burst out against his wife in a flood of vulgar abuse. Nadia Alliluyeva left Voroshilov’s house. The same evening she committed suicide. 
Bolshevism and Democracy: Deutscher is particularly interesting on the general significance of Bolshevism, and his book provides valuable substantiation for the view that the Bolshevik Revolution was a genuinely working-class act, based on the mass support of the workers. It is interesting, by the way, to learn that in the 1905-06 period ‘the Bolsheviks were not alone in practising guerrilla warfare and “expropriations"... Even the Menshevik Georgians, loud in denouncing the Bolshevik raids, were not averse to sharing the booty of Bolshevik forays. In Poland it was the right rather than the left wing of the Socialists that specialised in revolutionary terrorism’.
In several instances Deutscher substantiates the view that the Bolshevik regime, within the limits of its possibility and before its degeneration into Stalinism, was essentially democratic. Thus we read of the post-revolutionary period: 
The course of events was such that the Bolsheviks could not help becoming the country’s sole rulers after their partners [the Left Social-Revolutionaries] had refused to share responsibility for the peace. Alone in office, they still refrained from suppressing their opponents, except for the extreme right, the initiators of the civil war. Only in June 1918, when the civil war was already in full swing, were the Mensheviks and the right-wing Social-Revolutionaries temporarily outlawed on the grounds that some of their members sided with the White Guard. The Mensheviks were again permitted to come into the open in November of the same year when they pledged themselves to act as a loyal opposition within the framework of the Soviet regime.
And again we read: ‘The libertarian spirit of the revolution survived the climax of the civil war well into the year 1920.’ And again: 
The idea that a single party should rule the Soviets was not at all inherent in the Bolshevik programme. Still less so was the idea that only a single party should be allowed to exist. The proscription of the other parties, wrote Trotsky, was ‘obviously in conflict with the spirit of Soviet democracy’ and ‘the leaders of Bolshevism regarded it not as a principle but as an episodic act of self-defence’.
Deutscher has some rather interesting things to say about the role of Trotsky’s opposition to Stalin. He rightly sees the decision of the tenth party congress prohibiting factions as a major blow to Soviet democracy: 
The party was gradually transforming itself into a bureaucratic machine. It was true enough that concern for the revolution compelled Bolshevism to take the road chosen by the tenth congress; but it was also true that as it moved along that road Bolshevism was losing more and more of its original self.
In order to save the revolution the party ceased to be a free association of independent, critically minded and courageous revolutionaries. The bulk of it submitted to the ever more powerful machine... Those who handled the levers of the machine and were most intimately associated with it, those to whose upbringing and temperament the new bureaucratic outlook was most congenial automatically became the leaders of the new era. The administrator began to elbow out the ideologue, the bureaucrat and committee-man eliminated the idealist. Who could be favoured by this evolution and who could favour it more strongly than Stalin, the committee-man par excellence, the committee-man writ large?
In this situation, then, of the early 1920s, Trotsky was wrong, Deutscher believes, to have conducted for so long as he did his struggle against Stalin within the upper circles of the Bolshevik Party. [1] By doing so ‘he had been burdened with responsibility for a policy to which he had been opposed; and he had done nothing to rally in time those who might have supported him’.
In Deutscher’s opinion Trotsky should have taken the necessary risk of quickly appealing to the Russian people at large and thereby perhaps forcing a split in the Bolshevik Party  –  a risk because it might have, as Trotsky feared, opened the way to counter-revolutionary action; necessary, because his failure to do so meant that counter-revolution, if of a different kind, would spring from within the party. But while he disagrees with certain of Trotsky’s tactics, Deutscher makes it perfectly clear that Trotsky’s faction fought to preserve the original ideals of the revolution.
A Poor Ending: In view of these excellences in Deutscher’s book, it is painful to close this review with a comment on his last chapter. Deutscher succumbs to a variety of ‘Cannonism’  –  actually, that is, to a critical acceptance of the Stalinist myth. He speaks of both ‘the tyranny of Stalinism’ and ‘its progressive social performance’, by which he means ‘a fundamentally new principle of social organisation, which, no matter what happens to him [Stalin] personally or even to the regime associated with his name, is certain to survive to fertilise human experience, and to turn it in new directions’.
In other words, we have here the old tragic error about the ‘progressiveness’ of nationalised property in the abstract, quite apart from the fact that it is in the hands of a reactionary dictatorship that has done more than any other regime in modern history to destroy the proletarian revolution. 
It would be useless here to argue this question with Deutscher, since our views on this matter have appeared often enough in this paper and The New International. Suffice it to notice how, even in so splendid an analyst and critic of Stalinism as is Deutscher, this last inverted form of the Stalinist myth still maintains its hold!

Notes
1. The word ‘solely’ (or something similar) seems to have been omitted after ‘Stalin’, otherwise the text implies that Deutscher felt that Trotsky was wrong to have opposed Stalin; it is clear from Deutscher’s original text that he felt that Trotsky’s mistake lay in his refusal to take the discussion of his criticisms from solely within the Politbureau into the party membership as a whole  –  MIA.

 


Irving Howe Archive






The decline of American socialism – and it would be frivolous to deny this decline or minimize its extent – has led to a great many efforts at retrospection, criticism and premature burial. These studies, no matter how sincere their intention or refined their method, are usually signs of the phenomenon they treat; as witness the tone of supercilious complacence and superior distance in which many of them are written.
By far the most ambitious among these is a vast two-volume compilation, recently published under the auspices of the Princeton University seminar in American Civilization. [1] This study is likely to be received as an authoritative work of scholarship and, more important, to be accepted as a basic text in the American universities. The first volume of Socialism and American Life contains a number of essays, the second an annotated and copious bibliography. The first is somewhat less than a contribution to the ages, the second is a work of genuine scholarship and within certain limits, to be specified later, extremely valuable to anyone interested in the subject.
Since a wide range of material is covered in this book, I will restrict myself, in this review-article, to four general headings: (1) the quality, reliability and scholarship of the articles; (2) the political theories of the major contributors; (3) the theory of social classes advanced by the major contributors; (4) the problem of the decline of American socialism. The detailed discussion which at least the last three of these calls for is here impossible; but a few introductory remarks may be helpful.
 
I. Some Notes on Scholarship
No single person is qualified to judge all the essays in this book. Suffice it to say that in terms of quality they are extremely uneven. The longest and most important is an historical sketch of American radicalism by Daniel Bell, and despite fundamental disagreements with its point of view, I think it fair to say that it is a work of careful scholarship and literary skill. Sidney Hook contributes a piece called The Philosophical Basis of Marxian Socialism in the United States, merely a summary of what he has written elsewhere. Will Herberg, whose intellectual history comprises a span from Lovestone to Jehovah, is the author of American Marxist Political Theory, written from his “neoliberal and theologically grounded” point of view. A study of Sociological Aspects of American Socialist Theory and Practise comes from Wilbert Moore, a prominent sociology professor at Princeton. The most competent pieces are the historical ones: a sketch of pre-Marxian socialism by E. Harris Harbison, a Princeton professor; a portrait of American utopian socialism by T.D. Seymour Bassett, the bibliographer of the project. There is also Harry Laidler’s European Socialism Since 1948, an article marvellously predictable in its unremittant pedestrianism.
Perhaps the range in quality is best suggested by a glance at the non-political articles. Professor Willard Thorp’s study of the left-wing intellectuals during the 1930’s is superficial, condescending and thoroughly uninterested. On the other hand, Socialism and American Art by Professor Donald Drew Egbert is an outstanding contribution, rich in detail, ready to extend its subject at least a tentative sympathy, and obviously the result of intensive study.
The problem of point of view is more complicated. Anyone familiar with radical politics must be aware, merely from the list of contributors, that for all its claim to impartiality, the book is largely an expression of the views of the American Social Democracy. That most, if not all, the contributors have no organizational ties does not matter: American Social Democracy is less a movement than a climate. When the editors of this book write that “various shades of Marxist opinion are represented among the authors of several of the essays,” they are either uninformed or disingenuous. Between Hook and Herberg there are important differences on God, but not society. Between Bell and Moore there is a startling discrepancy in tone, but not in politics. The only author representing a divergence from Social Democracy or liberalism is Paul Sweezey, who contributes a piece on Marxian economics which, except for a few friendly references to Stalinist Russia, has no political relevance. How curious it is that the only person the editors could find to provide a contrasting “shade of Marxist opinion” turns out to be ... a quasi-Stalinist. That is purchasing one’s objectivity rather cheaply.
Many readers are likely to accept the claim of the editors that they have included “various shades of Marxist opinion.” Nowhere in the book, however, does any writer appear who, speaks for Trotskyism, or revolutionary socialism, or left socialism – no writer of the left, that is, who represents any of the shades of socialist opinion which reject both Stalinism and Social Democracy.
Partly because of this one-sidedness in the choice of contributors, Socialism and American Life is full of the misunderstandings, the points of ignorance and bursts of malice one would expect at a time when anti-Marxism has become a crowded and honored profession. There is, of course, much solid scholarship in this book; but there is also enough distortion, carelessness and ignorance to call it into serious questions as a reference work. I have noted many, but here, to avoid tedium, I will list only a few.
Item. In his generally valuable article on pre-Marxian socialism, Professor Harbison writes: “Marx and Engels felt they had purged their analysis of all non-scientific elements, but they left one notoriously utopian belief embedded in their system: the doctrine of the classless society.” In obvious good faith, Professor Harbison has misconstrued the entire Marxist position. As every scholar should know, Marx and Engels declared previous varieties of socialism to be “utopian” not because they anticipated a classless society, but because they failed to realize that such a society is possible only on the foundation of an advanced technology, which alone permits a life of leisure and plenty. One may disagree with this idea, but to do so one must first state it clearly.
Now it is possible to believe, and at the moment all too fashionable, that the idea of a classless society is utopian; in that case, Marx and Engels did not, as Professor Harbison says, merely leave “one notoriously utopian belief in their system”; their whole program must then be dismissed as utopian. But if one is to use the word “utopian” in this way, intellectual responsibility requires that one make clear Marx used it in an entirely different way.
In any case, to argue that the hope for a classless society is utopian is an absolutist dogma – of precisely the kind modern critics like to attribute to Marx: it assumes the continued existence of class society to be inevitable. If Professor Harbison means, however, that in a socialist society there might still be a wide range of talent, distinction and achievement, he is surely right – but has neglected the Marxist contention that in such a society there would not be economic exploitation of class by class. The only meaning that can be attributed to Professor Harbison’s remark is that Marx and Engels were utopian ... because they believed in socialism. It would be better to say such things directly.
Item. “Democratic centralism,” Lenin’s formula for party organization, is discussed by Professor Moore in his essay and by the editors in an introductory chapter. The editors write that in a democratic centralist party, once a political discussion is closed, “the decision is handed down from above by a small central group and is supposed to be accepted by the rank and file without question or comment.” (My emphasis – I.H.)
As a piece of scholarship this is scandalous. Which “small central group?” What evidence is there (none, of course, being cited) that Lenin ever urged the rank and file to accept any decision without question or comment? As a description of the Stalinist parties, the statement of the editors has a certain rough validity, but is still not at all precise: for even in the Stalinist parties decisions are not “supposed” to be accepted without question or comment.
But more. Since Lenin is the author of the idea of democratic centralism, it would seem a matter of elementary intellectual loyalty to quote Lenin, or at least to state the notion as Lenin conceived it. Then, if you wish, criticize it; or try to show that it led to reprehensible practices in the Bolshevik Party; or even that it led to the totalitarian structure of the Stalinists. But first say what Lenin believed. It would, for example, enlighten the many inexperienced readers of Socialism and American Life to be informed that “the small central group” turns out to be, in Lenin’s scheme of things, an elected executive or central committee, bound by the policy decisions of party conventions. It would further enlighten readers to be informed that nowhere in Lenin’s writings (not even as shorn and mangled by David Shub) is there the faintest suggestion that the rank and file must not comment on decisions of the central committee. Such distortion seems to me beyond possible excuse: the editors should either inform themselves or write on other subjects. But, of course, one can plead Zeitgeist, which for a time permits everything.
Now, Professor Moore with his contribution. In a democratic centralist organization, he writes, “the minority may not question the decision of the majority. Decisions are binding down the line, and initiative for questioning current policy must always come from the top.” Within context, there is reason to suppose that Professor Moore may have in mind the organizational life of Stalinists. If so, he is wrong. It is entirely meaningless to speak of “majorities” and “minorities” in Stalinist parties: no such creatures exist. The trouble is that Professor Moore takes at face value the Stalinist claim to be “democratic centralist,” not realizing that it is pointless to discuss Stalinist organizational methods in terms of their adherence to democratic centralism or any other organizational concept. For Stalinism has no interest in theory, but merely utilizes Marxist terminology and tradition for its own purposes. Stalinism is entirely totalitarian in its inner life; and one need not agree with Lenin’s view of organization to realize that, whatever its real or fancied faults.
But as a careful scholar Professor Moore must surely be aware that the term “democratic centralism” refers, originally, to the Bolshevik party of Lenin. In this party minorities not merely questioned but fought against, howled and denounced the decisions of majorities. Surely Professor Moore is acquainted with the fact that in 1918 Bukharin and his group of “left communists” publicly agitated against Lenin’s Brest-Litovsk policy, demanded in public newspapers that the German terms be rejected, and in effect set up a party of their own “within” the Bolshevik party. Professor Moore is very firm with Marxism for its lack of precision in defining social classes; it would have been more seemly if, in what is after all a much simpler matter, he had been a little precise himself.
Item. In his article Harry Laidler writes: “Many socialists have maintained since the Russian Revolution that communists did a great disservice to the world by their refusal in 1917 to join with the other socialist parties in Russia in forming a coalition socialist government.” That this sentence has fewer errors than words is due to Laidler’s gifts as a stylist.
Now the year 1917 is a rather important one in Russian history, two revolutions having occurred during its 12 months, one in March and the other in November. A careful scholar – and none other could enter the pages of our book – would specify when in 1917, before or after the revolution, the Bolsheviks “refused” to enter a coalition government. Perhaps he means to suggest that the Mensheviks and SRs were for a coalition government both before and after October?
Before the Bolsheviks took power, at a time when they had a minority in the Soviets and the Menshevik-SR bloc had a majority, Lenin put forward the slogan “All Power to the Soviets.” On April 20, 1917 Lenin wrote: “It must be explained to the masses that the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies is the only possible form of revolutionary government and, therefore, our task is, while this government is submitting to the influence of the bourgeoisie, to present a patient, systematic, and persistent analysis of its errors and tactics ... While we are in the minority, we carry on the work of criticism and of exposing errors, advocating all along the necessity of transferring the entire power of state to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies ...” On June 23, 1917 Lenin wrote: “We hold that the unique institution known as the Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies is the nearest approach to an all-people’s organ for the expression of the will of the majority of the people, a revolutionary parliament. On principle we always have been, and are, in favor of having all the power pass into the hands of such an organ, despite the fact that at present this organ is in the hands of the defencist Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionists ...” (My emphasis – I.H.)
Lenin was here urging that a government be established in which the Bolsheviks would not participate, a government of Mensheviks and SRs, provided the “10 capitalist ministers” were eliminated. Perhaps this was a bluff? Then Mensheviks and SRs need only have called it, need only have given land to the peasants and peace to the soldiers to have undercut the Bolshevik appeal.
If a government of Soviet parties were formed, wrote Lenin, a peaceful transition to socialism would be possible: “Only in Russia can power be transferred to already existing institutions, to the Soviets, immediately, peacefully, without turmoil, for the capitalists are not in a position to resist the Soviet ...” (June 20, 1917). But the Mensheviks and SRs did not want power, either for the Soviets or themselves – they preferred to maintain ministerial relations with the bourgeois parties and international relations with the Allies.
Later, after the Bolshevik government was formed, there was some talk of a coalition government of all socialist parties. The Mensheviks laid down as a condition for such a coalition that Lenin and Trotsky, those notorious “German agents,” be excluded from the government. In effect, this was a proposal not for a partnership but for an act of political suicide by the Bolsheviks.
These, in brief, are the facts. Had Laidler mentioned at least a few of them, his readers might be better informed on the problem of coalition governments.
Item. Will Herberg writes: “Because the true concern of the socialist is fixed on the world to come, the problem of living and working in this world becomes a very perplexing one. In harmony with its basic orientation, orthodox socialism can engage in but one really legitimate form of activity in the existing order – preparing for the revolution. In strict logic, therefore, ‘immediate’ or ‘partial’ demands – that is, demands that fall short of the socialist goal and may thus be granted within the framework of the capitalist system – can have no place in the socialist program.”
These, exactly, are Herberg’s words.
Would there be any point in reminding Herberg that socialists believe the struggle for immediate demands a frequent aid to the growth of socialist consciousness; that they really desire improvements in the conditions of the people, even under capitalism; that they do not consider extreme misery a fertile ground for the flowering of a socialist movement? It is a long time since Herberg has thought in Marxist terms, and he may not remember what these simple propositions mean. Let us therefore transpose them into a language he readily grasps. Orthodox Judaism, to which Herberg assents, anticipates the coming of the Messiah, for then alone can all men be united in love and justice. That, so to say, is its form of “socialism.” Would it not, however, be malicious if a Marxist were to write that orthodox Jews, because their eyes are riveted on the coming of the Messiah, could not in strict logic struggle for religious liberty in this imperfect world? or that their expectation of the Messiah made “perplexing” their performance, meanwhile, of such religious duties as the conversion of non-believers, the say]ng of daily prayers, the rendering of charity to the poor?
If a Marxist wrote such nonsense, you can imagine what howls would rise from Herberg. And since he writes it, why don’t we have the right to howl, say, just a little?
It would be tedious to list further errors of commission [2], of which there is a substantial number; but to complete the picture, a word is necessary about some errors of omission. We have here a group of writers who take a firm moral stand against the sins of Bolshevism – and who can oppose a firm moral stand against anyone’s sins? But these very writers are strangely silent in other regards. You would never learn from this book that the Irish Easter Rebellion was suppressed by an English government in which leaders of the Labor Party participated. Or that the French Social Democrats have consistently supported “their” imperialism in Asia and Africa. Or that the German Social Democrats are said to have had some connection with the murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg. Indeed, if you read no other book on socialism, you would be completely bewildered at coming across a statement made in his salad days by Sidney Hook: “the historic function of social democracy since 1918 has been to suppress or abort all revolutionary movements throughout the world independently of whether it shared power in a coalition government or not.”
 
Another quite remarkable omission from this volume is any discussion of the fact that we are at present living in a war economy; that this war economy is largely responsible for the air of “prosperity” which pervades the land; that it obviously conditions both the socialist movement and the indifference to radicalism felt by most workers and intellectuals; in short, that the entire mood and tone of the book is, at the very least, strongly influenced by the historical moment in which it appears.
But by far the most serious omission in this immense volume is one that immediately disqualifies it as an attempt to understand either contemporary society or radicalism. There is no effort in any of these essays to develop a theory of Stalinism, a theory of its sociology in Russia, its significance as an international movement, its relation to Asian nationalism, etc. etc. The most important, difficult and challenging question of our day – surely not unrelated to the subject of this book – is left untouched. There is no effort even to develop the trite notion that Stalinism flows “inevitably” from Bolshevism, a notion which, even if stated, would not remove the necessity for treating Stalinism as a distinct phenomenon, a society and movement requiring special analysis. While the editors find room for chapters on 19th century utopian communities, Christian Socialism, and a number of other not quite burning matters, they have not thought to treat this most important subject of the day. If nothing else, this alone is enough to render the book an intellectual failure.
 
II. Theories of Politics
The major theoretical article in Socialism and American Life is by Will Herberg. It is difficult to cope with this article in political terms, since it does not really rest upon an examination of history or current politics, but consists mainly of maxims suggesting paths of desirable conduct and visions of desirable events. To polemize against Herberg is somewhat like depreciating a man who has just delivered a solemn lecture against sin; the innocent and malicious alike may conclude that one is for sin.
I do not myself think that the expression of political maxims (e.g. democracy is an absolute good, power is always dangerous etc. etc.) is a worthless activity, if only because socialism, in some fundamental if implicit sense, is a moral goal and not merely a predicted stage of future society. While economic conditions may impel workers and other people to struggle against capitalism, that struggle acquires a socialist dimension only through consciousness and will; and once you will the existence of socialism, you are declaring a preference on the grounds, presumably, that it will be better for humanity. Even as it depends on and is limited by historical conditions, the conscious activity for socialism is a moral action. No matter how much Marxists may refer the socialist struggle to the needs of the working class, their wish that this class assume leadership in the march toward socialism rests upon a moral assumption that it is desirable for humanity to move toward socialism.
In pronouncing his maxims, Herberg does not trouble, however, to wonder whether they can be taken as political tactics or solutions. Nowhere in his article is there an awareness of the tension of history, of the fact that a mere statement of a desired end does not yet settle the problem of how to reach it, or the fact that action within history must be conditioned by that which one acts against. To announce, as he does, that democracy is “an eternal human value” is laudable; but to assent to this maxim is not yet to consider how this value can be realized or thwarted, limited or expanded in practice. Herberg succumbs to the great fault of political moralists: he ignores, finally, the need for examining history in its particulars.
These general remarks are best illustrated by glancing at Herberg’s treatment of the problem of revolution. Like most liberals and Social Democrats, he discusses the subject of reform and/or revolution as if it were primarily a question of moral preference: which is more desirable, a gradual peaceful slide into socialism or a bloody insurrection? Put this way, the question permits of only one (sane) answer. Unfortunately, it “proves” too much, for it makes Marx and Lenin seem neither wrong nor stupid but simply maniacs who should have been put away. I take it Herberg doesn’t quite claim that.
The writings of the important Marxists have never rested on absolutist dogma. On the question of the “road to power,” they have been based on the following items: (1) a study of past history, particularly major shifts of class power; (2) an analysis of capitalist society; (3) a prediction, partly drawn from the previous two factors, of the likelihood of violence, or its absence, in future transfers of social power.
Every major change in social rule during the modem era has been accompanied by one or another degree of violence. The greatest of all bourgeois revolutions, the French; the English Revolution under Cromwell; even the sacrosanct American – all violent. Neither the bourgeoisie nor its political ideologues showed the faintest disinclination to use violence when advantageous to their ends. Had moralists urged the Continental Congress to eschew violence in 1776, only impatience would have been the response. [3]
The writings of Marx and Engels on this subject contain a series of propositions something like the following: (1) when the bourgeoisie sought to achieve undisputed social domination, a conflict of violence arose; (2) the modern capitalist state rests on bodies of armed men far stronger than any known in previous societies; (3) even when capitalism is threatened, not by fundamental opposition, but by partial inroads in power, it does not hesitate to use force; (4) therefore it follows that when the working class and its allies try to establish socialism, or show a degree of power preparatory to the establishment of socialism, the defenders of the old order will probably not hesitate to use force.
Marx listed three exceptions, Holland, England and America, countries where he believed a peaceful transition to socialism possible. Not too many years ago – in 1933 – an American Marxist wrote on this subject:
At the very time when Marx was making his exception in favor of England she had the largest navy in the world, standing armies in India, Egypt and Ireland, a highly developed bureaucracy, and as Marx’s letters testify, the most astute and class-conscious ruling class in the world ... Is this a country in which the social revolution could have taken place peacefully?
Nor is the reference to the United States any more fortunate. [At the time Marx made his exception], America had gone through her second revolution to break up the semi-feudal slavocracy which barred the expansion of industrial capitalism. At the very moment Marx was speaking, the North was exercising a virtual dictatorship over the South ... Was it likely that in a country in which feeble and “constitutional” attempts to abolish chattel slavery had called forth the most violent civil war of the nineteenth century, the abolition of wage slavery could be effected by moral suasion?
These intransigent lines may seem sectarian to some; and I cite them not to raise the issue of whether Marx or the commentator was correct. The point I wish to make, rather, is that the author (Sidney Hook) was arguing in terms of historical precedent, possibility and actuality; his argument was therefore open to verification and rebuttal. But Herberg does not write in this manner: he will not stoop to history.
Herberg tells us that the Bolsheviks insisted upon one thing “as a fixed dogma: the revolution could not be accomplished peacefully, without force or violence.” This may sound pretty bad for the Bolsheviks, only it is not quite accurate. If Lenin had any “fixed dogmas,” they were that capitalism offered no hope for humanity, socialism had to be instituted in fullness, the working class is the major actor in the revolutionary drama, etc. etc. As I have shown in earlier pages, Lenin was ready to suppose that the Russian Revolution could take place peacefully (and, by the way, it virtually did, the bulk of violence erupting only later, when the White armies, helped by the Western powers and by some though not all the Mensheviks, began a counter-revolution.) The two quotations cited from Lenin could be supplemented by many others, but to avoid tedium, I shall risk only one more: “The capitalist regards the Soviets of Workers’, etc., Deputies as anarchy, because such an organization of power does not commit the people beforehand and unconditionally to capitalist subjection; but provides liberty and order together with the possibility of peaceful and gradual transition to Socialism.” (April 27, 1917) Trotsky, discussing the English crisis of 1926, declared a peaceful transition possible (Where is Britain Going?); in 1941 the editor of The New International expressed a similar opinion about contemporary England.
Still, it would be idle to deny that the Communist International in its “heroic period” believed that the revolutionary working class had to anticipate struggles in force. Why? Because Lenin was blood-thirsty and Trotsky a scoundrel?
One must remember that for several years after the first world war, Europe was gripped by a revolutionary situation; it seemed a definite possibility that the continent would go the path of Lenin. Reaction was desperate; in Italy Mussolini prepared to march on Rome; in Germany the Reichswehr plotted counter-revolution; Luxemburg and Liebknecht were murdered – was this an atmosphere in which one could envisage a smooth transfer of social power? Instead of announcing, ex cathedra and from his moral perch, that Lenin made force into a “fixed dogma,” might not Herberg more profitably considered whether Lenin was right or wrong in his estimate of Europe in 1920? If he cared to argue in terms of historical evidence, we should be happy to listen; we are far from persuaded that Lenin or anyone else was infallible; we believe in fact, that he, as anyone else, made serious mistakes; but if one is to propound maxims, one must be prepared to relate them to experience.
And, indeed, did not Italy in 1921, as later Germany in 1933, prove that Lenin had estimated the European situation with at least some realism? (Unless, of course, Herberg inclines toward that most philistine of opinions: if Lenin hadn’t started making revolutions, the fascists would never have arisen; q.e.d. Lenin is responsible for fascism. This is a piece with the Rotarian view that if agitators didn’t disturb the workers, there’d be no strikes and hence no strikebreaking.) Had the German workers taken power in 1920, a certain amount of blood might have been shed – the exact amount depending largely on the attitude of the Social Democratic leaders; but it would have been a tiny fraction of the blood spilled 15 years later in Germany because the workers had not taken power. It is right to urge that the cost of revolution be reckoned; but one must, at times, reckon the cost of abstention from revolution.
Now there are wiseacres – some testify for the FBI, some don’t – who say that all this is merely eyewash, for everyone “knows” that Marxists and particularly Leninists believe in armed insurrection, coup d’etats etc. When such talk is not mere provocation, it is mere ignorance. For it is a fundamental tenet of Marxism that voluntary and active participation of socialism can be built only with the the masses; without that participation, socialism cannot be weakened; to attempt to “sneak into” power is a certain way of betraying the socialist goal.
Nor is this a recent or retrospective discovery. Wrote Lenin on April 22, 1917: “To become a power, the class-conscious workers must win the majority over to their side. So long as no violence is committed against the masses, there is no other road to power. We are not Blanquists, we are not for the seizure of power by a minority.” Dozens of other citations are possible; here are two. April 27, 1917: “Blanquism consists in an effort to seize power by relying on the support of a minority. With us it is quite different. We are as yet a minority, we realize the need of winning a majority.” May 6, 1917: “the slogan of ‘Down With the Provisional Government’ is at the present moment not sound, because such a slogan, unless there is a solid (i.e., a class-conscious and organized) majority of the people on the side of the revolutionary proletariat, is either a mere phrase or, objectively, reduces itself to encouraging efforts of an adventurous nature.”
It would be absurd to suppose that the present-day disagreements between Marxists and reformists revolve about the question of “violence”; that is the version of textbooks, journalists and informers. By a revolution Marxists refer to a shift in social power from class to class, a transformation of property relations – and the means by which this change is effected do not effect the definition. Violence can occur without social revolution, social revolution without violence. Every sane socialist, of whatever faction, hopes that the transition to socialism will occur peacefully; it would then be easier, quicker and, most important of all, more humane. But surely this is not the issue that agitates the radical movement today. If this were the only point of differences between Marxists and reformists, I would favor unity with the Social Democratic Federation – and would brook no aesthetic objections. What is reprehensible about Social Democracy is not at all that it fails to issue blood-curdling calls for violence, but that it accommodates itself to capitalism, to its institutions and values. Is your goal a fundamental social change or a blend of reforms? Do you believe in class independence or have you discovered the wisdom of class cooperation?
 
Surely, no Marxist of reasonable intelligence criticized the British Labor government for enacting nationalization of industry through legislative means or, in principle, for compensating former owners. Our criticism was that Attlee showed no interest in stimulating workers’ participation in factory management or in developing a socialist foreign policy. Though it took socialistic steps of a kind unprecedented for a reformist government, the British Labor leadership still accepted far too much of the old order, still thought – as G.D.H. Cole wrote in England – of the workers as followers to be manipulated and directed. On such living issues did the clash between Marxist and reformist manifest itself.
Still, it may be asked, doesn’t the experience of the British Labor regime raise the question once more of “the road to power?” Let us agree that it does. Clearly, a bolder party could have led England much further along the road to socialism, and probably have done so without suffering armed resistance. This is a phenomenon of the decline of capitalism, as the possibility of a peaceful transition envisaged was a phenomenon of its youth. Exhausted by two wars, worn down by international competition, deprived of large sections of its empire, burdened with an obsolete industrial plant, the English capitalist class lacked the strength and the spirit to consider, let alone begin, armed resistance. And it showed its usual class intelligence when it peacefully accepted nationalization, for it sensed that Attlee was not likely to deprive it of all unearned sustenance. Wait or risk everything in dubious gamble, was its choice; it chose wisely.
All this is true, but not enough. There is no evidence that the British bourgeoisie so much as contemplated armed resistance; it realized that in a country where the (domestic) democratic tradition is as strong as in England, any extra-parliamentary adventure, by whichever party, can end only in grief. Was it, however, also true that the English bourgeoisie was itself so imbued with the democratic spirit that it would not try to upset a democratically chosen government? The question is of 3rd rate importance, but worth a glance. Remember, for one, that this was a battered, if not defeated, class; no longer the proud ruler of an international empire, but the suppliant partner of the United States; a class that had lost a great deal of its self-confidence and morale. Remember, too, that the English bourgeoisie had never, in the past, hesitated to use force: to drown Indian nationalism in blood, to break the general strike of 1926, to cloud the skies of Ireland with terror. Have the latter-day representatives of this class become so much more civilized? In truth, it had little choice – and considering its many difficulties it managed quite well to stay on its feet.
But it would, nonetheless, be a serious error to underestimate the power of the democratic tradition in a country like England, sullied though that tradition has been by politicians and publicists. In modern society, the democratic tradition, which comes to far more than a duplicate or veil for bourgeois ideology, is a force in frequent opposition to the state, a means of bequeathing and receiving values won from or against the state, and the very groundwork, the inseparable basis, of socialism. Had some fascist gang tried to overthrow the Labor regime, the vast majority of the population, including many who had not voted for Labor and some who had been temporarily hurt by its measures, would immediately have rallied to the government. For despite its painful backwardness with regard to imperialism, the British people have a profound if unarticulated appreciation of the value of democracy – and rightly so! [4]
We see, therefore, that in some countries the problem of “the road to power” cannot be exhausted merely by an analysis of class relations or an appeal to historical precedents. The democratic tradition, a good in itself no matter how frequently vulgarized or traduced, plays a role in setting this problem; and if socialists, by their principled adherence to that tradition, strengthen it and endow it with fresh meaning, the path to socialism is likely to be eased. In America, of course, together with this tradition there is another one, based on mob violence; how the two are likely to interact in the future it would be risky to say. One thing is clear: the problem cannot be settled by a fatuous sneer at Leninist violence (generally, the sneer of a liberal ready to justify atom-bomb violence.) Perhaps it is true that the radical movement in the late twenties and early thirties, under the influence of Stalin and Zinoviev, had a barricade obsession; perhaps true, as well, that the Communist International, even in its brief best days, was inflexible on this matter. But surely Herberg’s maxims help very little.
In practice, if not in formal statement, the socialist tendency speaking through The New International has refined its position on these problems – returned to a Marxist view unsullied by Stalinist influence, or if you wish, modified its view under the impact of recent events. For example, the phrase “dictatorship of the proletariat” has virtually been dropped by most Marxists. To Marx, in the few places he used it, the phrase meant nothing more than a regime transitional to socialism, one in which the majority of the people, centered about the working class, protected its victory from armed counter-attack and prepared both the economy and itself for a classless society. Had Marx lived to see the horrors immediately suggested to the modern mind by what the Stalinists call “the dictatorship of the proletariat,” he would surely have found another, less ambiguous description. Shifts in language being historically conditioned, it seems unlikely, perhaps unnecessary, that “dictatorship of the proletariat” can ever recover its original, unobjectionable meaning. Today, socialists declare against dictatorship of any kind: we are for popular rule, for the defense of minority rights, for the preservation and enlargement of democracy to a point capitalism cannot reach.
The phrase is open to another variety of misinterpretation: the workers will “lord” it over their middle- class or agricultural allies, etc. But at least in industrially advanced countries, the transition to socialism might well be made with considerable ease, through a regime that would be far less dominated by any single class than the organ of a population bound together by a common, visibly liberating purpose.
Similar considerations apply to the term “bourgeois democracy.” As traditionally used by Marxists, it suggests the limitations of democracy in a capitalist context; yet, through debasement, it sometimes came to suggest – and not only, though primarily, in the Stalinist movement – an impatience with or implicit depreciation of democracy.
Historically, democracy was the political form most advantageous, though not uniformly indispensable, to an expanding bourgeoisie; but more than that, too. It was the reward wrested by the masses from the bourgeoisie for help in its revolutions; and whatever its inadequacies or distortions, democracy is one of the two or three most precious conquests of human history.
The great values of freedom of speech, press, assemblage and belief; of habeas corpus and the assumption that a man is innocent until proven guilty – these are not bourgeois; they are victories won through centuries of human effort, the very fundamental of socialism, the heritage of the past that is most precious for the future.
Herberg is right, I think, when he attacks the notion that democracy is a “transitory institution” and, instead, declares it an “enduring value.” He is right, but in a vacuum; for he makes no effort to relate this enduring value to anything in or of society. Among Marxists the problem of democracy has received more serious and anxious attention during the past decade than ever before – and for very good reason. Democracy has never seemed more precarious, and capitalism less interested in or capable of defending it, than in recent years. Some decades back it could be assumed by socialists that democracy was an assured conquest which would outlive capitalism, and the problem was to build upon it, so to speak a socialist edifice. In a sense, democracy was taken for granted, perhaps too much so, but taken for granted since it was nowhere greatly threatened. The major conflict was between a reeling capitalism and a self-confident Marxism. Today, however, the situation is quite different: we live in a period when history has been thrown back, when the working-class, except in a few countries like England, hardly plays an independent political role. There is, today, no immediate possibility for the achievement of socialism in either continental Europe or the United States; but there is a very serious danger that democratic rights will be destroyed by Stalinism in Europe and by domestic reaction here. Consequently, socialists place a greater emphasis on democracy than ever before.
Is this mere opportunism, a tactic prompted by weakness? By no means! We realize, first, that if socialism is to be reached democratic rights must be preserved; a world-wide totalitarian society, of whatever sort, means the death of socialist hopes for an indefinite future. And we value these democratic rights in themselves, defending them, if I may say so, with greater vigilance and consistency than those liberals who are ready to wink an eye at the persecution of Stalinists or, for that matter, of various kinds of anti-Stalinist radicals.
What might be maintained is that during the early Communist days in America, characterized as they were by romantic and thoughtless leftism, and during the thirties, when both Trotskyism and left socialism were contaminated by Stalinist germs, some Marxists had a tendency to take a cavalier attitude toward democracy, not so much in their formal programs as in their implicit attitudes. Like other people, they had not yet grasped the full meaning of totalitarianism; they were dizzy with fantasies of revolution quite unrelated to the realities of American life; and because the future seemed so near and so good, they were ready to discard or at least neglect the best of the past. But this, if true, is no longer true; and one of the most objectionable aspects of Herberg’s article is that he nowhere indicates the numerous discussions of democracy that have concerned Marxists during the past decade, not least of all in the pages of this magazine.
 
Herberg may be misleading on “the road to power,” but he is simply hair-raising on other subjects. Writing of “revolutionary socialist teaching” on “the Soviet system,” he lists several tenets. Here are two:
“... the arbitrary, dictatorial character of the regime, free from all restrictions of law or convention.”
This is said, not about Bolshevik practice, which is open to debate, but about “revolutionary socialist teaching.” In such teaching, however, the workers’ regime is anything but arbitrary: it is based on a popular upsurge expressed through popular institutions. Nor is it dictatorial, except in the special sense that it is still a class society. (Surely, to confound this special sense of “dictatorship” with the generally-understood sense of totalitarianism is unworthy of a man with so acute a moral sensibility as Herberg.) As for being free from restrictions of law or convention, which law is Herberg talking about? Every new society establishes its own laws, keeping some from the past and discarding others. That is what the French did, and the British and Americans too. A socialist society would remove from the books those laws that preserve private property in the means of production, but would preserve those which guarantee fair trials and free speech. Similarly with conventions: some kept, some not. After the Russian Revolution people called each other comrade instead of mister. At the same time, we may suppose, men still gave up their seats in Moscow street-cars, if not to all women, then to pregnant women. If Herberg had thought for a moment, instead of indulging in the popular sport of Bolshevik-baiting, he would have realized that it is impossible for any society to be “free from all restrictions ... of convention.”
“... the direction of the total affairs of society by ‘the party of the proletariat,’ all other parties being outlawed as the expression of non-proletarian interests.”
Herberg cannot be referring to the Stalinists for he is intelligent enough to write that Stalinist action “soon lost all grounding in principle.” If it is not, however, part of Stalinist teaching, he must be asserting that the “outlawing of all other parties” is found in “the revolutionary socialist teaching” of, say, Marx and Lenin. Nothing of the kind is true; no evidence is presented by Herberg for this wild assertion, nor can it be. To the contrary, there are numerous instances (cited frequently in past issues of this magazine) where the leading Marxists speak of several parties functioning within a workers’ states. [5] In Bolshevik Russia, it is true, the Mensheviks and SR’s were outlawed shortly after the revolution; the correctness of this step is certainly open to debate; but it must be understood that they were declared illegal on the charge of joining and supporting the White counter-revolution, not because of any principle or doctrine. How much reality would creep into Herberg’s schematic moralizing if he mentioned the fact, say, that the Social Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan tried to murder Lenin. And what is so malicious about all this is that Herberg argues, not that the Bolsheviks made mistakes or committed political crimes, but that they took the measures they did because they were adhering to some Marxist or Leninist principle of a one-party regime.
The one section of Herberg’s article that has a certain interest is his criticism of the image of the future that is held by most socialists. Here proof is almost impossible, since no one can demonstrate by objective measurement that socialists hold one or another vision of the classless society; but impressions are not without value; and some of Herberg’s, though by no means all, are worth discussing.
He finds that the usual image of socialism is too untroubled. All the conceivable difficulties of the future are lumped into the transitional workers’ state which is assigned the task of solving them; after which, socialism. But if you think of socialism as a society which has solved all social problems, then clearly there is no point in discussing the problems of socialism. Let us take a difficult problem which, perhaps because it is concrete, Herberg does not raise. One of the great misfortunes of modern life is that millions of people have to do meaningless routine work. This is partly a consequence of the division of labor, and in turn a cause for the worker’s alienation from his work. The difficulty is exacerbated by the conditions of capitalist production; but why are we to suppose that with the abolition of capitalism this problem would be solved? or even with the achievement of socialism? The high level of productivity which is a prerequisite for socialism makes the division of labor indispensable; the division of labor means, for many, un- creative work. Under socialism, to be sure, there would be more leisure, the workers would play a role in planning and managing factories, their cultural interests would be widened so that life outside the factory would be enriched – but they would still be doing uncreative work. How is this problem to be solved? I don’t know. It doesn’t require any immediate anxiety, if only because it is, alas, not an immediate problem; but an awareness of it helps keep our image of the desired future from degenerating into a dull and static Elysium, as intolerable as the Christian vision of Heaven.
 
Even in a socialist society, writes Herberg, there would be social clashes – and not merely disputes over where to build dams or any of the other trivial examples given in socialist primers. The mistake socialists make, he says, is to believe that “the only conceivable universal motive of antisocial conduct is economic.” Well, we can’t be sure, not so long as we live in a class society; there do seem to be deep-seated aggressive drives in the human organism, but the degree to which these might be lessened or put to constructive use in a healthy society is a subject largely for speculation. On the other hand, it is a coarse error to suppose that human nature is ineradicably evil, though in these times a most fashionable error. Herberg refers, again without evidence, to the “power drive ... rooted in the nature of man, much deeper than the superficial layers of economic interest through which it manifests itself ... power creates its own interest and feeds insatiably on itself.” If by bureaucratism one means the special privileges given a ruling stratum that rests upon one or another class, then it follows that in a class society this kind of bureaucratism, the most fundamental kind, would be eliminated. But it may be that the various procedures and habits associated with bureaucratism – the usurpation of special privileges, the “short-cutting” of democratic procedures, the excessive respect accorded to the office, etc. etc. – rest not merely (even if primarily) on class rule; it may be that they follow from the sheer largeness and cumbersomeness of the modern economic and political and industrial unit. Under socialism, there is reason to suppose that a very considerable simplification of administrative procedures could be enforced, since many of the economic and social motivations now present for administrative complication would then be removed. But unless one wishes to say that under socialism bureaucratism is impossible by definition – in which case, it is fruitless to discuss any problem under socialism, since all evils can be declared impossible by definition – it must be granted that even with its main social cause removed, bureaucratism might still be a problem.
But if it is rash to assume that the removal of economic inequality would entail the complete eradication of bureaucratism, it is completely false to suppose that man has some unspecified and unanalyzed power drive (power for what? where? when?) which keeps him from cooperative behavior. This “power drive” is a category of political moralists, not of psychologists or anthropologists, who in fact have marshalled considerable evidence to show that in some societies (particularly among savages who have read neither Kierkegaard nor Niebuhr) it does not exist.
 
Polemizing against the concept of the “vanguard party,” Herberg deduces (but does not describe) how the party leadership becomes “the vanguard of the vanguard.” And “what this doctrine has meant for the regime and practical activities of the Communist Party [which one?] it is hardly necessary to relate.” But it is preposterous to suppose that so complex a phenomenon as the rise of Stalinism can be explained by so limited a “cause” as the vanguard (or any other) theory of the party. In truth, every political organization, and particularly every socialist organization, sets itself up as some kind of vanguard movement: the CIO speaks “for” the workers, the ADA speaks “for” the liberals, the SP speaks “for” socialism, the SWP “speaks for” Trotskyism, etc. etc. A political party that does not lay present or future claim to leadership, is a contradiction in terms. This does not, of course, dispose of the problem of the “vanguard party.” I think it makes sense to say that the vanguard theory shares with other theories of organization, and perhaps has even more than them, certain dangers: it is too easy to identify the “historical interests” of the class with the immediate interests of the party, particularly when the former are defined by the party; it is too easy for the party leadership to become a privileged stratum above the ranks, privileged in terms of prestige, not income; it is too easy to make a grand correlation between bureaucratic phenomena and class society, thereby passing over the concrete problems of bureaucratism in parties. But there is no sure-fire way of avoiding these problems, short of refraining from organization.
Another criticism of Herberg’s is that the socialist movement tries to absorb the entire life of its members. On this, he is frank enough to admit that it was the German Social Democracy which first began to create a “whole life” for its members, everything from nurseries to literary societies. The notion of “everything in and through the movement” is certainly dubious, if only because there are many fields of human activity which the movement is incompetent to approach. Nor is there good reason why it should try to approach them: the political party has specific purposes, sharply limited and in some ways to be regarded merely as a necessary burden. Again, it should be added that the notion of “everything in and through the party,” which was favored in almost every wing of American radicalism some 15 years ago, has in practice been abandoned by the political tendency that expresses itself through The New International.
 
Herberg’s most interesting remarks about the image of socialism concern the problem of democracy. Two definitions, he says, are possible. “Democracy may be taken to mean the equalitarian mass state, the absolutism of popular sovereignty against which no individual or minority can conceivably claim any rights. But democracy may also be taken to mean a liberal, limited-power state, guaranteeing civil and political liberty, protecting the rights of individuals and groups against predatory minorities and oppressive majorities alike.” Because, he continues, socialists have been “committed so uncritically to the cult of popular absolutism,” they have dismissed as mere bourgeois shams the various checks and balances by which constitutional governments are limited in power.
The important point touched by Herberg is muddied by extreme and careless formulations. For one thing, the phrase “popular absolutism” is ambiguous and emotionally overcharged; “popular will” would be more accurate. Nor need it be supposed that the “equalitarian mass state” is one in which, necessarily, no individual or minority can “conceivably claim any rights.” Herberg may not know it, but his statement is itself a crude instance of the “inevitability” fallacy: he is saying that wherever popular sovereignty is supreme there is never a possibility for minority rights. Surely, this is a view that can be rejected, not only in terms of a socialist future, but even in terms of our experience in the capitalist present. The desired image of socialism, one shared by all the major socialist writers, is a society in which popular sovereignty or popular will is blended with the protection of minority rights. The transition period, the most dangerous and difficult of all, requires an intense political consciousness; and while there is no reason to suppose that such an intense political consciousness is a “normal” or even desirable feature of human life at all times, there can be no guarantee of minority rights except insofar as they are cherished in consciousness – and this is true for all societies. For the transition to socialism to be made democratically – that is, for the transition to be made at all – there must be a high level of political consciousness, a principled respect for democratic values, and the existence of “countervailing powers” in potential opposition to the state: parties, cooperatives, unions, industrial units, all independent from and able to resist the state.
These problems are of considerable interest to socialists, though by their very nature they neither permit nor require immediate solutions; still, it is good to be aware of them. One could take Herberg’s hints and suggestions with a greater degree of seriousness if one were not aware that for his school of thought they must necessarily be academic; for what is the point of raising problems about the shape and tone of a socialist society if your whole politics comes, objectively, to little more than adaptation to the status quo – adaptation with reforms but adaptation nonetheless?
 
III. Theories of Classes
American society, writes Daniel Bell at the end of his article, has not fulfilled the classical pattern of Marxism. In America there are none of the hard-and-fast social groups Marx found in Europe: no Proletariat, no Bourgeoisie, no Aristocracy, no Military. Bell does not mean, of course, that we have no workers or capitalists or army officers; by his capitalized categories he wishes to refer to cohered classes or castes or status groups of a kind, he claims, that have not appeared in America. The position suggested here he has developed at greater length in an article America’s Un-Marxist Revolution (Commentary, March 1949). It is the position of David Riesman in his book, The Lonely Crowd. And it receives its extreme and ludicrous statement in a recent article by Mary McCarthy (The Reporter, Jan. 22, 1952) who writes that “Class barriers disappear or become porous; the factory worker is an economic aristocrat in comparison to the middle-class clerk; even segregation is diminishing; consumption replaces acquisition as an incentive. The America ... of vast inequalities and dramatic contrasts is rapidly ceasing to exist.”
Miss McCarthy’s remarks may be dismissed as mere fantasy, but the viewpoint of Bell has to be considered. A fair summary of it would run something like the following: American society has never settled to the hard social polarities suggested by Marx. The theory of class struggle may help explain the conflict between merchant and agrarian classes in early America, but since then the social fluidity and economic expansion of this country has made for a situation in which veto groups jockey for power, prestige and income but do not align into two irreconcilable classes. Actually we have, as Bell says, “interest blocs: in functional terms, labor, farmer, business; in social terms, the aged, the veterans, the minority groups; in regional terms, the Missouri Valley Authority, Columbia Valley Authority, St. Lawrence waterway.”
How else, inquires Bell, but in terms of competing power blocs can you explain the rise of Roosevelt? Political theorists have seen Roosevelt as “a temporizing solon, whose political reforms sought to stave off the revolution of the propertyless masses; a Tiberius Gracchus, a patrician who deserted his class to become the people’s tribune; a Louis Napoleon, an ambitious power-hungry demagogue, manipulating first one class then another while straddling them all in order to assure his personal role.” Bell rejects all these comparisons as “baroque,” and sees him as a balance between competing pressure groups, adjusting their conflicts, evening out inequalities; a benevolent umpire of a “managed economy.”
 
Even in simple empirical terms, this analysis has curious weaknesses. Bell denies the existence of a cohered selfconscious bourgeoisie at precisely the time when it is becoming more aware of its position and “destiny” than it ever was. Never before has there been such a flood of institutional “free-enterprise” propaganda as during the past decade; never before has the American capitalist class so consciously assumed responsibility for the defense and preservation of its system on an international scale. Nor has there been a time when the military as a group showed the degree of self- conscious independence it recently has.
It is true that all the competing groups have functioned in terms of cooperation-and-struggle, but this is a phenomenon of war economy – war economy being a dirty word that neither Bell nor any other self-respecting liberal will deign to use. The notion of an equilibrium between competing veto groups acquires plausibility only in moments of prosperity: it is a theory which arises, for example, in imperialist countries where the advantages of foreign exploitation are so large that some of those advantages drip down to the workers. In the United States today the situation is somewhat different: the apparent restraint of the competing classes or groups is due to the blessings of what Bell in his Commentary article delicately calls “managed economy.” That these blessings no reform government of capitalism, certainly not the New Deal, has yet been able to sustain, we know from experience.
As for Bell’s question about Roosevelt, he erects a puzzle where none need exist. The phenomenon of a liberal politician trying to patch up capitalism is well-enough known in Europe; and soon we shall know it well enough in America too. This may not be all that Roosevelt was; but if you don’t see that he was this primarily, you will never understand his social role. In terms of conscious motives, he may just possibly have been Gracchus serving as the people’s tribune and more probably was a Solon offering reforms to stave off – perhaps not revolution – but certainly mass discontent; in terms of his objective role, he was surely more a Solon than anything else; and in his immediate behavior he occasionally did resemble Louis Napoleon. His extraordinary popularity or charisma is due partly to large personal gifts and partly to the panic of a country unused to the shock of so extreme a depression and therefore desperately seeking a father to save it. We need not enter into this problem here except to ask: if war had not broken out and the New Deal had continued in its failure to solve America’s economic problems, how long would the Roosevelt legend have survived?
But since Bell’s theory has, in one or another form, become quite popular lately, it may be useful to shift the discussion to a more abstract level and review both the Marxist notion of class and the writings of some American sociologists on this subject.
 
There are innumerable methods of stratifying a population: by religion, by prestige status, by social class, by urban-rural division, etc. etc. The Marxist approach emphasizes social class. Unhappily Marx did not offer a text-book definition of “class”; the chapter on classes at the end of Capital, Volume III, remains a mere fragment. This does not mean, however, that he failed to suggest in many contexts what his idea of class was. Because he was concerned with social struggles and looked upon society in dynamic terms, he cared more about observing the movement of history than providing neat academic categories.
But there are definitions. Bukharin defined class as “the aggregate of persons playing the same part in production, standing in the same relation toward other persons in the production process, these relations being also expressed in things (instruments of labor.)” Trotsky offered a looser but in some respects more useful definition: a class is defined by “its independent role in the general structure of economy and by its independent roots in the economic foundation of society. Each class ... works out its own special forms of property.” A recent writer, Lewis Coser, offers a definition of the Marxist concept that is couched in the language of Max Weber: “a class [is] a group of men whose life situation is determined by their economic function within the total society, and whose conditions are similarly determined by this economic function.” Useful as these definitions are for various purposes, the first two, at least, cannot encompass all problems; as Max Shachtman has pointed out, they do not apply to the merchants, whom Engels was ready to accept as a class even though they did not take part in production.
The Marxist approach to class is what sociologists call an “objective” one, though not, as we shall see, entirely so. It establishes social classes in terms of the roles played by groups of men in the process of economic production. Ownership or non-ownership of the means of production becomes a central criterion for determining class membership. And class opposition occurs with regard to the distribution of the total social product. In turn, this distribution is conditioned by the relation of various groups to the mean of production.
But while one may consider it fundamental in some sense, the relation of men to the means of production is clearly not always a sufficient criterion for establishing class membership. Occupation, which is not quite equivalent to one’s relation to the means of production, may often be, in specific instances, a more important criterion. Other objective factors are also important: income, power, common interest. Generally speaking, a class develops particular forms of behavior and cultural outlets; it has a distinct prestige rating in society; it develops a unique community of outlooks, a class attitude.
Still, this leaves us with many problems. If you define a proletarian as one who sells his labor power on the market, does that mean an engineer is a proletarian? Or a salaried business manager? Or a government official? We reject such descriptions empirically, for we know that in their styles of life, their identifications and their interests, these people are not generally aligned with the workers. Relation to the means of production and occupation, while often congruent, are not always so; and if one wants a still finer social distinction, one must consider other objective criteria, such as income or status. Even here difficulties appear: the income of a white-collar worker may be pretty much the same as that of an industrial worker yet their modes of life, their relations to classes, their patterns of culture are likely to be quite different.
A whole school of sociology follows the “subjectivist” approach to classes, agreeing with Sombart that a social class is a group “which, by its way of thinking, stands for a particular system of economic organization.” Richard Centers, an American scholar of this school, defines class as a “psychological phenomenon ... A man’s class is a part of his ego, a feeling on his part of belongingness to something; an identification with something larger than himself.” And R.M. McIver writes: “class does not unite people and separate them from others unless they feel their unity or separation.”
 
What the subjectivist calls class, Marxist refers to as class-consciousness; what Marxists call class, one subjectivist writer, Centers, calls stratum. Does this mean, then, that the distinction between the two is largely verbal? To some extent, it is. An important reason for the distinction is that the two schools are really interested in different problems: they ask different questions and solicit different orders of response. But between the extreme versions of either approach there is a fundamental split. What McIver says above is clearly untrue: people are separated from each other – in occupation, housing, leisure activity, social friendship, even language habits – regardless of whether they feel it or not. This extreme subjectivist approach has no way of accounting for the indisputable fact that, at times, the conditions of men are determined by factors of which they are not aware; a worker caught up in a depression and deprived of his livelihood is a victim of capitalist crisis even if he clings to the ideology of Horatio Alger. Class position, class behavior, class attitudes – all exist regardless of, though not unaffected by, class awareness. The relations here vary: class position is almost untouched by class awareness, but class attitudes depend very much on awareness. At the other extreme, merely to note that men are stratified according to their relation to the means of production is not yet to say very much, unless one concludes that certain consequences in behavior follow from this stratification. And once that is said, it follows that we have abandoned purely objective criteria. We may conclude, therefore, that a useful approach to class, while basing itself on objective criteria, would not confine itself to them; the dichotomy between objective and subjective, except in extreme instances, is not very meaningful. Once the problem is taken from the realm of abstract definition and placed in the context of historical movement, the two tend to become inseparable.
In his book Historical Materialism Bukharin has an excellent passage on this matter:
Class psychology and class ideology, the consciousness of the class, not only as to its momentary interests, but also as to permanent and universal interests, are a result of the position of the class in production, which by no means signifies that this position of the class will at once produce in it a consciousness of its general and basic interests. On the contrary, it may be said that this is rarely the case. [Bukharin here proceeds to offer reasons why there is a discrepancy between class position and class awareness.] The result is that a class discharging a definite function in the process of production may already exist as an aggregate of persons before it exists as a self-conscious class; we have a class, but no class consciousness. It exists as a factor in production, as a specific aggregate of production relations; it does not yet exist as a social, independent force that knows what it wants, that feels a mission, that is conscious of its peculiar position, of the hostility of its interests to those of other classes. As designations for these different stages in the process of class evolution, Marx makes use of two expressions: he calls class ‘an sich’ (in itself), a class not yet conscious of itself as such; he calls class ‘für sich’ (for itself), a class already conscious of its social role.”
 
The basic Marxist definition delimits class position. It also notices class opposition. Both of these are present despite the awareness of participants. At times, class struggle may break into open class warfare. Class struggle can occur on different levels of intensity, and with different degree of consciousness. Most of the discussions, particularly in academic circles, as to whether the American workers are class conscious simply ignore the fact that there is more than one degree of class consciousness. There is, for example, the class consciousness which exists in terms of competition within a commonly accepted system: the working class sees the capitalists as a kind of enemy but does not think of capitalism as an enemy. The present attitude of large sections of the American labor movement is probably close to this attitude.
Class consciousness depends on a vast number of factors. If there is a strong class tradition in a country, a tradition of socialism or militant unionism, obviously class consciousness will be intense. If there is great social mobility, it may hardly exist at all. If social mobility is possible but difficult, that may intensify class consciousness. A sudden extreme change of conditions is often a prod to class consciousness. War, international trade, foreign events, conditions of employment, political tendencies – these are further influencing agents.
It goes without saying that the theory of classes is a simplification; all hypotheses are. The only relevant question is this: can the theory be used with profit to understand and control society? Many of the objections raised against the Marxist theory of classes are based on misunderstanding or ignorance. Marxists do not say that there are only two classes in society; or that political behavior is invariably determined by class position (“a portion of the bourgeoisie,” writes Marx in the Communist Manifesto, “goes over to the proletariat.”); or that the development of class consciousness is automatic, a simple reflection or reflex from economic conditions.
And Marxists, it may be added, are aware that there are other significant stratifications in society besides those of class. It is true that Marx did not pay as much attention to these as have other social thinkers; the problems he was dealing with led him to concentrate on classes rather than castes or status groups. But what Max Weber writes on those latter seems to me entirely acceptable to Marxists. Status groups, he says, are bound together by some non-economic conception, a conception of “honor” – nobility, religion, race, etc. They are “communities” in a sense that “classes” only intermittently are. “Property as such is not always recognized as a status qualification, but in the long run it is, and with extraordinary regularity.” When the style of life specific to a status group becomes formalized in law, convention or religion, and membership in it becomes hereditary, it becomes a caste. By contrast, writes Weber, classes represent “possible, and frequent, bases for communal action. We may speak of a ‘class’ when (1) a number of people have in common a specific casual component of their life-chances in so far as (2) this component is represented exclusively by economic interests in the possession of goods and opportunities for income, and (3) is represented under the conditions of the commodity or labor market.” Weber has recently become a favorite of American sociologists, sometimes being put in opposition to Marx; but there is more wisdom in these few lines than in all the writings on class of American sociologists, laid end to end, from Harvard to California.
A theory of classes involves the claim that, in some sense, this kind of stratification is more important than another. The test for this claim is empirical, but before the test can be made it is necessary to know the meaning of the claim. What do we mean by saying that economic classes form a more fundamental distinction in society than religious or vocational and racial groupings? And particularly since we are ready to grant that, in a given moment, conflicts among capitalists, or clashes between whites and Negroes, or splits in the working class may be more noticeable and exacerbated than the opposition between the classes.
In Toward the Understanding of Karl Marx, Sidney Hook offered one answer. All other antagonisms in capitalist society, he says, are reconcilable: all employers have a common interest in maintaining a high rate of profit, their inner disputes can be modulated through mergers and agreements, the opposition between vocational groups can also be mediated and in any case does not involve class exploitation. The test, then, of a fundamental social division is the difficulty of removing it. But the mere fact that the opposition between worker and capitalist may be declared integral to capitalism proves only that its duration will be equal to that of capitalism; not yet anything about its intensity or importance. In any case, the statement that the classes are irreconcilable is a predictive statement; it involves a claim as to what will – that is, may – happen.
 
In an interesting article (The Theory of Social Classes, Marxist Quarterly, April 1937), Abraham Edel offers another possible use of the word “fundamental.” He suggests that “a certain division into classes will be found to be a fruitful hypothesis explaining a great variety of the interrelationships of social traits in any, or many, cultures.” By assuming the most important social division to be that of class, you are able to explain social phenomena more adequately and control them more usefully than people who assume that the most important social divisions are, say, those of nation or philosophy or religion. This, of course, is an hypothesis to be tested, but an hypothesis made clear. If, however, the Marxist theory does help explain why at a certain moment mysticism becomes intellectually popular or large sections of the productive forces remain idle amidst general want, then it would seem likely that its efficacy results from the fact that it describes an actual relationship among people; that people are so situated as to make their relation to the means of production or their occupation a determining factor in the history of their lives. If it works, this hypothesis points back to an actuality. Otherwise, why should it work better than others? Why should we be prompted to start with this rather than another hypothesis?
If you want to estimate what Weber calls the “life-chances” of a person, the single most important fact to know about him is his occupation. That is true, however, only in situations where class relations predominate. It is not true in a society with rigid caste divisions. Even there caste position and class status (or occupation) are, as a rule, closely correlated; but there are mixed situations, particularly in the South, where caste and class intersect, conflict and melt into each other. For a white man in the South, the most important determining factor of his life is generally not (as he would like to believe) his whiteness but his class position, his being a worker or a capitalist or a storekeeper. But for a Negro, caste position is still probably the most important factor: the middle-class Negro is still shaped and bent more by his condition as Negro than his income or occupation.
Basically, however, the Marxist theory of classes is intended far less as a device for social classification than a method for studying social change. It asserts that the major motions of modern society can best be understood in terms of class maneuver and class conflict; this is still an hypothesis, of course, but one for which the evidence is by now overwhelming.
 
From motives of curiosity I have devoted several weeks to glancing through the writings of American sociologists on the subject of class; I do not feel my time was well spent. There are a number of valuable empirical studies of class, but hardly a significant theoretical work. Only a few years ago the most prominent American sociologist, Talcott Parsons, Professor at Harvard, wrote: “the Marxian view of the importance of class structure has in a broad way been vindicated.” (Papers, American Economic Association, May 1949). But there is little evidence that this remark has been taken seriously by American sociologists.
For one thing, their very approach makes difficult a serious examination of class relations. This is a subject that cannot be studied in static terms, by taking a poll or conducting a survey – though, of course, such methods can be very helpful. The problem of class must be seen in dynamic historical terms: it makes no sense, for example, to discuss social mobility without correlating it with the movement of American society from war to prosperity to depression to war to war economy. And in most sociological studies, neither history nor politics is a welcome visitor.
In 1940 Fortune magazine ran a poll asking people to assign themselves to “upper” or “lower” or “middle” class. It triumphantly concluded that America was a middle class country because 90 per cent of the respondents classified themselves as “middle.” The central weakness of this poll is, of course, its wording; where a scientist might not assign any emotional valuation to such words as “upper” and “lower,” people answering the poll might very well do so. A much more serious effort in this direction is found in a study by Richard Centers, The Social Psychology of Classes, based on a questionnaire sent out to 1,100 people. (We need not here enter into the question of what makes an “adequate sample”; presumably, the pollers of some intellectual sophistication have solved the problem.) Centers found that 51 per cent of his respondents identified themselves with the “working class.” Obviously, working class does not have the depreciatory overtones of lower class; hence, more people were ready to make that identification. Even here the problem is complicated by the fact that many of the 1,100 answers were probably not based on any precise notion of what a worker is; several factory owners placed themselves in that category. But clearly, it is a considerable advance over the Fortune poll.
Since Centers used a psychological definition of class, he could discover only what we would call data with regard to class-consciousness. Nonetheless, some of his material is highly interesting:
Whereas almost nine-tenths – 87 per cent – of large business owners and managers are either conservative or ultra conservative in political and economic orientation, only about one-fifth – 21 per cent – of semi-skilled manual workers are so oriented. Again, although 55.5 per cent of large businessmen can be described as ultra conservative, only 2.5 per cent of unskilled workers are found in this category. These differences are ... not confined to the urban strata alone, but are manifested between the rural occupational strata as well.
Nearly three-quarters of all business, professional and white collar workers identify themselves with the middle or upper classes. An even larger proportion of all manual workers, 79 per cent, identify ... with the working and lower classes.
There are large and statistically significant differences among occupational strata as determined by the battery of questions concerned with conservatism- radicalism. The top occupational strata are marked by their adherence to the status quo ... the lowest occupational groups are distinguished by their lack of support of the status quo
and by their endorsement of views clearly radical in character. [Center’s use of “radicalism” is open to question; perhaps “social reform” would be more adequate.]
A substantial degree of relationship is also found between political behavior and occupational status. The higher groups are characterized by much greater support of the traditionally conservative Republican Party than is the case with the lower occupational strata.
These paragraphs, taken almost at random from Centers’ book, do little more than suggest its quality. He has been criticized in the academic journals for drawing conclusions favorable to a Marxist view from correlations not high enough to be conclusive. In any case, his book shows conclusively that in terms even of self-awareness, which often lags behind reality, the notion that America is a middle-class country, so dear to propagandists and professors, is simply untrue. And it must be remembered that by far the most serious limitation of such a study is that, at best, it tells us merely what people think about themselves.
 
Another extremely valuable study of this kind is Analysis of ‘Class’ Structure of Contemporary American Society – Psychological Bases of Class Divisions by Professor Arthur Kornhauser in a compendium called Industrial Conflict: A Psychological Interpretation. Kornhauser states his problem as follows: “Problems of ‘class’ are concerned essentially with the social orientations presumed to grow out of people’s contrasting objective conditions ... To what extent are the acknowledged income and occupational contrasts of our society accompanied by significant psychological differences?” Using a variety of polls, Kornhauser submits them to exhaustive analysis. Though unsympathetic to the Marxist approach, Kornhauser concludes: “In all these examples [of polls] from quite independent sources, marked differences in opinions are seen to be correlated with the objective differences in income and occupation ... There is some indication that upper and lower economic groups have tended to draw farther apart in the past few years – particularly as seen in the decreasing favor of the New Deal at high income levels ... On many issues, of course, attitudes are not closely correlated with the objective economic position of groups. The most enlightening of these ... are the questions relating to individual opportunity to rise as contrasted with the existence of fixed classes. On this issue, people at all levels adhere overwhelmingly to the traditional American belief. They expect either themselves or their children to ‘get ahead’.” In other words, Kornhauser’s date supports the common Marxist contention that there is a certain amount and kind of class consciousness in America – to be specified later – but not, or at least not yet, of the kind present in Europe or envisaged in the Marxist program itself.
The limitations of the psychological approach, particularly when based on polls which elicit purely formal responses, are obvious. Another prevalent approach in American sociology is the community study. Here greater flexibility of observation, distinctions between position and awareness, and particularly between verbal response and observable attitude are possible. But these studies suffer from one central limitation: for purpose of convenience they usually employ mediumsized mid-Western cities, usually of about 50,000 people. It happens, however, that the social weight of the United States at the present time is probably in the large cities; in the small-city community studies both the major institutions of capitalism and the major sectors of the working class must be by-passed.
Of these studies the most significant still remain Robert Lynd’s Middletown and its sequel Middletown in Transition. Though Lynd did not find, of course, a thoroughly aware bourgeoisie pitted against a thoroughly aware proletariat, his analysis makes sense only in terms of generally Marxist assumptions. “One’s job,” concluded Lynd, “is the watershed down which the rest of one’s life tends to flow in Middletown.”
Another valuable books of this kind is Elmtown’s Youth by A.B. Hollingshead. This is a study of high-school youth in a Mid-Western town, “designed to test the hypothesis that the social behavior of adolescents is related functionally to the position their families occupy in the social structure of the community.” The detailed answer to this question is, of course, the book itself; the summary conclusion, which does not even hint at the wealth of material collected by Hollingshead, is that “there is a functional relationship between the class position of an adolescent’s family and his social behavior in the community.”
 
If we turn to the academic sociology journals, we find various minor empirical studies which demonstrate, for example, that even among elementary school children class position helps determine major areas of behavior; or that in a city like Oakland, California there is considerable social mobility, though most of it is to be found within the middle class and from the upper strata of the working class to the middle class. One interesting study, by Alfred Jones, investigated the attitudes of Akron, Ohio residents during the 1938 sit-down strikes; his questionnaire was focussed on opinions of corporate property. Slightly more than 75 per cent of the Akron population was found to be not “unfavorable” toward corporate property; 16 per cent violently anti-corporate and 8 per cent pro-corporate. This, in terms of conscious attitudes and opinions – at a time when the Akron workers were, objectively, challenging private property “rights”
through sit-down strikes. Here we have statistical verification of the common observation that there are great “contradictions” of attitude among the American workers.
And, indeed, it is hard to escape the feeling – though I think it should be resisted – that sociological research on class mainly confirms what we already “know” through observation and historical analysis. This is largely due to the fact that there is nowhere in existence a serious generalizing study of American class relations – a lack which casts as great discredit on American Marxists, with their claim to a special interest in the subject, as it does on professional sociologists, despite the fact that the latter have far greater opportunities for such a study.
Nonetheless, a few provisional remarks – and they will, finally, lead us back to Bell’s thesis – are possible.
The classless ideal was closest to realization in America during the 1820’s and 1830’s. Seventy per cent of the gainfully occupied worked for themselves. The frontier made acquisition of landed property quite easy. Only 15 per cent of the gainfully employed were wage workers. Then, indeed, there was a middle-class America. In Triumph of American Capitalism, another product of salad days, Louis Hacker wrote:
... if industrial workers in America did not migrate westward to become free farmers, certainly potential workers did ... small farmers of New York, New England, the British Isles, Germany and Scandinavia who began to fill up first the old North West and then the prairie States would have been converted early into industrial workers ... if they had not had the opportunities to continue farming under more satisfactory conditions. These opportunities were to be found in the American West, certainly throughout the whole of the nineteenth century, and in considerable measure, up to the end of the World War.
By 1870 most of this had changed. Among people employed in agriculture, 25 per cent were tenants and 30 per cent propertyless laborers. The old middle class, composed of small independent entrepreneurs, was clearly declining, and declining much as Marx predicted it would. In 1870 the independent middle class still formed 33 per cent of the gainfully employed; by 1940 it had shrunk to 20 per cent.
Writing in The Marxist Quarterly, January 1937, Lewis Corey found that “The economic power of independent enterprisers is as relatively insignificant as their numbers. Not more than 400,000 are engaged in manufacturing, mining, construction, and transportation, where they are overwhelmed by the might of concentrated corporate capital. They flourish most actively in trade, where the chain stores make constantly greater gains.” Since Corey wrote, economic conditions have changed considerably, but this description, by and large, still holds.
A report of the Smaller War Plants Corporation in 1945 declared that:
The relative importance of big business, particularly the giant corporations, increased sharply during the war, while the position of small business declined ... In each of the war industries, with but one exception, firms with 10,000 or more employees grew in relative importance. In manufacturing as a whole, these few giants accounted for 13 per cent of total employment in 1939, and for fully 31 per cent of the total in which made few gains during the war, 1944 ... In the non-war industries, small business, generally speaking, held its own. Taking manufacturing as a whole, the giants expanded greatly, while all other firms, especially small business, suffered a substantial decline ...
The destruction of the independent middle class goes deeper than the figures might suggest, for it is often in the interests of big capital to leave certain of the independent strata on paper, although they are completely dependent on the big undertakings.
 
About the famous “new middle class” there is not much need to write here [6]; most of what needs to be said appears in C. Wright Mills’ excellent book. A few points, however: The “new middle class,” by virtue of being propertyless, is at least as dependent on capitalist production as the working class and perhaps, because of its comparative lack of social cohesion, even more so. The small entrepreneurs could, at one time, partly insulate themselves from capitalist crisis: the farmers, during the period of capitalist expansion, could avoid the worst effects of city depressions, if only because they consumed their own produce to a far greater extent than they do now. This was also somewhat true of independent artisans as well. But the “new middle class,” often composed of salaried employees in tertiary (“service”) industries and of bureaucratic fat in primary and secondary industries – these are highly vulnerable to capitalist crisis. They have no social stake in terms of property; they have only an economic stake in terms of income; their increasingly mechanized work “lowers” them to a semi-proletarian level; large numbers of them are ideologically oriented and smitten with the malaise characteristic of modern urban life. Consequently, they often form, as they did in Germany, one of the most explosive groups in modern society.
There remains, most important of all, the working class, and of all classes the least studied or analyzed. Comprising a majority of the gainfully-employed population, organized into powerful trade unions, this class retains its strategic position in society, immediately, as a powerful bargaining and pressure group, ultimately, as a lever for the establishment of socialism. Though the percentage of the working class in relation to the total of gainfully-employed has decreased somewhat since 1870, there has been a sharp increase in the number of workers engaged in manufacturing industries. Writes Fritz Sternberg:
In 1929 the number of workers in [manufacturing] industries was 10.5 millions, in 1938 it was 9.2 millions and in 1939 it was 10 millions. But during the war it rose to 15 millions in 1942, and reached its highest point in 1943, with 17.3 millions. But even in 1945 it was still 15.3 millions, and in 1948, 14.1 millions.
This concentration of workers in manufacturing industry seems all the more significant when one recalls that, despite the increase in agricultural production, there has been a steady though not uninterrupted decrease in the number of farmers in America. Nor do these figures adequately suggest the social weight of the working class, its increasing coherence as a force in American life.
 
There remains the difficult problem: to what extent does social mobility still play a significant role in determining the life and attitudes of workers? No very precise answer can, or need, be given; it is enough to note that, despite the temporary increase in mobility that has undoubtedly occurred during the past decade, the general tendency during the past half century has been toward more rigid stratification. Writing in the early 1940’s, the Temporary National Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress found that:
It is widely recognized that substantial opportunity for promotion does not exist for a large proportion of the workers ... Most of them, therefore, must look forward to remaining more or less at their current levels despite the havoc this may visit upon the American tradition of ‘getting ahead.’
A recent study of employment in Oakland, California (by Reinhold Bendix and Seymour Lipset, American Journal of Sociology, February 1952) indicates that there has been an increase of movement between top strata of the working class and the middle class; empirical observation among the Detroit auto workers suggests that during the war and immediate post-war years some of the more adventuresome left the factories to set up small businesses; but by and large there seems no reason for supposing that the degree of mobility among the workers has been nearly as great as among the various elements of the middle class-operators, fixers, bureaucrats, quasi-intellectuals – for whom the war economy has provided a “natural culture” in which to thrive and spawn.
There is of course some mobility: that is what we mean by speaking of a class society rather than a caste society. In a fine study called The Middle Classes in Middle-Sized Cities (American Sociological Review, October 1946), C. Wright Mills found that the group of small businessmen and professionals contained the largest proportion of people who had climbed from lower strata, 18 per cent having had working class fathers and 9 per cent low-income white-collar fathers. But both the top, Big Business and Executive, and the bottom, Wage Worker, showed considerable rigidity, nine out of ten wage workers coming from wage working families.
What these facts (as many others that could be cited) suggest is aptly generalized in Social Life, one of the better sociology texts, by Melvin Tumin and John Bennett:
Mobility has slacked off as the United States developed a stable economy and wealth-power system. Instead of a general tendency toward mobility we find that mobility is highly variable for certain points in the class system where temporary economic changes require new personnel, as in the recent war when the demand for highly skilled workers was suddenly increased many times over pre-war conditions.
With this factual background, we can touch for a moment on the problem of class consciousness. To what extent, if at all, are American workers class conscious? It is easy enough for liberal writers to reach glib generalizations: the American workers are not socialists, hence they are not class conscious. Behind this argument there is the assumption that Marx filled out a prescription for the workers which they, however, had enough sense not to use. Actually, of course, no class, except in very rare circumstances, can be said to have a homogeneous consciousness. In America today there are various levels of class consciousness among the workers, ranging from a tiny minority of socialists to a considerable minority which identifies itself with the middle class. But it is indisputable that there has been an immense increase of a certain kind of class consciousness during the past few decades. The rise of the CIO, one of the two or three most important events in 20th century American history, is sufficient evidence. Where most AFL unions previously cultivated a job or craft consciousness, the CIO has given a certain generalized content to the conception of “the labor movement”; has aligned a considerable section of the American workers, the most aware and militant, as a cohered group battle for common ends. True, the CIO accepts the continued existence of capitalism; it does not, of course, have socialist consciousness; but it represents a consolidation, both in economic and political terms, of the strongest elements within the American working class. This may not be entirely what Marxists want; neither is it however what the apologists for “a middle class America” presume to exist. It is an intermediary stage, mixed, complicated – as all developments in actual history, as distinct from theories about history, must be.
 
We can now return to Bell’s theory of America as the scene of mobile competing pressure groups working in a flexible, managed economy, in which there is no ruling class but a sharing, with whatever friction, of political power.
I think it indisputable that during the past 50 years America has become increasingly stratified into social classes. The social mobility traditionally associated with this country is, except in certain limited sectors of the middle class, a thing of the past; and such of it as remains, is largely the dubious fruit of war economy. In terms of income, this stratification is graphically demonstrated. The Census Bureau, in its 1951 report, found that the top fifth of the American population gets nearly half, 47 per cent of the nation’s money income (before taxes) while the bottom fifth gets only three per cent. The top 40 per cent of the nation’s money income (be- of money income while the bottom 60 per cent gets 20 per cent of income. [A] This is hardly a picture of equality or even of fairly evenly balanced competing groups.
Of the “interest blocs” proposed by Bell, three – labor, farmer, business – are social classes; three others, vaguely referred to in terms of Valley Authorities, are apparently regional groupings. Only the remaining three – the aged, the veterans, and the minority groups – may properly be called interest blocs, and even they split up along class lines. But if it is merely the existence of either the regional groupings or the special interest blocs that invalidates the Marxist theory, then that theory was never valid even in Europe. Both France and Germany have often been disturbed by conflicts between provinces and regions; England has witnessed long struggles between England proper and Scotland, as recently England proper and Wales. No one has yet thought to suggest that the presence of these conflicts removed class struggles from the countries of Europe; and unless someone is bold enough to declare the conflict of interest between the Columbia Valley Authority and, say, the Tennessee Valley Authority (or any conflict like it) more important to an understanding of American life than the conflict between capitalists and workers, then the mere listing of nine groups in an unequal series does nothing to disprove the Marxist approach either.
In certain limited situations, the Bell hypothesis has limited use. If you want to take a narrow-focus view of American politics, to examine why certain temporary alignments occur in the Democratic Party, it may be profitable to think in terms of competing interest blocs. But so soon as you try to define trends that run deeper and longer than a transient maneuver, you will have to think in terms of classes.
The relation between the “interest bloc” and the “social class” resembles the relation between an eclectic multicause approach to history and historical materialism. The shorter a period of history you study, the less usable historical materialism generally is; all sorts of minor problems arise which the generalization of the Marxist approach cannot handle; but if you want to study large-scale movements of societies and classes, then the Marxist approach gives you a far deeper appreciation and understanding than any other. Something of the same seems to me true with regard to “interest bloc” and “social class.”
For the error that Bell makes is not in suggesting that the “interest bloc” approach can be valuable, but that it should be counterposed to the Marxist approach. The trouble with Bell’s method is, however, that when used for large-scale social intervals it fails to recognize any principle of subordination among blocs; it fails to see that in the long run these blocs align into social classes. Merely to point to a multiplicity of causes or factors in history represents no very great wisdom; the problem is to weigh causes and factors, to see them in internal relationship. This much done, it becomes clear that the farm bloc in American history, for all its importance, has not been able to shape fundamental policy, and never will.
The conflicts – and they are real enough – that occur between big business and the state are conflicts between sectional capitalist interests and the general political interests of American capitalism which, because of its unprecedented international position, must take into account all sorts of domestic pressures from labor, farmers and other groups in order to preserve the necessary domestic balance for the creation of a war economy. Yet the power of the capitalist class remains unchallenged, if not unchecked. The most significant test during World War II concerned the financing of new industrial construction; and here Big Business succeeded in throwing the risk entirely onto the shoulders of the state, after which it took over the factories. Everything followed the blueprint (the non-existent blueprint, no doubt, for none was necessary) of the capitalist class.
 
In the coming period the basic question with regard to class relations is this: assuming no immediate war, will the U.S. economic system be in a position to utilize its gigantic productive capacity to the full or will it again become involved in market difficulties and economic crisis?
In his book Capitalism and Socialism on Trial, Fritz Sternberg offers an answer of the Marxist type:
We may regard it as out of the question that in the future there will be any economic expansion of the United States beyond her own frontiers to an extent that will make it a decisive factor for the solution of the market problem ...
The industrial production of the United States is much greater than that of Europe, not including the Soviet Union. Now when a social organism which accounts for almost half the total production of the world enters a phase of outward expansion, then that expansion must take on an incomparably greater scale if it is to obtain the same results as were obtained by European capitalist expansion in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Sternberg then proceeds to show that in the United States foreign trade in relation to production as a whole was always much smaller than was the case with any of the European industrial powers. During the past several years, the ratio between U.S. military expenditure and private capital exports has been 25 to 1. So long as this situation continues, “it is unlikely that U.S. private capital will be willing to make investments on a large scale outside the country.”
Thus, the problem of markets, now “solved” by war production, is not likely to be solved by foreign investments. This leaves only the prospect of another New Deal, that is, further experiment with welfare economics within the framework of capitalism. Continues Sternberg:
On the assumption that there is no world war, the time will come when the U.S. armaments sector stabilizes itself at a certain level, and perhaps even declines. When this comes about, the U.S. economic system and U.S. society will be faced with the question which Roosevelt tried and failed to answer in the ‘New Deal’ – namely, how to close the gap between a gigantic volume of production and a volume of consumption which lags behind it, or, perhaps better, how to prevent the gap from opening up in an economic organism for which the process of external expansion has not, and cannot have, anything like the effect that it formerly had for Europe ... the U.S. economic organism has become extremely vulnerable to economic crisis – as the 1929 crisis clearly demonstrated – the gigantic increase of production and industrial concentration has still further increased this vulnerability ...
Another New Deal, then, would, if it had any chance for success, have to manage the economy so radically that it could create full employment with a steady growth of production and labor productivity. Thus far, not a single capitalist state has succeeded in doing this. In Britain, where full employment was achieved, it came from a mixture of war economy and an effort to transform the capitalist system.
The major problem of capitalism, still unsolved and, so far as one can see, beyond solution, the problem which more than any single other factor determines its development and shapes the struggle between classes, is this:
The power of capitalist society to accumulate capital is much greater than its capacity to make sustained use of additional capital in private profit-making industry.
As against this analysis, there is Bell’s conclusion: “If a democratic society is to survive ... then some new sense of civic obligation must arise that will be strong enough to commend the allegiance of all groups and provide a principle of equity in the distribution of the rewards and privileges of society.” Imagine: to have labored with such energy and talent, only to produce so scraggly a mouse!
 
IV. Setbacks to American Socialism
Why has socialism failed to thrive in America? Of course, this question can be misleading since there were times when it did thrive, most of all, during the period of 1912–1918 and, to a lesser extent, during the early 1930’s. Nonetheless, socialism in America has never established itself as the formidable force that it became in Europe, never won the support of the labor movement or any appreciable section of the population. The usual reason for this fact are well enough known, and despite their lamentable lack of novelty (which would immediately disqualify them in the eyes of some intellectuals) they seem to me still true. Without ado, let me list these reasons briefly:

The absence of a feudal past in America, which meant that capitalism could develop here with a minimum of restrictions.
 
The tremendous natural resources available on the American continent, untapped and readily accessible.
 
America has been a unified land area, thus avoiding the problem of frontiers cutting up natural economic units, as they have in Europe.
 
Because capitalist society started largely afresh in this country, or at least only against a past of small farming and handicraft, it did not have to fight the usual internal bourgeois revolution except as against the slave-owning South. Consequently, the working class was not involved in revolutionary struggles during its infancy.
 
The great demand for labor power and the constant scarcity of labor meant, during the most of the 19th and part of the 20th centuries, that the working class could enjoy relatively high wages. Simultaneously, the scarcity of labor stimulated the invention of labor-saving devices, which, in turn, meant a high level of productivity.
 
For many decades, until the beginning and perhaps into the 20th century, the Western frontier, by absorbing critical sections of the population, prevented an exacerbation of class conflict in the East.
 
Because of the constant influx of immigrants from central and eastern Europe, the American working class was sharply split into native aristocrat and depressed immigrant, a split which postponed the emergence of class unity.
 
Strategically located at a (until recently) safe distance from Europe, the United States was not burdened with the upkeep of a large standing army.
 
As one of the last major capitalist powers to appear on the world market, the United States could take advantage of the most recent industrial innovations of Europe and apply them on a mass scale beyond the resources of Europe.
 
Because of the above factors, there has been, during the past half- century or so, a rise in real wages in the United States, that is, a rise in the standard of living – by no means commensurate with the possibilities opened up by the expansion of production and the increase of productivity, but a rise nonetheless. “On the reefs of roast beef and apple pie,” sneered Sombart, “socialistic Utopias of every sort are sent to their doom.”
 
American Marxism, at least since 1919, has been dependent on the course of European Marxism. The decline during the past two decades of the American socialist groups, while partly the result of native conditions, is to a large extent a reflection of the numerous defeats suffered by European radicalism.
 
The damage done by Stalinism to the socialist cause is incalculable. Coming in a country already inhospitable to socialism, the appearance of Stalinism as a powerful force in the thirties and forties created a misapprehension as to the nature of socialism that is likely to linger for some time.
 

In listing these causes and conditions, I do not wish to minimize the ineptitude of American socialism itself, the many failures it brought upon its own back; but that is the subject for another article. Suffice it to say that this ineptitude is, in part, a reflex of the unfavorable historical setting which the United States has presented to socialism; and while I do not believe that the hour always calls forth the required movement or man, surely a more favorable situation would have led to a larger and more significant socialist movement.
Bell does not exactly ignore the above factors, but he insists that most of them are “not causes but conditions” – a distinction of limited value, since a condition militating against the growth of socialism may also be seen as a cause of its failure to grow. His own explanation is:
that the failure of the socialist movement in the United States is rooted in its inability to resolve a basic dilemma of ethics and politics. The socialist movement, by its very statement of goal and in its rejection of the capitalist order as a whole, could not relate itself to the specific problems of social action in the here-and-now, give-and-take political world. It was trapped by the unhappy problem of living ‘in but not of the world,’ so it could only act, and then inadequately, as the moral, but not political, man in immoral society. It could never resolve but only straddle the basic issue of either accepting capitalist society, and seeking to transform it from within as the labor movement did, or becoming the sworn enemy of that society, like the communists.
If the fancy distinction between politics and morality is for the moment removed, this description is rather like the classical one of a “centrist” party, one that is neither Marxist nor reformist, but vacillates between the two. Bell’s explanation for the American socialist movement having been in this predicament is much too portentous and unhistorical. The socialist movement proved unable to relate itself to the “here-and-now” political world not because of its rejection of the capitalist order; for there were clearly many radical parties in Europe which rejected the capitalist order and yet managed very much to relate themselves to “here-and-now” politics. The socialist movement in America failed to do this because of specific conditions which kept it, for the most part, in the unhappy condition of being a sect. In other words, the problem is explained in specific historical terms, not in terms of some timeless and portentous pattern which has the socialist movement forever torn between political immediacy and moral motivation.
Now Bell has, in his own way, hit upon a real problem: how does a Marxist group survive in historically unfavorable intervals? The radical movement is characterized, he says, by the “orgiastic chiliasm” of the Anabaptists, a phrase Karl Mannheim applied to suggest messianic hope, ecstatic faith in the millennium to come. “But the ‘revolution’ is not always in sight, and the question of how to discipline this chiliastic zeal and hold it in readiness has been the basic problem of socialist strategy.” Continues Bell:
In effect, the Socialist Party acknowledged the fact that it lived ‘in’ the world, but refused the responsibility of becoming a part ‘of’ it. But such a straddle is impossible for a political movement .... Each issue could be met only by an ambiguous political formula which would satisfy neither the purist nor the activist who lived with the daily problem of choice. When the Loyalists in Spain demanded arms, for example, the Socialist Party could only respond with a feeble policy of ‘workers aid,’ not (capitalist) government aid; but to the Spaniard, arms, not theoretical niceties, were the need of the moment. When the young trade unionists, whom the socialists seeded into the labor movement, faced the necessity of going along politically with Roosevelt and the New Deal in order to safeguard progressive legislative gains, the socialists proposed a ‘labor party’ rather than work with the Democrats, and so the Socialist Party lost almost its entire trade-union base. The threat of fascism and World War II finally proved to be the clashing rocks through which the socialist argonauts could not row safely. How to defeat Hitler without supporting capitalist society? Some socialists raised the slogan of a ‘third force.’ The Socialist Party, however, realized the futility of that effort; in characteristic form, it chose abnegation. The best way to stem fascism, it stated, ‘is to make democracy work at home.’ But could the issue be resolved other than militarily? The main concern of the anti-fascist movement had to be with the political center of fascist power, Hitler’s Berlin, and any other concern was peripheral.
I am not going to discuss the specific points raised by Bell; a few are shrewdly put, others reveal a total neglect of the role of political ideas in shaping the course of history. But let us grant that this description has a certain rough empirical relevance for American socialism. What Bell fails entirely to consider is: how does it work for Europe?
It doesn’t. It doesn’t work for either the reformists or the Marxists, for the practical politicians or the chiliastic moralist. Take the chiliastic Communist Party of Germany in the early 1920’s (when it still was a Communist Party). It had no trouble in deeply involving itself in every concrete political problem of the moment. Or the greatest chiliasts of them all, the Russian Bolsheviks. They came to power by finding immediate slogans which corresponded to both their chiliastic intentions and the social needs of the masses. So we see that the mere fact of intransigent opposition to society (being in but not of it) does not necessarily prevent a political movement from making contact with the realities of the moment.
And the same thing, in a different way, is true of the Social Democrats. Leon Blum, the Social Democratic leader, was prime minister of France during the Spanish Civil War. Unlike his impotent American comrades, he was in a position to do something very concrete for the Spanish Loyalists; he didn’t have to content himself with vague phrases about “workers aid,” though in France even that would have meant a great deal; he could have utilized his position of power, as head of the Peoples Front, to help Loyalist Spain on a mass scale. Why didn’t he? Surely he was no chiliast, surely he was not torn by the conflict between politics and morality, immediacy and ultimates?
The point can be generalized. European Social Democracy was repeatedly close to power, repeatedly had at its command the allegiance of masses of people, yet never did it succeed in solving even those immediate problems which, Bell tells us, the chiliastic zeal of American socialists prevented them from solving. And why? Precisely because the European Social Democrats had become of society rather than merely being in it; precisely because they had abandoned their earlier intransigent opposition. Bell’s argument is shattered by the fact that, particularly in Europe, immediate problems can no longer be solved in themselves; they wait upon a fundamental social reorganization.
 
Bell’s general schema has, then, no validity for either Marxism or Social Democracy on a world-wide scale; at best, it tells us what we know only too well: that in a country with relative social stability, it is difficult to keep a Marxist group intact, caught as it is between its unrealizable final program and the pressures to treat immediate issues in terms of political compromise. But this is hardly news: it is the one problem more than any other that American Marxists have discussed ad infinitum and, I am almost tempted to say, ad nauseam. And by its very nature it is an insoluble problem: so long as the situations exist that forces Marxist groups to remain sects, they will be in a condition of intermittent or chronic crisis.
But if Bell’s theory is not very helpful, its implications are very interesting. In effect, he is saying that socialists should abandon the whole idea of building an independent movement, that they should integrate themselves (as so many have, and with such delightful comfort!) into the institutions of capitalist society. His position is different from that of the traditional Social Democrats in one major respect: he realizes that in America there is no room for a Social Democratic organization. Whereas in Europe Social Democracy built its own bureaucratic structure with its own jobs and status and power, in America the Social Democrats have had to find their jobs and their status and their power in the trade unions, the state and the quasi-intellectual industries. And what Bell is saying to his friends of the Rand School is, in effect: let’s recognize the situation for what it is.
For our part, we have no objection whatever, to this advice. We merely insist, however, that the problem of socialism remains; that it is not, in this modern world, an academic one; that it offers the only solution to a crisis of society that is steadily destroying civilization.
In a certain sense, then, Bell’s view helps clear the air: it forces people to decide whether socialism still has any real-life meaning for them or whether it is merely a pleasant recollection. Bell makes his choice, we ours.
*
If the reader has been indulgent thus far, he may wonder what positive conclusions follow from my polemic against the articles in Socialism and American Life. In a sense, none. I think nothing is more preposterous than the kind of crankism that periodically afflict the socialist movement: if only we pass this resolution or adopt that tactic, or “turn our faces” here, all will be well. But clearly, for the next period, all will not be well; and nothing, no frenzied gesture here or desperate device there, will seriously change things.
But there are other opportunities. One of the false notions that has arisen in recent years is that the American socialist movement failed because it was too “theoretical.” If anything it was the other way: the movement was not theoretical enough. In no major country has Marxism been so intellectually barren, so devoid of original or even serious critical work. At various times, this may not have mattered too much, say in 1912, when the movement was expanding, or in 1933, when an appreciable group of trained intellectuals spoke in the name of Marxism. Today, however, when the number of difficult political problems that beset socialists is so large, and the number of intellectual opponents who batter at our walls so tremendous, the need is clearly for sustained and serious intellectual work. It will not do much longer – it should never have done – for socialists to sneer at the fact that no full-scale study of class relations in this country has been undertaken by professional sociologists. Why has no Marxist undertaken it? And similarly with other problems: the changing nature of imperialism, the historical estimate of Bolshevism, the theoretical description of Stalinism, etc., etc. If we find unsatisfactory, as we must, the contributions in Socialism and American Life, we had better acknowledge that there is nothing of similar solidity or size from a Marxist point of view. Why this is so, I shall not try here to explain. But the time is surely at hand – perhaps long overdue – for sustained intellectual work, for an assessment of the tradition, for a confrontation of critics, for an examination of problems on more than a tactical or empirical or journalistic level.
* * *
Footnotes
1. Socialism and American Life, Two Volumes. Edited by Stow Persons and Donald Drew Egbert. Princeton University Press, pp. $17.50.
2. Still, a word must be said about the 500 page bibliography. Immensely useful as it is, there are serious problems involved in its method. The editions have not been content with a mere compilation but have decided to annotate their entries. Unfortunately, they do not make explicit the (inevitable) political bias from which they work, and the result is that the bias comes through in a variety of indirect and disguised ways. Between their wish to be objective and their unacknowledged point of view there is frequent conflict. Usually, the latter dominates.
Because they have not declared their bias at the outset, which would have been the useful and honest thing to do, the bibliographers fall into a variety of confusions. Here is an example of that confusion at its worst: “No comparably objective literature exists on the sociological analysis of the socialist culture of Soviet Russia, the chief country where socialism has achieved complete power.” Surely this vicious nonsense is not accepted by the contributors to the first volume.
Equally serious is the fact that the bibliographers, despite their evident conscientiousness, display a lack of first-hand knowledge of their subject; they have worked hard, but at a problem which is not theirs. For example:
“The Left Opposition would not participate [in the London Bureau set up in 1933] and later lost to the London Bureau the Spanish and Dutch Trotskyist adherents of popular fronts.” Inaccurate: the Spanish and Dutch Trotskyists were not at the time adherents of popular fronts, and the issue at stake was something quite different.
Victor Serge “abandoned Trotskyism for democratic socialism” – not entirely accurate and certainly a heavily weighted statement.
“Leon Trotsky, in The New Course, and Max Shachtman in the same volume, attempt a compromise between democracy and bureaucratism.” This far exceeds the permissible limits of bibliographical annotation; it is simply a political characterization – and in our opinion, a false one.
“The Trotskyist faction wrecked the Socialist Party organization before it was expelled in 1937.” At the very least, a gross oversimplification, even if one believes, as I do, that the behavior of the Trotskyists in the Socialist Party is open to serious criticism. The Trotskyists entered the SP at a time when it was moving leftward. When the SP right-wing proposed policies unacceptable to both the Trotskyists and the “native” left-wing of the party, policies such as the support of a capitalist candidate, LaGuardia, in New York, a faction fight broke out. The struggle was, essentially, over ideological issues. To know this is to see how superficial and misleading the bibliographical comment is.
The bibliographical comment on “the Shachtman group” indicates that its author took a hurried glance at The New International but did not look again. Thus, an article by Shachtman is cited in which he claims the adherence of the Italian Trotskyists for his position on the Russian question. At best, this is of fifth rate importance. But Shachtman’s article in the December 1940 New International – Is Russia a Workers State? – which is perhaps the most important theoretical statement he has made on Stalinism, is not cited.
3. It may be said, however, that all of these revolutions occurred against autocratic regimes while the transition to socialism is likely to take place in democratic societies. This, to some extent, is true; the only problem is whether the defenders of capitalism will show sufficient restraint to permit, without violent interference, a democratic, majority-supported and peaceful transition to socialism. While it cannot be answered a priori, this problem can profitably be discussed. But Herberg will not deign to such details.
4. One need only compare the drive against civil liberties that has taken place during and, often enough, because of the Fair Deal regime with the relative respect for minority rights under both the Labor and, thus far, the Conservative cabinets.
5. During the mid-1920’s some of the Bolshevik leaders, particularly those who, like Bukharin, made a bloc with Stalin, did speak of a state in which only one party was legal, the Communist Party. (There is nothing necessarily undemocratic about one party being in power, so long as the others have full rights of opposition.) But this, it must be remembered, was already the period of Stalinist decline, when the whole atmosphere of revolutionary Russia was poisoned. Even Trotsky, the leading fighter against Stalinist bureaucratism, wrote some things in The New Course that seem to condone the idea of a one-party state (see, particularly, page 27, paragraph 2.) There is no difficulty in taking an attitude toward this sort of thing: it needs only to be repudiated.
6. Except for a word on the article in Socialism and American Life by Wilbert Moore, the sociologist who has already distinguished himself with respect to democratic centralism. Moore challenges the Marxist analysis by citing the existence of several occupational groups which, he says, “do not fit into either of the approved Marxian categories.” But this remark gives away his whole case: it assumes that Marx “approved” of only two categories, bourgeois and proletarian; it assumes, that is, that Marx was an ass. Professor Moore cites the presence of farmers, service-industry employees, white-collar workers and professionals; though what he supposes he is proving by this citation – other than the fact that many of these are not proletarians – is not clear. Modern industry has, he says, become bureaucratized to an extent unforeseen by Marx. Perhaps so, perhaps not; what Marx foresaw is not finally of first importance; but what is important is that this development does not conflict with the basic Marxist analysis. The growth of bureaucracy, insofar as it is not the consequence of war-time sloth, is due primarily to the shift from individual to corporate ownership. Professor Moore thinks this may sometimes make it difficult for the worker to identify just who the capitalist is!
* * *
Note by ETOL
A. One line of text appears to have been repeated here and one line left out.




The experience of all ages and nations demonstrates that the work done by slaves, though it may appear to cost only their maintenance, is in the end the dearest of any ... [The slave] can have no other interest but to eat as much and to labor as little as possible. Whatever work he does beyond what is sufficient to purchase his own maintenance can be squeezed out of him by violence only, and not by any interest of his own. (Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations)
The lowest possible wage which the slave earns appears to be a constant, independent of his work. [In contrast to the free worker] the slave obtains the means necessary to his subsistence in natural form, which is fixed both in kind and in quantity, [whereas the remuneration of a free worker] is not independent of his own work. (Karl Marx, manuscript quoted by Dallin and Nicolaevsky)
State property becomes the property of “the whole people” only to the degree that social privileges and differentiation disappear, and therewith the necessity of the state. In other words: state property is converted into socialist property in proportion as it ceases to be state property. And the contrary is true: the higher the Soviet state rises above the people, and the more fiercely it opposes itself as the guardian of property to the people as its squanderer, the more obviously does it testify against the socialist character of the state property ... If a ship is declared collective property, but the passengers continue to be divided into first, second and third class, it is clear that, for the third class passengers, differences in the conditions of life will have infinitely more importance than that juridical change in proprietorship. (Leon Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed)
But the workers and Red Soldiers of the Soviet Union fight with a bitterness unmatched in this war because they are defending the socialist achievements of a workers’ revolution. Factories, mines, mills, railroads, workshops belong to those who work them. The soil belongs to those who till it. A man who will not defend such a treasure is either a coward or a traitor. (George Collins, a leader of the Socialist Workers Party, in The Militant, September 12, 1942. Italics not in original.)
 
I.
Slave labor is not an accidental or surface excrescence of the Stalinist regime; it is integral, inherent, irreplaceable. For the foreseeable future, Stalinism, if it wishes to maintain itself in power, will continue to utilize slave labor as an increasingly important if still auxiliary means of exploiting the Russian people. Even if it wished to, the regime could not longer dispense with slave labor – no more so than it could “democratize” itself. The physiognomy of Stalinism is basically determined; all that can change are secondary aspects.
In this respect a comparison with Nazi Germany is illuminating. The Nazis did not use slave labor to the extent that Stalinist Russia has; under the Hitler regime, labor never became as indispensable a part of Germany’s national economy as it has become for Russia under Stalin. This is due not to any superior benevolence on the part of Hitler, but is caused by the difference in the social nature of the two regimes.
Hitler’s original reason for setting up concentration camps was largely political: he sought a place to herd every oppositionist or potential oppositionist. Since the Nazis understood that the living death of the concentration camp was more terrifying than rapid physical death, they utilized the camps, with diabolical skill, as a specter of horror to whip fear into the hearts of all those outside the camps. Men who might not have feared a bullet were cowed by Buchenwald.
Since Germany remained essentially a capitalist economy, its industry under Hitler was still largely based on “free labor” (in the Marxist sense; that is, free from ownership of the means of production and thereby forced to sell labor power, but also possessing the freedom to decide whether or not to sell this labor power). For all of the Hitlerite restrictions, there was considerable bargaining between capitalist and proletarian, as well as between capitalists for workers during labor shortages. This was true even during the years of the most stringent war economy. There was not, of course, the classically pure free economy as abstracted in Capital – an abstraction that existed nowhere, as Marx knew – but Germany remained, for all the considerable intervention of the state in economic life, a social system in which the major relationship was between private capitalist in control of the means of production and private proletarian selling his labor power.
During the first years of Hitler’s rule, the camps impinged only slightly and indirectly on German economy; no one thought of them as a significant source of production. After the outbreak of the war they underwent a change in function: they began to acquire sonic importance in the country’s war economy. Where previously the camps had been indifferent (at best!) to the survival of inmates, their rulers were now forced to use the prisoners to help plug gaps in Germany’s labor force. That is why there was even a certain “amelioration” of conditions in a number of camps; if the Nazis were to utilize camp labor they had to keep its members alive and able to work. But even here, it should be noticed, the political rationale of Nazism continued to play a vital role, often seemingly in opposition to the economic interests of the regime. Otherwise, how explain the destruction of thousands of workable human beings (Jews, Poles, etc.) in crematoriums at a lime of an acute labor shortage?
Finally there was the large-scale importation of foreign labor into Germany, which again was dictated by immediate military needs. One cannot of course predict with certainty what would have happened in case of a Nazi victory, but it seems likely that in such an eventuality large numbers of the foreign slave laborers would have been returned to their native countries, there to be exploited by Quisling regimes for the benefit of Nazi Germany. One may surmise that the Nazis would not have wanted to keep indefinitely in Germany the politically explosive and economically competitive foreign slave workers. Their permanent residence in Germany might have seriously endangered the status of the highly skilled German working class which the Nazis wished to placate in order the more thoroughly to exploit. The Nazis, then, used slave labor for basic economic functions only when the immediate wartime shortage of labor, caused by unexpected military reverses, forced them to; and even then they used only foreign labor as an adjunct of “free” and capitalistically-regulated German labor. To have literally enslaved the advanced German working class (as distinct from totalitarian control of their lives) would have been absurd from the Nazi point of view, since it would unquestionably have resulted in a decline of productivity; and the Nazis were not addicted to that sort of absurdity.
Slave labor, then, was always peripheral to German economy, even when Hitler exerted the mast rigorous controls. In peacetime the Nazi economy could have continued to function without the use of camp labor.
This is not the case with Stalinist Russia.
 
Role of Stalinist Slavery
Under the Stalinist regime the use of slave labor preceded the war and had only an indirect connection with it. Though slave labor had its origin in the political repression of the Stalinist regime during the years of its consolidation, it soon acquired a new significance. The Kremlin, it is true, continued to utilize slave labor as a punishment for political dissidents, but by the early thirties slave labor had reached an extent and acquired a specific weight in Russian economy that began to make of it an integral relationship of production in the Stalinist state. Political considerations may have provoked the creation of labor camps, but now economic need kept those camps in existence and often even forced the manufacture of political pretenses to find new inmates for them.
Here, then, is still another paradox of Stalinism, a system of paradoxes. In an economy based on nationalized production, a “higher economic form” than private capitalist economy, there arises an immense and integral labor force doomed to social relationships and conditions that hark back to pre-capitalist societies. This is another ironic, tragic index of the “law of uneven development.”
What is the basic social purpose of slave labor in Russia?
In their indispensable and remarkably documented study of this subject [1], Dallin and Nicolaevsky advance a number of answers to this question, but seem to me to fail to unify them into the necessary leading proposition. But it should in fairness be said that this proposition is implicit in their book.
Slave labor in Russia is an attempt by the ruling bureaucratic class to overcome by the most reactionary and backward methods the economic backwardness of the country. As with all such attempts, it leads only to greater internal contradictions, to an aggravation of that very backwardness it is designed to obliterate. Every forced march leaves victims on the sidelines.
Here Trotsky’s basic analysis of the decline of the Russian revolution, whatever peripheral disagreements one may have with it, is indispensable. Trotsky related all the political-social developments of post-revolutionary Russia to their context: a wracked, primitive, semi-feudal country with an illiterate population which had only the most tenuous ties with modern culture. Left to its own resources, he insisted, revolutionary Russia could only disintegrate. Though in our opinion he did not accurately predict the nature of this disintegration – a bureaucratic oligarchy resting on and inseparable from nationalized economy [2] rather than, as he expected, a weakened bureaucracy sliding back to private capitalism – the essential aspects of his analysis remain valid. Even our divergence is based on his premises.
 
Extensive Exploitation
Slave labor, then, was the Stalinist answer to the high level of productivity of the western capitalist powers. Since Stalinist Russia – for all its propaganda about Stakhanovism and the like – could not even approach the level of productivity reached by the major capitalist countries, its only possible competitive alternative was to exploit labor “extensively” rather than “intensively.” By these crude descriptives I mean the following. The exploitation of labor in a highly efficient and technologized economy (by means of careful rationalization, high development of skill and extreme concentration of capital) may be described as “intensive” since labor is exploited to what amounts to maximum efficiency for the given social conditions. That level, with an occasional flashy exception, is clearly excluded for Stalinist Russia and would be possible for it only if it gained control of, and was able successfully to integrate into its economy, one of the major industrial areas of Western Europe. Hence the Stalinists had to resort to “extensive” exploitation of labor (e.g., slave labor) which is ultimately socially wasteful. The mass exploitation of large groups of mainly unskilled slave laborers was certainly not an efficient device, for it soon exhausted considerable sections of them and gave rise fo a tremendous mortality rate; but still it achieved some of the regime’s production objectives. It is most significant that the Stalinists seldom banished scarce and difficult-to-replace skilled workers to slave camps (unless they were genuine political oppositionists); the regime found it more expedient to exhaust as rapidly as possible the labor of peasants and other elements inessential to industrial production.
This is a general characteristic of the Stalinist regime, as of all bureaucratic attempts to impose uncorrelated industrialization on primitive economies. Its equivalent is graphically evident in the Stalinist exploitation of Balkan oil fields by wasteful processes which result in higher immediate yields but shorten the life and decrease the total yields of the wells. Interested only in its immediate consolidation of power and imperialistic expansion, Stalinism is quite ready to waste material and human resources.
As broken down into more specific categories, forced labor has the following uses for Stalinist Russia:
1) It is cheap. During 1932–33, according to Dallin, the cost of upkeep per camp laborer was slightly over 500 rubles a year. The average wage in Russia during that period was, according to official statistics, 1,496 rubles a year. Dallin comments:
“This differential, multiplied by the millions of prison workers and the years of work, is an important element of the government’s industrialization fund. General workers’ wages rose 174 per cent between 1926 and 1935 (due in part to the inflationary rise in prices); during the same period the cost of food per prisoner increased by only 90 per cent.”
This meant that the supply of consumer goods available to the bureaucratic strata of the population was in large measure based on the high rate of profit which the NKVD squeezed out of the labor camps, “profits never made in other fields of Soviet economy.” While not the dominant means of exploitation in Russia, slave labor provides that margin of fatty increment which allows for the extreme social elevation of the bureaucratic layers. The bureaucracy’s “primitive accumulation” is to a considerable extent based on slave labor; how much, it is impossible to calculate.
 
Blood Instead of Machinery
2) It is possible to employ slave laborers with a minimum investment of capital. In the huge projects – canal building, forestry, road building, etc. – on which slave laborers were employed, almost all of the work was done by simple, unskilled processes. Vast expenditures of cheap, docile and easily replaceable slave labor were substituted for machines and technical skill. Since there is nothing other than natural limits to prevent a continuous lengthening of the working day and since the immediate, though not ultimate, expenditures for the upkeep of slave labor remain stationary regardless of the amount of labor performed, the bureaucratic dictatorship is able to squander unskilled labor recklessly. In fact, it could be less concerned about human waste than about deterioration of machines; for while machines had to be replaced by expensive outlays of valuta both at home and abroad, Stalinist Russia had at its disposal a virtually inexhaustible supply of labor. Human blood replaced the machine.
In 1937 the NKVD actually assigned to its branches over the country quotas on the number of prisoners to be sent to labor camps. If nothing else, this fact alone would strongly lend to substantiate the analysis of Russian slave labor made here: that it is integral to Stalinist economy.
 
3) Slave labor eliminates, or at least lessens, the problem of labor discipline. The slave laborer is a completely depersonalized being, a unit manipulated at will. (Some of the accounts of horrors in the Russian camps rival anything that happened in Nazi Germany. If anything, from a certain point of view it is more horrible deliberately to work human beings to death than to gas or burn them. Some, may disagree about this; as Molotov would say, it is “a matter of taste.”)
By setting up slave camps, the regime was able to “solve” an industrial problem: how to deal with restless workers who shifted from factory to factory in search of better conditions. (In the camps, one could not quit or be absent or late.) But it solved an even more acute problem. All of the major slave labor projects were and are in extremely undesirable locations and are assigned extremely difficult tasks: Arctic gold mining, the Baltic canal, Siberian forestry. To entice “free” workers to these areas, the Stalinist regime would have had to pay wages higher than those it paid the most skilled workers in the cities. But since it was precisely these projects which, with the exception of lumber destined for the foreign market, were least immediately profitable and were based on the slenderest capital investments in relation to possible yield (many were military projects which would never yield any return) the government could not possibly offer such wage incentives. Its only alternative was forced labor.
 
II
The disadvantages of slave labor are well known; they are pithily expressed in the quotation from Adam Smith at the head of this article. The Stalinist economists, too, must have been aware of these disadvantages and tried to overcome them.
In ancient Rome slave-owners were aware of the problem of incentives: why should a slave work hard if he had nothing to gain from his work? The Roman slave-owners solved this problem, or tried to, by offering very real incentives to a portion of their slaves, especially the enslaved Greek intellectuals. Some were able to buy their freedom, others to gain a status which, while formally still slavery, was actually a step up the social ladder, and still others gained material advantages though their status remained the same. The mass of the slaves, however, were assigned to such primitive, unskilled tasks that it made slight difference in terms of yield whether or not the slave felt much incentive; for such tasks the whip was enough.
In Stalinist Russia the problem of incentive has been tackled “scientifically.” A devilishly skilled series of social gradations have been instituted in the slave camps (here, no doubt, the Stalinists learned from the Nazis) which offer laborers incentives in the form of slightly better food, clothing and living conditions if they exert themselves. All of these levels are wretched enough, but if a worker refuses to exert himself at all he dooms himself to a quick death, since the lowest level is below subsistence level. Yet his choice is between a quick and a considerably prolonged death, for the camp worker is caught in the vicious circle of expending more energy to get more food to expend more energy to get more food ...
Dallin quotes from Camp Order No. 9 of the Administration of Dmitrevski Camp of 1936:
A camp inmate fulfilling his production norms up to 79 per cent under the increased rations is issued 600 grams (21 ozs.) of bread daily; if he fulfills from 80 to 90 per cent, 700 grams daily; from 100 to 109 per cent, 800 grams (28 ozs.); and from 110 to 124 per cent, 800 grams plus the right of obtaining 200 grams from the stalls (canteens).
Yet for all these “incentives” (many of them deliberately calculated so that the amount of energy required to get the additional increment of food is greater than the amount of energy that can be gained) slave labor remains most wasteful. Dallin calculates, and quite convincingly, that no slave labor system in history has been so wasteful of human beings as that of Russia.
 
Inefficiency of Slave Labor
The reasons are not hard to discover.
“A private slaveowner who invested capital in his slaves was concerned about their well-being and existence just as he was concerned about his animals. In a state economy, which is not required to invest money in its labor force, this motive for providing minimum care for the slaves does not exist ... When manpower perishes, the slave-employing agency sustains no loss of investment.”
Nonetheless
“the efficiency of forced labor, despite incentives and compulsion, was and is on an extremely low level. The average efficiency of a slave laborer has certainly been below 50 per cent of that of a free Russian worker, whose productivity in turn has never been high.”
The evidence adduced by Dallin for this statement cannot here be conveniently reproduced, but it is overwhelming.
If nothing else, this fact serves as an indication that Stalinist Russia, for all its squandering of human beings, will not by its own resources be able in the near future to reach a level of productivity even approaching that of the advanced capitalist countries. Each bureaucratic forced march engenders subterranean crises, economic dislocations, moral disintegration. In a totalitarian statified society it is even less possible to divorce political from economic events and both front moral and intellectual implications than it is in a capitalist country. In Russia no crisis can remain “departmentalized”: it strikes the totality of social life.
Nor is it difficult to imagine what an undercurrent of resentment and hatred the Stalinist regime has engendered among the masses. The forced-labor camps produce the most terrible moral conditions: deceit, spying, corruption – and above all the omnipresent concomitant of totalitarianism, fear. (Godfrey Blunden’s novel, Room on the Route, was a most vivid portrait of how fear is the dominant emotional current of Russian life.) What regressive social and political tendencies may result from this large-scale barbarism it is impossible to predict. One thing is clearer, however, than ever before: nothing remotely resembling socialism or democracy, nothing that has the faintest similarity to the aspirations of humanity for security and freedom can be built on this society. It must be destroyed.
 
III
Dallin’s book is divided into two sections: a full compendium of revelations about life in the labor camps and a historical account of their development. Though this article has been devoted to a discussion of the implications of the material he adduced, other and certainly more dramatic articles could be written about the terrible accounts of those who have escaped from the camps and about slave labor in Russia as a function of the history of Stalinist Russia in general. I should especially like to mention the brilliant chapter by Nicolaevsky called The Land of White Death, which details the development of gold-mining slave camps in the northern Kolyma region, “a desolate land at the very edge of the world, in the coldest wastes of the Arctic.”
This chapter reads as if it were written by Jules Verne, Edgard Allen Poe and Franz Kafka – but none of these inadequate comparisons suggest the quality of sheer horror which it produces as one reads this account of Stalinism’s bestiality. (Whoever wishes to experience the full significance of modern totalitarianism should subject himself to the experience this writer had: read The Land of the White Death directly after David Roussct’s story of Buchenwald, The Other Kingdom.)
Were a full analysis of the materials in Dallin’s book attempted here, we would have to quarrel in fundamental terms with his Menshevik bias by which he attempts, quite unsuccessfully, to suggest that the slave-labor camps of Stalin are the logical and unavoidable outcome of Lenin’s regime. To show that brutality and inhumanity and repression still existed under the Bolsheviks is not at all to prove that they are the seeds of Stalinism; it is merely to indicate the conditions under which the young workers’ state had to function. Bolshevism tried to overcome the heritage of backwardness and authoritarianism by heroic if unfulfilled measures; Stalinism consolidated and raised to unprecedented heights these aspects of Russian autocracy. But since our purpose here is not to dispute Dallin’s political views but to discuss his materials, we can drop this question for a more appropriate occasion.
 
Men Into Beasts
The human implications of slave labor have necessarily been slurred over in this attempt to grasp their sociological implications. Yet we must not forget that we are dealing here with the fate of millions of human beings; men with hopes and aspirations and dreams, even as you and I; men who have been degraded to the level of sub-beasts. If the abstraction of theory seems to lead away from the human, it is always in order the more adequately to lead back to the human. I should therefore like to end by quoting from one of the accounts of escaped Polish prisoners who had been dragooned by the thousands to fill Stalin’s slave camps:
Half-naked, barefoot, and nearly dead, we reached a place in the deserted, terrible, frozen “tundra” where a post bore the sign of “Lagpunkt No. 228.” With almost superhuman effort we dug zemlyankas, i.e., pits filled with mud and barely covered with branches and earth. Our nourishment was rye flour (raw) kneaded with water. In the night men crowded in the zemlyanka sleep on branches thrown over the mud, warming themselves by contact with one another’s bodies. Moans, curses, cries, threats resound during the night ... At 4 a.m. the naryadchik (chief) sounds reveille by hitting the blade of a saw with the haft of some instrument. There is no need of dressing, since no one ever undresses. Breakfast consists of the second half of the flour portion received during the evening before ... The work is construction of a road running parallel to the near-by railroad. Snow has to be removed with spades; the deeply imbedded brakes of the tundra and other plants have to be uprooted and the soil leveled off. The quota is 20 square meters per worker. With limbs stiffened by the frightful cold, one has to keep moving and working in order to avoid freezing ...
Sometimes the following scene could be observed near the kitchen: numerous prisoners would be squatting expectantly outside the door. Suddenly the cook would appear and throw out the slop and remnants. Everybody would rush, push, fight and rummage in the garbage for some putrid food ... In an instant, not a trace of food would be left. And the men, who were no longer men, would return to their former position and wait, with their eyes fixed on the kitchen door ...
The working conditions were almost always deadly for us. We were forced to work in temperatures of 40 degrees Fahrenheit... We had to cut trees in the forests even when the snow was waist deep... In the summer, while mowing in this marshland, men had to stand knee-deep in water or mud for 10 or 12 hours ... Scurvy was widespread, wounds opened, and abscesses suppurated. Gangrene was frequent, often necessitating amputation of fingers, hands and feet ...
The climate alone was enough to kill the southerners. For a year or a year and a half a “hero” prisoner would do Stakhanovite work and accomplish 120 or 150 per cent of his quota. Then one night he would die in his sleep, without a moan, of a heart attack, and in the morning his companions would find beside them a “healthy corpse” – healthy, because he had died suddenly without having been ill.
In the 17th camp the rate of mortality was very high ... There were many cases of suicide. In September of 1940 in the barrack where I lived a Viennese Jew, Frischhof, hanged himself from his cot. The Germans had held him in Dachau for 11 months; he had endured that imprisonment but could not stand this one ...
The readers of The New International must be especially interested in the fate of the most steadfast political opponents of the Stalinist regime. Here is a section of a report:
I shall relate an authentic story which I heard in prison, and which throws light on the fate of the Trotskyists. Several dozen of the most important among them were deported to Vorkuta. While they were still together, they decided to eternalize their memory by a last manifestation of their inflexible will, and thus remain victorious, even if sent to hard labor.
They presented a list of demands, claiming the right (1) to be isolated from common criminals; (2) to be employed only for work corresponding to their professions, i.e., intellectual work; (3) never to be separated from one another.
They implemented these demands by a threat of a hunger strike until victory or death. The NKVD of course turned down their demands. The Trotskyists then started a hunger strike which lasted for 120 days without interruption. During the time the camp authorities forcibly administered artificial nourishment. In spite of this, many died. When all efforts to break their spirit proved ineffective, the Trotskyists were separated with the help of a pack of fierce dogs unleashed in their barracks.
The sick men were carried out by the soldiers. They were sent in various directions and, after a while, nobody mentioned them. It is pretty certain they were shot, since no one of them has ever been seen since.
This is the regime which George Collins, a leader of the Socialist Workers Party, declared in a statement never repudiated by his party to be one in which “factories, mines, mills, railroads, workshops belong to those who work them”; the regime which the Socialist Workers Party and the other “official” caricatures of Trotskyists declare to be a “degenerated workers’ state,” and which they call upon the workers of the world to defend!

Footnotes
1.
Forced Labor In Soviet Russia, by David Dallin and Boris Nicolaevsky, Yule University Press. $3.75. Unless otherwise specified, all quotations are from this book.
2. To avoid misinterpretation, when one says that the Stalinist bureaucracy is inseparable and cannot exist apart from nationalized economy, that is not the name as saying that nationalized economy cannot exist apart from Stalinism.
 



I want to begin my reply by restating our point of view on the Polish situation, for I think our correspondent misunderstands the position.
Poland is today ruled by a Stalinist puppet regime buttressed by Russian army bayonets; it does not have mass support in Poland. It couldn’t last a week were it not for the fact that Poland today is not an independent nation but rather a vassal dominated by the Kremlin. Opposed to this puppet government are the masses of Poles – of this there can be no doubt; all testimony points to it. A vast, scattered, heterogeneous opposition, which has the support of the vast masses of Poland, is forced to function as an underground movement. In this opposition there are various political strata including the petty bourgeois peasant movement led by Mikolajczyk and trade union and socialist elements. Attached to this opposition are also fascist and anti-Semitic elements trying to capture the opposition for their reactionary purposes.
 
Socialist Attitude
If we faced a situation in which there were a totalitarian Stalinist government and a fascist-dominated opposition, there would be no choice for. Socialists but equally to condemn both. They would have no alternative but to attempt slowly to-rebuild some small socialist circles. But today in Poland there is the possibility of Socialists becoming involved in a mass movement, the major purpose of which is the expulsion of the oppressive Stalinist army. This purpose being progressive and desirable, Socialists, we believe, should give critical support to and participate as an independent force in the opposition.
What critical support means concretely is that we aid the attempts of the opposition to break the totalitarian terror, to restore democratic liberties and to expel the Russian army. Socialists should certainly retain their organizational independence, as our correspondent urges; they should also retain and vigorously exercise their right to criticize politically, and attempt to take over the leadership of, the opposition resistance movement, but it would be self-defeating for Socialists to abstain from giving this critical support and from participating in a mass movement of opposition to the Stalinist totalitarian government on the ground that the fascists also try to gain control of its opposition. (It should be emphasized that Mikolajczyk is NOT a fascist; he is a bourgeois democratic politician. We must not be deceived by Stalinist propaganda into believing that the entire Polish opposition is fascist.)
To abstain from participation in this mass movement, the primary purpose of which is thus far to regain national integrity for Poland, is in effect to surrender the field to the reactionaries and fascists. The program which we propose does not in any way involve political identification with Mikolajczyk; it means that when Mikolajczyk, for whatever reason, fights for the restoration of democratic rights, we support THAT fight.
 
Nature of the Opposition
The crucial point is in the question asked by our correspondent: “Since the Mikolajczyk-led opposition is ... an agent of imperialism ..., then why is it assumed that this group represents the lesser of two evils?” A distinction must be made here. Mikolajczyk is an agent of Anglo-American imperialism, but the opposition movement which he leads – and leads, incidentally, most inadequately, as is indicated by his willingness to participate in the Stalinist government – that opposition movement is NOT an agent of imperialism. We therefore urge support of the struggle of this opposition for democratic demands and the expulsion of the Russian oppressors, while conducting a bitter struggle to free the opposition from Mikolajczyk’s politics.
Bess S. asks what is NEW in the situation. What is new is that the foreign oppressor is Stalinist imperialism and that we have to work out a tactical application to this new situation of our point of view on the national question in Europe – previously applied only to situations where capitalist powers were the imperialist oppressors. Socialists have in the past not hesitated to give critical support to and to work in movements for liberation against armies of occupation, while reserving political and organizational independence from the resistance movement. This resistance movement, since it involved great masses of the population, was a fertile arena for political activity. What complicates, though it does not basically change, the situation is that in Poland the occupying power is Stalinist totalitarianism and that fascist elements try to capitalize on the mass resistance.
 
Dangers of the Situation
Is there a danger that a successful resistance movement against Stalinism might result in a victory for the fascist fringe of the opposition? (And it is merely a fringe; the masses involved in and supporting the opposition are not fascists.) Yes, of course there is such a danger; politics is full bf dangers. But recall that in the French resistance there were also reactionary elements, notably those around de Gaulle. In that resistance there were also the French fascists headed by de La Rocque, with whom, of course, the French Socialises had nothing to do. But the vast mass movement generated by the resistance could not be controlled by de Gaulle, just as, in case of a similar victory in Poland, it would almost most certainly not be able to be controlled by Mikolajczyk.
Bess S. waves aside the simple example I offered: when a GPU man comes to arrest an opposition leader, do you support the arrest or try to prevent it? But that example is very important; it crystallizes one of the central issues involved in our position. As for the counter-question she poses, that is easy for us to answer. If a. fascist government tried to arrest. Stalinists involved in a movement of mass resistance against the fascist rule, then we would try to prevent the arrest of the Stalinists.
The reason why the above example is important was stated in my article in the following words: “Even if a socialist opposition to the Stalinist government were to deciare itself equally against both the Stalinists and Mikolajczyk, it would be forced in practice to cooperate with the opposition in defense against Stalinist terror.” We believe that Bess S. cannot evade this consideration and that her objections to our point of view are based on a misunderstanding of what we actually mean by critical opposition.
Further comment from readers is invited on this matter.
 



Ernest Erber’s polemic in the January 1947 issue of The New International against my Reviewing the New Course (Op. Cit., September ’46) unquestionably represents the opinion of the majority of our movement. But in largely ignoring the
specific questions my article raised and concentrating his salvoes on
my “idealist” historical method, he has shifted the discussion
from the specific issue – what he calls “those aspects of the
methods and policies of the Revolution which facilitated its
strangulation at the hands of the bureaucracy” – and has forced
me, in this brief rejoinder, to plunge in after him into the depths
of historiography.
 
1) In and Out of Context – How to Approach the Past
Erber takes me to task for writing that one can examine an
historical work by attempting a “placement of oneself in the
context in which it was written”; and that one can also examine the
past with a full consciousness that the examination is colored by
subsequently acquired experiences and knowledge. He finds it
“amazing” that I should call the effort to “move
backwards in time and imagine ourselves in a situation of the past”
both “never successful” and “self-contradictory.” He is
unwilling to admit to legitimacy any method which does not squarely
place itself “in the context” of the period under study and he
has himself a bit of fun with queries as to when one approaches a
period of history “in” or “out” of context; whether there is
any value from my point of view to a method admittedly
self-contradictory, etc.
I think Erber’s complaint misaddressed; he should rail against
the practise of history in general rather than my attempt at it. For
the two methods of which I spoke are merely variants of emphasis –
degrees of recognition of distance – in any historical examination
conducted some time later than the period under study. One may and
should attempt to “place oneself” in the context of the period
understudy, to imagine one’s attitudes if in So-and-So’s shoes;
but that attempt can never be quite successful, for it is impossible
to eradicate ideas and experiences absorbed from events that took
place after the period under study. But suppose such an attempt were
possible, suppose one could step into the attitudes, opinions
and limitations of a figure of the past. How could one learn anything
that way? All one would know would be what that person knew then. To
draw lessons from his experience, the use of subsequently acquired
data is essential. For it is not only the past which helps illuminate
the present; it is also the present which illuminates the past.
Erber’s apparent failure to take the latter half of this reciprocal
relationship into consideration is the major cause of most of his
objections to my methodology.
In any historical study one admits the unavoidable fact of
hindsight, second-guessing and subsequently accrued knowledge and
opinions. This recognition is legitimate so long as it doesn’t
result in moralistic judgments where the belief in present superior
conceptions is based on knowledge that was unavailable to those judged.
When Erber therefore asks: “If it (the attempt to view in
context) cannot be done successfully and if the effort is
self-contradictory, of what value is it?”, he is really questioning
not my statement of the limitations of the “in context” approach.
but rather the efficacy of historical criticism in general. For it is
obvious that I couldn’t have and didn’t question the need of
trying to “imagine ourselves in a situation of the past.”
Were that attempt not made, historical criticism would literally
be impossible. I was rather suggesting the limits of that
attempt and therefore the need frankly to take those limits into
account as part of the data of one’s historical examination, as
well as to acknowledge that sometimes such recognition of limits is a
positive advantage. (This recognition is common to all scientific
methodology, especially in the social sciences, and is sometimes
called the inclusion of the experimenter in the experiment.) As for
the problem of which emphasis to underscore at a given time, that
depends on the purpose of the investigation: a study of the
possible alternatives facing Trotsky in his struggle must attempt to
confine itself to the then available data, but a study of the lessons
that struggle has for us today can range beyond the context of the
then experiences and take into account subsequently developed
knowledge and ideas. That somewhat variant results would necessarily
follow from either emphasis is as obvious in the field of
historiography as is the fact that the position – both
spatial and ideological – of an astronomer has a bearing on the
data and results of his experiment.
That Erber should find these quite obvious notations on historical
method “amazing” is itself ... amazing.
 
2) The Strange Appearance of Thomas Carlyle
The main purpose of my article was to try to note – through an
examination of his The New Course where they appear in
incipient but clear form – what seem certain errors in Trotsky’s
approach to the struggle of the Left Opposition against Stalinism.
These errors which manifested themselves in an underestimation of the
need to propagate the idea of soviet democracy, later formed
the basis of his untenable views in favor of defending Stalinist
totalitarianism in its imperialist war and labeling it a “workers’
state.” These boiled down to his insistence that Russia faced only
two alternatives: either return to a genuine working class
revolutionary regime or to be led by the Stalinist bureaucracy
to the return of capitalism, that is, private property. But neither
alternative was realized; something else, a third variant, took
place: Stalin didn’t restore private property but rather maintained
and protected nationalized property while simultaneously instituting
a privileged bureaucratic totalitarianism. The main tack of my
article was to determine the consequences of Trotsky’s failure to
see the possibility (not the inevitability) of such a
variant. Such a determination of consequences involves no
retrospective judgment; if accurate, it is merely a statement of fact.
However, and secondarily, I also wrote that “it does not seem
absurd to ask why Trotsky didn’t see what took ordinary mortals
twenty additional years to see.” For saying this, Erber finds me
guilty of a “Carlylian theory of the man of genius.” I think he
is wrong for at least two reasons:
a) It was physically and historically possible for Trotsky
to have foreseen the possibility of an indigenous bureaucratic
totalitarianism maintaining nationalized property. That is why his
charge that I was urging the use of “tanks at Waterloo” is
invalid. It was literally impossible under the then social and
scientific conditions to use tanks at Waterloo; but it was not
analogously impossible for Trotsky to have had a more valid
conception in the period from the opening of the struggle until
Stalin’s consolidation of power.
b) The question of whether Trotsky “should have foreseen
the possibility of bureaucratic collectivism” was not raised by me
with an eye to passing a moralistic judgment. [1]
I tried to establish the possibility of such foresight by Trotsky in
order to examine the consequences of his not foreseeing. This is not
a “should” statement.
In any case Erber’s venture in historiography in describing my
views as Carlylian is inaccurate. My views may be wrong but they are
not Carlylian. For Carlyle would have declared that Trotsky, if a
“great” enough man, would have pushed through to triumph. Carlyle
virtually denied social limitations on individuals and insisted on
the history-making powers of great men. I considered, rather,
Trotsky’s understanding of the situation, but never said that no
matter how perfect his understanding, he could have surmounted the
historical limitations of his situation in Russia.
 
3) Democracy and Revolution – The Central Question
Wherever Erber drops his adumbrations on historical method, he
says a few words about the problems I raised, but in a manner that
can only be described as skittish. From the context of his article
one suspects that he too feels that these problems require
consideration and that some of the comparatively simple answers with
which we contented ourselves in the past no longer suffice; and so he
fulfills his task as defender of orthodoxy with more relish when he
can wander in the mazes of historiography than when he turns to the
Russian experience itself. However, a few of his remarks on the
latter are of interest:
a) Erber charges that I didn’t sufficiently consider that not
only bureaucratic degeneration, but also capitalist restoration, was
a danger.
“Howe’s method,” he writes, “leads to an
indiscriminate rejection of everything that proved of value to
Stalin in his fight for power. Implicit in this is the danger that
the indiscriminate attempt to avoid the risk of bureaucratic
degeneration can lead to disarming the revolution in the face of the bourgeoisie.”
Exactly what “an indiscriminate rejection of EVERYTHING
that proved of value to Stalin” means I do not know; nor, I
suspect, does anyone else; it is, however, an “impressive”
statement. Disciplined organization, for example, proved of value
to Stalin; by what process of ratiocination can Erber prove that my
remarks led to a rejection of disciplined organization. Such
emotively charged but difficult-to-prove charges do not add light to
the polemic.
But, more important, I wish to challenge Erber’s implication –
his central implication – that the emphasis on a democratic
struggle to prevent bureaucratic degeneration would have led to
“disarming the revolution in the face of the bourgeoisie.” For it
seems to me that every democratic measure calculated to oppose
bureaucratic degeneration would have simultaneously strengthened the
resistance of the most advanced and conscious revolutionary elements
to the danger of capitalist restoration.
b) Erber is willing to grant that mistakes were made by Trotsky,
but he insists that, if an examination of them is to have any value,
they must be “traced back to flaws in Trotsky’s theoretical
conceptions.” So he suggests that we decide Trotsky underestimated
the danger of prohibiting factions in 1920 and that this error flowed
from “his conception of the relationship of democracy to
centralism,” then “we must proceed to rectify our conception of
this problem ...” By all means ... but not enough. For
errors flow not only from theoretical conceptions; such an
opinion betrays a far too formalized and rationalistic conception of
history. Errors flow concretely from the emergence of current
contingencies to which theoretical conceptions may be inappropriately
applied or may no longer be relevant and often from the fact that new
theoretical conceptions cannot be evolved in sufficient time. Which
is why I, for one, would be far less interested in any revision of
the formal conception of the relation of democracy to centralism
(“the rules”) than in the open, frank admission of past mistakes
and the real emphasis and orientation of our present thinking.
c) Erber questions my suggestion of a possible bloc between the
Trotskyists and the Bukharin Right Opposition after the latter became
the target of Stalinist suppression. He offers three arguments:
Such a bloc would have been legitimate only if “bureaucratic
collectivism was inevitable” and “capitalist restoration could
never be realized.” Ergo, my argument means that bureaucratic
collectivism was inevitable. But nothing of the kind is true. The
possibility of such a bloc – leaving aside tactical considerations
irrelevant to this discussion – was justified not because
bureaucratic collectivism was “inevitable” but because by 1930 it
was much more of a danger than capitalist restoration, which
became, after a while, a Stalinist-inflated bogeyman to inhibit all
oppositions.
Such a bloc Erber sees as “fantastic” because the Rights were
lithe most rabid anti-Trotskyists in the party.” But so were
Zinoviev and Kamenev rabid anti-Trotskyists and Trotsky didn’t
hesitate to consummate a bloc with them after their break with
Stalin. A bloc is not an ideological agreement; it is an agreement
for certain specific objectives, in this case first and foremost the
joint defense against Stalinist repression.
Finally, Erber trots out what seems to me by now the old chestnut
about the Right Opposition being “capitalist restorationist.”
What does that characterization mean? If seriously and literally
applied, it means that a victory for the Right Opposition would have
led to a capitalist restoration. Is that view now tenable? If so,
Erber would have been logically required to support Stalin’s
expulsion of Bukharin from the Russian Communist Party, even if
disapproving Stalin’s methods. And Erber should have himself an
interesting time explaining what Trotsky meant when he wrote in 1938
that “the Right group of the old Bolshevik Party, seen from the
viewpoint of the bureaucracy’s interests and tendencies,
represented a Left danger.” But if Erber means merely that a
Right Opposition victory might have increased the danger of
capitalist restoration, he has still to explain why a bloc for the
joint defense against the encroaching Stalinist terror and for at
least a return to internal party democracy, would have favored the
Right as against the Trotskyists.
d) One of my central points was that the problem of democracy can
now be seen to have been the pivotal question of the Russian
experience. Erber then asks the me: why were not the “anarchists,
Left Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks correct on this question
as against Trotsky? ... Even if we assume that their program would
not have led to Stalinism, was it preferable to risk a bourgeois
counter-revolution? Would a Russian Gallifet (a Russian Himmler was
more likely) have been preferable to a Yagoda?”
No, neither a Gallifet nor a Himmler was preferable to a Yagoda;
but neither was a Yagoda preferable to a Gallifet or a Himmler.
Why does Erber insist on this choice? Why does he assume that when
one believes soviet democracy to have been the “burning question”
and Trotsky, even though its great historical defender, to have made
certain mistakes, that such an opinion has anything in common with
the belief that the anarchists, SR’s and Mensheviks were right “as
against Trotsky” ... especially when my article specifically
indicated that I believed them wrong. For these groups went beyond
the bounds of soviet democracy; they took up arms against the soviet
state-that has always been the traditional Bolshevik answer to the
criticism against their suppression, with which my article registered
agreement. Why does a belief that Trotsky made certain errors mean
support of the Mensheviks?
It is true that, as Erber says, one cannot draw up in advance
statutes of limitations. But the recognition of the errors of the
past, even while defending the general historical legitimacy of
Trotskyism, does serve to orient us for the future, even if it gives
us no “statutes.” It rein forms us that democracy is an
inalienable aspect of a workers’ state, that the preservation of
democracy is a central task of the revolutionary vanguard in such a
state, that no parties basically loyal to a workers’ state should
be suppressed no matter how harsh their criticism, and that for
proper workers’ democracy all workers’ parties must be
subordinate and responsible to the soviet or council which is the
supreme organ of workers’ rule. To say this is not yet to say what
is going to happen; but it is to make a statement of what we want
to do.
*
I do not believe that my article was a definitive statement on the
problem or that it was even a sufficient beginning. It was rather an
expression of concern with some of the things in Trotsky’s book,
The New Course, as reflections of his historical role. Since
my piece was in the nature of a “flyer,” it was necessarily
speculative. Erber, who has assumed the mantle of the more
traditional point of view, agrees however that, even if I am guilty
of all the “errors” he has enumerated, a serious consideration of
the problem is necessary. Very well, then. At least he sees
the problem. I hope. that he will therefore not content himself
merely with exposing my methodological “errors” – a task
comparable to Sisyphus’ burden – but will himself directly
approach the problem.

Footnote
1. Which is why
Erber’s insistence that my approach must lead to a denigration of
Trotsky’s genius – since, you see, Trotsky didn’t foresee what
happened – is at best irrelevant, unless he is trying to suggest,
or imply that I suggested, that geniuses never make mistakes. Can’t
Erber’s strictures against me on this point just as well be used
against him for criticizing Trotsky for maintaining the “workers’
state” theory, and have not the Cannonites done so?
Be it noted that Erber assigns the word “should” to me: it is
not so used in my article.
 



Enough time has passed since the elections in Poland to form an
estimate of what happened in that Stalinist-dominated land. Since we
have, in past columns, tried to offer an analysis of the Polish
situation, and Labor Action has printed the highly informative
dispatches of A. Rudzienski, we shall here restrict ourselves to a
few points:
The extent of the totalitarian farce, the open and cynical
disregard for the most simple democratic procedures, becomes clearer
after a perusal of the dispatches from Warsaw. The
Stalinist-dominated government published “election results”
which allowed the opposition a little more than 10 per cent of the
total vote cast. Yet it was a generally accepted estimate that the
opposition had the support of the overwhelming majority of the
population. Proof of this is best seen in the dispatches of even
those correspondents most sympathetic to the Stalinist government. As
starry-eyed a fellow-traveler as Stephen Laird of the New Republic
wrote in that magazine that “... a number of observers,
including some high neutral officials, say that though the Peasant
Party might have won 85 per cent of the votes three months ago in a
free election, today it would have won no more than 70 per cent.”
Let us grant that: but let us also notice that between the 70 per
cent it would have won in a free election and the 10 per cent it was
allowed by the government there is a rather considerable difference
...
If further proof of the totalitarian nature of the election is
desired, we can turn to the pages of the British New Statesman and
Nation, a Stalinoid magazine similar to the New Republic
in this country. Its Warsaw correspondent, Doreen Warriner, who falls
over herself with clumsy enthusiasm for the Stalinists, is still
forced to write that:
“Mikolajczyk, though far less popular than he
was a year ago, still has a large following; and, if all governmental
pressures were removed, would probably get a majority.”
(The Laird dispatch, incidentally, contains an interesting
interview with Mikolajczyk, Peasant Party leader. When Laird asked
him if he agreed that as many government followers were beaten up by
his supporters as were his people beaten by government agents,
Mikolajczyk replied: “This is possible, but the difference
is that our people are beaten up in jail.”)
By allowing the opposition a mere 10 per cent of the vote, the
Stalinist government was openly flaunting its determination not to
take democratic procedures seriously; it was as if it were saying
that it intended to maintain its rule regardless of what the Polish
masses desired.
What was the actual vote cast in the elections? It is impossible
to say, for thousands were forced to cast “open ballots.”
Workers in factories were marched en masse to the polls and
there government ballots were distributed to them. Since in such
situations the government is very often his direct employer, it
requires more than a little courage for a worker to vote against it.
It is interesting to note that wherever the opposition was
permitted watchers at the counting – only a small minority of
election booths – the results were favorable to it. Sydney
Gruson reports in the New York Times of January 24, 1947,
that:
“... in thirty-five booths where watchers
witnessed the entire day’s voting and counting, Mikolajczyk’s
party gathered 33,669 against 20,809. The coincidence of a
majority for the PSL (opposition Peasant Party) in almost every booth
where they had watchers seems too strong to dismiss lightly.”
Under the circumstances the statement of Zygmunt Zulawski, veteran
Socialist leader who has remained in opposition to the Stalinist
regime, that the government bloc’s election methods were
comparable with “those used by ‘the fascist regime’.”
(N.Y. Times, Feb. 9, 1947) is a masterpiece of understatement.
But it is unnecessary to belabor the obvious. As must be the case
with any election held by a Stalinist totalitarian government, the
elections were a complete fake. Now that this parody has been
finished, the Stalinist leaders in Poland have made it plain that
they intend to tighten the governmental reigns and crack down even
harder on any opposition that threatens their rule. They are
continuing to label all oppositionists as fascist though, as A.
Rudzienski’s article in last week’s Labor Action
demonstrates, that is by no means the case. A statement by the
Stalinist leader, Hilary Mine, threatening severe measures against
any continuation of opposition, clearly indicates an increasing
totalitarianization.
Yet it seems unlikely that the Stalinists will quickly or easily
succeed. The Polish food situation remains very bad. The magazine
World Report estimates that:
“Food shortages may become serious in Poland
this spring after UNRRA ends its work. The autumn harvest of 1946 was
expected to make Poland generally self-sufficient in food, but recent
reports from agricultural areas have been less optimistic. Crop
estimates are being scaled down.”
 



Readers familiar with the American radical movement, will remember
Will Herberg. During its short-lived existence, the Lovestone group
(them“right” Communists) found in Herberg one of its
theoreticians. As such he was noted for a certain intellectual,
nimbleness, if not profundity.
When the Lovestone group committed suicide at the beginning of the
war by a mass dissolution, virtually all of its people retired from
socialism entirely. Many of them discovered that life as an appointe
official of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union could be
quite comfortable; and since the Social Democratic leadership of that
union has a liking for ex-revolutionists cynical enough to work in
its hire, it found jobs for the Lovestonites. For an
EX-revolutionist, it can always find a job.
Herberg maintained his quiet existence as a minor bureaucrat until
recently, when he resumed literary activity. He gravitated, naturally
enough, to Dwight Macdonald’s Politics, where he
participated in that magazine’s massed flight from
revolutionary socialism with an essay urging the substitution of
religious values for science. And now he has come out with a
full-fledged statement, From Marxism to Judaism. (Commentary,
January 1947)
The title tells the story perfectly, and it is such a truly
pitiful – I mean that literally: truly pitiful –
performance that it might be charitable to pass the article by in
silence. Yet if only by its embarrassing extremity, it should provide
a sobering check for those intellectuals toying, in one way or
another, with religious conceptions. For Herberg’s article
reads as if deliberately written to provide an illustration for John
Dewey’s attack on the modern flight from science and reason,
and as a contemporary instance of a perennial phenomenon in periods
of political reaction. Who, familiar with the history of the
socialist movement, can read this frank call for supernatural values
without remembering the “God Seekers,” who, after the
defeat of the 1905 Russian Revolution, abandoned socialist politics
and went off in search of absolute Godliness?
How else is one to explain such atavistic nonsense as Herberg’s
declaration that “the affirmation of freedom of the individual
person can be grounded in nothing less ultimate than the belief that
he. is created in the image of God”? This is the final
wretched, pitiful instance of the intellectuals retreat; and if we
note the moral, believe us that it is not to crow, but rather to
point to this caricature of the trend in order to make clearer its
meaning.
 



In its summer 1946 issue, Partisan Review printed an
editorial attacking the Stalinist “Fifth Column” in American
intellectual life: the New Republic, The Nation and PM.
Marking a demonstrative return to contemporary political concerns by
a magazine which in recent years showed slight visible interest in
them, this editorial serves as a central point from which to discuss
the attitude of radical intellectuals to political problems.
Though intended primarily as an exposé of the corrosion of the
liberal press by Stalinism, the editorial casually and by the
blandest references adopts a position toward the current political
scene which can only render impossible an effective struggle against
Stalinism – not to mention making hopeless any sort of positive
socialist aim. Partisan Review has succumbed to Stalinophobia,
a disease common among intellectuals who were once radicals; its
major symptom is that regular tired feeling. Stalinophobia
takes the form of bitter and quite justified denunciations of
Stalinism, without any corresponding effort to develop a sociological
understanding of it. Hatred for Stalinism becomes an emotional bloc
to its political analysis. (The pages of The New Leader –
from whose basic position the editors of PR cannot distinguish
themselves) even if they would wish to – are cluttered with such
vulgar articles which do not even attempt to understand Stalinism and
which always lead to support of one or another reactionary
imperialism solely because of its conjunctural opposition to Russia.)
The victims of Stalinophobia – which disease the editors of
PR, in their November–December 1946 issue, coyly try to
equate with mere concern at the expanded power of Stalinism –
succumb to the same inadequate and often hysterical method of
thinking which characterized most American liberals at the time of
Hitler’s power. As witness:
PR declares that “as long as American policy is weak
and halting, the peoples of Europe ... will gravitate helplessly
... into the Russian orbit.” (My emphasis – I.H.) The
italicized phrase is central. By its use, PR rejects the
method of analysis which characterizes the basic aspects of American
foreign policy in class terms and substitutes instead the typical
liberal (as opposed to socialist) approach of “test your strength.”
PR wants a strong foreign policy in relation to Russia and
objects to the present (“weak” and “Caspar
Milquetoast” policy of the State Department. It accepts the
State Department’s own declarations at face value without
understanding that the “soft” policy is a necessary stage in
consolidating public support at home and abroad as a prelude to a
“get tough” policy at the proper time. These complaints of PR
about U.S. foreign policy vis-à-vis Stalin are in no
essential way different from the complaints which filled the pages of
The Nation, The New Republic and PM (the “fifth
column” press ...) about U.S. foreign policy vis-à-vis Hitler.
The phrase quoted is not an isolated expression but typical of a
political approach. PR urges, similarly, a policy of “trying
to needle this timidly conservative (State) Department into a more
aggressive (foreign) policy ...” Here again the same idea –
even the same stale cliché – of PM, The New Republic
and The Nation during the period when they supported the
Stalinist collective security policy as a means of defeating
Hitlerism ... or, to be more accurate, of hastening the already
inevitable imperialist war between the Allied bloc and Germany. That
the editorial writer of PR recognizes, if only in some
uncharted area of his subconscious, this identity of spirit and
approach with the very Stalinoid magazines he is now castigating, is
evident from his statement that “Hitler might have been
permanently checked had he been firmly opposed at his very first
steps toward aggression.”
The logic of this position, incidentally. has always been rather
difficult to follow. It asserts that if the Anglo-American bloc had
been “needled” into threatening war with Hitler, war would have
been avoided. Unless its proponents wish to suggest the preposterous
idea that Hitler could have been “peaceably contained,” their
proposal merely meant a war ... to prevent war; from which conclusion
the Stalinists did not shy away.
One word of commendation, however, is due the editors of PR:
though only in a passing phrase, they did not hesitate to face the
consequences of their position – at least in the Summer ’46 editorial.
They write: “But granted (which we do not believe) that ...
any consistent criticism of Russia will necessarily lead to war; will
appeasement, then, do any better? If war is inevitable, does it not
become a man’s duty to cry stinking fish and face up to the
inevitable?” Of course, of course. And by “stinking fish”
it is clear that support of U.S. imperialism is meant. An apt image.
 
PR’s Critics
Apparently stung by the numerous criticisms which their editorial
evoked, the editors of PR return to the same subject in their
November–December 1946 issue. They print several letters, the main
one by Heinz Eulau of The New Republic, and then launch sharp
polemical arrows against 1) the Trotskyists; 2) Dwight Macdonald, and
3) the liberals. PR’s sole, though considerable, advantage
over the Nation-New Republic liberals is its
anti-Stalinism; though, as we have tried to point out in this
article, its present political methodology is in no essential respect
different from that of the liberals. Macdonald [1]
defends himself in the November 1946 issue of his Politics. So
we shall content ourselves with a few words here on the attack on
Trotskyism, as well as the further elaboration of its own position,
contained in the PR editorial. The attack on the Trotskyist
position on war is made in three major points:
1) By a “verbal sleight of hand” the Trotskyists
“surreptitiously place democratic capitalism and Stalinist
totalitarianism on the same plane, as if the evils of the two systems
were really comparable ...” and then they denounce those who
support U.S. imperialism in the Second or Third World Wars as
adherents to the theory of “the lesser evil.” Now there is
here a bit of “verbal sleight of hand” but not by the
Trotskyists. Just what does PR mean by its accusation that we
place democratic capitalism and Stalinism “on the same plane”!
One is surprised to find such a vague spatial image in a magazine
which, in non-political matters, is so concerned with verbal
precision. For several meanings are possible: a) democratic
capitalism and Stalinism are the same kind of social system, which we
of the Workers Party deny; b) democratic capitalism and Stalinism are
both manifestations of an international social disintegration which
if continued will lead humanity to barbarism of one kind or another,
which we affirm; and c) there is no difference between the kind of
political rule (civil liberties, etc.) existing in the U.S.
and Russia, which neither we nor anyone else with faintly perceptive
eyes affirms.
If is c) which PR means, as seems it likely, then its point
is a total and obvious non sequitur. For one can clearly admit
the differences in political rule between the U. S. and Russia,
without necessarily supporting the former in a war against the
latter. The mere fact that one country is a capitalist democracy and
the other a bureaucratic dictatorship is no necessary reason in and
of itself, as PR assumes, to support the former in a war; for
there may be, and in fact are, other and more fundamental
considerations, and the differences in political superstructures may
not be, and in fact are not, the issues at stake in such a war.
We reject, however, PR’s contention that no comparison is
possible between democratic capitalism and Stalinism and that there
is between them “the incommensurability of life and death”
(demonstrated perhaps during the recent war?). Though they are
different social systems, they are both reactionary social
systems and a choice between reactionary systems would be necessary
only if one abandoned the socialist perspective.
We affirm rather that support of either democratic capitalism or
Stalinism in a war means support to the social forces leading
humanity to the abyss of barbarism. Or does PR wish to contend
that only Stalinism, and no longer capitalism, is the vehicle of
international social decay?
2) PR no longer believes that “the masses are at
present capable of overthrowing both capitalism and Stalinism,”
which leads it therefore, logically enough, to support U.S.
imperialism in its “resistance to Stalinism.” (You must
admit that “resistance to Stalinism” is a delicate way of putting
it.) Here again we discover lamentable verbal imprecision on the part
of PR. If by the above-quoted statement, it merely means that
the masses have not yet overthrown democratic capitalism and
Stalinism or are not doing so at this moment, they have scored an
irrefutable but not very useful point. For what is at stake is this
question: is there a possibility, sufficiently reasonable to warrant
socialists acting on it, of stimulating the masses to such
revolutions? The reasons which lead us to answer this question
affirmatively we shall not detail here; they have been discussed in
this magazine many times, as well as in my article against Dwight
Macdonald in the October issue of Politics, who also no longer
believes in the possibility of proletarian socialist revolution. But
we have come a long way from the question of attitude to war; we have
come to the central question of socialism itself. That this statement
is no exaggeration can be seen when considering the next point.
3) PR writes: “And even if ... the old order could not
be completely destroyed, there still remains one of the basic
questions of our period: what reason is there to believe that the new
society will not repeat the pattern of Stalinism by creating a new
ruling elite and a new form of oppression? Not only have the
Trotskyists failed to present a single scrap of evidence – or
theory – to show that the masses are able to accomplish their own
revolution and retain control of it, but they do not seem to be
interested in the question.”
The last clause quoted is simply incredible: the pages of this
magazine have contained dozens of articles which in one way or
another, ably or poorly have discussed this question. PR may
not find our answers satisfactory, but to suggest that we are not
interested in the matter is to show very bad taste in conducting a polemic.
However, a much more fundamental question is here raised: what
does PR itself believe? For our part, we continue to maintain
“that the masses are able to accomplish their own revolution and
retain control of it” – but perhaps that is merely Marxist
obtuseness? Very well then. If PR believes that such a
possibility does not exist, then it has the responsibility to
demonstrate that contention to the socialist movement in general,
which has labored along now under that belief for a good many years.
And what then happens to PR’s socialist protestations? For
if the masses cannot make “their own revolution and retain control
of it” then socialism is prima facie impossible.
PR owes its readers a blunt statement on this matter.
Either it believes that “the masses are able to accomplish their
own revolution and retain control of it” – in which case their
polemic against the Trotskyists is, to be charitable, irrelevant; or
it does not so believe – in which case it must cease to speak, as
it attempts to do in its editorials, as part of the socialist
tradition. Anything less is intellectual irresponsibility.
* * *
I wish to conclude this discussion with a few notes on PR’s
November–December 1946 statement, where it attempts to wriggle out
of some of the more embarrassing formulations of its first statement.
In response to the question “whether we will support America
in a war with Russia,” PR writes, “we can only say
now that will depend on the existing situation when and if war
comes.” Such squeamishness seems strange in people who only two
months before were ready to “cry stinking fish and face up to
the inevitable.” That this half-hearted attempt to squirm out
of open commitment to U.S. imperialism comes from embarrassment
rather than conviction is shown in the very next sentence where PR
urges “that we propose to support the American policy of
resistance to Stalinism so long as this policy meets the test of
genuinely liberal and democratic standards ...”
Though we know that Philip Rahv and William Phillips edit
PR, we solicit letters from readers explaining how Freda
Kirchway, Max Lerner and Bruce Bliven – 1938 versions, to the very
phrase – happen to write their editorials.
Everyone has the right to maintain whatever political position he
wishes, provided he thinks through to the end its logical
consequences. We suspect PR on this score because we fail to
note one little phrase in its editorials – atom bomb. But
since PR is preparing to support the U.S. in a war with
Russia, it must also be aware that that would be an atomic war. What
then are the possibilities of the retention after such a war of the
democratic human and cultural values in the name of which PR
prepares to “cry stinking fish and face up to the inevitable?”
PR must consider the consequences of its course. What
attitude does it have toward current American military preparations?
Are they not essential if “we” are to have a firm foreign policy
toward Russia? For whatever Stalin’s attitude toward editorials, it
is known that he respects armored divisions.
What is PR’s attitude, again, toward the proposals for
conscription? And toward proposals to cease manufacture of the atom
bomb? And what about strikes which weaken U.S. imperialism vis-à-vis
Russia? If PR comes to the conclusion that Stalin, like
Hitler, will not be impressed by powerful editorials and ferocious
speeches, is it prepared to urge American imperialism to drop a few
atom bombs on Russia, before Stalin gets the bomb too?
These questions are neither wiseacreish nor tricky. They point to
the inescapable consequences of PR’s political position and
it is incumbent upon its editors, who are so insistent upon
intellectual responsibility in other fields, to speak frankly and
openly on this, a central question of our times.

Footnote
1. The exchange between PR and
Macdonald, though incidental to our purpose, has a few precious
aspects. Relations are bad between these political Heldenkämpfer
but they do have a few good words to say for each other. PR
finds that Macdonald “as against the Trotskyists, has at least two
points of contact with reality in holding: 1) that the masses are not
revolutionary in the sense that they can be counted upon at present
to rise up of themselves (sic!) and overthrow both capitalist
and totalitarian oppressors; and 2) that Stalinist Russia is a new
class society with a peculiar dynamism of its own which makes it an
expanding threat to the whole world.” As for the first of these
“points of contact with reality” we cheerfully grant PR
and Macdonald their common position and readily acknowledge our faith
in the possibility of proletarian socialist revolution, though not of
course by a rising “of themselves,” whatever that may mean. On
the second point. the editors of PR are either ignorant or
most forgetful, for they must know that at least one section of the
Trotskyist movement – that associated with this magazine – not
only believes but was instrumental in expounding in this country the
idea that “Stalinist Russia is a new class society with a peculiar
dynamism of its own.”
Macdonald, for his part, finds PR’s polemic against the
Trotskyists “masterly, as far as it went, since it repeated what
I myself have said often ...”
To this mutual accolade comment would be supererogatory.





January 17, 1948
Mr. Liston Oak
Managing Editor, New Leader
7 East
15th Street
New York City
Dear Mr. Oak:
You have by now received, I am sure, a copy of the January 13
issue of Labor Action in which I commented on your use of a
picture of your comrade, Leon Blum, leader of the French Social
Democracy, under which there was printed, in your column Trends, a
caption stating that Blum “reaffirms Indo-Chinese
independence.” You will recall, too, that I suggested that the
use of this caption, in light of the recent behavior of the Blum
cabinet, was to commit a falsehood. And, further, that the official
silence of the The New Leader, as well as the caption under
Blum’s picture in your column and William Henry Chamberlain’s
shame-faced defense of French imperialism, cast a certain doubt on
the “democratic values” on which you pride yourself and
which you so sharply contrasted to “Bolshevik amorality”
in your debate with Max Shachtman.
Perhaps I have been wrong. I therefore want to tell you about a
project which we of the Workers Party and Labor Action are
planning. On Saturday, January 25, between 12 and 1 p.m., we are
going to run a picket line around the French consulate protesting
French oppression of the Indo-Chinese national independence movement.
We are going to urge the French to withdraw their troops from
Indo-China and grant that country immediate and unconditional
independence. Surely you, as a defender of democratic values, must
agree with that!
I am therefore proposing that you, as a defender of democratic
values, join with us on the picket line protesting the sending of
General LeClerc by the Blum cabinet to Indo-China, as well as the
statements of Minister Moutet in which he insisted on a “military
decision” as a preliminary to negotiations with Viet Nam.
Since you might feel a little uncomfortable marching on a
picket line under the banner of “amoral Bolsheviks” who
believe that Socialists should not send royalist generals to shoot
colonial peoples, I am prepared to persuade the Workers Party to let
you march in the picket line under your own banner and with your
own slogans. You will not think it impertinent if I suggest a few
slogans for your contingent:
“Dear Comrade Blum: Stop shooting Indo-Chinese
fighters for national independence.”
“Dear Comrade Blum: It is unsocialist to send a
known reactionary and imperialist like LeClerc to suppress the
Indo-Chinese.”
“Dear Comrade Moutet: As a member of the French
Social-Democracy, you shouldn’t talk and act like Winston
Churchill or Charles de Gaulle.”
Will we see you around next Saturday?



 


Yours,
Irving Howe



 



The splendid dispatches which our special overseas correspondent,
A. Rudzienski, has furnished this paper and The New International
on the Polish situation have given an unrivalled picture of one of
the most chaotic and terrible political situations in Europe today.
His article in last week’s issue details the manner in which
the Stalinists, an unpopular minority in the nation, have wormed
their way into the apparatus of other parties in order to render
ineffective any opposition to their Moscow-buttressed rule.
Nonetheless, the opposition continues, grows, develops. Dispatches
from Warsaw by Sydney Gruson, New York Times correspondent,
pile detail upon detail, unnecessary to repeat here, of how the
elections scheduled for January 19 are being rigged in the most
outrageous fashion. Candidates of the opposition Peasant Party have
been kidnapped, murdered and imprisoned. A dissident Socialist group
which, unlike the official Socialist Party, has refused to accept
Stalinist domination, has been completely barred from the ballot.
And now the Stalinists have worked out a new device: they are
“persuading” workers to go en masse to the polls
to register an “open” vote – why be ashamed of how
you vote, say the totalitarian rascals of Stalinism. Since refusal to
participate in this “open” casting of votes is tantamount
to a declaration of opposition to Stalinism – a dangerous step
involving possible loss of work and bread – this latest
Stalinist trick insures them of an electoral victory. (The hungry and
weary Polish workers remember that the city of Cracow was punished
for its mass opposition to the Stalinist “constitution”
in the referendum held last fall by having thousands of its citizens
deported from their homes.)
The political situation in Poland is admittedly complex: a
Stalinist government supported by Russian bayonets, without
sufficient mass support to enable it to rule independently; mass
terror as political method; a heterogeneous opposition, both
semi-legal and illegal, whose political composition ranges from
extreme antiStalinist left to the extreme fascistic and anti-Semitic
right.
The outside world is unable to discover the exact internal
political differentiation within this opposition, the strength of the
various tendencies and their relation to each other; though there is
no reason to accept as valid the Stalinist smear of the opposition as
fascist. For we do know that during the Nazi occupation there
appeared in Poland underground newspapers which were both socialist
and anti-Stalinist in character; since the Stalinist state does not
permit their legal existence today, such tendencies must function
underground.
The choice for revolutionary socialists seems difficult (with
the result that some people in the socialist movement, secure in the
warm comfort of their Finished Program, keep a
discreet silence on the matter.) Should revolutionary socialists,
both in Poland and elsewhere, take their stand beside the Stalinist
government, which has nationalized much of Poland’s industry
and expropriated that remnant of its capitalist class which remained
after the war? But that means to support the Stalinist terror. That
means to support the Stalinist attempt to consolidate their
totalitarian apparatus and destroy the opposition to it. It
means for the revolutionary movement to sign its death warrant.
For a Stalinist consolidation in Poland would result in drying up
of the normal channels of political expression, the imposition of the
grey blanket of terror and enforced unanimity. Poland, like Russia,
would become the “Land of the Single Opinion.”
But can revolutionary socialists conceive of working with the
Mickolajczyk-led opposition? Is he not in favor of the restoration of
private property in those industries where it has been abolished? Is
he not an agent of Anglo-American imperialism? Yes, of course he is.
And it is undoubtedly true that there are anti-Semitic and fascistic
groups in the underground which, whether he encourages them or not,
look to him for leadership. But let us admit that this is a new
situation, which cannot be completely viewed in old ways. There is no
doubt that the masses of Poland oppose the government. (Rudzienski’s
articles have demonstrated that beyond a doubt; I shall not repeat
his data, but merely refer the skeptical reader to past issues of
Labor Action.) Even if a socialist opposition to the Stalinist
government were to declare itself equally against both the Stalinists
and Mickolajczyk, it would be forced in practice to cooperate with
the opposition in defense against Stalinist terror.
 
Against the GPU Regime
The masses of peasants and most of the workers are sympathetic to
the opposition. To support the Stalinist government against
Mickolajczyk means therefore not merely to aid in the
totalitarianization of Poland; it means to isolate oneself from the
Polish masses and take one’s side besides the bureaucratic and
privileged strata bribed into serving as Stalin’s Polish
agents. We therefore say that the task of Polish revolutionary
socialists is to give critical support to the opposition camp.
By this formula we mean: the revolutionary socialists would do
their best to maintain their organizational independence, and would
not tolerate submergence within the opposition. It would continually
distinguish its revolutionary socialist program from the capitalist
program of Mickolajczyk and would attempt to take over the leadership
of the opposition to ensure a politically fruitful struggle against
Stalinism. But it would work within and cooperate with the opposition
wherever the opposition fought against GPU regime.
Those who disagree with this course must answer the question: When
the GPU men come to arrest a Peasant Party leader, do you aid them in
the arrest or try to prevent it?
For one cannot stand aside when an incipient civil war is raging,
nor can one keep silent merely because it is an unprecedented
situation. Those, of course, like the Socialist Workers Party in this
country, who make a mockery of socialist ideas by proclaiming
Stalin’s Russian prison camp a “workers’ state,”
have no logical alternative but to support the totalitarian
Polish government against the opposition; for according to their
position, is not Poland, with its nationalized industries, a
“workers’ state” (since, for them, nationalized
economy equals “workers’ state”) and is not
Mickolajczyk the representative of capitalist restoration? But since
this position is more than a little embarrassing, they prefer the
course of silence.
We for our part acknowledge that the position outlined here is
fraught with danger, that it requires a most skillful leadership to
apply it successfully. But it does point a way out of the dilemma.
For the major need in Poland today is to drive out the Russian
oppressors, once again to give the Polish masses a chance to
determine their own destinies. Given such a chance, we are sure they
would choose neither the satraps of Stalinism nor the remnants of the
old anti-Semitic arid fascist “colonels” clique which
ruled Poland before Hitler’s invasion. To open the gates to the
possibility of mass political participation and expression, rather
than to help drive in the GPU clamps on those gates, is the purpose
of our position.
 



In the December 28, 1946, issue of The New Leader, there
appears in the regular column which Liston Oak writes, Trends,
a picture of Leon Blum, leader of the French Social Democracy with an
accompanying caption: “LEON BLUM – Reaffirmed
Independence for Viet Nam.”
The New Leader is a Social Democratic paper and Liston Oak
is its managing editor, though he professes a certain organizational
independence from the Social Democrats. Oak has made a specialty of
writing preachments about “democratic values” and in a
recent debate with Max Shachtman, chairman of the Workers Party,
attacked Bolshevism for what he called its “undemocratic”
practices.
Now there appears in his column this really remarkable caption
under Leon Blum’s picture. At a time when Blum’s
government is sending General Jacques Leclerc and several thousand
troops from North Africa to aid in the suppression of the
Indo-Chinese independence movement: at a time when the party of Leon
Blum in conjunctlon with the MRP and the Stalinists has voted in the
Chamber of Deputies for motions of support for the troops attempting
to re-establish the control of French imperialism in Indo-China (see
last week’s Labor Action for exact reports of this); at
this time Liston Oak, the defender of “democratic values”
carries in his column the outright falsehood that Blum reaffirms
independence for Viet Nam.
We wish to ask Oak, and we are certain the entire radical public
would be greatly interested in his reply:
Is not your “comrade” Leon Blum the Premier of the
Government which has sent Leclerc, notorious for his previous record
of antidemocratic suppression, to Indo-China to help smash the Viet
Nam?
Did not your “comrade” Blum retract his
pusillanimous statement in Le Populaire about freedom for
Indo-China in favor of a statement urging its “freedom within
the framework of the French union” – the favorite dodge
of all supporters of imperialism?
And what will you, Liston Oak, and your New Leader with all
its democratic pretentions now say about the imperialist record of
the French Social Democrats who are going their (and your) comrades
of the British Labor Party one better – though there have not
yet been reports of your “comrade” Blum’s troops
legally whipping Indo-Chinese the way your “comrade”
Bevin’s troops legally whip Palestinian Jews?
For the question is, Liston Oak, what price “democratic
values?”
 



“France,” said Admiral
Thierry d’Argenlieu, French High Commissioner for Indo-China,
in a Christmas message, “does not intend in the present stage
of evolution of the Indo-Chinese people to give them total and
unconditional independence, which would be an action gravely
prejudicial to the interests of both parties.”
This is the message of the man who is the chief representative of
French imperialism, today attempting to reassert its domination over
the Indo-Chinese people. He is not merely, however, the
representative of French imperialism in general; he is the
representative of the government of Leon Blum, leader of the French
Socialist Party, in particular. The cabinet of Blum has indicated no
intention of disavowing this naval martinet, infamous for his desire
to use fire and whip to smash the Indo-Chinese nationalist movement.
On the contrary it has sent as “military inspector” for
Indo-China and as aid to Admiral d’Argenlieu, Major General
Jacques-Philippe Leclerc, expert on mobile warfare, who has a record
of having previously suppressed nationalist movements in Indo-China.
In addition, the cabinet of “Comrade” Blum has
dispatched a crack regiment of paratroopers from Algeria abroad the
cruiser Duquesne and, says the New York Times of December 25,
“it was reported that these would be followed by a full
division, including legionnaires aboard the liner Ile de France.”
There is the behavior of “Comrade” Blum’s
cabinet toward colonial people aspiring to national liberation; there
is the true imperialist face of Social Democracy.
Blum, before his assumption of the premiership, tried to wriggle
out of his difficult position. He wrote in Le Populaire, organ
of the French Social Democracy, that he favored independence for the
Indo-Chinese. When the Parisian rightist press howled, Blum retreated
to the formula “independence within the framework of the French
union” – the new patent medicine with which the
capitalist parties hope to save dying French imperialism. But once he
assumed the premiership – and how effectively does a cabinet
post remind a Social Democrat of his responsibility to capitalism! –
he said that while he favored an amicable agreement with Indo-China,
he would “not be intimated by force!”
Is not this language typical of the imperialist suddenly
confronted with a colonial people? Who has been invading whose
country for these many decades – have French troops been in
Indo-China or have Indo-Chinese troops been in France?
And what do Blum’s American comrades – the worthies of
the New Leader who are so solicitous of “democratic
values” – have to say about this?
*
If, the role of the French Social Democracy is scandalous, there
is no word to describe the Stalinist attitude toward the Indo-Chinese
rebellion other than outright treachery. Elsewhere in this issue we
report the statement of the French Stalinists, opposing national
freedom for Indo-China. Here we wish to present additional evidence
that the French Stalinists are actively supporting French
imperialism against Indo-China.
 
Stalinist Game
In a dispatch to the New York Times for December 24, C.L.
Sulzberger writes: “The powerful French Communist Party has
played a skillful juggling game, balancing between support of local
independence factions and of a new form of imperial structures.
At first Maurice Thorez, Jacques Duclos and Andre Marty (French
Stalinist leaders) appeared to sponsor full independence for
Indo-China, but a wave of popular indignation resulted in a
backtracking more attractive to metropolitan French votes ...
At present the Communists officially sponsor a colonial solution,
with the federal concepts of an overseas France.” (My
emphasis – I.H.)
But an even more dramatic indication of the Stalinist attitude
toward Indo-China took place on December 24 when the new Upper House,
or Council of the Republic of France, opened its sessions in Paris.
In his dispatch to the New York Times, Lansing Warren writes:
“... the session was marked
by a single Incident when the chairman asked the Council to join in a
demonstration of gratitude to the French soldiers now fighting in
Indo-China.
“The House applauded
vigorously with the exception of a large contingent of Communists who
remained in their seats while the others stood up to cheer. There was
a full minute of hesitation while the applauding was maintained and
then in a body the Communists slowly rose to their feet at a signal
from their leader and joined in the demonstration.”
A really remarkable occurrence! Notice that while the Stalinists
remained in their seats “the others stood up to cheer” –
“the others” obviously including Blum’s fellow
deputies of the Social Democracy. They were ready to cheer French
imperialism in Indo-China.
We should also notice that the Stalinists didn’t
spontaneously express their indignation against French imperialism,
against the slaughter of nationalist forces by French planes. They
merely sat quietly in their seats.
And finally, “at a signal from their leader” –
what a commentary on the mind of Stalinism! – they stood up and
“joined in the demonstration.”
There then is the face of Stalinism as well – applauding
the French troops who maintain imperialist rule in Indo-China. We
pose this question to any members of the Communist Party reading
these lines: Is this what you stand for? Is this what you believe and
want? And If it is not, why do you not raise these matters tn your
party, demanding that the Daily Worker break its shamefaced silence
about the behavior of the French Stalinists?
*
After what has happened in Indo-China and after the open support
which the French Social Democrats and Stalinists have given to French
imperialism, we have special reason to be proud of our French
comrades – the Fourth Internationalists of the Parti Communiste
Internationaliste, who, without the slightest ambiguity, have come
out in support of the Indo-Chinese people; who have demanded the
complete withdrawals of French troops from Indo-China; and who, as
recently reported in Labor Action, defied the Parisian police
to demonstrate their solidarity with their Indo-Chinese brothers in
the streets of Paris.
Because of the internationalist position they have taken, we stand
today – when Blum is preparing the troops of Leclerc to shoot
down the Indo-Chinese nationalist movement and when Thorez is
cheering him on, even if after a “full minute of hesitation”
– we stand squarely by the side of the French Fourth
Internationalists. They do not bow down before French imperialism;
they rather defy it and send to their brothers of Indo-China the
message:
We are with you in your struggle for independence; we
are your brothers; we shall fight besides you against the Leclercs,
the Blums and the Thorez’s.
It is a message which we of the Workers Party in this country wish
merely to repeat.
 



A considerable fuss has been raised about the short-lived Blum
cabinet in France. It has been hailed in the American press as a
brilliant administration which has gone far to revive the French
Social Democracy and the position of France as a power. There is no
doubt that, within certain limits, the Blum cabinet has acted
with energy and dispatch. It enforced a reduction of five per cent in
France’s price structure and it initiated negotiations with
England for a mutual assistance pact. If an election were held in
France today it is quite likely that the Social Democracy would get a
larger vote than it did in the recent election where it fell to the
position of a second rate party.
At this point we should return to the words “within
certain limits” which appeared in the sentence above
describing the energy of the Blum cabinet. For the Social Democracy
of France has been neither desirous nor able to lift itself from its
basic historical role as agent of its native capitalism. The
reduction in prices, though of some aid to the French workers, is
conceived of mainly as a device to forestall their persistent wage
demands. And the proposed pact with Britain is merely a maneuver
entirely within the limits of capitalist diplomacy. The Social
Democrats did not try to effect any basic changes in the French
social structure; that is not their role.
But most revealing was their attitude toward the Indo-Chinese
revolt. Blum’s behavior was in no essential respect different
from that which would have characterized de Gaulle or Bidault. Blum
sent a top military man and one of its most reactionary politicians,
General Leclerc, to suppress the Indo-Chinese; he reaffirmed the
appointment of Admiral d’Argenlieu, Indo-Chinese governor,
whose callous imperialist behavior had so incensed the people of the
colony; and he further supported his Minister, Moutet, who after a
trip to Indo-China issued statements refusing even to negotiate with
the nationalist rebels.
That is the record of Social Democracy. Whatever quirks of energy
or verbal boldness it may indulge in, its historical role remains the
same as before: it is indissolubly wedded to the maintenance of
capitalism.
 
The French Stalinists And Indo-China
The Daily Worker in this country has maintained a strange
silence on the Indo-Chinese events and especially on the statements
of the French Stalinists in support of French imperialism (reported
in Labor Action a few weeks back). It has, however, printed
reports, which appeared simultaneously in the capitalist press, that
the French Stalinists have come out in favor of negotiations with
Viet Nam, the Indo-Chinese nationalist movement.
We should clearly understand the significance of this stand by
the French Stalinists. They have not adopted a revolutionary position
on this matter, or anything even resembling a revolutionary position.
As a party of “responsibility” (that is, of complicity In
the French parliamentary swindles) the French CP has NOT raised the
slogan of independence for Indo-China. It has merely urged that
negotiations be resumed with Viet Nam, a demand which the more
intelligent variety of imperialists can and do support.
The sharpest contrast can be made between the Stalinists in France
and the Parti Communiste Internationaliste, French section of the
Fourth International. The PCI has a very simple position on
Indo-China. It demands that French imperialism get out, lock, stock
and barrel; it demands that every French soldier be withdrawn. It
does not, as does the French CP, offer advice to French imperialism
on how to resume relations with and therefore domination of
Indo-China. It says: Get out, get out; let the Indo-Chinese people
determine their own faith. That is a revolutionary socialist
position; it is the ONLY democratic position on this matter.
Everything else, anything else, the slightest equivocation, the
slightest hesitation – means support of imperialism. And here
too is a testing ground for political positions.
 
The American Liberals and Indo-China
One cannot read the so-called liberal and even radical press on
the events in Indo-China without feeling a strong sense of nausea.
Look through the New Republic, The Nation, PM,
the New York Post, the Wisconsin Progressive, and that
most wretched of sheets, The New Leader – and you will
not find a word in behalf of Indo-Chinese independence. There were
times when the American liberals, whatever their ultimate
shortcomings, were at least able to rally behind comparatively simple
issues like colonial independence where the democratic (if not
Marxist) position is so indicated as to make impossible any
double-talk. But even that day is past.
The Nation and The New Republic (Henry Wallace,
Editor) hem and haw, and question if the French are conducting
themselves quite properly. The New Leader, a sheet for the
decayed minds of ex-radicals, prints tripe by Henry William
Chamberlain, as witness:
“If Moutet is now convinced, as is reported in
dispatches from Indo-China, that a military decision must be sought,
I am inclined to believe that the responsibility for the recent
flare-up of fighting is on the Viet Nam side. The Overseas Minister
is not the kind of man who would lend himself to any act of
imperialist aggression.”
This is tripe; this is a lie; this is support of French
imperialism; this is writing as an enemy of simple democracy, which
demands that the Indo-Chinese be allowed national independence.
Strong words? Yes, they are; perhaps not the nicest language or most
diplomatic characterizations. But there is a limit to everything. And
the sight of these pious liberals, these democratic worthies who are
so ready to read us lectures about “Bolshevik amorality”
– the sight, I say, of these liberals twisting themselves all
over creation in the attempt to condone the French suppressions, is
more than any socialist should be able to bear without anger.
 



The Other Kingdom
by David Rousset
Reynal and Hitchcock. $2.75
Before the war David Rousset was a French intellectual who adhered
to the Trotskyist movement. He weighed 209 pounds. These two
statements may involve a rather odd juxtaposition, but in a moment
you will see the connection.
When the Nazis overran France, Rousset worked in the underground.
He edited bulletins giving news reports to the underground workers
who had no other source of reliable information. He engaged in the
most dangerous and from the Nazi point of view the most unforgiveable
activity of all: he helped the revolutionary socialists who were
making contact with anti-Nazi groups in the German army. When the
Gestapo caught him, Rousset was sent to Buchenwald where he remained
for 16 months until the end of the war.
When Rousset was released he weighed 114 pounds – and he had
gone through the modern Inferno, that ultimate terror which modern
society has ended in, that terror which is its consummate expression.
Concentration camp – the Nazis named it well; for it is the
concentration of all the barbaric and retrogressive tendencies of
modern society.
The Other Kingdom is a brief, fragmentary record of
Rousset’s experiences and also a beginning toward a sociological
comprehension of the concentration camp. It is an utterly terrifying
and horrible book, even though it does not recount nearly as many
horrors as other reminiscences of former camp inmates. It is rather
uniquely terrifying and horrible because it explains, because
it does not merely see the camps as irrational outbursts of evil
nature. When the Nazi atrocities are seen as part of a calculated
policy of German imperialism, they become the ultimate in terror. For
then we see them as part of this world, as a logical and
necessary development from the disintegration of capitalist society.
Without hesitation I want to say that Rousset’s book is by all
odds the very best that has been written on the subject; it not
merely shocks, it informs. Without equivocation Rousset places the
concentration camps within the framework of capitalist society. He writes:
“The existence of the camps is a warning. German
society, both because of the strength of its structure and the
violence of the crisis that demolished it, underwent a decomposition
that is exceptional even in the present state of world affairs. But
it would be easy to show that the most characteristic traits of both
the SS mentality and the social conditions which gave rise to the
Third Reich are to be found in many other sectors of world society –
less pronounced, it is true, and not developed on any such scale as
in the Reich ... It would be blindness – and criminal blindness, at
that – to believe that, by reason of any difference of national
temperament, it would be impossible for any other country to try a
similar experiment. Germany interpreted, with an originality in
keeping with her history, the crisis that led her to the
concentrationary universe. But the existence and the mechanism of
that crisis were inherent in the economic and social foundations of
capitalism and imperialism. Under a new guise, similar effects may
reappear tomorrow. There remains therefore a very specific war to be
waged ... And the German anti-Fascists, interned for more than ten
years, should be our valuable comrades in arms in such a fight.”
 
Concentration Camp Bureaucrats
The most revealing fact adduced by Rousset is that it was not the
SS alone which inflicted the brutality on the prisoners. It was the
SS which of course represented the actual police power in the prison.
But the acts of brutality – the beatings, the torture, the routine
misery – were often left by the SS to their agents among the
prisoners. Within the concentrationees’ ranks there was established
a bureaucracy which, though totally subservient to the SS on top,
still had a great deal of power over the prisoners below. These
bureaucrats gained special privileges: they had more food, they did
not have to work and they had the delicious privilege of beating the
wretches who were their fellow prisoners. Even among the damned there
arose distinctions of rank and privilege!
The SS knew what it was doing. It understood that where hunger and
misery were prevalent, it could secure for itself the loyalty of a
section of those subjected to this hunger and misery by slightly
alleviating its plight. The SS was following the age-old policy of
ruling classes: divide and rule; but it was following it in a
particularly terrible and inhuman situation.
The prisoners themselves were prevented from establishing genuine
solidarity. How could men who worked like beasts from dawn to dusk,
who were perpetually concerned above all else with dreaming of more
bread and avoiding the lash and the fist – how could men reduced to
this condition effectively develop a sense of solidarity?
Distinctions of nationality, of camp rank, of politics were all
exploited by the SS to get groups of prisoners off against each other
like raging beasts.
But the main distinction within the ranks of the prisoners was
between the greens and the reds: The greens were the vast majority of
prisoners, the criminal and flotsam and jetsam the Nazis had picked
up, while the reds were of course the politicals. (By the time
Rousset arrived in Buchenwald most of the German anti-Nazi prisoners
had been killed off.) Between the greens and the reds a deadly
struggle broke out for control of the camp administration. The Nazis
tended to favor the greens because they were more “trustworthy”
and less scrupulous, but the reds had one decisive advantage: they
were better organized and more efficient. And in many camps there
were labor projects to be organized and work quotas to be reached; as
a result the politicals gained control of some camp administrations
toward the end of the war.
 
Intercamp Morality
It should not be imagined that the politicals in any way resisted
the Nazis when they came to “power” in the camp administration.
Had they indicated the slightest attempt in that direction, they
would have been immediately murdered off. Such a move would have
simply been a gesture of suicide. For the politicals to take over
camp administration meant to follow the basic orders of the Nazis –
work quotas, overall discipline, etc. – but allowed them to
circumvent the Nazis on other matters. They could treat their fellow
prisoners somewhat more humanely than did the brutal greens; they
could try to save an occasional prisoner whom the Nazis had picked
out for destruction. It was a bitter choice with which the to in
politicals were confronted: cooperate, a sense, with the Nazis in
order to ease the lot of the prisoners and save some of their skins
or to adopt the gestures of absolute morality and commit suicide en masse.
In an excerpt from a forthcoming book by Rousset which continues
his fascinating discussion of the concentration camps in greater
detail (printed in the latest issue of Politics) he discusses
this problem. At one point a camp administration of politicals faced
the problem of trying to save a group of 37 men whom the Nazis had
brought to the camp with the evident intention of murdering them. The
politicals decided that at most they could save three of the 37: a
bitter choice but under the circumstances unavoidable! To talk of
morality or moral choice under such conditions seems nonsense; there
was a certain very narrow choice but it lacked the basis in freedom
without which morality becomes meaningless. The truth is that the
conditions of life in the camp forced the prisoners to choose
between wretched and miserable evils; the only way to avoid this was
death. And if one believed, as did the politicals, that they
represented an important cadre for the post-Hitler period, then death
was a luxury – I mean that literally – which they could
not afford.
This is one of the questions which Rousset discusses in his book.
There are others, equally fascinating: why didn’t the Nazis kill
the concentrationees off immediately? Why did they kill them off
gradually and slowly? But I shall stop here. I think enough has been
said in this review to indicate to readers, the absolute
indispensability of this little book to anyone who is in any way
concerned with the problems of our time.
*
For Rousset’s book I have only the greatest admiration. For his
talents as a writer, for the portrait of himself as a human being
which emerges from the book I also have admiration. It might
therefore seem best to end this review by expressing the humility
which we in America must feel toward those European comrades who have
suffered as has Rousset.
Yet I should be avoiding a very important responsibility if I were
to do that. The unfortunate and sad truth is – how terribly painful
it is to say this! – that Rousset’s book leaves one wondering
about one essential question: Stalinism. Were it merely mere
difference of opinion on some tactical question, it would be best in
reviewing this book to remain silent. But on Stalinism one cannot.
Rousset praises the heroism of the German Stalinist prisoners.
That is understandable; no doubt they were heroic. But there is
nowhere in his book, which discusses the Stalinists if only in
passing, the slightest suggestion of a fundamental and critical
opposition to the Stalinist movement. He writes of them as if they
were “the Communists” rather than as a movement in the service of
a totalitarian state as vile as that of the Nazis and one which
maintains to this day concentration camps as terrible as those of the
Nazis. What makes this silence even more disturbing is the reports
which have come from France about theories developed by the group of
intellectuals to which Rousset adheres – theories about Stalinism
representing the revolution, even if the “bureaucratically”
consummated revolution. Such theories, we say categorically, can only
result in the death of whatever hope there is for the reconstitution
of a genuine socialist movement.
I do not wish to make any accusations. I do not know. But the
conjunction of this strange ambiguity in Rousset’s book and the
reports about his group make for a highly disturbing situation. For a
man like Rousset, with his background, his talents and his sense of
humanity, to express in the slightest degree any deviation
from his previous anti-Stalinism would be nothing short of tragic.
I hope my uneasiness on this matter is unwarranted. But I think
this uneasiness cannot be dissipated until Rousset speaks out plainly
and frankly.
 



Literature and Art
Selections from the Writings of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
International Publishers. $2.25. 154 pp.
This book should be read by three groups of readers: those
interested in Marxism; those interested in literature and art; and
finally those interested in Marxism and literature and art.
Most of the selections are available elsewhere in English
translation, but it is very useful to have this compilation,
especially since there is no Stalinist introduction to besmirch it.
It contains selected passages from books, unpublished fragments and
letters which reflect the cultural attitudes of Marx and Engels. It
is divided into four sections:

The Origin and Development of Art, which contains
the most familiar material: the famous discussions of the
relationship of art to society, the “superstructure” of ideology
to the social “base.” There are selections from The German
Ideology, a few fragments and the famous letters of Engels to
Schmidt and Starkenberg in which he repudiates mechanistic
interpretations of historical materialism.
 
Art in Capitalist Society, which contains selections
on the specific effects of capitalist society on the practice of
art. There is an obscure polemical section from Marx’s Theorien
über den Mehrwert and an extraordinarily brilliant fragment by
Marx on the dehumanizing effects of money.
 
Realism in Art, mostly drawn from letters by Engels
discussing his conceptions of realism in art. To this reviewer, this
section is the shakiest in the book; many of Engels’ observations
are very keen but others show a spirit not too sensitive to the
purposes and nature of art (as for instance, his definition of
realism as “the truthful reproduction of typical characters under
typical circumstances.”)
 
Literary History, which analyzes cultural periods
and individual writers, among them Goethe, Heine, Shelley and Byron,
Thomas Hood, Carlyle, Chateaubriand and Balzac. This section
contains the most material previously unpublished in English and is
by far the liveliest and most controversial.

I do not wish in this brief notice to start juggling the old
chestnuts about Marxism and art, propaganda and art, etc., which have
contributed so much to the dreariness of recent years. I wish only to
note a few reactions to the book which will, I hope, stimulate others
to read it.
Marx and Engels did not write a comprehensive work of esthetics;
they dealt with the subject only in passing. Marx did have in mind a
book on Balzac, whom he greatly admired for his depiction of 19th
century French social types; but even if that book had been written,
it would probably have been an unpretentious study of certain social
implications of Balzac’s novel, and not a “Marxist analysis” of
Balzac as a writer. Marx and Engels developed a method of historical
analysis, but there is no indication that they considered it also a
method of literary criticism or a substitute for literary criticism.
They were tempted occasionally to apply their method to literary
history, but they nowhere indicate in these writings that they
believed literature to be only an aspect of history.
These selections from Marx and Engels contain statements which if
made by latter-day Marxists would, at least until a few years ago,
have been considered downright heretical, as for instance one by Marx:
“It is well known that certain periods of highest
development of art stand in no direct connection with the general
development of society, nor with the material basis and skeleton
structure of its organization. Witness the example of the Greeks ...”
Now it is true that if anyone so desired he could go through this
volume and find some pretty crude statements in which the authors,
especially Engels, judge literary works by political standards. But
this would be a misleading procedure for at least three reasons:

During the early years of Marx’s and Engels’
intellectual development, their historical method was itself often
crude and still fuzzy with Hegelian verbiage; many of the selections
are taken from this period and it is only natural that its crudity
should overflow into literary judgment.
 
While in their published writings Marx and Engels confine
themselves usually to discussions of cultural history and origin,
they reserve most of their literary judgments for private letters
and usually hastily written “off the cuff.” Thus there are some
harsh statements by Marx in a letter on Heine; yet it is common
knowledge that he considered Heine the greatest German poet of his
time. Marx was able to distinguish between categories of discourse.
 
Some of the crudities are merely personal lapses of taste,
usually those of Engels. By comparison with Marx, Engels’ literary
writings seem almost pedestrian. (Yet in fairness to Engels it
should be noted that he writes that “The writer is not obliged to
intrude on the reader the future historical solutions of the social
conflicts pictured.”) Marx indulges more frequently in strictly
literary judgments; he had a much finer esthetic sensibility than
Engels and his remarks show a strong interest in and love for
literature as sheer literature, that is, what James T. Farrell calls
“the refreshment value” of a work of art. (A Note on Literary
Criticism)

Yet, though there were lapses, one can only marvel that men who
spent their lives in political conflict still had such fine and
certain taste. They did not allow their newly developed and
explosively powerful method of historical analysis to obliterate
their feeling for the cultural tradition of the past. In Aeschylus,
Shakespeare and Goethe, his favorite authors, Marx did not seek
“solutions”; nor did he analyze them in terms of their “social
context.” That was left for others.
It is clear from these writings that the Marxist historical method
contributes a great deal to an understanding of the origins and
development of a cultural tradition or a work of art – the more so,
Engels tells us, “the longer the period considered and the wider
the field dealt with.” That is, it helps in the intellectual
placement of literary material antecedent to its literary judgment in
somewhat the same way that Freudianism does. But I think all the
internal evidence of this book substantiates Edmund Wilson when he
writes in his essay, Marxism and Literature, that “Marxism by
itself can tell us nothing whatever about the goodness or badness of
a work of art ... A man may be an excellent Marxist but if he lacks
imagination and taste he will be unable to make the choice between a
good and an inferior book ...”
But to return to the book. There are some things in it that are
quite extraordinary. I have mentioned already the selection called by
the editor The All-Revolutionizing Power of Money. Though
draped in Hegelian linguistic paradoxes, this fragment, based on
selections from Goethe and Shakespeare, is a remarkable tour de
force on the dehumanizing role of money in modern life.
There are some things with which the modern reader is bound to
disagree – as for instance, I think, Marx’s judgment that the
reason we are attracted to Greek culture is that Greece represents
the childhood of humanity and the “Greeks were normal children.”
That seems to this reviewer a gross over-simplification.
But the essential virtue of Marx’s and almost always Engels’
writings on literature is that they are aware of the existence of
culture as an activity of human beings which is its own sanction –
and which, though subject to and part of historical development,
still possesses value not reducible to that relationship. For though
their historical method necessarily involves reduction of complex
phenomena of conceptually ordered sequences – as must any
historical method – they are equally aware that this very same
method may be fatal for an analysis of art. They did not establish an
esthetics, they didn’t claim to, and they didn’t relieve their
followers of the obligation of knowledge and taste. They did,
however, change man’s vision of this world – which was enough.
 



The intellectuals are the most delicate sensorium of the
life of society. In their remarkable ideological fluctuations of the
past 30 years, one can read the history of contemporary society in
oblique, distorted yet revealing terms. Bolshevism and Stalinism;
pacifism and Vansittartism; pragmatism and existentialism; militant
atheism and neo-mysticism; revolutionary activism and secluded quietism
– the list can be extended indefinitely. A discussion of these shifts
which merely denounces the intellectuals’ “irresponsibility” is largely
a waste of time, even if morally or emotionally satisfying. For the
intellectuals’ instability (which at least indicates reaction and
awareness) is largely a reflection of the failure of the major social
classes to resolve the crisis in which we are jutted. Any other view
grants the intellectuals a degree of social independence they do not in
reality enjoy.
The political development of the American “left” intellectuals since
the great depression may be charted in four major trends: their
attraction to radical politics in the early thirties; their subsequent
break from Stalinism and turn to Trotskyism; their retreat from Marxism
in the late thirties; and finally their flight from politics in
general. [1] In this article I
wish to discuss only the last of these trends, the flight from politics.
Though not a class in the Marxian sense, the intellectuals wield an
influence far greater than their direct socio-economic strength.
Because of their characteristic concern with ideas, they are able to
wrench a certain limited freedom from their social milieu; they are not
merely linked to the present, they can “live” ideologically in either
the past or the future. To analyze their present situation, we must
therefore not only place them in their general position vis-à-vis
the major classes of society, but go further by examining some of their
ideas.
In few instances have the intellectuals formulated their flight from
politics into an explicit system or rationale, and that only by the
scholastics or academicians. Such a codification is impossible for the
left intellectual whose background is at least partially political. For
it is such a patently absurd idea to suggest that modern men can live
without politics or solve any of his fundamental problems without
politics, that few have had the courage to justify their behavior by a
theoretical elevation. Instead a variety of half-conscious subterfuges
are adopted. One sneers at politics as “dirty” – which is in a sense
true but which skirts the central problem of whether men must sometimes
engage in activities which are “dirty.” Another turns to “ultimate”

problems of life – man’s basic nature, cosmic anxiety, death, “fear and
trembling” – which, whatever their other areas of relevance, are
certainly not a logical substitute, even if an emotional one, for the
problems with which politics is concerned. And still a third says that
politics is “dull” by comparison with other intellectual activities –
which, again, may or may not be true but which is irrelevant if only
because politics recommends itself not for esthetic reasons but by its
claim to be unavoidably necessary. Obviously none of these
subjectively formulated motivations expresses the basic cause for the
flight from politics. For though the intellectuals may develop a
considerable ingenuity in the means by which they negotiate this
flight, its causes are largely rooted in the immediate crisis of
society.
To the intellectuals politics seems to offer no way out; it seems
able only to embroil us further in the current catastrophe. This
feeling is the direct consequence of the failure of the revolutionary
upsurges of the twenties and thirties, the most shattering experience
of our time: shattering to people, to movements and to ideas. An entire
generation of intellectuals was politically destroyed just as virtually
an entire generation of revolutionists was politically destroyed. [2]
The intellectuals feel themselves trapped in a dead end: the
bifurcation between knowledge and action. They feel that nothing
matters any more; that no matter what one does, one
cannot challenge the political power of omnipotent bureaucracies.
(Kafka’s novel, The Trial, gave anticipatory
expression to this sense of powerlessness in its view of man as a victim.)
In an article by C. Wright Mills, a radical sociologist, the feeling is
vividly described:
We continue to know more and more about modern
society, but we find the centers of political initiative less and less
accessible. This generates a personal malady which is particularly
acute in the intellectual who has labored under the illusion that
his thinking makes a difference. In the world of today the more
his knowledge of affairs grows, the less effective the impact of his
thinking seems to become ... He feels helpless in the fundamental sense
that he cannot control what he is able to foresee. (The Powerless
People, by C. Wright Mills, Politics, April,
1944 – My emphasis – I.H.)
Now, honesty requires that we acknowledge that this
feeling is not confined to the intellectuals, the “powerless people”;
it is a feeling which must also seize the revolutionist who correctly
analyzes each revolutionary situation only to find in its defeat still
another tragic confirmation of the validity of his analysis. (There is,
by the way, an easy way to avoid this feeling and even to enjoy the
most delicious optimism: simply live in another world ... and chalk up
each defeat of the socialist movement in this world as a
victory in your private world.) But the crucial difference between most
intellectuals and the revolutionists is that the revolutionists
continue to resist reaction; that they have maintained their conviction
of the necessity of political activity; and that they have not elevated
moods of the present into philosophies of presumed universal relevance.
Shortly before the Russian Revolution, Lenin, in a moment of deep
pessimism, told a Swiss audience that he doubted if the Russian
Revolution would come in his lifetime – which didn’t prevent him from
trying to nullify his prediction.
There is the greatest weakness of the intellectual: if he responds
most readily to the times, he also succumbs most easily to its
pressures. A glance at the present intellectual situation in America
indicates the extent to which this is true. One need but list a few
indices: the disintegration and atomization of American intellectual
life; the pathetic quest for novelty, often at the expense of
basic relevance and validity; the belittling of science and the
elevation of the irrational; the reappearance of musty theories of
social utopias; the growth of academicism in literary life; the
popularity of the doctrine of man’s essential and unavoidable isolation.
Perhaps even more alarming than the reappearance of reactionary
ideas is the intellectuals’ loss of rebelliousness. By and
large they have become, at least in a physical-economic sense,
comfortable citizens of the community. Most of them have settled down
during recent years to the security of the good life, even if that good
life is occasionally conscience-torn. Gone is the sensitivity to the
world’s sufferings which was such an admirable trait of the
intellectuals of 15 years ago. So immersed are they now in man’s

cosmic suffering that they maintain their silence about the
here-and-now sufferings of men; so fascinated are they by
their private problems that they are indifferent to the social
catastrophe which tortures all humanity. [3] Or if not indifferent, then helpless and hopeless.
Marx’s statement that the task of philosophers is no longer to
philosophize about the world but to change it has been amended to read:
“but to mourn for it.”
The directions which this flight takes are many, but in this article
I wish only to note briefly four of them: the turns to religion,
absolute moralism, psychoanalysis and existentialist philosophy as substitutes
for politics. It goes without saying that where literary material is
cited, I intend neither literary analysis nor evaluation.
 
The Turn to Religion
That, a substantial group of intellectuals should accept
religious notions as relevant to modern man’s situation is perhaps the
most striking tendency of contemporary intellectual life. Though the
causes of any individual’s conversion are often complex and perplexing,
the turn to religion in general is not difficult to explain. Each age
of defeat and dissolution sees similar developments. Where men fail,
miracles are needed; where chaos reigns, men yearn for order. And who
can offer miracles as acceptable or an order as comforting as the
church? Hence the resurgence of religio-emotional primitivism among
sophisticated intellectuals.
The consequences of this turn are enormous. For those who revert to
religion must necessarily break with the entire tradition of modern
thought as it stemmed from the Enlightenment and twisted through the
20th century. The assumptions of rational inquiry and scientific
method; the reliance on intelligence as a means of social
investigation; the conception that man need seek no sanction for his
quest for dignity and meaning outside of himself and that a tragic view
of life is derivable from an acceptance of a naturalistically-ordered
universe which is not a function of some external cosmic
power – all of these traditional postulates of western thought, which
Marxism accepted the better to drive them to total realization, are now
discarded by the religious converts who can urge only intuition,
mysticism and faith. They abandon not merely Marx and Freud and Dewey
and Einstein and Darwin and all the other names which have become the
symbols of modern thought; they abandon as well the intellectual
progenitors of the bourgeois revolution. They move back beyond the
Encyclopediasts to pre-bourgeois ideology.
Notwithstanding the strained attempts of a few “left” Catholics and
Protestant socialists to wed religion to some mildly leftist politics,
the large-scale adoption of religion can lead only to passivity and
indifference. How could it be otherwise among men who find this world
so painful that they seek another? [4]
And though religion does serve as emotional nourishment and a source of
mythic symbolism for individual artists (e.g., the talented young
American poet, Robert Lowell), its general domination of the cultural
scene could lead only to obscurantism, stultification and in some
instances regimentation. For today religion is a hard crust on the
social organism shutting off the breath of freedom, generosity, and experimentation.
The central and most representative figure in the turn to religion
is T.S. Eliot, who helped initiate the trend. Unlike many other
converts, Eliot was never a radical in politics and unlike many others
he has taken his conversion most seriously. He has accepted the
ceremonies and dogmas of Anglo-Catholicism with apparently literal
belief; he has not hesitated before some of its least credible or
savory implications. And he has transmuted church values into his literary
criticism and his politics. When as distinguished and sophisticated an
intellectual as Eliot could write in a manner worthy of a parish priest
announcing an index prohibitorium that
In ages like our own it is necessary for Christian
readers to scrutinize their reading, especially of works of the
imagination, with explicit and theological standards. (After
Strange Gods, by T.S. Eliot – my emphasis, I.H.)
then the implications of the religious revival for
political and cultural freedom become clearer.
Eliot has even attempted a political application of his religious
doctrine. In his book, The Idea of a Christian Society,
he constructed a Christian Utopia which, having been established as a
platonic idea, he held to be more significant than the
worldly reality of church political behavior. He argued that the
practice of church politics is a merely transient aspect of
Christianity while the idea of a Christian society is its
indestructible essence. Just as it is helpless before the
self-contained structure of solipsism, so reason is disarmed by this
bland dismissal of actuality in the name of a formal ideal. In this
instance one can only put aside the idea and insist on an
examination of the reality; one can only place Eliot’s argument for
what it is: a traditionally-formulated apology for church reaction.
Yet if Eliot represents the most rigidified personification of the
intellectual reaction to which religion must eventually lead,
he still remains a major voice in contemporary poetry. Which should
warn us against too easy correlations between religiosity and cultural
sterility. For despite the occasional intrusion of his dogma, Eliot’s
poetry still draws, as it usually has, on the emotional tensions of
contemporary life for its major substance.
Few of the other converts to religion have been able to adopt the
faith as rigorously as has Eliot, even when their difficulties led them
to mystical extremes. Such writers as Aldous Huxley and Evelyn Waugh –
paralleling the philosophical vagaries of Jeans and Eddington – have
desperately run to the shelters of faith; but even after they entered
God’s castle they still could not find peace. For none of them has
genuine religious faith. They have a will to faith, a yearning for
faith, a faith in faith, but faith itself they do not have. And though
the skeptical intelligence of such minds as Huxley, Waugh and Isherwood
may even be driven to a conviction of the need for faith, the
quality of faith itself eludes them. Much of the undeliberate pathos of
the later novels of Waugh and Huxley derives from this insistence on a
faith they have not really captured. Their faith is largely verbal:
a chimera which they feel could give them solace if only they could
grasp it.
Huxley’s conversion indicates still another basis for the escape to
mysticism. Running like a thread of reproach through his novels is a
pervasive fear of life and especially of the modern organization of
life (Brave New World, though purporting to satirize a
future Utopia actually described modern society). His fear of life
manifests itself in his equivocal attitude toward sex: in his Ends
and Means he urges sexual sublimation for “the enlargement of
culture.” Is it any wonder that this writer’s conversion resulted not
merely in a deterioration of his talent but also a rupture from all the
vital sources of modern life and feeling?
But the most pitiful and in a way terrifying, result of the turn to
religion appears in the poetry of W.H. Auden. Not only does Auden
prostrate himself before his God; he exults in the prostration, in the
utter renunciation of man’s powers of reason and in the promiscuous
proclamation of man’s guilt. The brash rebelliousness of his youth is
now twisted into a masochistic abasement before his Lord. In his
talented poem, For the Time Being, a Christmas Oratorio, he brings to ultimate
reduction the surrender and self-denial of the intellectual-in-quandary.
By Him is dispelled the darkness wherein the fallen
will cannot distinguish between the temptation and sin, for in Him we
become fully conscious of Necessity as our freedom to be tempted and of
Freedom as our necessity to have faith. And by Him is illuminated the
time in which our freedom is realized or prevented, for the Course of
History is predictable in the degree to which all men love themselves,
and spontaneous in the degree to which each man loves God and through
Him his neighbor.
It is Auden as well who urges on modern man the
Calvinistic dogma that:



“... even in
The germ-cell’s primary division
Innocence is lost and Sin,
Already given as a fact
Once more issues as an Act.”



The religious conversions of the intellectuals have
their low-brow equivalents: Dorothy Sayers and C.S. Lewis, who proclaim
Christianity as a Rotarian dogma equally good for ailing souls and
worldly troubles and who trot out all the theological paraphernalia
(original sin, salvation through redemption) in hearty Salvation Army
style; and finally Lloyd Douglas, who concocts profitable fictional
miracles in the apparent belief that the Bible didn’t provide enough
with which to write best sellers.
 
The Quest for Morality
Yearning for a steady anchor in a terrifyingly
uncontrolled world, a group of intellectuals have turned to absolute
morality as a secular equivalent of the turn to religion. Though each
participant in this quest for the moral grail establishes his own
emphasis, there is one supposition common to all of them: the rejection
of the social matrix of morality and the insistence upon a supra or
extra-historical set of moral values.
Ultimately any sharp dichotomy between “social” and “individual”
morality must result in confusion, for it tends to polarize “society”
and “the individual” as unimpinging abstractions. Both extremes fail to
see the individual inextricably in society and society
necessarily composed of individuals; they are hence unable to develop a
dynamic and active view of morality and its context in existence, or as
the current jargon would have it, its existential context. Either
extreme must necessarily lead to a static and passive view of morality.
In practice few people can cling to these extremes. Once, however,
one admits to an interaction of individual and social or rather once
one admits an indivisible coexistence in which both terms are really
short-hand descriptive abstractions of linked aspects of human
existence – then there is still the main problem: what is the
relationship between these two necessary abstractions and what, if any,
is their causal sequence? Here, I think, Marxism provides a valid and
operationally useful answer: it sees man in context, within limits; it
defines thereby the area of his freedom. (Since it must be based
on complete indeterminacy, “absolute freedom” is no longer actual
freedom; there is nothing in relation to which to be “free.”)
When Marx said that “man makes his own history, but not out of the
whole cloth,” he was, I think, saying something along these
same lines; he was suggesting that the scope of moral action and the
limits within which moral choice is possible are largely conditioned by
the situation in which man finds himself, that is the society in which
man lives. This does not mean that all moral problems are thereby
automatically solved; on the contrary. It does, however, help us to
define them and to test their relevance. Nor does it mean that all
moral problems are reduced to social problems; on the
contrary. It does, however, insist upon that connecting link, with
context without which the moral problem becomes reified and thereby
divorced from human situations.
Now the most interesting thing about the turn to absolute morality
is that, when viewed in historical perspective, it is itself so clearly
conditioned by the very temporal and contingent social conditions from
which it tries to free itself. The attempt to discover again absolute
morality is in the present historical situation clearly a result of the
sense of impotence the intellectuals feel before the social problems of
the world. Were the intellectuals engaged in activity which they felt
would make a difference, they would not try to climb the cliffs of
absolute morality. So there is more than a touch of irony in the fact
that the turn to absolute morality can be explained only by an approach
which is its antithesis.
The source of this tendency in the feeling of social impotence is
vividly described by a socialist writer.
Justice and Truth are capitalized and it is felt that
it might thereby be possible to regain for them a lustre which was
lost, in the daily grind of earthly contact. This reminds one of the
word magic practiced in certain primitive cultures: if a tribesman does
a forbidden thing he constantly cries aloud that he is doing the Good
and Rightful, thus hoping to fool the Gods. The current cry for Justice
and Truth seems to be a related phenomenon; here also word magic
replaces coping with the real world. (Digging at the Roots or
Striking at the Branches? by Louis Clair, Politics,
October, 1946.)
Once, however, the categories of absolute morality have
been established and capitalized, where then? What are the
consequences? To live according to the precepts of this morality?
But that is impossible, literally impossible. The moralist’ must live
in this world, in capitalist society; he must still, like it
or not, behave as a unit of a commodity-producing society. He may
publish a magazine advocating absolute morality, but all the conditions
of his act of publication – from the cost of printing to his ability to pay his
contributors – are determined by factors which violate his absolute
morality. He has only three choices: to split himself; to
isolate himself; or to try to change the social conditions in which his
dilemma is rooted. If he chooses the last, then he must become a
politician; and no politician of any sort ever has, ever can
or ever will be able to function according to absolute morality.
Apart from the fact that this tendency leads to an impasse for
social activity, it leads to something perhaps as unattractive:
unlimited banality. Thus Dwight Macdonald, the man who went from Karl
Marx to Paul Bunyan, discovers – hold your breath! – that people in big
cities are unfeeling and calloused, that in fact cities are too big and
that men should never hurt each other. If Macdonald urges men
to turn the other cheek to society, his co-thinker, Paul Goodman, urges
men simply to ignore society. Goodman tells people to stop working for
wages, to quit their jobs when they find their work uninteresting. He
neglects to mention how people are to eat and feed their children if
they follow his advice, but then no thinker can be expected to make his
system completely foolproof.
The whole matter was once summed up to perfection by Dwight
Macdonald before he departed from this world:
The essence of reactionary politics is to try to get
people to behave in a class society as though it were a classless
society, i.e., to stop “playing politics.” (My emphasis – I.H.)
 
Psychology as a Substitute
While the turn to religion is an atavistic reaction, the
recent absorption in psychoanalysis by American intellectuals is a more
complex phenomenon. Without question Freudianism is one of the major
achievements of modern culture. We may accept as significant
contributions to our understanding of human life Freud’s broad insight
into human behavior while rejecting his sociological by-products. (His
specific clinical procedures and methods of therapy should be evaluated
only by specialists.)
The recent glazed fascination with which American intellectuals have
turned to psychoanalysis is, however, not merely an alert reaction to a
powerful theory; it is that, but it is also something else. For if the
turn to religion involves an atavistic reaction, then the recent
fascination with psychoanalysis involves a distention of
materials. In the attempt to make psychoanalysis serve where politics
presumably failed, a number of its less cautious converts have distended
the discipline beyond its proper limits.
This distention takes two forms. First, the exorbitant claims made
for a theory which is essentially a hypothesis for individual
therapy and neither a Weltanschauung nor a method of social
analysis (e.g., the uncritical analogical theory of “mass neurosis” of
the German people). Secondly, though less tangibly, the evident element
of morbidity with which the theory is espoused, its use not as a
challenging tool for self-understanding but as a haven from
responsibility and action. The human being becomes a passive and
prostrate victim unable to act or react.
The most extreme distention of psychoanalysis is at present
practiced by the political followers of the analyst, Wilhelm Reich.
Proceeding from the most admirably motives, Reich’s writing is immersed
in a thoroughly revolutionary spirit which rejects the capitalist
status quo. In his book on fascism, Reich displays a historical sense
not often found among orthodox Freudians: he attempts a correlation
between political authoritarianism and sexual suppression which is
suggestive if not conclusive. Yet the basic political effect of his
writings, whatever their value for therapeutic practice, is to provide
a plausible rationale for the flight from politics.
Reich develops a theory of sexual fabianism: he sees the
authoritarian structures of capitalist society leading to a destruction
of orgastic potency among its citizens. From this theory he concludes
that before people can become genuine revolutionists they must first
restore their orgastic potency; otherwise any revolution would merely
perpetuate in new guise the authoritarian structure of the past and
inhibit the development of free sexuality and the creative
potentialities of mankind.
Even if we accept the hypothesis of an intimate correlation between
political authoritarianism and sexual suppression, there does not at
all necessarily follow its converse: that the achievement of sexual
freedom will make people into, or is an indispensable prerequisite for
people becoming, revolutionists. As has been remarked by critics of
Reich, the tyro of the bedroom is not necessarily the hero of the
barricades ... and vice versa.
In the meantime people attracted to Reich’s views, especially their
popularization by his enthusiastic followers, find a rationale for
political abstention: they must achieve orgastic potency first,
and one doesn’t do that overnight, you understand. ... To justify this
abstentionism, they raise the hoary question: how can a party of
neurotics (substitute believers in violence, immoral people, etc.,
etc.) make a really liberating revolution unless its membership is
first sexually liberated?
How, in the light of this question, past revolutions were
accomplished – revolutions which certainly fulfilled the social tasks
necessary and possible for them (the great French, the Cromwellian, the
American, the Russian) – the Reichians do not explain. They are forced
into the dilemma either of denying historical validity to all previous
revolutions or of asserting that the parties leading these revolutions
were composed of unneurotic, orgastically potent individuals.
Reich has explicitly repudiated socialist political movements, which
he sees as perpetuating the present authoritarian structures. He calls
upon the proletariat to liberate itself sexually. Whether this
liberation is possible under capitalism and why capitalism is so
bad if it is possible – these problems confront the Reichians. Is
it not evident then that, whatever its value for
therapy, this theory is a sexual variant of that school of absolute
morality which insists that the individual must save himself before he
can try to change society? Whether the call be to attain the True and
the Good; or to find the Only God; or to achieve sexual freedom, the
result is the same: the substitution of individual redemption for
social revolution. Men are told what to be, not what to do.
And how palatable is this substitution for those in flight from politics!
 
The Vogue of Existentialism
The breathless adoption of existentialism by a number of
American intellectuals is a striking instance of their desperate quest
for novelty. They are not really interested, with honorable
exceptions here and there, in its philosophical aspects, for the appeal
of existentialism is as a mood rather than a doctrine. One must
therefore differentiate between the philosophical school which has
behind it a considerable history and the current Paris-New York vogue.
Whatever the philosophical implications of existentialism – on which I
am not in a position to comment – it seems that they are hardly such as
to warrant all the excitement that it has provoked in American
intellectual circles. Nor does one discern in existentialism proposals
for human behavior or social action sufficiently radical or new to
warrant so much excitement.
I have neither the desire nor the training to offer here any sort of
exposition or criticism of existentialism. [5] But while refraining from such presumption, I think
it is not too risky to say a few words about the existentialist tendency
in so far as it is related to the contemporary intellectual flight from politics.
The reason for the current existentialist vogue is not a sudden
interest in its attempt to upset traditional philosophical edifices;
not, that is, in existentialism’s views on the traditional
epistemological and ontological systems. Existentialist philosophers
have attempted to deny the relevance of ontological problems as
traditionally formulated – something which should be familiar enough to
American intellectuals not to cause too much excitement.
The immediate importance of existentialism seems rather social and
psychological: it accurately and dramatically portrays the
moods of an entire generation and it extrapolates these moods from
their social matrix by constructing them into a set of attitudes with
which to counter the conditions from which they arose. In the hands of
the French writers who are currently the most prominent exponents of
existentialism, the theory is largely a matter of developing attitudes
to life (what the man in the street often believes philosophy to
be) rather than dealing with the usual philosophical problems.
In the view of its proponents, the human being is different from all
other beings in that he possesses self-consciousness, he is able to
feel concern about his own being and he must therefore always be aware
of his unavoidable and possibly imminent death. For this reason his
most fundamental attitude to life is “anxiety.” As a keen critic of
existentialism, Paul Kesckemeti writes:
“In ‘anxiety’ existence comes nearest to a complete
and adequate understanding of itself, because anxiety contains in
itself the most fundamental piece of knowledge that is given to man,
namely, the knowledge that his existence is finite. It is bounded by death.”
This sense of the nullity of life as stemming from its
finiteness is expressed by Sartre when he writes that “every existent
is born without reason, perpetuates itself out of inertia, and dies
fortuitously.” To this acceptance of life as a journey from void to
void, existentialism, at least in its French version, adds several
other attitudes: man’s true nature, his “authenticity,” is most
thoroughly developed when he squarely and fully confronts his
“anxiety,” which is life’s fundamental heightening condition;
the free individual is thrust into a “situation” not of his own making
but he is always able to make a choice in his attitudes and
actions and thereby possesses the freedom to “engage” himself. Camus, a
writer associated with the existentialists though not strictly speaking
of them, adds the concept of rebellion as the basis of man’s dignity
for which the dramatic image is his myth of Sisyphus. He writes of
Sisyphus, the symbol of man, that he
“... is the absurd hero. His scorn of the gods, his
hatred of death, and his passion for life earned him the unspeakable
punishment of his whole being being employed to achieve nothing.”
The connection between these attitudes and the dilemma
of the leftist intellectuals within the French resistance during the
occupation – a dilemma of having to reconcile political resistance with
a fundamental desperation and sense of desolate helplessness – is well
known and obvious enough. But what I find most striking in these
attitudes of existentialism is that, if taken more in terms of
imaginative projections than as factual descriptions of human
existence, they express as vivid dramatic abstractions
precisely the dilemmas of the intellectuals who feel themselves to be
the “powerless people.” That the proponents of existentialism claim
their generalized descriptions of their own historically caused
and limited situation as a description of all human existence is
merely an ironic footnote.
But I think it should be apparent that the obsessive concern with
“anxiety” is the result of the historically provoked and multiple
anxieties of contemporary life. Or that the preoccupation with death per
se is the outgrowth of the terrifying domination of recent life by
the death-politics of totalitarian society. One need not go
too far back in history to show that men (as distinct from “man”) have
not always felt death to be the dominating fact of their lives; that at
various times men have accepted their death as an event of not too
great moment and certainly as an event which did not make their entire
lives “absurd” – and this after the loss of belief in an
after-life. One need only point to as recent a period as that after the
First World War, when there was a great wave of revolutionary
enthusiasm. It is impossible to imagine the attitudes of existentialism
being as readily accepted then as they are today. (The one country,
Germany, in which existentialism arose and gained some influence during
the twenties was, significantly enough, the most deeply wracked by the
capitalist crisis in Europe.)
If we remain skeptical of existentialism’s dramatic abstractions as
valid descriptions of life “in general” (because we are skeptical of any
descriptions of life “in general”), we must still recognize that
existentialism mirrors in conceptual terms the “alienation” of the
modern intellectual. Existentialism seems to me essentially a
reflection of a period of social defeat and decay. (Sartre’s doctrine
of “engagement,” while it stresses the need of making choices does not
yet prove the need for taking action.) It too tells man what to be, not
what to do; it is a symptom of our times, related, though indirectly,
to the flight from politics.

I have tried to chart briefly a few of the directions of
the flight of the contemporary intellectuals from politics. Once these
tendencies are understood, there is little more to say except this: We
are living in the midst of a terrible cataclysm, the disintegration of
a putrescent society. And the tendencies which have been described here
are the result of this disintegration: the collapse and surrender of
the human intelligence before the terrors of our times.
But if the intellectuals flee from politics, politics pursues them
relentlessly. Ultimately they cannot escape it. Yet it seems reasonably
certain that with one or two exceptions and surprises none of the older
intellectuals (those who reached their maturity in the thirties) can be
expected to resume any sort of active or close relationship with the
socialist movement. If the road away is a smooth and gentle decline,
the road back is uphill and rocky.
What then will happen when the depression bursts in a few years?
Some of the intellectuals will succeed in providing themselves with
relatively comfortable cushions to soften the fall; others will lose
their marginal jobs and seek out the equivalent of WPA if there is one.
But the younger intellectuals of tomorrow, those who are still in
college or beginning their work – what about them? Here we can expect a
genuine revolutionary ferment, a political rebelliousness which may
result in a new leftward trend.
It is to this group that we look forward with some hope for a new
flowering of revolutionary intellectuals. We cannot expect that so
accomplished or brilliant a group as gravitated to Marxism in the
thirties will appear in the near future. But we can work with small
beginnings: we can try to build the kind of movement which is
sympathetic to the needs and problems of young intellectuals and which
by its democratic nature and its lively and undogmatic attitude to
ideas will be able to attract them. It is in such elements – one can
already discern the first dim signs of their appearance – that we can
find a counter-influence to the current flight from politics, a flight
which is perhaps the last chapter in the history of a generation of
American intellectuals.

Footnotes
1. The reader may
have noticed a shift in focus from “intellectuals” to “left
intellectuals.” It is really with the latter that I am here concerned,
though to understand their development we shall have to discuss general
intellectual tendencies. It goes without saying that many, perhaps
most, American intellectuals did not participate in the four trends I
have mentioned.
2. The most
pathetic evidence of the destruction of an entire revolutionary
generation is the fate of the Loveatone group. This once proud Marxist
tendency committed suicide en masse at the outbreak of the
war, an act which has few precedents in the socialist movement. Of its
three main figures, one, Lovestone, has become a “think man” for a
trade union bureaucracy; another, Wolfe, is now a Menshevik who defends
Chiang Kai-shek’s regime (see American Mercury,
August 1947); and the third, Herberg. has been converted to orthodox
Judaism. Tempus fugit, indeed!
3. A revealing
instance is the indifference and silence of the bulk of American
intellectuals about the recent colonial repressions by French and Dutch
imperialism in Indo-China and Indonesia. Fifteen years ago such events
would have evoked an immediate and powerful reaction from at least a
section of the American intellectuals.
4. Theoretically
religious converts could attempt to bring God’s order to earth, as a
few iconoclasts have seen their task; but most of the recent converts
have sought a haven in religion rather than a creed of public action.
5. The best brief
account of existentialism of which I am aware is in an article by Paul
Kesckemeti in the March 1947 issue of Modern Review.
Other references are: William Barrett’s pamphlet, published by Partisan
Review, which discusses mainly Heidegger, an existentialist
codifier: Hannah Arendt’s scholarly but difficult article in the
Winter 1946 Issue of Partisan Review; and Jean Paul
Sartre’s fragmentary Existentialism, published by
Philosophical Library.
 



The Case of Comrade Tulayev
by Victor Serge
Doubleday, 306 pp. $3.00.
The first thing that needs to be said, and perhaps the most important thing, is that Victor Serge’s novel conveys atmospheric authenticity: he knows Russia, he knows Stalinism, he knows the revolutionary movement. This authenticity is not necessarily the result of Serge’s long political experience, for it does not at all follow that because a man knows something intimately in life he can write about it satisfactorily in a book. The “reality” encountered in experience is not the “reality” achieved in literature: witness the fact that Henry James wrote a superb group-portrait of radicalism in The Princess Casamassima yet knew nothing at first-hand about the radical movements. In fact, it is interesting that of the three 19th century novelists who have given us the greatest political novels yet written – Dostoievsky, Conrad and James – only the Russian had any sort of political experience, and that in a brief traumatic brush with a utopian group. No greater testimony can be offered to the power of the imagination than the fact that Henry James, a conservative 19th century gentleman, could write more accurately and perceptively about radicals than John Dos Passos, who had come into close relations with the radical movement.
No, the authenticity of Serge’s novel is an imaginative achievement. A journalist by instinct and training, he has intermittently taken the imaginative leap, the imaginative risk by asking himself: what is the interior experience of a Russian capitulator? what is the interior experience of a deposed bureaucrat? About half the time this leap is successfully completed.
The central trait of Serge’s previous writing has been its romantic quality. He has produced a certain kind of loose journalism: the impressionistic memoir, the nostalgic reminiscence, the indignant pamphlet. His strength: a touching sort of warmth, a genuine humaneness, a Jacobin fraternalism. His weakness: a “softness” of touch, a blurring of effects, an inclination to schwärmerei, a lack of discipline. These characteristic traits can all be found in Comrade Tulayev, but what distinguishes the book is Serge’s conscious effort to surmount his journalistic self and write like a genuine novelist. A rather mechanical division suggests itself: whenever he is writing narrative, filling in the background of his story by brief synoptic passages, he writes as a journalist while his scenes, in which the characters take over and replace his customary rhetoric, have the novelistic quality, not always successful but still the quality.
In a certain sense, the radical reader has especially to be on his guard while reading Comrade Tulayev. The material is so close to us, the point of view so congenial, the pathos so unbearable (the pathos in life, prior to our reading) that we are emotionally defenseless against the entire impact of the book. Now I do not say that the point of view is wrong or the pathos unjustified; I say rather that the emotion which we bring to Comrade Tulayev or which it can elicit almost immediately by the very announcement of its subject is not yet, at least not necessarily the emotion which comes from a genuine esthetic experience. Let me offer a simple example of what I mean. During the Hitler period the most sleazy sloganized book or play about anti-Semitism could greatly stir a Jewish audience, the book or play serving as a button to release the anguish already present in the audience. But this was not the same thing as the anguish which might have been released through a genuine work of art on the same theme. Now, as it happens, Comrade Tulayev is a mixed affair: partly a fine novel, partly a second-hand pastiche of the conventional novel, and partly stirring journalism. Let us try to distinguish.
There are two superb scenes in Comrade Tulayev, neither directly political yet both greatly tinged with political colors. In one of them the brilliant capitulator, Rublev, who expects momentarily to be arrested, arranges a meeting with some of his old comrades in the woods. Three men, old veterans and comrades of the revolution, meet by stealth: they know their days are coming to an end. They discuss what can be done in desultory terms, they disagree, they quarrel a bit. So far it is a fairly routine, though effective scene. But now Serge shows a touch of genius. The spontaneous life-force of these men is stirred – stirred by the coldness and purity of the snow in the woods, by the warmth and pathos of this, probably their last meeting – and they begin ... what? Not to talk about programs, politics, ideas; it is too late for that; they are doomed. They begin throwing snowballs at each other laughing like children, for an unbearably pathetic moment innocent and carefree and forgetful.
“They leaped, laughed, sank into snow up to their waists, hid behind trees to make their ammunition and take aim before they let fly. Something of the nimbleness of their boyhood came back to them, they shouted joyous ‘ughs,’ shielded their faces with their elbows, gasped for breath. Wladek stood where he was, firmly planted, methodically making snowballs to catch Rublev from the flank, laughing until the tears came to his eyes, showering him with abuse: ‘Take that you theoretician, you moralist, to hell with you,’ and never once hitting him ...”
This is the work of a real novelist: it is spontaneous, fresh; it tells us more about these men than any number of abstractions could; and yet it would be impossible without an intimate foreknowledge of their politics, impossible without a foreknowledge of the moral stature and quality of the Bolshevik old guard. Now take as a contrary example a scene in which a young Trotskyist, Stefan Stern,
“suddenly put his arm around her waist [his secretary], drew her close, and simply said: ‘You’ll stay with me, Annie? I get so bored at night.’ ... She looked at him out of the corner of her eyes, divided between annoyance and a sort of joy, wanted to answer him angrily: ‘Go get yourself a whore, Stefan – like me to lend you ten pesetas?’...” etc, etc.
Maybe some young Trotskyists – or young anything else – talk this way, but if so I have never met them, and hope I never shall. This sort of stagey dialogue is simply embarrassing. And there are plenty of other examples: A bureaucrat reprimands his wife, asking her if she wants a divorce. “She said furiously: ‘Yes.’ And at the same time, more softly, her long eyelashes lowered: ‘No.’” Really!
* * *
Comrade Tulayev is written in the conventional form of the European social novel, what might be called the revolving- stage or multiple-strand novel. A series of simultaneous actions are initiated, characters move in foreboding proximity or ironic dissonance and then somehow the several strands of action are brought together into climax. This is the sort of book prevalent in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and not without reason: it assumes an essentially stable society, in which the matters most worth observation are the relations of conflicting groups and the gradations of social manners. Today this approach is almost unavoidably stale, if only because it ignores those indispensable revolutions in technique of the past several decades which were themselves the consequence of the break-down of modern society. The “slice of life” novel cannot cope with the vertiginous extremities of modern experience; it is too slow, too stately, too rationalistic; it is designed essentially to depict an orderly, competitive, many- leveled bourgeois world.
The multiple-strand novel is particularly inappropriate for a portrayal of modern Russian life, for no novelist could possibly know enough about the social gradations such a novel requires. And for Serge, not a trained novelist but a journalist writing a novel, it is a most dangerous form: it requires too much from him in terms of craft, particularly in transitional passages; it exposes him too greatly to the temptation to fill in the holes of his narrative with the putty of rhetoric. One consequence, therefore, is that the novel has an excessively schematic quality: each character is meant to illustrate a type and you get the famous “gallery of characters” about which middle-brow critics like to babble but which does not produce the kind of dramatic action or the moral presentment which is necessary for a first-rate novel.
A comparison with Darkness at Noon has a certain value here. In some respects, to be mentioned later, Serge’s novel is quite superior to Koestler’s, but precisely because of its cumbersome, cluttered form it is unable to achieve the dramatic concentration of Darkness at Noon. Koestler shrewdly realized his literary (if not his intellectual) limitations and narrowed the range of his book to one locale, one dominating character and one uninterrupted action, thus accumulating drive and power. Serge’s novel, by comparison, is structurally diffuse.
Still, I should not like to give the impression that Comrade Tulayev is a failure; it has many successful things in it. There are qualities of observation and occasional novelistic achievements which are as good as anything done by the major European political novelists of this century, though not of the 19th century.
The two major achievements of the book are Serge’s characterizations of Rublev the capitulator and Ryzhik the intransigent oppositionist. Viewed esthetically, Rublev is more convincingly done than his counterpart, Rubashov of Darkness at Noon. Koestler drew his character primarily in terms of moral abstraction: Rubashov capitulates because of a faulty conception of morality, an inadequate understanding of the relation of means to ends, and his ratiocinations become a significant but dubious dimension of the book, a heavy load carried only by its swift action. As a projected human being, Rubashov is soon dissolved in the mental gymnastics Koestler assigns him. By comparison, Serge’s Rublev is established with less didactic stringency, more humane tolerance: his reasoning is essentially the same as Rubashov’s, though Serge is more gifted than Koestler at suggesting the particular inflections of an Old Bolshevik’s thinking, but he exists as a man rather than a shadow of a writer’s intellect. I cannot understand myself, however, why some reviewers counterpose Serge to Koestler in the portrayal of a capitulator, for Rublev thinks much like Rubashov, if less abstractly; both capitulate to Stalin on the false and somewhat incredible theory that it is necessary to subordinate opposition because of the threat of external capitalism. If it be replied that Serge is superior, not because Rublev is different from Rubashov, but because he also shows Old Bolsheviks who do not capitulate, then one has moved to the preposterous position of attacking a novelist for not having written about something. This may be a valid criterion for an encyclopedia, but not for a novel.
Serge is at his best in his portrait of Ryzhik, the old Trotskyist, and here he does not make any false steps, he does not romanticize at all. It is a brilliant stroke to show Rublev as, in a certain sense, more political, more intellectual than Ryzhik: the capitulator must engage in a far more ingenious set of mental processes than the oppositionist who stands firm and irrevocably committed. And Serge is also very shrewd to have Ryzhik not appear until almost half way in the novel; after all the bureaucratic filth and capitulationist feebleness, the shock of this old, grizzled veteran revolutionary is profoundly liberating. This is Serge’s main achievement: he has shown what a real revolutionist is, an old rebel hard and strong and simple, not really an intellectual, but the best kind of militant. Ryzhik is, in a sense, beyond politics: he is in the more perilous arena of commitment. His way is clear to him: he lives faithful to the original passion of the revolution: he hardly cares whether anyone heeds him, whether he himself will live. When asked for a message to Moscow, he magnificently replies, “Write them that I shit on the bureaucratic revolution.” When a Stalinist bureaucrat tries to pump him, he tells her, “Look at yourself in a mirror tonight – I am sure you will vomit. If it were possible to die of vomiting, you would die ...” This is a revolutionary hero, yet in no way overdrawn or fanciful: one can think immediately of some of the Old Bolsheviks who would fit Ryzhik’s measure, some of the fighters who were with Trotsky during the Civil War.
Here, at last, Serge does not dissipate his passion in rhetoric, he realizes it in character. Ryzhik is the living tissue of revolutionary passion. Yet – there is something still better. As he is being brought back to Moscow for a confession he will not make, Ryzhik encounters in a cell another old man, Makarenko, also an oppositionist. They embrace in an ecstasy of excitement, talk for a while. What Ryzhik says is acutely disappointing, the old pap about “our state remains a factor of progress in the world because it constitutes an economic organism which is superior to the old capitalist states” – which sounds simply grotesque in a Stalinist prison. Makarenko listens, he has heard all this before; he agrees ... yet …
“Our meeting is extraordinary ... An inconceivable piece of negligence on the part of the services ... We are living through an apocalypse of Socialism, Comrade Ryzhik ... Why are you alive, why am I – I ask you! ... I wish I might live for a century so that I could understand ...”
“I understand,” says Ryzhik.
“The Left theses, of course ... I am a Marxist, too. But shut your eyes for a minute, listen to the earth, listen to your nerves ...”
And then, later:
“Ryzhik, I give you my word of honor that I shall never forget you ... See here, you must try to get a few hours’ sleep ...”
An extraordinary meeting, two extraordinary men. Makarenko knows the theses; “on the whole” he agrees, but he hardly cares now, for what concerns him is the “earth,” the “nerves,” the living trembling quality of the life which he sees transcendent in Ryzhik.
Ryzhik is the personification of revolutionary passion; Makarenko transvalues it into something higher, revolutionary compassion. And these are the two great scenes of the book: the capitulators, brilliant dialecticians, throwing snowballs; the oppositionists, beyond formulae of politics, in the embrace of comradeship.



That George Orwell’s 1984 [1] is a work of major significance, as a political document if not as a novel, and that it is probably the best delineation of totalitarian society we have, is by now clear to anyone who has read the book. It is a book written from the total energy of an aroused man, with all the passion and percipience at his command; a book clearly the product of fear, as there is every reason it should be; a book which, in addition to its public relevance, has a distinct undercurrent of personal tragedy. There is a kind of woeful rightness in the fact that Orwell died shortly after completing 1984, that it shows the strains of his harsh and exacerbated impatience. Whatever one’s disagreements with Orwell’s politics, and they are numerous, one must honor a writer who with his last-breath kept pleading with modern man not to let himself be reduced to an ultra-modern slave.
1984 is limited in scope: it does not investigate the genesis of totalitarianism, nor the laws of its economy, nor the prospects for its survival; it merely presents a paradigmatic version of its social life. Orwell’s profoundest insight is his insistence that in a totalitarian society man’s life is completely shorn of dynamic possibilities. The end of life is completely predictable in its beginning, the beginning merely a manipulated preparation for the end. There is no opening for that spontaneous surprise which is the token of, and justification, for freedom. For while the society itself may evolve through certain stages of economic development, the life of its members is static, incapable of climbing to tragedy or dropping to comedy. Human personality, as we have come to grasp for it in class societies and hope for it in a classless society, is obliterated; man becomes a mere function of a process.
The totalitarian society, whether of the fascist or Stalinist variety, thus represents a qualitative break from Western history and tradition. There have been unfree societies in the past; during the Middle Ages there was hardly anything of what we would now call democracy. Yet it was then possible for an occasional group of scholars to create an oasis of relatively free intellectual life (free not by our standards but in relation to the society of the time). The totalitarian society permits no such luxuries: it offers a total “solution” to the problems of the 20th century, that is, a total distortion of what could be the actual solution.
Fascism may indeed be, as Marxists have said, a final decayed form of capitalism, and Stalinism a bastard society arising during that decay as a result of the failure of socialism; but such descriptions, while essential, do not exhaust the problem. Fascism and Stalinism have more in common with each other, despite the difference between their property relations, than either have with capitalism or any past form of Western society. Unlike previous societies, both forms of totalitarianism enter the historical scene completely reactionary, without even the faintest, most ambiguous contribution to humanity; both utilize modern technology to suppress freedom to an extent not merely unthought of, but actually impossible, in previous societies. They leave no margin, no Church in which sanctuary is possible for the thief, no Siberia where the revolutionist can freeze and starve but also study, not even a private life to which the dissident can retire in humiliation and despair. When Winston Smith rebels in 1984 the state apparatus not only destroys him, it first forces him to believe he was wrong to rebel.
The social horror of 1984 is to some extent the product of Orwell’s imagination, but the power of that imagination derives from the fact that it is based on, extrapolated from reality. There are no telescreens in Russia but there could well be: nothing in Russian society contradicts the “principle” of telescreens. The fictitious telescreen is horrible precisely because it is so close to reality; imaginative fictions stir us because they are distorted and thereby more distinct versions of our experience.
Usually the utopian novel, such as Bellamy’s Looking Backward, is unbearably dull because its benign vision of the future is fatally marred by its author’s limitations of sensibility: his utopia reflects the damage class society has done to him. But in Orwell’s case, where he is writing an inversion of the utopia novel, a portrait of what one critic has called the unfuture, there is no such problem: if too often we envisage the good society as a surfeited bore, we have plenty of training in imagining its opposite.
I have said that the totalitarian society is qualitatively different from anything we have known in the past, and that, I imagine, may evoke a certain uneasiness from readers who have heard such remarks used as justification for the “lesser evil” theory of politics. But such uses of a valid observation are unjustified. If the totalitarian society is crucially different in kind from its predecessors, it is also organically related to them: it is the ultimate issue of the failure of traditional or liberal capitalism. There is here, so to say, an example of the historical dialectic spinning furiously in reverse, and consequently the more we are impressed by the horror of totalitarianism the more clearly should we see the inability of liberal capitalism to forestall it. What Orwell’s book makes clear or should make clear if people thought about its meaning, is that even if there were once a possibility for a modulated social solution, there is no longer such a possibility; we are truly in an apocalyptic situation: history, and not any disposition toward extreme formulations, forces us to say that it is now all or nothing. 1984 is the face of nothing.
 
II
The accuracy with which Orwell has observed the essential qualities of totalitarianism is remarkable. His book is not really a novel: Smith and O’Brien and Julia are not credible human beings. Seldom are they characters involved in dramatic action, too often are we told things about them rather than shown their interior experience in depth. But that does not really matter, since there is no reason to read 1984 as a novel. Exactly what genre to assign it to I don’t quite know, but that doesn’t really matter either.
There are first the incidental accuracies, the accuracies of mimicry. Take, as an example, Orwell’s imitation of Trotsky’s style in The Theory and Practise of Oligarchical Collectivism by the villain of Oceania, Emanuel Goldstein. Orwell has here caught something of the rhetorical sweep of Trotsky’s grand style, particularly his inclination to use scientific references in non-scientific contexts (“Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however far it is pushed one way or another.”) Or consider how well Orwell has noticed Trotsky’s fondness for the succinct paradox through which one may sum up the absurdity of a society: “The fields are cultivated with horse plows while books are written by machinery.” Or consider how well Orwell has noticed the revelatory detail of the authoritarian institution: that grey-pink stew, surely familiar to anyone who has ever been in an army, which Smith eats for lunch; that eternal bureaucratic stew ...
On a profounder level than accurate mimicry or particularized observation is Orwell’s grasp of the distinctive social features of totalitarian society. Here he tends to write abstractly, as a sociologist rather than novelist, but still with great penetration.
One of the most poignant scenes in 1984 is that in which Smith, trying to discover what life was like before Big Brother’s reign, talks to an old worker in a pub. The exchange is unsatisfactory to Smith, since the worker can remember only stray bits of disconnected fact and is quite unable to generalize from his memory; but it is extremely apt as a bit of symbolic action. The scene indicates that one of the most terrifying things about totalitarian society is that it systematically destroys social memory, first, through the forced disintegration of individual experience and, second, through the complete obliteration of objective records. The worker whom Smith interviews remembers that the beer was better before Big Brother (a not insignificant fact) but he cannot really understand Smith’s key question: “Do you feel that you have more freedom now than you had in those days?” To pose, let alone answer, such a question requires a degree of social continuity and cohesion, as well as a complex set of value assumptions, which Oceania has deliberately destroyed. For in such a society there is no longer a sense of the past: man is deprived of his ancestors.
The destruction of social memory becomes a major state industry in Oceania, and here of course Orwell is borrowing directly from Stalinism which, as the most “advanced” form of totalitarianism, is infinitely more adept at this job than was fascism. (Hitler burned books, Stalin has them rewritten.) The embarrassing document disappears down memory hole – and that is all.
Orwell is similarly acute in noticing the relationship of the totalitarian state to culture. Novels are produced by machines, a considerable improvement over the Russian “collective novel” of two decades ago. The state anticipates and supplies all wants, from “cleansed” versions of Byron to pornographic magazines. That vast modern industry of prefabricated amusement which we now call “popular culture” is an important state function. And meanwhile language itself is stripped of those terms which connote refinement of attitude, subtleties of sensibility. As one character says:
“Don’t you see that the whole aim of Newspeak [the official dialect of Oceania] is to narrow the range of thought? In the end we shall make thought-crime literally impossible, because there will be no words with which to express it. Every concept that can ever be needed will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning rigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten ... The whole climate of thought will be different. In fact there will be no thought, as we understand it now. Orthodoxy means not thinking – not needing to think. Orthodoxy is unconsciousness.”
With feeling as with language. Oceania seeks to destroy spontaneous affection because that, too, is subversive. Smith, in one of the book’s finest passages, thinks to himself:
“It would not have occurred to [his mother] that an action which is ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless. If you loved someone, you loved him, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love. When the last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child in her arms. It was no use, it changed nothing, it did not produce more chocolate, it did not avert the child’s death or her own; but it seemed natural to her to do it.”
The totalitarian state destroys social memory. It makes all of life a function of its operation. It frowns upon those luxuries of feeling which are the essence of human response to unavoidable tragedy. And worst of all, it destroys private life.
 
III
So far as I can see, there are only a few errors in Orwell’s book, and most of those flow from the fact that his totalitarian society is more total than we can at present imagine. None of them is completely indefensible; they are errors at all because they drive valid observations too far.
In Oceania the sex instinct, particularly among members of the Outer Party (the lower bureaucracy), is virtually obliterated. (I do make allowance for the fact that Orwell’s method is dramatization by exaggeration.) One of the most harrowing bits in the book is Smith’s recollection of his sexual relations with his former wife, a loyal unthinking party member: she would submit herself regularly once a week, as if for an ordeal and resisting even while insisting, in order to procreate for the party.
Now there is a point to this: in Russia there has been a noticeable restriction of sexual freedom. But we must distinguish between a Stalinist attempt to develop more reliable child-bearing units among the masses and a presumed tendency to sexual prudery among the upper social layers. So far as we know, the Russian ruling circles do not indulge in the kind and amount of perversion which prevailed among the top Nazis, but it is hard to believe that there is not a good deal of sexual looseness among even the Stalinist machine-men types.
We know from the past that the sexual instinct can be heavily suppressed. In Puritan society, for example, sex was viewed with some suspicion, and it is not hard to imagine that even in marriage pleasure was not then a conspicuous consequence of sex. But it must be remembered that in Puritan society the suspicion of sex was based on a rigid morality universally accepted, on a conception of the supreme good: men mortified themselves enthusiastically in the name of God. In Orwell’s Oceania, however, there is no similar exalted faith; in fact, such faith is looked upon with suspicion, for what is wanted is mechanical assent rather than intellectual fervor or enthusiastic belief. It therefore seems hard to imagine that the lower bureaucrats of the Outer Party would be able so completely to discard sexual pleasure; it seems more likely that in the insufferable boredom of Oceanic life there would be a great hunger for sexual activity, if only in order to gain a moment of excitement. Orwell anticipates this point by informing us that sexual promiscuity in the Outer Party is punishable by death. But to forbid promiscuity is not yet to quench the pleasure component of sex itself.
The point has a more general significance. A reactionary society can force people to do many things which are against their social and physical interests and which may cause them acute discomfort and pain; it can perhaps accustom them to receive pain with passive resignation; but I doubt that it can break down the fundamental physiological distinction between pleasure and pain. (No doubt, to anticipate an objection, there are situations when pleasure and pain intermingle, but they are nonetheless distinguishable human experiences.) Man’s biological construction is such as to require him to need food and, with less regularity or insistence, sex; society can do a lot to dim the pleasures of food and sex but it seems most unlikely that it can destroy them entirely. We may consequently expect the animal component of man to rebel against social constrictions which deny such fundamental needs, even when his consciousness has been corrupted and his mind terrorized. No doubt, this objection to Orwell’s view of sexual life in Oceania has its limits, for there are times when, apparently, instinct can be completely controlled or numbed. (Why, for example, did not the Jews who were led to Hitler’s gas chambers make some gesture of rebellion, even with the foreknowledge that they would be destroyed if they made it? Perhaps because they had been drained of the capacity for initiative; perhaps because they feared torture more than death.) In any case, I think that while Orwell is right in suggesting that totalitarianism inhibits sexual freedom and creates a psychic atmosphere which mutilates sexual pleasure, he has exaggerated the extent to which men can be driven to discord and renounce their basic animal drives.
More important is Orwell’s conception of the social role of the proles, or workers, in Oceania. As he sees it, the proles are actually better off than members of the Outer Party: they are allowed greater amounts of privacy, the telescreen does not bawl instructions at them or watch their every movement, and the secret police seldom bothers them, except to remove a talented or independent worker. Presumably Orwell would justify this conception of class relations in Oceania by saying that the workers as a class have become so helpless and demoralized that the state need no longer fear them. Now we have no right to say that this never could happen, but we must also observe that it has not yet happened. Neither the Stalinists nor Nazis have felt sufficiently secure to relax their surveillance of the workers; in Russia the tendency has actually been toward increasing domination of the workers’ lives.
Orwell’s conception of the workers’ role in a totalitarian society can also be challenged on more fundamental grounds. The totalitarian state can afford no luxuries, no exceptions; it can tolerate no group outside its constantly exercised control. It must always scour every corner of society, searching for dissidents and once more implanting its dogma; anything less would be the beginning of its collapse. It is in the nature of a totalitarian society that it is constantly in a process of self-agitation: it is always shaking and reshaking its members, testing and retesting them to insure its power. And since, as Orwell himself says, the workers, demoralized and brutalized as they are, remain the only source of possible revolt in Oceania, it is precisely they whom the state would least let alone.
Finally, there is Orwell’s extremely interesting but unsatisfactory view of the dynamics of power in a totalitarian society. As Orwell presents the party oligarchy in Oceania, it is the first ruling class in history which dispenses with ideology. O’Brien, the representative of the Inner Party, says “The Party seeks power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the good of others; we are interested solely in power.” The Stalinists and Nazis, he remarks, came close to that view of power, but only in Oceania has all pretense to be serving humanity – that is, all ideology – been discarded.
Now it is true that all social classes have at least one thing in a common: a desire for power. The bourgeoisie has sought power, not particularly as an end in itself (whatever that vague phrase may mean), but in order to be free to engage in a certain kind of economic and social activity; that is, bring to climax the tendencies of capitalist production. The ruling class of the new totalitarian society, most notably in Russia, is different, however, from all previous ruling classes in this respect: it does not think of political power as a distant means toward a non-political end, as the bourgeoisie did to some extent, but rather as its essential end, for in a society where there is no private property the distinction between economic and political power means very little.
So far this seems to bear out Orwell’s view. But if the ruling class of the totalitarian society does not think of political power as a channel to economic expansion and social domination, what does power mean to it? This is, of course, an extremely difficult and complex problem, and those who say that the end of power is power are not contributing anything remarkably profound. For one thing, we may say that many of the objectives for which previous ruling classes sought power can now, in the totalitarian society, be found in political power itself. In bourgeois society political power does not necessarily mean social status, economic wealth, industrial initiative, financial opportunity; in totalitarian society, or as we have called its Stalinist version, bureaucratic collectivism, all of these reside within political power.
But there is something else. No ruling class, at least within Western society, has yet been able to dispense with ideology. (True, there have been ruling classes which did not claim to be ruling for the good of humanity; instead, they might speak of the glory of the nation. But the glory of the nation can ultimately be referred to the good of humanity.) All ruling classes feel a need to rationalize their power, to find some presumably admirable objectives in the name of which they may (often sincerely) act. This they need to win followers, to bind their country with some common outlooks, and to give themselves a measure of psychological security.
Can one, then, imagine a ruling class completely devoid of these props to power? I doubt it. It is true, for example, that among the Russian bureaucrats there has undoubtedly been a great increase of cynicism; few probably believe that they are now directly building socialism with or without the whip; but there must still be some vague assumption, even if only a cynical one, that somehow what they are doing has in it an element of the good. Otherwise they would find it increasingly difficult, perhaps impossible to sustain their class morale.
And the same thing must be true for Oceania’s rulers. That they cling ferociously to power; that they do not rule in order to help humanity in any way; that many of them become cynical about their ideological pretensions; that others of them rationalize their power in terms of a theory of benevolent despotism – all this could be credible. But one cannot believe that a modern ruling class, in a mass society, as all modern societies must be, could survive if it frankly and openly declared itself in the manner of Orwell’s Inner Party.
 
IV
Shortly before his death Orwell wrote:
“My novel 1984 is not intended as an attack on socialism, or on the British Labor Party, but as a show-up of the perversions to which a centralized economy is liable ... I do not believe that the kind of society I describe necessarily will arrive, but I believe ... that something resembling it could arrive.”
This seems to me satisfactory not only as a statement of Orwell’s intention, but as a description of the book’s actual slant. However, since certain socialists have expressed an uneasy feeling that Orwell may be saying that an Oceania may arise, not merely from Stalinism, but also from a genuine socialist effort, I wish to consider – and accept – 1984 on those terms as well. My point is simply this: even if Orwell had meant it in this way, there would be no cause for alarm or anger; we have no right to assume that we have the future tucked away in our vest pockets.
There was a time not so long ago when socialists tended to think of the transition from a class to a classless society as largely an “automatic” process dependent on an expansion of the means of production; I do not say that anyone wrote it out so bluntly (though I imagine that if you took the trouble to look you could find examples of that too) but rather that this was the prevalent cast of our thought. This is something I don’t want to argue about: I know it to be a fact. It was, I think, largely an inheritance from the corruption of the revolutionary movement during the mid-1920’s by the early form of Stalinism and also perhaps by Zinovievism.
It is a way of thinking that is now impossible to any mildly intelligent person. As one reads again Lenin’s State and Revolution, one is repeatedly struck by how extreme – almost, if you wish, utopian – is his democratic bent, his insistence that the masses of people can achieve sufficient maturity and knowledge to serve as autonomous and responsible members of a free society. Some of his most withering sarcasm is reserved for Kautsky and Bernstein when they contaminate their vision of the socialist future with bureaucratic outlooks received from the capitalist present. But while one can only admire Lenin’s complete democratic aspiration and brush aside with impatience all the ignoramuses and fakers (mostly fakers; cf., Mr. Shub) who portray him as the first modern totalitarian, one also feels that much of what he wrote about the immediate transition from class to classless society is either inadequate or, more often, based on a particular involvement with backward Russia which does not apply elsewhere. Lenin’s emphasis, for example, on centralism, while undoubtedly relevant to a country like Russia, is not mechanically to be transposed to other countries. His admiration for Marx’s formula that the Paris Commune “was not a parliamentary, but a working corporation, at one and the same time making the laws and executing them,” must now, I think, be questioned, even though this particular formula .has been sacrosanct in the Marxist movement. The notion of checks and balances within a government, within any government but particularly one which has concentrated in itself social and economic power, seems rather more sensible than it once did. I recall myself often sneering at the checks and balances in the American constitution as being “merely” a device to ward off popular rule during the post-revolutionary period in America; no doubt it was that, but it wasn’t that “merely”; it was also a rather sensible means – within the limits of the class society established at the time – to prevent dangerous concentration of power.
Power is, in one sense, a neutral mechanism, an end for which every social class aspires; but it is also, and always, a danger, as is tacitly recognized by the Marxian formula that in the classless society the state will “wither away” and there will no longer be repressive organs. No doubt, there is truth in the view that to reach a stateless society it is necessary to use power, to win it and extend it; but at the same time we must not forget that the habits of social domination, even when exerted by a progressive class or by real or assumed representatives of that class, are likely to give rise to character structures that will resist the withering away of the state in the name of which power is to be assumed. Similarly, we are now, or should be, somewhat suspicious of the centralism often associated with the transitional period from capitalism to socialism; not that a high degree of economic centralism is unavoidable if the material prerequisite for socialism, a high standard of living, is to be achieved; but rather that with economic centralism must come social and political decentralization, the sharing of power by different, conflicting groups within and near the working class. Just as one of the main factors making for democracy within capitalist society is the fissures created by the conflicts of various strata of the ruling class, so in a transition regime democracy is more likely to be preserved if there are substantive fragmentations of power. What is wanted is not, as one often hears, that the state “allow” the workers to strike, but rather that the workers, through trade unions and cooperatives, have enough social and economic power that the state could not prevent them from striking. The people always need protection from the state; the workers from a workers state, too.
These remarks are terribly cursory and, as such, open to misreading, but I make them not in order to present any sort of rounded view on the difficult problem of the transition to socialism, but merely to indicate an opinion that that transition is not guaranteed in any sense, not even guaranteed by the fact that “we,” the good people, the good socialists might undertake it. The effort to build socialism rests ultimately not on any economic development, indispensable though an increase in productivity and the consequent possibility for leisure and plenty may be; it rests, not with the famous “unleashing of the productive forces,” but rather with a conscious experiment in social relations. The experiment is impossible without the productivity; but the productivity does not yet insure the success of the experiment.
Marx said that with socialism human history would first begin; it is a pregnant remark, suggesting that the final purpose of socialism is to allow men, within the context of a limiting natural world, to determine their own destinies. But they must determine; they must act; they must choose. Seen in these terms, socialism is not merely a necessity but also a gamble: it means a great concentration of power and resources, and all the dangers that come from such a concentration. Misused, distorted by an inadequate conception of its purpose and its continuous ethical content, the effort to build socialism may conceivably be twisted into something as horrible as 1984. What Orwell seems to be telling us is that it need not be if there is a sufficiently high level of human consciousness, that the experiment rests finally on that high level of human consciousness. I see no reason to disagree.
 
Footnote
1. 1984, by George Orwell. Harcourt Brace, 314 pp. $3. Reprinted as a Signet book, 25¢.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. This has been reprinted a number of times since it first appeared in New International.



Two Friends of Man
by Ralph Korngold
Little, Brown, 425 pp., $5.
The American past has recently been so diluted with liberal water that it begins to seem like a long record of ineffectuality and compromise. It is therefore pleasing to have this book, a full-scale biography of the two leaders of nineteenth century Abolitionism, William Lloyd Garrison and Wendell Phillips, who were distinguished precisely for their intransigence and readiness to defy popular views. Ralph Korngold has soaked his book in the Abolitionist atmospheres; his sympathies are, in the best sense of the term, Jacobin, and his book shows a tactful use of a materialist approach to American history which, because it does not vulgarize and oversimplify, is extremely welcome.
Korngold has centered his book on the personalities of the Abolitionist leaders, but since the contrast between Garrison and Phillips involves a major cleavage of perspective within Abolitionism, his approach is fruitful. Garrison was primarily what we should now call a, propagandist: he edited the great Abolitionist paper, The Liberator, and served as organizer for the loosely-bound but nonetheless fiery American Anti-Slavery Society. An extraordinarily courageous man who was nearly lynched several times by Boston mobs, Garrison was the first to make popular in America the program of unconditional abolition of slavery. Yet he was a man of decided intellectual limitations, whose anti-slavery feeling lacked any larger or controlling social context and who mixed his Abolitionism with a variety of such semi-crank notions as prohibition.
 
Views on Civil War
Phillips was something else. Where Garrison had come from a poor family and had had only a limited education, Phillips was one of the last and best of those Boston patricians who took seriously and selflessly the notion of “public service.” He was capable of serious intellectual generalization and eager, above all, to relate the seemingly isolated problem of slavery to a total pattern of social life. So long as the slavery question was unsettled, the two leaders could work together for their common end, and with regard to some tactical problems Garrison’s greater flexibility of maneuver was perhaps more useful than Phillips’ intransigence. But after the Civil War the distance between the two became clear: Garrison considered the fight for Negro freedom over, while Phillips, who grew more radical with age, insisted that the Negro problem involved more than the juridical abolition of slavery and required for its solution the economic rehabilitation of the Negro on the land. Phillips saw the need for an agrarian revolution in the South during the Reconstruction period; had his “harsh” program been carried out the entire cast of American history would have been changed for the better. But while it was to the interest of Northern capitalism to destroy slavery in the South, it feared the consequences of a fundamental democratic revolution in Southern agriculture at a time when the Northern labor movement was beginning to arise.
Phillips soon moved beyond the bounds of consistent Jacobinism or left-wing Republicanism. In his old age, after he had expended his considerable fortune in almost reckless charity, he joined in the formation of a short-lived Labor Party in Massachusetts and ran as its candidate for governor. To what extent he became a socialist is rather a moot point, not quite clarified by Korngold, but it is clear that he was at the very least moving toward socialism. Most important of all, he had come to understand the interrelatedness of social phenomena: he saw that slavery, low wages, women’s suffrage were problems arising within a common social context and comprehensible only against the background of an expanding American capitalism. The man who could have basked in the popularity of yesterday’s radicalism became universally hated as a dangerous radical – which, indeed, he was.
Perhaps the most interesting section of Korngold’s book is his discussion of Phillips’ position during the Civil War. Unlike Garrison, Phillips was strongly antagonistic to Lincoln, dredging up Lincoln’s unsavory record on slavery, denouncing him for his failure bluntly to proclaim an end to slavery, and calling upon the North to prod Lincoln into transforming an inept military campaign into a dynamic revolutionary-democratic war. (Phillips called Lincoln a “first- rate second-rate man.”) It is interesting to notice the similarity between Phillips’ position and Trotsky’s vis à vis Russia during the period in the mid-1920s when Trotsky put forward the famous “Clemenceau thesis.” When denounced for criticizing Lincoln, Phillips replied, much like Trotsky, that his platform called for a more vigorous prosecution of the war against the South, possible only if it were transformed into a revolutionary crusade against slavery. There can be no question that Phillips’ spirited agitation during the Civil War (he spoke to crowds of 40,000 and 50,000 regularly and was acknowledged the outstanding orator of his day) was a major factor in forcing Lincoln to announce the Emancipation Proclamation.
 
Tonic for Our Times
What impresses one most about these men is their immense courage, their readiness to face mobs and jeers and calumnies with dignity and humor (Phillips’ family tried to have him sent to a lunatic asylum when he became an Abolitionist!). They were, in their day and not only in their day, American radicals; and their radicalism took an uncompromising turn. When the Constitution was invoked to justify the Fugitive Slave Act, Garrison and Phillips publicly denounced the Constitution, and Garrison burned it at a public ceremony. So far as this reviewer can ascertain, Garrison wasn’t even put on a “subversive” list, and since there were then no telephones his couldn’t be tapped ...
Perhaps the only serious criticism a non-specialist can make of Korngold’s book is that in his eagerness to show the immediate actuality of Abolitionism he has not analyzed with sufficient methodological rigor the ideas behind it. For such analysis the reader is urged to turn to the chapter on Phillips in Richard Hofstadter’s The American Political Tradition. But Korngold’s book is a bracing tonic for our times, a reminder of the resources of American radicalism.
 



I
Question: What is morality?
Answer: Morality is that which liberals accuse Lenin of rejecting, and in the name of which they find it possible to support the construction of the H-bomb.
 
II
The root of the crisis is political. If Western capitalism had a dynamic program with which to win the confidence of the masses of people in Europe and Asia, it would not be catapulting down the bomb alphabet.
Perhaps the most important political statement made since the war was Churchill’s remark in Boston last spring that only the atom bomb stood between Western Europe and the fate of Russian “communizing.” No capitalist spokesman has ever made a more total admission of the political, intellectual and moral bankruptcy of the system he defends; a more complete acknowledgment that its essential means of existence is sheer force. Churchill was saying what has since become quite clear: the capitalist West has no means short of war with which to stop the growth of Stalinism; it can contain here, suppress there, but Stalinism, with its usurped “revolutionary” dynamic, has the distinct political advantage. The more H-bombs the West builds, the more will Stalinism thrive politically.
What has failed is not some vague thing publicists like to call the “conscience of humanity” but the specific anti-Stalinist policy of the bourgeois powers. By dint of a tremendous effort, they temporarily stopped the Russians in Berlin – only to have China conquered by Mao. The expansive possibilities for Stalinism in Asia are at the moment very great: it is bleeding French imperialism to prostration in Indo-China, it is creating havoc in Burma, it is badly disrupting Malaya, Britain’s last Pacific base. In the meantime, Stalinist strength in Western Europe, while possibly in decline, is not decisively less than two or three years ago. It still has the support, albeit less active, of great sections of the French and Italian workers, and though it cannot now take power in these countries, it could fatally disrupt them in case of war. In Germany the Stalinists are beginning to regain strength through a demagogic campaign, for national unity. The rest of the world? A headline in the New York Times tells the story: Brazil Reds Busy, Though Outlawed – Social Conditions, High Living Costs Seen as Fertilizer for Underground Movement. Only in the United States have the Stalinists taken a serious beating – and great consolation indeed it must be to the State Department that Eugene Dennis will sit in jail while Mao rules China.
In their muddled and inarticulate way, the workers of Europe and the masses of Asia are determined never to accept the old world. Stalinism they take to be a new world, or perhaps a slightly tarnished version of it. So long as there seems no dynamic alternative, they will continue to accept Stalinism. It is a fact completely damning to the “official” anti-Stalinists that they have not succeeded in breaking the Stalinists’ hold on any large section of their followers, and that the Stalinists have lost support among the masses only as a result of their own policies in Eastern Europe.
The bourgeois world is trapped in the insoluble contradiction that its inability to win enthusiastic, devoted political support in Europe and Asia, which is quite a different thing from accepting US dollars, drives it to relying ever more heavily on the techniques of military domination, whicb in turn alienate the masses of Europe and Asia even more. For remember: thus far the only nation that has used the A-bomb and announced the intended manufacture of the H-bomb is the US. This is the dialectic of disintegration in which Western capitalism is trapped; and from it there are only two ways out: a surrender to socialism, to conceive which is preposterous; or war, to conceive which is not at all preposterous. The decision to manufacture the H-bomb signifies, above all, the failure of a society. For a society that can survive only by reliance on weapons of mass incineration will not survive.
 
III
What is so curious, and so nauseating, about the discussion whether the H-bomb should be made or used is that to all practical purposes the A-bomb is now regarded as quite “normal.” But we do not propose to accept any such notion nor do we propose to forget the fact that an official body of the US government has itself declared the use of the A-bomb unjustified by military requirements.
President Truman, by comparison with whom Nero seems conscience-stricken, has said:
“I made that decision [to use the A-bomb] because I thought 200,000 of our young men would be saved by making that decision and some three or four hundred thousands of the enemy would be saved ...”
This commendable humanitarianism is first called into question by the fact that 125,000 people were killed by the A-bomb. To slaughter so many people because others might in the future be killed if they were not slaughtered, is in itself a pretty dubious piece of morality. (I constantly refer to morality in this article because I have recently been reading the works of David Shub.) But suppose it can be shown that there was no military need for dropping the A-bomb – what then becomes of the humanitarianism of our drowsy leader?
We are indebted to Jack Brad in Labor Action for publicizing a little-known report of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey, an official government commission. The reader will understand why I reprint some of the excerpts from that report.
The survey, extraordinarily sober in language, reports that invasion was not the military alternative to atomic bombing of Japan.
By destroying his [the worker’s] dwelling, by causing him and his family to evacuate burned-out cities, by disrupting and overtaxing transportation facilities, by arousing his fear to report to a place of work which he knew was a bombing target, by making his purchase of food and daily necessities more difficult and finally by lowering his “morale” – in other words by employing the methods of the Wehrmacht over Coventry, of incendiary indiscriminate bombing, such a condition of general paralysis had been wrought that the economy was grinding to a standstill. (My italics – R.F.) The responsible leaders in power read correctly the true situation and embraced surrender well before invasion was expected. (My emphasis – R.F.)
By “early 1945 ... the enemy’s principal problem was to give expression to its political decision to end the war.” In May, 1945, the Japanese approached the “neutral” Russians, asking them for “Russian intercession to end the war.” Whether the Russians communicated this proposal to the US is not known, but it is almost inconceivable that they did not. (If the Russians did not, incidentally, the US would have a tremendous propaganda point against them, for their possible failure to do so resulted in the murder of 125,000 people; but then the fact that the US has not even tried to make this point suggests that it was aware of the Japanese feeler.) The Russians turned down the Japanese proposal for reasons that are obvious: they were not yet in the Pacific war, and a too-hasty peace treaty would have excluded them from the spoils.
With a frankness exceeding the requirements of official morality, the Strategic Bombing Survey continues:
The Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs did not defeat Japan, nor by the testimony of the enemy leaders who ended the war did they persuade Japan to accept unconditional surrender. The emperor, the lord privy seal, the prime minister, the foreign minister and the navy minister had decided as early as May of 1946 that the war should be ended even ff it meant acceptance of defeat on Allied terms.
And further:
Based on a detailed investigation of all the facts and supported by the testimony of the surviving Japanese leaders involved, it is the survey’s opinion that certainly prior to 31 December 1945, and in all probability prior to November 1, 1946. Japan would have surrendered even if the atomic bombs had not been dropped, even if Russia had not entered the war, and even if no invasion had been planned or contemplated. (My emphasis – R.F.)
Every decent human being should engrave these words in this mind: they show that the US stands guilty of having been the first power to use the atom bomb at a time when there was no military justification for doing so.
A footnote: it may be asked whether the US was aware of these facts at the time. The overwhelming probability is that it was: Did not the Russians receive peace proposals from Japan? Was not the famous Sorge spy ring, by American boast, privy to the innermost political circles of Tokyo? Was US Intelligence so inept as not to know the dominant political temper of the Japanese leaders? Will the defenders of Truman plead ignorance as an excuse for mass murder?
 
IV
The liberal mind is a beautifully compartmentalized affair: it admires morality and lives by expediency. All too many liberals have no conception of the relation of an abstract moral standard to what is felt to be the press of necessity; they do not understand that precisely when necessity is invoked must it be most thoroughly measured against the larger moral standard. In their discussions of whether to manufacture the bomb, they first weep over the moral horror of it, and then pass to that compartment of immediacy where they sadly urge that more and larger bombs be made. Consequently, they implicitly confess that there is really no moral consideration involved in the actual decision: there is only preliminary moral dismay. But this puts them in the position which Richard Shufflebarger of Martinsville, Ind., a private citizen of admirable intelligence, has neatly pointed out in a letter recently printed in the New York Times:
Some have suggested that in this course [making the bomb] we have no freedom of choice, therefore no moral responsibility. If we have no moral responsibility for our actions, then by what right do we pass moral judgments on Stalin?
This strikes one as the most interesting question of the year.
 
V
The problem that haunts the popular mind is this:
“To manufacture the H-bomb is terrible, to conceive of its use is even more terrible, but if ‘we’ do not make it and then the Russians do, they will have the world at their mercy; but since we do not want the Russians to have the world at their mercy, we must ourselves make the bomb.”
Aside from the fact that this argument ignores the distasteful consequences of “we” having the world at “our” mercy, it actually does pose the dilemma of those who think in terms of identification with the US government. If one’s thinking is circumscribed by the power struggle between the US and Russia, and if one supports the US in that struggle, then clearly one must regretfully conclude that the US should make the bomb. (However, the argument cuts two ways, and one wonders whether the tyros of “orthodox Trotskyism” on the lower-right-hand corner of whose program there is still inscribed in 3-point type “the defense of the Soviet Union” will urge Stalin to manufacture the H-bomb to prevent capitalist encirclement – with the proviso of course that they could defend the workers’ fatherland more effectively than the so-evidently “timid” Stalin ...)
That support of the US vis-à-vis Russia, in however critical form, must logically lead to support of making the H-bomb (a conclusion from which the consistent New Leader does not hesitate), shows to what an extremity of political bankruptcy and moral desperation any involvement with status quo politics reduces one. If one accepts the dilemma as real, then one must choose between two courses, both of which will probably lead to the mass destruction of humanity.
The greatest crime of the bourgeois and Stalinist worlds is that they prevent political solutions to political problems: ultimately both rely on force or the threat of force in their struggle with each other, though the Stalinists, through their usurpation and corruption of the socialist dynamic, have also at their disposal powerful political weapons. This is the dead-end of the “lesser evil” policy – not only to face the prospect of mass murder but also to approve the preparations for it. The H-bomb makes ridiculous all talk of socialist “critical support” of the US, for it clearly shows that the only outcome of a new war would be the extermination of populations and the death of modern civilization.
To those who say that the H-bomb must be built because the survival of the American nation is as much a moral problem as the survival of humanity, Max Lerner has replied:
“I do not deny that there is the moral problem of American national survival. Of course there is. But the whole point is that in a world where either we or the Russians would be willing to use instruments of mass extermination, neither could survive morally; and in the end neither could survive physically.”
I predict that when the Last Judgment comes and the prosecuting attorney reads off the long, long list of Lerner’s political stupidities, someone will offer this above paragraph and the celestial jury will say, “All right, for that let him sneak into heaven.”
 
VI
What then of the advocates of “preventive war”? One can readily picture the brass in the Pentagon who curse the course of history and mutter to each other: “We should have dropped the bomb before the Russians got it; that would have been the clean and easy way of doing it. Now we’re stuck.” But these minds, which cannot be said to be superior to that of James Burnham, have never been able to understand the consequence of a “preventive war” – that it would rally Europe solidly behind Stalin; that it would drive the Russian masses into the hands of Stalin; and that it would antagonize large sections of US public opinion. Thus, in an odd way, politics does take its revenge on mere force, for it forces the advocates of force to rely on politics, which they rightly suspect and for which they know, and again rightly, that they have no true vocation. In a world of horror there are still a few minor compensations of observation.
 
VII
The only political response from bourgeois circles to the H-bomb that even shows an effort to think is the speech of Senator McMahon of Connecticut. It is a speech of evident sincerity, and his phrase that the US would be “incinerated” in the case of a new war is worth remembering. And he at least understands what the pathetic mediocrity who sits in the White House serenely pronouncing his faith in “man’s higher nature,” does not understand: that the solution to the crisis can only be political.
“Let me warn,” says McMahon, “that building hydrogen bombs does not promise positive security for the United States; it only promises the negative result of averting for a few months or years, well-nigh certain catastrophe.”
So far as it goes, we must support any proposal to use American resources to reconstruct devastated areas of the world, while insisting that national sovereignty in those areas hot be threatened. But the ultimate emptiness of McMahon’s proposal is that it has no political content. The world shall be reconstructed with US aid – good. But under whose control? Who shall rule this world? Shall the Chinese Stalinists be allowed or helped to consolidate their power? Who shall control Germany? Indo-China? These are the real problems of the struggle between the US and Russia, and even if the McMahon plan were carried through with maximum effectiveness, it would not in the slightest solve these problems.
 
VIII
But there is one point in McMahon’s speech that is of great importance. Even, he says, if the “cold war” continues indefinitely without erupting into a hot one,
... it would undermine and corrupt that which we prize more highly even than the absence of hostilities: I refer to liberty. How is it possible for free institutions to flourish or even to maintain themselves in a situation where defenses, civil and military, must be ceaselessly poised to meet an attack that might incinerate fifty million Americans? ... Consider, too, the restrictions on freedom already brought about by the atomic bomb and by its pressure upon us to accept loyalty checks, espionage counter-measures, and widening areas of official secrecy ... To stay alive we will find ourselves more and more compelled to imitate the totalitarian rival. (My emphasis – R.F.)
This is a passage that might well be pondered by those theoreticians of the “new liberalism,” such as Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who see a gradual enfoldment of one New Deal euphoria into another, as well as by those who look to a passage into the liberal paradise greased by the lubricants of “mixed economy.” We even go so far as to call it to the attention of Walter Reuther whose response to the H-bomb has been to suggest that we adhere to the Christian way of life. The Christian way of life having been defined by the Vatican as support of the H-bomb, we suggest that Reuther, as a self-proclaimed architect of the future, try again.
 
IX
In the meantime, the scientists mourn. They are the most conspicuous and pathetic victims of that process of mental atomization that has inflicted American intellectual life. For decades they have been notoriously indifferent to politics, notoriously and proudly confined to their “specialty.” Now their specialty has erupted into their faces, leaving them with the sour splatter of guilt. But it should not be imagined that this guilt has produced very much heroism.
What shall the scientists do? We leave aside for the moment the question of what they should do as human beings, though they are now belatedly recognizing that they are human beings. What shall they do as scientists in relation to their scientific work? And here one hears a variety of conscience rumblings, but with little effect.
One scientist, Norbert Wiener, has offered a consistent answer: the use of the atom bomb, he has said, is unjustified in any terms; he refuses to have anything to do with the manufacture of such weapons; and he will not place his very great talents at the disposal of those who make the bombs. Harold Urey, in the New Leader of February 11, says simply: “The H-bomb must be built.” He regrets it, of course, as who does not, but ...
Then the 12 leading atomic scientists who published a statement after the H-bomb was announced, have this to say:
Few of the men who publicly urged the President to make this decision can have realized its full import ... No nation has the right to use such a bomb, no matter how righteous its cause. This bomb is no longer a weapon of war but a means of extermination of whole populations. Its use would be a betrayal of all standards of morality ... To create such an ever present peril for all the nations in the world is against the vital interests of both Russia and the United States.
I think all the data necessary for determining what should be the course of the individual scientist is available in the above statement: if the H-bomb should not be used in no matter how righteous a cause; if it can no longer even be called a weapon of war; if it betrays all standards of morality; and if (precipitous anticlimax) it is even against the interests of the powers that will manufacture it – then by what conceivable argument can the scientists say that Norben Wiener’s stand is incorrect. How can they justify their continued participation in the manufacture of such weapons?
To this view I may anticipate two objections:

It is impossible to distinguish between scientific work dedicated to the H-bomb and scientific work of a general theoretical nature, for the latter is the basis of the former. This is partly true, and it would be quixotic to urge scientists to cease being scientists. So long as they do their work, their discoveries can be used for destruction or creation. But there is clearly a distinction between a scientist whose theoretical discoveries, perhaps in the form of mathematical notations, make possible the H-bomb, and the scientist who then uses these notations to make the bomb.
 
The problem of what the individual scientist should do is not a political problem, but a personal one; your proposal verges on conscientious objection: the scientist would do best by becoming a socialist. That scientists should become socialists goes without saying, but what they should do as men; what should they do as scientists? I am not at all frightened by the accusation of pacifism, which at the moment seems to me one of the few conceivably honorable positions. But I am greatly concerned with the kind of argument that says the course of action for an individual is not the concern of a political movement. We are not called upon to give advice to scientists, and it would be absurd for us to issue slogans telling them what to do; but we have every right, and in fact every obligation, to have firm opinions on the question. In the present world, as of course in every other, what is important is not merely what one says or believes, but also what one does. The position of Norbert Wiener makes clear that he at least refuses to invent devices that are “no longer a weapon of war but a means of extermination of whole populations.” As such, he is performing what I take to be a highly moral act – and I see no reason (at least I hope I don’t) for the suspicion with which some socialists view the word “moral.” To say that atomic energy can be used for either good or bad purposes is true; but in question is what the scientist should do when it is used for bad purposes. And in such a situation, merely to say that he should become a socialist is, I think, sheer cant.

A footnote: The United Press of February 16 reports:
“Explosion of the first hydrogen bomb might cause the world and all in it to disintegrate in less than a minute,” Dr. Allan Munn, one of Canada’s foremost physicists, said today. He continued: “I would have preferred to see nobody make the H-bomb ... My sympathy, however, is with the US in its decision to go ahead with production.”
If what Dr. Munn says is true, then there is not even the “if-we-don’t-do-it-first-Stalin-will” justification for the H-bomb, for while it is conceivable that Stalin wants to rule the world there is no particular reason to suppose he wants to blow it up; consequently, no reason to suppose that he, or anyone else, would employ the H-bomb. Hence, why make it? Unless it is that the moral superiority of “our” blowing up the world first is self-evident ... Dr. Munn qualifies as one of the great political realists of the age, the James Burnham of the atomic scientists.
 
X
The mindless prattle for “world government” continues. What is so false about the Federalist movement is not that it seems far from achieving its aims (an objection that would hardly be tasteful for socialists to make), but that its aims are, by their very nature, impossible of realization and internally contradictory. A world government, we are told, would eliminate the danger of atomic war. Perhaps. But which of the two contending power blocs will dominate that world government? Is there any reason to suppose that one side will voluntarily surrender its sovereignty to the other, and in the absence of such a surrender would not world government be little more than (a) a mere consolidation of one side, or (b) a joke? The World Federalist movement is a mere expression of good wishes, which would not necessarily, in this grim moment, be so bad were it not thoroughly committed to persuading and cajoling the governments in power, were it not thoroughly permeated with the psychology of accepting the status quo. It is here that the important difference between the US World Federalist movement and the French movement symbolized by Garry Davis is seen: the former is committed to the cementing of the governments in power, the latter, however confusedly, to resisting the governments in power. In that distinction is the essence of politics.
 
XI
A new alignment, it seems to me, is being enforced in politics. On the one side stand all those who, for whatever reason, favor the politics and the production of the H-bomb: it would be idle to deny the many different motivations behind their agreement, but it would be naive to deny that what binds them – acquiescence in the means of mass incineration – must ultimately overwhelm their differences. On the other side stand all those who, for whatever reason, oppose the manufacture and the politics of the H-bomb: the independent socialists, the pacifists, and the scattered handful of radicals who have not become Social-Democrats. I believe that this is the fundamental political alignment of the day, that the H-bomb has become the fundamental touchstone of one’s political position and human qualification. This – and not one’s theoretical views about the nature of the state or the role of Bolshevism, or the permissibility of violence or the “dictatorship of the proletariat” – is what splits the world in two: politically, intellectually, morally. And if we socialists, handful that we are, must stand alone with another handful of pacifists and radicals, so be it. The general theoretical differences between ourselves and the pacifists remain; in other circumstances those differences will seem more significant than they do today. But now the central fact is that only we and they have spoken out against this means of mass incineration; and I propose that, so far as is practically possible and without blurring our differences in motivation, we should speak together.
One of the things we socialists must say, I am convinced, is that under no conceivable circumstances would a socialist society, even if locked in struggle with a capitalist or Stalinist enemy, use H-bombs. We are not pacifists and we recognize, for example, that if a socialist government were attacked by a counter-revolutionary reaction, that government would have the right to use force in self-defense. (Incidentally, how one must restrain oneself on this question of force: consider the sheer ugliness of the spectacle of people who denounce the almost bloodless assumption of power by the Bolsheviks and yet approve the murder of 125,000 people in Hiroshima and Nagasaki ) But while recognizing the permissibility of force in certain circumstances of self-defense, one cannot conceive that a socialist government could condemn the population of an enemy city, say, to total extermination: such methods would only besmirch its claim to political and moral superiority. Force used in self-defense by a socialist government would, in any case, be a mere last resort and by no means a major one; for we are convinced that such a society would have its program, its ethos, its achievement as a major rallying point.
In the absence of such an unqualified declaration, we would be in no moral position to condemn the H-bomb: we could still condemn the society that leads to its use, but not the use of this particular weapon. Yet everyone feels, and rightly, that there is something “different” about atomic weapons, and surely this common feeling is not without foundation. The objective of war is, or until recently has been, to destroy the enemy’s army; the only possible objective of atomic bombing is to destroy populations. Admittedly, there are intermediary means of warfare which tend to combine the two, but there is a clear difference in consequence between a rifle or machine-gun which kills the soldier of an invading army trying to destroy a socialist state and the atom bomb which destroys a city. The former socialists may, at times, find themselves forced to use; the latter, they never should.
But is this distinction valid in theory? One can readily imagine a pacifist saying:
“How absurd. Do you really think that in principle there is any difference between one man killing another with a rifle bullet on the battlefield and an H-bomb killing 250,000 people in a city? On what moral ground can you claim the latter to be ‘worse’ than the former?”
There is much point to this argument, I think, and we must grant that in terms of that general moral standard by which we should like to be able to live and by which we hope to mold the society of the future, the atom bomb is not morally superior to the rifle bullet. But the distinction holds nonetheless. Pacifism is based on an absolute standard of values to which socialists adhere: our vision of the good society is one as committed to non-violence as that of the pacifists. However, we do not believe, as do the pacifists, that the means to achieve this end can be qualitatively equivalent to the end itself: were that possible, there would be no distinction between means and end, there would be no need to move towards the end, for the end would already exist in the means employed. The means is a tense connective between the undesired present and the desired end: it must be realistic enough to make possible effective action within the present, but it must be sufficiently tinged with the ideal qualities of the end to make certain that, in fact, the end is reached. This, I think, is the general justification for the possible use of force in certain sharply delimited situations: it cannot be a justification for the use of atomic weapons, for these weapons destroy not a demarcated enemy, but humanity itself.
 
XII
Are there at present any proposals or slogans that socialists might propose or support vis-à-vis the H-bomb? I would suggest two, but with the preliminary warning that their possible effectiveness is highly limited. The major criterion for such proposals is simply this: do they direct the masses of people against the two power blocs that threaten human incineration? If they do, then they are desirable, regardless of their limitations, their “impracticability,” or their departure from “traditional” socialist slogans.
I think we should support the demand put forward by the atomic scientists that the US government issue a statement declaring that it will not be the first to use the H-bomb. The utility of such a demand, or for that matter such a promise, is obviously limited; but the fact that the US might not adhere to such a promise should be no deterrent to raising the demand. On the contrary; for even as the demand is raised, it should be pointed out that the US bears a heavy responsibility for having been the first to drop the A-bomb. The only known instance of both sides in a war agreeing not to use a weapon is with regard to poison gas, and that for the obvious reason that poison gas may be as harmful to those who employ it on a battlefield as to those against whom it is directed. At the same time, it should be noted that poison gas was not used in bombing raids against cities, where it would certainly have been extremely “effective.” If then, in qase of another war, there were a covenant not to use atomic weapons, for reasons similar to the agreement not to use poison gas, that would surely be a valuable thing for humanity – though it is admittedly difficult to imagine such a situation. In the interim, the demand for a government declaration not to drop the H-bomb may become a popular one; we should propose its extension to all atomic weapons; and so long as it results in the slightest flicker of revolt against the war-makers, we should support it.
In Europe particularly and perhaps too in the United States, socialists should consider the advisability of raising the following demand: that all nations simultaneously engage in atomic disarmament and that this disarmament be checked, not by the UN which is nothing more than a grouping of the nations themselves, but by representatives of the mass-popular organizations, such as the free trade unions, helped by scientific specialists able to provide the information these representatives are not likely to have themselves.
To some people, concerned with piety rather than politics, this may seem a retreat to the slogan of “disarmament” which the movement has always rejected. But it is necessary to think of these things in some sort of context. When Lenin rejected the slogan of disarmament in the years after the first world war, he did so, among other reasons, because it would breed “pacifist illusions” among the masses and because, he said, it was necessary to prepare for the assumption of socialist power. But that situation does not exist today: there is nowhere in the world the slightest immediate possibility for the assumption of socialist power, as there was in 1920, and the existence of “pacifist illusions” among the European masses would today hardly be a catastrophe. Lenin feared “pacifist illusions” at a time when they might be counterposed to mass revolutionary activity, at a time when the bourgeois governments were themselves talking a good deal about disarmament.
But today the great danger in Europe is, not the illusion of pacifism, but the illusion of passivity. The great danger is that the masses of Europeans will feel themselves helpless and hopeless victims of a war they never made, and will relapse into fatalism, as in part they have. Therefore, today to raise a slogan such as the one I have suggested might perhaps be a means of stirring them from passivity. That is the significance of the Garry Davis movement. People who take a totally negative attitude toward the Garry Davis movement because Davis is not a socialist or because of his alleged intellectual insufficiency, show that they understand absolutely nothing about politics. The significant question is: does Davis’ movement cause discomfort to both groups of warmakers? does it attack both sides? does it represent a stirring among people who begin to feel that perhaps they may yet determine their own fate? That is the way to judge such movements, and correspondingly such slogans as I have proposed. Today the pacifism of the masses, to the degree that it exists, is a healthy instinctive reaction against the murder-plans of the rulers. We must work with such tendencies, encourage them, educate them – and learn from them. I italicize this last phrase because all too often the assumption of many Marxists has been that they can learn from no one but themselves. The events of the past two decades, among them the collapse of the large, organized Marxist movement, should teach us otherwise.
 
XIII
Even at their best, even if greeted enthusiastically by large numbers of people, such slogans are only of limited significance. For it is possible that we are entering a period beyond slogans, a period in which the fundamental social responses are merely acquiescence or resistance. The Marxist movement has always been susceptible to a fetishism of slogans, an assumption that if only the “correct” slogans were put in the editorial box of a well-or-badly-written newspaper, then all would be on the way to being well. In any case, as we approach the ultimate convulsion of modern society, “slogans” are of increasingly minor significance. For society drives humanity to some situations that cannot be remedied by partial actions, and in which it is necessary to say: our only solution is to change the world.
And why not? What else is there? It is very possible that there will be no way of preventing the powers from beginning the war toward which they move; but if that is so, let it be said that there were some men who, in the sea of blood, did not acquiesce. More than personal honor and integrity are at stake, but if that were all it would surely be enough.
 



Beyond Defeat
By Hans Werner Richter
G.P. Putnam. 312 pp. $3.
This novel by a young German who served in Hitler’s army has already been reviewed in the general press in a routine and uncomprehending manner; no one has so much as remarked on its significance as a document from the undersides of Germany.
As a novel, the book is not very impressive: like a great many young European writers, Richter affects the manner of Hemingway, terse, clipped, journalistic, which is quite inadequate to the intensely dramatic material about which he writes. The law of combined development works here with a neatly ironic twist: the writers of harrowed Europe copy the style of the crude and sensational Americans in whom they see – falsely, I think – a “virility” no longer indigenous to European culture. Too often the result of this style is a brutal treatment of brutality, a false assumption that to depict a disgusting situation the writer must adopt as his own the emotional qualities of that situation. Richter’s book, like the recent novels of many of the Italian and French writers, suffers from this fallacy.
But its importance, however, is not as a novel; its importance is as a document. Richter was at one time a minor functionary of the German Communist Party, then became some sort of independent socialist. The leading character of Beyond Defeat, obviously a facsimile of Richter himself, is a German socialist caught in the Nazi army. After the war Richter published a paper in Western Germany which the occupation authorities suppressed. Though the precise nature of his political views is unknown to me, I would venture to suggest that the fact of its suppression for criticizing the authorities indicates that, at the least, his paper was – shall we say? – interesting.
The novel itself begins with several routine battle scenes at Cassino. Pfc Guehler, the central character, persuades his buddies to surrender, for the U.S. barrage is intolerable and only death can result from continued resistance. Once the group reaches U.S. hands, the novel becomes an extremely interesting report of a German socialist’s experience.
When Guehler-Richter is questioned by U.S. intelligence officers, he is willing to discuss the politics of the war, to estimate the morale of the German soldiers – but refuses to give away positions of the Germany army. To do that, he says, would be to bring about the murder of his army comrades; and though he desires the defeat of the Nazi army he does not intend to make himself an agent of its military opponent. This kind of reasoning quite escapes the U.S. intelligence officer and Guehler goes off to a prison camp in America.
From here on there are a number of quite dramatic descriptions of the internal struggle between German Nazi and anti-Nazi soldiers. In the U.S. camp the Nazis rule through terror; the older prisoners of the Africa Korps are still firm in their Nazi ideology. But the newer captives are beginning to doubt. Guehler and his friends suffer from terror; they get no help at all from the U.S. authorities who think of Germans either as Nazis or, if anti-Nazis, as traitors to their country; and they finally decide to form an anti-Nazi underground to convince their fellow soldiers of their views. It is particularly interesting that when Guehler and his few friends have a chance to go off to a segregated camp for anti-Nazi prisoners they refuse: they believe it necessary to remain with the other soldiers and quietly, patiently talk to them.
Were it not tinged with an occasional streak of German nationalism, the outlook of Pfc Guehler would be completely what one would hope for from a German socialist. As it is, the book is still valuable: it makes some fine political discriminations in tactical approaches to the war, it does not divide German soldiers into simplistic categories but treats them in terms of a gradual political reorientation, and it is written from what is obviously first-hand knowledge. Socialists will want to read this book; and it is something of a pity, as well as a stroke of historical irony, that one’s main complaint is that Richter’s novel lacks tenderness and expressiveness, is too behavioristic and “tough” – that is, too “American.”
 



With the best will in the world, I do not quite see the purpose of Susan Green’s letter. Her general views on the war question have since been expressed in Labor Action and answered there; the present letter, a fragmentary expression of those views, makes little sense unless one is previously aware of them. However, a few fractional remarks:

I do not see why Susan Green writes with such polemical vigor about her proposal that the western labor movements try to communicate with the workers under Stalin’s dominion. Certainly, there is no reason to suppose that I or any other socialist oppose such efforts – though we might well disagree with some of the things that would be said in such broadcasts.
 
Her argument that it is difficult to pose demands that can be acted upon only in the West, is true. But the problem is: what follows from this difficulty? That the socialist movement should cease raising such demands? Then, it might as well close shop. Wherever there remains the possibility for free expression, socialists must express their views in full; which means to call an imperialist war an imperialist war. That this is difficult is hardly news.
 
It is true that I posed the socialist position on war in moral terms, but that does not mean I posed it merely in moral terms, as Susan Green implies.
 
But all this is minor by-play. Susan Green wants a basic change in the movement’s war position. She has a perfect right to propose such a change, and those who disagree have as great a right to answer her. Both have already been done in Labor Action. Her present letter adds nothing to the presentation of her views, and I feel no need to add anything, at the moment, to their refutation.

 



The most important fact about the Tito episode is not the immediate consequences it may have. The most important fact, in our estimation, is simply this: that it happened.
The modern totalitarian state, with its unprecedented control of public and private life and its seeming rock-like invincibility, wishes above all else to nurture the notion that it tolerates no dissensions in its ranks and permits no opposition among those it rules. Not merely that it tolerates no dissension and permits no opposition – even more, that such dissension and opposition are literally impossible.
And on the surface there seems to be plausible enough grounds for believing this notion to be true. When Hitler proclaimed that his state would last a thousand years, there were not a few political writers and analysts who more or less took him at his word. In this country the erratic James Burnham, who in little more than a decade rushed through various political centers while violently slamming doors behind him, played with the notion that the Nazi totalitarian state was invincible and a portent of an “inevitable” trend to come. In France certain socialist politicians were so impressed by the durability of Nazism that they even evolved a theory that it was necessary to give up outright opposition, as being in any case a mere futile gesture, and to enter into the Nazi movement, there to try to influence – no doubt, “humanize” – it.
 
The Myth of Invincibility
But it is a remarkable fact that just at the point where the great totalitarian states have seemed at their strongest, the point where they seemed to rule without challenge or hindrance, some dramatic event has taken place which showed the weakness of their foundations and the possibilities for destroying them. When Hitler, it seemed, had conquered all of Europe and destroyed a generation of socialists, there arose the national movements in the occupied countries. When Mussolini seemed finally to have saddled himself firmly onto the back of the Italian people, the Ethiopian war showed how flimsy and decayed his regime was. And now, when Stalinism has conquered Eastern Europe and extended its power throughout the world, there comes the Tito blowup.
Even if tomorrow the Yugoslavs completely surrender to Moscow’s will; or even if tomorrow the quarrel is ended by some sort of compromise; or even if tomorrow the Russians succeed, in one way or another, in driving Tito out and replacing him by a more servile representative in Belgrade – even then, from Moscow’s point of view, the damage has been done. At least one corner of the Iron Curtain has been shown to be pretty rusty. The myth of Moscow invincibility, which at the moment is so much more alluring than Hitler’s invincibility (both for the neo-Stalinists preparing to serve as quislings and for the Stalinophobes preparing to drop, or rather having dropped, atom bombs) is shattered. Where there is social coercion, social despotism and inequality – where there is a partnership between the big thief and the little one – there disputes and dissensions MUST break out.
If we understand this much, then it is possible more soberly to estimate the significance of the Tito affair. The likelihood is that, in one way or another, the breach between Moscow and Belgrade will be narrowed. For the requirements of the current European situation, which drive both Russia and Yugoslavia, make it impossible for Yugoslavia long to remain outside the Russian orbit while simultaneously making it virtually incredible that Tito should line up with the West. As for the Russians, they are limited in what they can do against Tito. To march in with troops would be such a disastrous political move that its disadvantages would far outweigh the likelihood of thus driving out Tito. Besides that, it must not be forgotten that Tito has a considerable army at his disposal. It seems incredible that the dispute will lead to armed struggle. Most likely, the Russians will try gradually to build up an anti-Tito bloc in the Yugoslav ruling party and edge the present leadership out.
Both the Russians and the Yugoslavs are limited in the extent to which they can move against each other, for they must always remember that if they do not stand together they may hang separately. Some sort of rapprochement is therefore the most likely outcome of the quarrel – a rapprochement which may then be hailed as proof of the “democracy” in the Stalinist movement ...
It is possible to overestimate the immediate consequences of the split between Stalin and Tito. But it would be difficult to overestimate the ultimate or symptomatic significance of the split.
For there must be very deep-rooted reasons indeed for the Kremlin’s denunciation of the Yugoslavs. Otherwise, why should the long statement have been issued precisely at the time when a death struggle with the Western powers was taking place in Berlin? Why issue the statement now, unless from the Kremlin’s point of view the situation had become so “bad” that it can no longer be delayed?
 
Fissures of Disintegration
What then were the issues in dispute? Here there are a host of speculations, none of them mutually exclusive. Tito was getting “too big for his breeches.” Perhaps. The Yugoslavs need machinery and other industrial aid which Russia cannot provide them, and were therefore turning with hungry eyes to the possibilities of Marshall Plan aid. Perhaps. The Yugoslav regime was not collectivizing its agriculture at the pace desired by Moscow. Most unlikely – who can believe that Stalin is worried about some independent peasants in Yugoslavia so long as a regime subservient to him remains firmly in power?
What all these speculations add up to, however, is a fundamental development. So soon as the Stalinist agents and quislings become firmly entrenched in power, so soon as they begin to satisfy some of their own appetites as well as helping their Imperialist masters, they begin to yearn for a more favorable division of spoils, a greater degree of independence.
And so the little Bonapartist strutter, Tito, now that he has an army of nearly a half million men, begins to develop imperialist ambitions of his own. Perhaps a little raid into Austria? Perhaps insistence on clinging to Trieste even when the Russians may consider it advisable to yield Trieste to Italy in order to win an election there? Perhaps a raid into Bulgaria? Or, better yet, perhaps a federation of all the little Balkan dependencies in which he, Tito, and his gang are certain to be the big frogs? A Balkan federation which would formally continue to pay obeisance to the “beloved leader” in Moscow while simultaneously edging out from under his rough fist – that might be nice, eh?
In any case, whatever the specific occasion for the break, whatever the immediate means of taping it together – it has taken place. Stalinism remains as a blight on the earth. But the fissures or its own disintegration have begun to appear, and though it grow more powerful those fissures will remain and deepen. For our part, let us drive deep and fatal wedges.
 



Henry Wallace’s most cherished possession is his claim to a political inheritance. In a recent editorial in the New Republic (January 19, 1948) he proudly calls the roll of American third parties with an erudition that speaks well for the magazine’s research staff. Wallace declares his movement to be in the tradition of the Locofocos, the Greenback Party, the Populist Peoples Party, and the LaFollette Progressives. Like anyone else uneasy about his present standing, Wallace itches for a family tree.
Which that happy genealogist of American liberalism, Max Lerner, hurries to provide. In a PM editorial (February 1, 1948) he declares:
Wallace comes, as Bryan and LaFollette came, out of the populist tradition of the Middle West. It is the tradition which glorifies rebellion and dissent, and is not fearful of being in a minority. There is an obstinate, hard cast to his jaw ... he is, in his basic thinking, as far from the Communists as Bryan was, or LaFollette. His thinking is populist – agin’ the trusts, agin’ imperialism, agin’ Wall Street ... through all his changes he has remained the Great Insurgent, unhappy unless he feels a ferment in his mind and unless he is leading his little band of Gideonites.
It is this claim to an insurgent ancestry which is certain to be a major talking-point in the Wallace campaign and which gains for him a considerable amount of popular support. To place Wallace’s candidacy accurately, we must therefore first examine his relation to the populist tradition.
For purposes of this discussion, the most important fact to remember about the populist movement is that it was a mass, largely spontaneous outpouring of rural discontent. It arose at a particular juncture in American history, which was not to recur and could not recur: the farmers, not yet completely subjugated by the encroachments of capitalism in agriculture, were able to play a somewhat, though decreasingly, independent role; while the working class loomed in the background, not yet fully cohered or aware of its strength. During this historical moment populism came into its own and blazed its brief, evanescent but not inglorious trail across this nation’s history. It was a movement aimed not against capitalism, but against some of its evils. All historians, whatever their bias, agree that populism was an indigenous, spontaneous mass movement. As V.L. Parrington notes:
Huge meetings gathered of the farmers of a county and daylong they listened to speeches that came straight from the hay-fields and the corn-rows, speeches that were an echo of the daily experience of the farmer and the farmer’s wife.
In the standard text on populism, John Hicks’ The Populist Revolt, there is detailed a mass of evidence showing how deeply populism sprang from the needs and experiences of the masses of farmers. Later historical studies have noted the degree of support the movement gained in the South.
Now my purpose in citing this evidence is not primarily to show that the populist movement was proportionately far larger than Wallace’s. Small movements sometimes become large. My point is another and more crucial one: populism arose from a pressing social need, the plight of the farmers; it was based on their conjunctural position which allowed them a certain leeway in organizing independently of either capitalist or working class; and it spoke, not without some justification, in the language of America’s greatest legend: the frontier.
 
Bryan or Stalin?
Nothing of the sort can be said about Wallace’s movement. The relationship of social classes that made possible agrarian populism in the 1890s simply does not exist today. The farmers cannot play the leading role they did then; and what is more, the present momentary prosperity granted them by war needs and post-war prices attenuates any inclination they might have to support Wallace.
By now populism is so historically untenable that it is not a paradox to suggest that if Wallace’s movement really were in the populist tradition it would enjoy far less support than it does, certainly far less in its major centers: New York and California. At present there is no large scale rural rebelliousness in America, no insistent mass “call” from the farms for Wallace to save the day. All the calling has been from the other direction.
Though Wallace’s personal roots are in a family deeply committed to the populist tradition, other facts in his life have adulterated his populism to the point where it is largely verbal. In any case, whatever his personal, nostalgic kinship with populism, his movement has no organic connection with it. No doubt, it may succeed in winning to its support the fossil residues of populist sentiment that persist throughout the country, but (Max Lerner notwithstanding) the Wallace movement does have more in common with Stalin than with Bryan.
Proof for this assertion is found in the way the movement was organized. The Progressive Citizens of America hardly exists in rural areas; its sole strength is in metropolitan centers. Ideologically the PCA is committed to what is unquestionably the most important current Stalinist demand: struggle against the Marshall Plan. In chronological development the Wallace candidacy follows from (a) the Stalinists drive to develop a front organization to oppose the Truman administration’s foreign policy; (b) the consequent appearance of the PCA and its inability to pressure Truman into a more conciliatory attitude toward Moscow; (c) the initial call for a third party made about a year and a half ago in the Daily Worker; (d) the subsequent commitment of the PCA to a third party. In this sequence the farcical climax is reached when Wallace broods over whether or not to accept the nomination, and is then impressed by the “Potemkin village” delegations which the Stalinists, masters at this sort of thing, shuffled up to the New Republic office.
Populism, indeed! Would William Jennings Bryan – who, whatever his deficiencies, could attract whole counties to his flaming speeches – have been taken in by delegations from such groups as the New York District Council of the CIO Electrical Workers, the Slovenian section of the Passaic IWO, and the Freiheit Mandolin Society?
The Wallace movement comes into existence from the top; it will no doubt attract considerable support from various dissident elements of the country but it does not stem from them; it does not even genuinely express their confusion.
In this connection, it is interesting to note that the Wallace movement is the first attempt to build a third party on a foreign-policy plank; all previous third parties have concerned themselves primarily with deeply-felt domestic matters. In an atomic age one cannot of course depreciate concern with foreign policy; but when one remembers that the tradition of American progressivism is linked to internal reform and lacking in any independent stand on foreign affairs, and when one remembers further that the single foreign-policy plank most important to the Stalinists happens to be Wallace’s major offering, then the coincidence is more than a little suspicious. Precisely because the Wallace movement is so artificial and synthetic does the “man in the street” think of it as based on a view on how “to get along with Russia.” And for once the “man in the street” is right.
The destruction of the myth that the Wallace movement steins from populism – a myth which is ultimately an historical slander – is of first importance in both analyzing and combatting it. Once that is done, however, several other questions remain.
 
The Price They Pay
What strikes one at first glance in the Stalinists’ sponsorship of Wallace is how much they stand to lose. For years now they have been doing their very best to infest the labor and liberal movements; and not without success. Now, by steering the Wallace movement into a third party, they lose their advantageous positions in at least four major arenas:
(1) Among the liberals. A number of prominent leaders of the PCA have already resigned: Hartley Crum, Frank Kingdon, Albert Deutsch. But this is only a portent of what is to come. Robert Kenney, the outstanding non-Stalinist PCA leader on the West Coast, is teetering between support of the Wallace party and loyalty to the Democrats. Others are in a similar position: there are times when political opportunists find it distressingly difficult to decide which course will be most advantageous to themselves. The newspaper PM, which has so consistently helped Stalinism, and also the Nation have both seized on Wallace’s candidacy as an occasion to put a period to their increasingly embarrassing flirtation with Stalinism. By driving the Wallace movement out of the Democratic Party, its Stalinist organizers have given their uneasy liberal “innocents” a convenient pretext for getting out from under. Though the Wallace candidacy may strengthen the Stalinist hold on those liberals who remain captive, the number of such liberals is certain to decrease. The domestic position of the American Stalinists is thus sure to be impaired.
(2) In the American Labor Party. When the Stalinists announced their support of Wallace, they gave the leaders of those right-wing CIO unions which had cooperated with them in the ALP the long-awaited “legitimate” basis for quitting. As a result, the Stalinists have been left holding each others hands in the ALP, with the value of their most useful political front in their political center considerably cut.
(3) In the CIO. Here the Stalinist losses may be less immediately perceptible, but ultimately more serious. Their support of Wallace forced Murray into openly chastising them, and made it next to impossible for him to continue his policy of maintaining an uneasy and unequal balance – but still a balance of a sort – between right-wing and Stalinist-controlled unions. In an immediate tactical sense, then, the Stalinists cleared the way for those CIO leaders, like Rieve and Reuther, who want Murray to take a more aggressive stand against the Stalinist CIO leaders. They must have known their support of Wallace would have this result They must also have known that they risked the ultimate danger of provoking a split in the CIO which would isolate completely those unions they control and expose them to possible destruction. Still they went ahead with the Wallace candidacy.
(4) Among their bourgeois supporters. One of the least discussed sources of support which the Stalinists have found has been among certain bourgeois politicians: Senators Pepper and Taylor, ex-Ambassador Davies and others. By provoking the Wallace candidacy, the Stalinists forced these bourgeois allies into a position where the latter would either have to break with them or with the Democratic Party. Pepper has chosen the Democratic Party; anything else would, in Florida, mean political suicide. Taylor is, at the time of writing, not yet decided. Davies has not yet been heard from. But in any case, it is clear that this highly important, if numerically tiny, ally is no longer as accessible to the Stalinists as before the Wallace candidacy.
I contend therefore that, no matter how large a vote Wallace gets and no matter how many recruits and sympathizers the CP picks up during the campaign, the eventual result must be a loss of influence for the CP. If the Stalinists controlled the bulk of the labor movement, as in France and Italy, they might then have taken such a course with a certain ease; they would not be isolating themselves. But in the present situation in the U.S., the Stalinists are, appearances to the contrary, cutting themselves off from the sources of their sustenance. And this, too, their hard-headed strategists must have known.
 
“Neither Recovery nor Revolution”
Why, then, did they so fervently build up the Wallace candidacy? Why did they not let the Wallace movement remain within the Democratic Party, as it would have done had not the Stalinists steered it to a third-party perspective?
For an answer we must for a moment shift our sights to Europe. The recent policy of the Stalinists in Western Europe has been analyzed in sufficient detail not to require lengthy discussion here. Suffice it to say that the disastrous strikes which the French Stalinists whipped up during the latter part of 1947, though seizing on the legitimate and overdue demands of the workers, were for them a part of the Russian war against the Marshall Plan. At the present all of European imperialist politics revolves around one dimension: time. Can American dollars be pumped in fast enough to stop Russia’s expansion and perhaps push it back? Can the Stalinist parties so disrupt the economies of France, Italy, Western Germany and Greece that the Marshall Plan will not succeed in bringing even a partial and temporary economic rehabilitation, thereby preventing the organization of a strong western bloc?
That western capitalism will consolidate a hold on some part of Western Europe; that it will effect a certain increase in productivity; that it will help to prop up the wispy bourgeois governments of France and Italy seems well-nigh certain. Russia does not seriously contend for domination of France and Western Germany at present; despite all the threatening gestures of the Italian Stalinists, it is unlikely that the Kremlin will signal an all-out attempt to seize power in Italy. Stalin knows that a successful, and perhaps even an unsuccessful, attempt to seize power in France or Western Germany means a quick war, which he certainly does not want. But at the same time how can he weaken the hold of U.S. imperialism in Western Europe?
The answer has been excellently summarized in a formula which the French conservative paper Figaro has offered to describe the current Stalinist policy in Western Europe: neither recovery nor revolution. Put into more exact terms: neither an attempt to seize the power, with or without the aid of the Russian army, nor a readiness to allow the bourgeois regimes to consolidate themselves with the aid of the Marshall Plan.
The Stalinists therefore resort to a policy of constant minor upheavals, of constant irritations. Was this not obvious during the recent strikes when they were intent on causing as much economic damage as possible and yet had no policy to carry the strike movement to a climax, certainly no policy of trying to move toward a general strike and a seizure of power?
They thus risked loss of support by many workers disgusted and wearied by Stalinist-led adventures, which meant serious sacrifices leading to nothing but futility. Did the French Stalinist leaders know this? Of course. And yet they went ahead. It seems likely that they lost the support of certain sections of the workers.
Yet the Stalinists achieved Moscow’s aims. They set back the possibilities of even the most rudimentary economic recovery [1] by several crucial months. For the Kremlin this counted more than any losses the French CP might sustain. As C.L. Sulzberger reported in the New York Times a few months ago, the Kremlin is willing to sacrifice the Stalinist parties of Western Europe in order to achieve this aim. For surely if the French CP continues to engage in such criminal adventures-driving strikes to the point where they go beyond ordinary trade-union actions and tend to challenge the power of the bourgeois stare, while yet not actually desiring to upset that power – then it will lose influence among the workers. (And more important, it will exhaust their energies.)
Thus far the French CP has maneuvered rather cleverly; it has done Moscow’s bidding (not without some apparent balking) but has not provoked the situation to the extent where the U.S. would decide that de Gaulle is its only resort. For the French CP knows that a de Gaulle regime might very likely mean its illegalization: a prospect its comfortable bureaucrats do not relish. How long it will be able to maintain this uneasy balance of doing Moscow’s dirty work while not provoking its own destruction remains to be seen.
In any case, that is the Stalinist policy in Western Europe: neither recovery nor revolution.
 
What the CP Gains
The extension of this policy to the U.S. takes the form of the Wallace candidacy. Since there is no depression as yet in the U.S. and since there is also, providentially, no possibility of the CP taking power, the formula “neither recovery nor revolution” cannot here be literally applied. But the results of the application of the formula in Europe are matched by those which will accrue to Russian Stalinism from the Wallace candidacy.
Though we hardly claim to be privy to the inner workings of the Stalintern, we do feel that if Moscow has not rewarded the present CP leadership with a winning smile for its work in promoting the Wallace candidacy, then it is really quite without gratitude. For even if Wallace were to withdraw tomorrow (say, after an astrological consultation) the mere fact of his announced candidacy has already proven to be of inestimable aid to Russia in its cold war with the U.S. The mere fact that a political leader of Wallace’s prominence could announce his candidacy on a platform which, both in fact and in the popular mind, is one of appeasing Russia helps the Stalinists in that

it provides them with a spokesman against the Marshall Plan more prominent than any they could otherwise hope to find;
 
it contributes a first-rate propaganda point to the Russians who can now point to the division in the U.S. as proof that there are “peace-loving” (i.e., pro-Russian) elements here;
 
it creates immediate difficulties for the Truman administration’s hope of a quick passage of the Marshall Plan by encouraging congressional opponents to weaken and resist it.

From the Russian point of view, can there be the slightest qualms about such an achievement, even if it may isolate the CP – even if, in fact, it were to result in the destruction of the CP?
For such a destruction is now, for the first time since the Palmer raids, not quite out of the question. It is unlikely at present, but it is not out of the question. If, as a result of the Wallace candidacy, the Republicans feel they can win with anyone (”anyone” usually means Taft); and especially if Taft does come to office in a reactionary sweep, then the illegalization of the CP in the U.S. becomes a distinct possibility. That the CP is aware of this cannot be doubted; that it went ahead with the Wallace campaign in any case shows how deeply loyal Foster’s leadership is to Moscow. To the Kremlin this possibility of illegalization is a matter of no deep concern when their own higher stakes are in play.
What is important is to see the Wallace candidacy as an extension to the U.S. of the “neither recovery nor revolution” policy of West European Stalinism. Only in those terms can we understand it – as part of the “cold war.”
 
Wallace’s Appeal
To place Wallace’s candidacy as a part of the “cold war” is not, unfortunately, to dismiss its effects in American life. While there is at present no possible means of predicting what sort of vote he will get, there is reason to believe that it will be, in terms of third-party potentialities, rather large.
For Wallace does appeal to deep-rooted political desires: when he cries “peace,” he stirs the hopes of many who look with dread at the overwhelming evidence that a new war is in preparation; when he cries “New Deal,” he touches the secret fears of those who, despite the present full employment, still wonder if they will be employed a few years from now. He is the only one of the capitalist party politicians who even talks in terms of reform and change. For that reason, if for no other, Wallace will get votes.
There are at least two other reasons why Wallace is likely to poll a sizable vote. He has behind him one of the best and most efficient political machines in the country: the whole apparatus of Stalinist and semi-Stalinist front organizations. This apparatus is composed of loyal and devoted people who are genuinely enthusiastic about Wallace’s candidacy. They will work hard and will get votes.
Finally Wallace is certain to be helped by the monumental stupidity and blindness of the U.S. labor leadership. Every one of the arguments that labor leaders have offered against Wallace is reactionary; they oppose him exclusively in terms of a continued commitment to capitalist politics. Against him they can offer only ... Truman, a sad little man who would have been so much better off as a filing clerk. Do they expect the workers to become enthusiastic about Truman? Do Murray and Green expect their followers to vote for the man who broke the railroad strike? No doubt, in this country of conveniently short political memories, many workers will. But it seems just as likely that many will vote for Wallace if only because he stands for something “different,” if only because in some vague way he reminds them of the New Deal which was also something “different.” The tragic failure of the labor movement to provide an alternative that is really politically “different” here rebounds directly in favor of the Stalinist campaign for Wallace.
*
Whom, or what, does Wallace represent?
He is a strange breed, is he not? He declares himself in favor of capitalism, yet advocates a foreign policy which by no stretch of the imagination can be considered as stemming from any section of the capitalist class. He declares himself in opposition to socialism (which he is), but speaks warmly of Stalinist Russia. [2]
Does Wallace represent “a section of the capitalist class” which wishes a “soft” foreign policy toward Russia? On the other hand, is he merely a quisling of Stalinism?
 
Character of Wallace Movement
The view advanced in some quarters that Wallace “represents” some unspecified “section of the capitalist class” which wishes to appease Russia strikes me as nonsense. Wallace is not the descendant and heir of the isolationism of the 1920s and 1930s which did characterize a section of American capitalism; he may feed on remnants of its influence, but that is another matter.
It is obviously not enough to refer (in vaguely pseudo-Marxist language) to “internal cleavages in the capitalist class” which produce the Wallace candidacy. Cleavages between whom? Which section of the American capitalist class does Wallace represent? What are the evidences of this cleavage in capitalism, besides the Wallace movement itself? Specific data and analyses are necessary before the phrases mentioned can be considered anything more than jargon. Does Wallace, perhaps, represent the same “section of the capitalist class” as does Taft?
I do not think any analysis can be made to prop up this view. From the standpoint of any section of the bourgeoisie, Wallace’s program makes no sense at all. The differences in Congress over the Marshall Plan represent differences in the degree of appreciation of the real needs of American imperialism, not differences in direction of policy at all equivalent to the isolation-versus-collective-security split of yesterday.
When Chamberlain appeased Hitler it was for the good and sufficient (capitalist) reason that English imperialism was not yet ready to fight its German rival. Chamberlain, a figure much abused by stupid journalists but no doubt privately appreciated by serious capitalist leaders, played for time while he feverishly built up the armed strength of British imperialism. His appeasement was an act of responsibility to his own class. Can one claim that for Wallace?
Rather, a Marxist analysis of the Wallace movement shows a dual character, as does Wallace himself.
On the one hand, Wallace is not merely a Stalinist quisling; he is not a complete Beirut or Del Vayo. First of all, he himself is not that; this indeed constitutes a matter of disquiet for the Stalinists since they cannot be quite sure what Henry is going to do or say next. But more important, Wallace’s program is essentially petty bourgeois, and his appeal is therefore primarily to reform elements among the urban middle classes and labor. His domestic economic program, insofar as he has one, is still oriented in the direction of a revival of small-business competition. On this side, his movement is primarily a capitalist-reform party.
But the decisive reason for existence of the Wallace movement is something else. Regardless of Wallace’s own peculiarities and personal role, the movement he heads is a Stalinist-inspired campaign and exists in actual life only as a Stalinist creature. The crucial proof of this statement may be seen in this fact: if tomorrow Wallace were to shift his line on foreign policy, he would quite suddenly find himself suspended in mid-air, without visible means of support. The organized and articulate basis for his movement, provided by the Stalinists, would evaporate; he would be left with the New Republic editorial staff and a few others of the same breed. Max Lerner, for once, spoke the truth when he called Wallace the “prize victim and trophy” of the Stalinists.
The Wallace movement is, in fact, a bastard formation. To characterize it with painstaking accuracy we would have to say the following: it is a petty-bourgeois capitalist-reform third-party movement primarily of the urban lower classes which has been aborted, sterilized, artificially licked into organizational shape, and run by the CP in the interests of the Kremlin’s foreign policy. As such we reject it, convinced that independent labor action remains the central political need for America in the coming period.

Notes
1. I suppose it is necessary to note that by this phrase I do not mean that a “permanent” or large-scale economic recovery of European capitalism is possible; it is highly doubtful, to put it mildly, if even the kind of temporary stabilization that took place in the twenties could be repeated. But this is not at all to deny the possibility that a certain very limited, temporary and brief economic upswing is possible in Europe if enough American aid is sent and if a measure of internal stability is reached to make possible the use of that aid. Such a possibility can be denied only by those who habitual stock in trade is to confuse historical tendencies with day-to-day events and thereby blur the meaning of both.
2. I am not troubling here to document these points, since Dwight Macdonald’s articles in Politics, now expanded into a book, did so with damning thoroughness.
 



One of the most frequent defenses which American Stalinists offered for the Hitler-Stalin pact was that when Stalin marched into Poland he thereby saved thousands of Jews from falling into the hands of Hitler. The argument, for all its speciousness, succeeded in attracting, if not enthusiasm for the pact, then a certain tolerance among Americans, especially American Jews. That Stalin, by signing the pact, helped Hitler march into Poland in the first place either did not occur to them or seemed irrelevant to the actual problem of what to do once Hitler did attack Poland. That is the way semi-Stalinists thought and it was on this line of thinking that the CP and its Jewish section harped with especial vehemence.
Now, however, that many of the secret documents with regards to the Hitler-Stalin pact have been revealed a new light is thrown on this matter. We read in a memorandum by the State Secretary of the German Foreign Office, one Weizsaecker, issued on December 5, 1939, that:
“Colonel General Keitel telephoned me today on the following matter: Lately there have been repeated wrangles on the boundary between Russia and the Government General (of the Nazi occupation in Poland – Ed.) into which the army, too, was drawn. The expulsion of Jews into Russian territory, in particular, did not proceed as smoothly as had apparently been expected.
“In practice, the procedure was, for example, that at a quiet place tn the woods, a thousand Jews were expelled across the Russian border; 15 kilometers away, they came back, with the Russian commander trying to force the German one to readmit the group. As It was a case involving foreign policy ...” (The report continues by discussing inner Nazi relationships with regard to how to handle this problem.)
These are sentences that should be read very carefully, not once but twice and three times.
For they give the lie completely and irremediably to the Stalinist claim that the Russian invasion of Poland was motivated by a desire to help the Polish Jews. Here we discover that when the Nazis themselves tried to push Jews into the Russian zone, the Russians – rather than welcoming the Jews, rather than taking them into their area and saving them from Nazi death camps – proceeded to drive them right back to the Nazis!
Notice, further, that the document quoted above speaks of this not as an isolated event but mentions it as an example of a procedure, a pattern. In other words, the incident must have been repeated many times, otherwise why should the Nazi General Keitel have complained?
What will the American Stalinists say to that? What will their Jewish paper, the Freiheit, say? Will they still continue to speak of the Hitler-Stalin division of Poland as a means of “saving” the Polish Jews? Or will they try to brazen out the scandal by silence?
 



The three most prominent Russian composers – Sergei Prokofieff, Dmitri Shostakovich and Aram Khatchaturian – were publicly denounced last week by the Central Committee of the Russian Communist (Stalinist) Party for writing music that is “inexpressive, poor, unharmonious, muddled” and that “smells strongly of the spirit of the modern bourgeois music of Europe and America, which reflect the marasmus (emaciation) of bourgeois culture.”
Among the other crimes of which these and other Russian composers were accused are: “formalistic distortions and anti-democratic tendencies alien to the Soviet people ... denial of the main principles of classic music, propaganda of atonality, dissonance arid disharmony ... renunciation of such most important foundations of musical creation as melody, a passion for muddled neuropathic combinations which transform music into a cacophonic and chaotic heaping of sounds.”
The Central Committee’s statement, bristling with innuendos against those sufficiently perverse to compose along atonal lines, demands music which combines “a high content of artistic perfection and musical form,” which moves in a “realistic direction” and which recognizes the “truthfulness and reality of music, of its deep organic connection with the people and their music and songs.”
Simultaneously with this ukase there come reports from Russia of an “ideological offensive” in the field of biology.
Anton R. Zhebrak, until recently president of the White Russian Academy of Sciences, is in disgrace. Zherbak is guilty of criticizing an American scientist who had written a criticism of the Russian geneticist, Lysenko, which implied that Lysenko is a representative figure of Russian science. Zherbak deprecated Lysenko’s status. This matter goes back to 1936, when Lysenko was involved in a dispute with the great geneticist Vavilov – a dispute which ended with Vavilov’s arrest and exile to a Siberian concentration camp. That is the way scientific disputes are settled in Russia, and if Zherbak does not confess the monstrosity of his error he is likely to travel the same one-way road.
*
In themselves these events are perhaps not of first importance. So many intellectuals have been debased by the Stalinist regime; so many have been forced to recant their heretical views (heretical, that is, in holding aesthetic notions different from those of that great artist-writer-musician-mathematician-scientist- philosopher-sage-BELOVED LEADER, Stalin); so many have been imprisoned, driven to suicide or silence – that the sight of a few others being whipped by the ideological lash might ordinarily provoke a mere sad and muted reflections on the fate of the intellectual in a totalitarian society.
But there are a few special characteristics about these latest events which are worth glancing at for a moment:
In some ways the plight of the intellectual under Stalinism is now worse than it ever was under Hitler. This may seem like an extreme statement, but I think the facts justify it. The degree of totalitarian supervision exercised by the Stalinist state over all forms of intellectual work is now greater than it was even under Hitler’s dictatorship. The Stalinist state is tighter in its organization; it has a more precise ideological criterion than Hitlerism did because its demands are strictly utilitarian, direct and immediate, while those of the Nazi state were encased in a mystical verbiage which gave a few writers a certain “leeway.” (I hope no one is foolish or malicious enough to read these remarks as any kind of “defense” of Hitlerism; rather should they be seen as an indication of how barbaric Stalinism is.)
I would cite as proof of these remarks one simple fact: in Nazi Germany, Ernest Juenger, a nationalistic novelist, was able to circulate a novel during the war years which contained a disguised attack on the Nazi regime. The Stalinist censors would have immediately noticed its critical intentions; they have learned to suspect any work of art which does not actively praise the state. And rightly so, since the production of a “neutral” work of art in a totalitarian society is an act of defiance against it; such a work of art presumes to a value of its own quite apart from its use to the state. And that is the sort of defiance the Stalinist state cannot tolerate. We may therefore predict that the famous Russian poet, Boris Pasternak, who has been driven to translating Shakespeare into Russian as a means of escaping the problem of writing independently, will soon feel, publicly or privately, the blows of the Central Committee aestheticians.
*
The statement of the Central Committee on music is indicative of the undisguised barbarism which Stalinism has produced in Russia. Imagine trying to write a satire on this subject; it would be quite impossible to write anything as weird, as wild, as utterly nonsensical and meaningless – as flagrantly nonsensical and meaningless – as the Central Committee has produced. One suspects that part of the half-conscious motive in this sort of thing is merely to show how all-powerful the Stalinist bureaucracy is – to show that if it wishes it can even make adult, intelligent men repeat nonsense syllables with an air of complete gravity.
Behind the general ideological purge now taking place in Russia there is of course a very fundamental political reason: the anti-Western drive of the Stalinist bureaucracy. But, given this basic motivation, can it be denied that there is also an element of sheer flaunting of power in such gibberish? The inner mechanics of a totalitarian state ore such that, despite its desire to produce a completely utilitarian intellectual atmosphere, it often indulges in displays of absurdity that are not directly utilitarian. For who will dare to criticize or disagree?
*
And what about the American Stalinists? What about those unhappy souls who flocked to hear Shostakovich’s music because it was an augury of “Soviet culture,” who eagerly cheered Khatchkturian’s kitsch because it came from the blessed country? Alas, they are again at sea. No sooner have they settled down after the disturbance of Browder’s liquidation than they learn that they can’t listen to a Prokofieff concerto without feeling the corrective breath of the Kremlin on their necks. How uncertain, how troubling life must be for the Stalinist intellectuals who eagerly flock to the “cultural lectures” of the CP’s front groups. Next thing you know even Josh White may be considered impure!
And while on this subject, just a word about the last issue of The Nation, where there appears a wonderfully-timed article by its Moscow correspondent, Alexander Werth, a persistent Stalinophile. With exquisite delicacy Werth describes Stalinist rubber-hose treatment of its intellectuals as “functionalism.” He gravely reports the enthusiastic reception of Prokofieff’s “more than usually profound” Sixth Symphony. It will be interesting to see If Werth bothers to say anything about this latest purge. And how much longer will The Nation print dispatches from this wretched creature who writes of “Soviet art” without once mentioning the simple, basic fact that it exists in a vast concentration camp?
*
Finally, one returns to the poor unfortunates denounced in the Stalinist statement. Whatever one may think of their music, how can one avoid a feeling of deep sympathy for them in their present plight? Most of these composers are quite apolitical; they wish merely to be left alone so that they can work. But suppose they wearily decide to knuckle under in ordef to be able to keep working – what do they do then? What kind of music will satisfy the Russian prison-keepers? How exactly are they to fulfill the specification that their composition recognize the “truthfulness and reality of music?”
For even if they want to knuckle under, there is no clear indication of what they are to do. The novelists know that they are to write heroic tales about the new Five Year Plan and the greatness of Stalin. But how is one to transmute Stalin’s greatness into musical idiom?
Every creative personality, every honest intellectual in Russia must today be filled with a deep despair at the humiliation to which the Stalinist regime subjects him. Precisely because the intellectual can be of greater use to the regime than the individual worker does it subject him to more merciless supervision. If the regime grants him better living conditions than it does to the worker, it leaves him even less independent and creative. It enslaves his mind and corrupts his soul.
Today we are accustomed to the despair that runs through artistic work in capitalist society. But when the intellectuals of Russia are at last freed from Stalinist slavery, we shall learn the full extent of despair to which contemporary society drives the human mind.
 



Many of the points that need to be made with regard to the election have already appeared in last week’s issue of Labor Action. Here we would only add a few others, especially insofar as they affect the prospects for the formation of a labor party.
Without question, the election returns must be seen as a swing to the left. By that we mean the following: the tradition of the New Deal remains strongly entrenched in the minds of millions of Americans, especially American workers. By the New Deal they do not mean, as we do, a patch-quilt attempt to rehabilitate capitalism by means of social reform; they simply do not think in such abstract terms. They mean rather the isolated pieces of social legislation, taken out of the context of pro- or anti-capitalism; they mean the legislation which they believe helped them to organize unions, granted them a measure of social security and gave work relief to the unemployed.
In that sense, then, the New Deal remains a vital factor in current politics. The masses of people want more reforms; they want concrete, activated legislation in favor of the poorer strata of the population. That means, specifically: price control, housing, social security, abolition of the Taft-Hartley Act.
However imperfectly, however dismally, Truman came, in the course of the campaign, to represent these things to the bulk of the American workers. Dewey, whom Harold Ickes aptly called “the candidate in sneakers,” broke the all-time record for mouthing vacuous platitudes; by comparison, Harding spoke out courageously on all the ills of the world and Coolidge was a positive thinker. Wallace kept losing support steadily, and for the good reason that his tie with the Stalinists became clearer each day of his campaign. There is no way of proving such an assertion, but we strongly believe that if the vote had taken place five or six months earlier, when the Stalinist tie-up was not as obvious, Wallace would probably have received at least three times as many votes.
 
Political Factors Produced Victory
Nor is there any question as to who elected Truman. One can prove that simply by elimination. Except for his own personal campaign, there was no powerful force working for him other than the labor movement. The political subsidiaries of the CIO – the PAC branches – have become extremely efficient in the last few years, as they have accumulated experience in the routine techniques of vote-getting. After the election, Jim Farley, a shrewd observer of small matters, said that Truman was elected by two factors: sympathy and the labor vote. We agree, but we would only add that the two factors are probably one.
The unions did not elicit enthusiasm on a large scale for Truman. Money contributions to the PAC lagged badly. Nonetheless, in so crucial an industrial center as Detroit the PAC was so efficient at getting workers to register that the city had the largest total registration of its history; the same holds true, to one or another extent, for other places. The workers voted for Truman, by and large, with reluctance, but as someone has remarked, a reluctant vote counts as much as an enthusiastic one. But – only for the moment, only arithmetically. The political dynamic behind that reluctance is something else again, to which we will return shortly.
Now a word on the so-called personal aspect of the campaign. A great deal has been said about Truman having gotten a sympathy vote. There is probably some truth to this, though the forces of sympathy not having been organized on a precinct basis like the forces of labor, it is difficult to prove the point.
However, if Truman got such a sympathy vote, it is largely a matter of POLITICAL feeling. Truman, for all his weakness and ineptness, seemed to many voters little more than an unfortunate man who had stumbled into an excessive responsibility; it was as if they had discovered that the next-door barber had suddenly been forced to take responsibility for the U.S. Treasury Department. A little ludicrous, but still you sympathize with him.
However, suppose the only alternative you see is someone like Dewey – the creature of plastics and chromium, contrived in a political beauty parlor and polished with the oil of caution. To millions of voters Dewey must have seemed more like a machine than a human being, and – this is the important point – a machine welded together by the most slickly reactionary forces in the country.
Truman seemed an inadequate human being, but a least a human being. Nobody could have suspected as much of Dewey. (The only human trait he showed was a barely concealed vanity – in this instance, the vanity of anticipation.) In other words, Truman seemed like “a man of the people” (all too much so) while Dewey seemed like a creature of Wall Street. That is a political fact, not a psychological speculation.
What now? The most encouraging immediate post-election result is the strong wave of confidence that seems to have swept over many workers. One overhears it in conversation in the streets and one hears it repeatedly reported by men in factories. ‘‘We did it,” they say, “and now we should collect.”
Good, we’re all for that. We’re for it, whether or not a labor party is formed. John Smith was elected Congressman in your district on the basis of a “pro-labor” platform and with the decisive help of your union. Okay; keep visiting him, remind him of his pledges, put a little pressure on – that’s what the CIO-PAC proposes and we think it’s a good idea. As one UAW official has said to his members: “We worked and we worked hard and successfully at this job of politics ... We now must demand our full wages for a job well done.”
The truth is that on an immediate basis the likelihood for the formation of a labor party is sharply decreased. We may imagine the reasoning of even those labor leaders, like some UAW officials, who had favored a labor party to run something like this:
“Well, sure, we were in favor of a labor party, and ultimately we still are. But look. We put Truman into office and he knows it. We now have a group of very competent officials – Governor Bowles in Connecticut, Senators Humphreys and Douglas in Minnesota and Illinois – who are close to us politically and who adhere to the ADA point of view. Why not push ahead? Why not try to take over the Democratic party entirely, as we have already succeeded in doing in a few places? We can apply pressure on these people; their tenure depends on us. A move for a new party now would be ... premature.”
From the point of view of those who want to see an independent political labor force, this sort of reasoning is, of course, invalid. It still thinks of the labor movement as a beggar – even if, at the moment, a more importunate beggar – who has to wait for crumbs at the liberal door – and how often has that door been slammed in the workers’ faces!
No doubt there will be a honeymoon between the Truman administration and the labor movement. No doubt, too, some concessions will be made to the American workers. The Taft-Hartley Act may be repealed or amended, though nothing as useful as the old Wagner Act will replace it. Some sort of housing program may be instituted and some wispy figment of price control begun. But that is only for the beginning.
 
Demonstrated Political Force of Labor
Remember that there are two ways of looking at the election results: (1) labor got “its boys” elected; (2) labor showed itself a decisive political force, with increasing consciousness of its own power, and increasing talent for getting out the vote.
We venture to state that it is the second of these factors that is the most important ultimately and that it is the second which will certainly carry most weight a year or two from now.
For the Truman administration can satisfy the demands of the workers only up to a point. Where that point is would be foolhardy to predict; we do not want to indulge in any naive or crude “Marxistical” generalizations according to which capitalism cannot satisfy any of the workers’ demands. There is a great difference between the ultimate, basic status of the working class and its insistence on a given reform. The former cannot be satisfactorily improved by capitalism, but the latter can be granted.
Nonetheless, a breaking point will come. One reason that breaking point is likely to come fairly soon is that the election result will, if it has not already done so, install a. tremendous sense of confidence in the workers. They will feel (and quite naturally so!) that they were strong enough to change the course of the election, hence they should be strong enough to win better wages in the coming negotiations.
Probably not in the spring of 1949, more likely in the spring of 1950, there will be a serious wage crisis, with the possibility of large strikes not at all excluded. For remember that we are still living in an inflationary economy, that the war preparations program continues to eat up vast proportions of the national income – and that these factors are bound to leave their mark on living standards. No matter what the Truman administration does, these more powerful and subterranean economic developments will stimulate large sections of* the workers to further dissatisfaction. And this dissatisfaction will have behind it a newly acquired sense of political confidence.
 
Labor Has Shown What It Can Do
That means, we think, that the possibility of a labor party is probably decreased for the moment, but that the social impulsions driving to-- ward it are likely to become more powerful in the next two or so years. Actually, if there were in this country a socialist movement of, say, 30 or 40 thousand people – even a socialist movement with an unsatisfactory program from the point of view of this paper – it could play a tremendous role in pushing ahead the date on which a labor party is formed.
But the Socialist Party of this country is little more than a memory of an electoral machine. And its leader, Norman Thomas, is one of the most astonishing muddleheads this country has even seen. We intend in the next few weeks to return to the election campaign of the Socialist Party – a very shabby business it was. But if the proportion of New York City holds for the rest of the country, the SP vote will be increased over 1944 by about 2½ times.
That means that there are about 200,000 people in this country who consider themselves socialists of one sort or another and whose pressure in behalf of a labor party could be considerable if it were organized. But the SP, which is one of the most SECTARIAN organizations in all of socialist history, is quite unable to do that; it suffers from the worst of all diseases: self-deception.
It does not even have the good sense to acknowledge to itself and to the radical public that it is nothing more than a sect among other sects, and hence indulges in all sorts of ridiculous pretension, such as confusing a roster of “big-name” signatures with mass support. And finally it suffers from the worst sort of bureaucratism: the bureaucratism of its leader’s personal whim. Whatever Thomas says at any moment becomes the SP’s point of view.
But let us leave this subject for the moment, to return to it a few weeks hence. The SP is not going to be the force to stimulate organization of a labor party: that much is certain.
In the meantime, the handful of labor militants has at its disposal stronger arguments than ever in favor of the formation of a labor party. Labor has shown its strength; let that strength be utilized in creating its own political house.
 



No one, it appears, seriously doubts that if General Eisenhower were to consent to run for President on either of the two capitalist party tickets, he would be elected by a considerable majority. Each of the two major parties hopes for his consent, the Democrats at the moment more eagerly than the Republicans, and each dreads the prospect of his commitment to the other party. Liberals want him, Southern reactionaries want him, labor leaders want him.
The New York Liberal Party and the Americans for Democratic Action, anti-Stalinist catch-all for liberals, who have been pretty much committed to Truman up to now, have begun speaking up for Eisenhower. CIO leaders, aware that Truman is a dead pigeon and that Wallace threatens to win many “protest” votes, are angling for Eisenhower’s candidacy as a way out of a desperate situation. Max Zaritsky, leader of the AFL hatters union and an associate of the Dubinsky social-democratic wing of the labor movement, has openly come out for Eisenhower.
Now this is an extraordinary situation, almost unprecedented in recent affairs. Perhaps some precedent could be found when poor old Ulysses S. Grant was persuaded to run for President, even though he was something less than a mental giant, but even such a comparison would not be too valid. For when Grant ran for President there was certainly not the kind of crisis situation that would confront whichever candidate wins in 1948.
 
Where Does He Stand?
Here, then, is a man who won himself a considerable reputation during the war as a competent general, though no one knows exactly to what degree that reputation is deserved – and only a few people have raised the question of how admirable an activity commanding an army is in the first place.
In any case, aside from his role in the war, Eisenhower has neither done nor said anything at all which could make him a national political figure. Yet we find the non-Stalinist liberals publicly begging him to run and large sections of the public seemingly ready to support him.

Why? Does anyone know where Eisenhower stands on any of the political issues of the day?
 
What does he think about the war danger?
 
Or the Marshall Plan?
 
Or the Taft-Hartley law?
 
Or the tax problem?
 
Or the housing situation?
 
Or the poll tax?
 
Or President Truman’s civil rights program?
 
Or any one of dozens of other extremely important matters that face the country?

No one knows what he thinks about them, or even if he thinks about them. Yet the hue and cry for him increases.
Is that not an extraordinary situation? Here the leaders of the Liberal Party and the ADA, who love to issue long programs full of detailed planks, are sponsoring a man who has never publicly committed himself on any issues.
 
Political Dilemma
What is the explanation? Well, for one thing, the non-Stalinist CIO and AFL leaders are in something of a jam. They know their members are dissatisfied with many aspects of the current political and economic situation. They know that Truman is universally regarded with contempt or ridicule and that a large part of the labor vote can never be swung to him if he runs. And they know, furthermore, that if Truman does run, a good many labor votes will go to Wallace, not because unionists support his pro-Stalinist foreign policy, but simply because they wish to register their sense of dissatisfaction. That means the labor leaders have to find someone who could replace Truman and enjoy popular support. Eisenhower seems about the only man to fit those specifications.
So the labor leaders and the liberals have begun to moan (not shout) for Eisenhower out of sheer desperation. Program, opinion, all that is discarded. Just give us the general.
It is to this desperate dilemma that the liberals have been driven by their policy of supporting the Democratic Party at all costs. And it is this dilemma that is liable to cause no inconsiderable grief to many non-Stalinist trade unionists.
For example, in the UAW Walter Reuther has not yet spoken up about the Eisenhower boom. But all of his nationwide political associates have tied themselves in with the Eisenhower boom. The likelihood, therefore, is that Reuther will also string along. But suppose Eisenhower continues to refuse and that Truman gains the nomination? Then, it seems, Reuther will, willy-nilly, support Truman, even while realizing that Wallace will take many labor votes on a simple protest basis.
In this morass of rotten politics, an aggressive and alert union leadership could rally the best union elements by a direct and uncompromising call for the immediate formation of an independent Labor Party. Whether the formation of such a party is possible for the coming election is less important than the effects such a call would have. The Wallace movement would be outflanked by the rising movement for independent labor action and in that way thousands of workers would be prevented from supporting the pro-Stalinist Wallace party.
A new swell of militancy could be aroused in the unions with the simple program of: break with all the capitalist and Stalinoid parties, form a party of your own. In this way, a path could be carved out of the mess in which the labor movement now finds itself with regard to political action.
 



Tell the West
by Jerzy Gliksman
New York, Gresham Prell 1948, $3.00
Jerzy Gliksman was, until 1939, a leading member of the Jewish
Socialist Bund of Poland. He was a brother of Viktor Alter, the
famous Polish socialist who was subsequently to be murdered together
with Heinrich Ehrlich, another leading Polish socialist, by the
Stalinist regime.
When the war broke out in 1939, Gliksman remained in Warsaw until
the Nazi armies were virtually at its gates, participating in the
attempt to organize labor resistance to the Nazis after the Polish
government had collapsed. He fled eastward when resistance seemed
quite hopeless. Like many other socialists, he rather naively
expected to receive, if not an enthusiastic, then at least a decent
welcome from the Russians.
The welcome he did receive was arrest by the Stalinist secret
police, incarceration for months without charges presented against
him, and finally a five-year sentence to a Siberian labor camp as a
socially suspect individual. The warden of the prison in which he was
held slapped Gliksman on the back and told him he’d be reconstructed
into a good Soviet citizen in Siberia.
Gliksman’s book (a strangely impassive and therefore in some ways
particularly impressive work) records his experiences in jail, on a
cattle car riding across Russia to Siberia, and during a year in a
Siberian lager. It would be useless here to repeat the incredibly
bestial details of the suffering he underwent and of the life of
slave laborers in Siberia. Suffice it to say that anyone interested
in this question will wish to read the book: it is an absolutely
honest, painfully restrained, completely apolitical record of human
suffering, distorted neither by passion nor bias. Gliksman is not a
skillful writer, but under the circumstances his very lack of skill
is something of an advantage. For the mere dreary recital of the
facts –  of the inhuman labor conditions, the constant hunger, the
degradation of prisoners in the camps – is eloquent enough.
By and large Gliksman’s book supports the theoretical conclusions
about forced labor in Russia that were discussed in this magazine
several months back in connection with David Dallin’s study of that
subject. The object of Stalinism was, unlike Hitler’s, not primarily
to terrorize oppositionists, its object was primarily to find large
supplies of cheap and expendable labor. In practice, the horror of
one was duplicated by the other.
Add Gliksman’s book to the gruesome list of books that describe
the life of men under modern totalitarianism.
 



Eric Bentley’s recent book on Bernard Shaw [1] frankly declares its intention to be polemical – to wit, a defense of Shaw as political thinker. Though half of his book analyzes the plays – and very well, too – the burden of Bentley’s argument is political. The result, to put it bluntly, is pretty sad.
Since Bentley’s argument is largely directed against the usual Marxist objections to Shaw’s politics, his own knowledge of Marxism is called into question. But as soon as Bentley enters the field of political theory he is like a provincial let loose in a museum: all he can do is to remember a few phrases of his hometown’s philistines. Thus we read that Marxism “appeals to pure sentiment, to that praise of the poor as poor which is the essence of demagogy.” And again, that Marxism believes in “the adequacy of ‘material and economic factors’ to make revolutions on their own” – whatever revolutions made on “their own” by “factors” may mean!
This kind of writing calls into question Bentley’s entire book; no one can claim serious attention when he gives such a completely ridiculous report of what Marx believed. This is the kind of impressionistic, off-the-cuff politics which a young literary academician can pick up by reading literary magazines in which ex-leftist intellectuals announce their break from Marxism. It is terribly stale and secondhand.
Shaw was never a systematic thinker. First shocked into social awareness by the depression of the early 1880s, he developed an eclectic concoction of notions picked up from a variety of sources. From Marx – whom, incidentally, he admitted having read only very skimpily – Shaw borrowed the general social critique of capitalist society, while rejecting the Marxian historical approach, the theory of class struggle and Marxian economics. From the marginal-utility economists Shaw borrowed his economic theories. But the most decisive intellectual influences in his life were a number of very perceptive but essentially reactionary critics of industrial capitalism: Carlyle, Ruskin and, when he read him later on, Nietzsche. These writers savagely attacked all the faults of capitalism, but since they rejected socialism and the working class (largely because of their antipathy to the masses and to any kind of mass movement) they had no alternative but to fall back upon mere nostalgia or reliance on a great and benevolent leader.
Shaw had one great intellectual virtue: he has been taken in by almost everything else but never by capitalism. He succumbed to Nietzscheism, Lamarckism, vegetarianism, imperialism, fascism, Stalinism, anti-vivisectionism, Fabianism and what have you; but he knew how rotten were the internal social workings of capitalist society and never stopped saying so. As a result his magnificently composed pamphlets, polemics and prefaces are full of some of the most eloquent and effective anti-capitalist agitation of our times. But that was all. His best writing was always in terms of particularities, always very concrete and limited. As soon as he entered the field of theory, as soon as he essayed generalizations, he usually made an ass of himself.
Even in the late nineteenth century Shaw’s political physiognomy was accurately described. Despite the fact that Shaw was infinitely more brilliant than he, the British Marxist, H.M. Hyndman, in an essay called The Final Futility of Final Utility destroyed Shaw’s economic theories. The British socialist writer, Max Beer, described Shaw most accurately:
Having no objective guide, no leading principle to go by, Shaw necessarily arrives at hero-worship – at the hankering after the Superman to guide mankind. I have noticed the same mental development in several continental critics ... They began with Social Democracy, passed through the Ibsen period, worshipped The Enemy of the People, finally becoming adherents of Nietzsche in theory and of Bismarck or some other social-imperialist in practice.
 
Supermen and Yahoos
For Shaw socialism was not a mass movement in which the working class played a leading role; he distrusted the masses of people, the Yahoos as he called them. What he had in common with the other Fabians, the more routine reformists, was precisely this distrust of the mass. They, however, did not go along with his notion of superman; as complacent and cautious reformists they had enough sense to realize that the leader theory was for them a very dangerous business. That is why they, who never could write such bitter and brilliant attacks on capitalism as did Shaw, also seldom succumbed to the modern totalitarians so disgracefully as did Shaw.
Only in recent years have we been able to see what Shaw’s Socialism for Supermen and Gentlemen really meant. When Mussolini came to power, Shaw was one of the first European intellectuals to applaud the tinsel dictator. For this Shaw got the most merciless polemical drubbing of his life. The Italian democrat – one of the last genuine survivors of the breed – Gaetano Salvemini went after Shaw fist and claw and never let go. Salvemini exposed for all time Shaw’s frigid flirtations with totalitarianism.
Later when Hitler came to power Shaw behaved in the same way. And finally he became an apologist for Stalin, in whose tyranny he saw a vindication of the principle of the “efficient leader.” Shaw may have yearned for the Nietzschean “socialisation of the selective breeding of Man” (The Revolutionist’s Handbook) – which Bentley has called, with other-worldly restraint, “idealistic racism” – but in practice he could not resist the wretched corporeal supermen of fascism and Stalinism.
This is the hardest nut for Bentley to crack and the way he does it is really an indication of what passes for avant-garde thought these days. Bentley approvingly declares Shaw believed that
liberalism and fascism are rival masks of capitalism, and fascism is in some ways the better of the two. It sometimes benefitted the proletariat, it gave bureaucratic status to functionaries who were formerly casual employees... To that extent it prepared the way for genuine socialism. (My emphasis – I.H.)
Shaw’s praise of fascism, Bentley triumphantly concludes, was merely a device to prod British liberals out of their complacent belief in laissez-faire capitalism. But is it not dear that by this sort of argument almost anything can be excused or explained away?
What Shaw wanted above all was a society run according to the rational prescriptions of Victorian intellectuals – gentlemen, every one of them. His hero – the naturally muted British version of the Superman – was the “efficient civil servant” who would do things right. If there is any single political idea that would be anathema to Shaw it is the one contained in Lenin’s remark that every cook must learn to be a cabinet minister. Shaw was for ministers ruling and cooks cooking.
Unlike the great Marxists, Shaw was fundamentally alien to the democratic and equalitarian spirit that has inspired all genuine socialist movements; his conception of socialism was thoroughly bureaucratic. He was ready to borrow from every non-capitalist theory so long as it was not committed to a belief in the independent historical role of the masses. That is why Shaw could admire Stalin but could never appreciate the democratic idealism which was the underpinning of Marx’s and Lenin’s life-work. To the end Shaw was the petty bourgeois, resentful of his rulers but hating the “Yahoos.”
That this son of doctrine should today find a certain response is not surprising. Mr. Bentley has done it the doubtful service of reducing it to its most frank, unadorned and ugly essentials.

Footnote
1. Bernard Shaw, by Eric Bentley. New Directions, 1947, 242 pp., $2.00.
 



Religion and the Rise of Capitalism
by R.H. Tawney
Penguin Books, 280 pp., 35¢
Here is probably the best book buy of the year. Penguin Books is to be congratulated on reissuing Tawney’s classic study of the relationship between the Protestant Reformation and the rise of modern capitalism. Since this scholarly work can hardly be expected to gain mass circulation, Penguin’s willingness to publish this inexpensive edition is cause for gratitude.
Tawney’s book is concerned with one of the most interesting and revealing of modern historical problems: what is the relationship between the rise of Protestantism in all its various branches and the simultaneous rise of capitalist society? To what extent are Luther’s heterodoxy, for instance, or Calvin’s system reflections of a still young but nonetheless developing capitalist economy that pushed its way through feudal restrictions? Or, for that matter, is developing capitalism rather the result of the new concepts that the Reformation elevated into systems of Protestant theology?
These are the questions that Tawney poses and answers. He answers them more satisfactorily perhaps than any other historian who has approached the subject. With a firm grasp on the actual realities of the economic transformation from feudalism to capitalism that rocked Europe for several centuries – Tawney places the decisive appearance of capitalism in Europe in the 16th century – he skillfully examines the interpenetration of economic situation and economic need with theological doctrine. He does not succumb to the error of the “idealist” historians who ascribe to theological conceptions or philosophical notions an independent role in initiating the historical transformation to capitalism. On the other hand, he does not see each shift in religious doctrine as a direct and immediate reflection of some brute economic need. Tawney shows how both economic transformation, and religious rebellion were part of a total social revolution that lasted hundreds of years and broke out into sporadic clashes of which the great climax was the French Revolution of 1789.
 
The Catholic Church
The first part of Tawney’s book is a brief but excellent account of medieval society in relation to the then Catholic Church. He examines in detail the social doctrines of the medieval church – the concept of society as an organism in which various classes served different but harmonious functions but were not to usurp the functions or rights of the other; the concept of “just price” as a means both of explaining and modulating economic practice; the church’s objection to usury, more often honored in the breach than in the observance, which was significant as an expression of its feudal, anti-capitalist outlook. Tawney shows how medieval doctrine was both a rationalization and defense of the feudal status quo, as well as an attempt to modulate and make harmonious the oppressive society in which the church – the greatest landowner of the time – had such a tremendous stake.
Tawney then proceeds to a direct examination of the social revolution which transformed western society from stagnant feudalism to a then progressive capitalism. He places the Protestant movements within this context, though he does not make the error of seeing them as mere mechanical reflexes of this social revolution. Luther’s doctrine he sees as a conservative moral rebellion against the laxness of the Catholic Church, the objective though not the deliberate effect of which was to destroy still further the hold of the regressive society to which the church was tied.
Much more influential and revolutionary than Luther was Calvin and the tremendous organization he built up. Calvin enunciated a system of theology that in its spirit and purpose served as both incentive and balm to rising capitalism; it expressed the world outlook of the new dominant class in theological terms. Though this was certainly not the subjective intent of Calvin and his theological brethren, it was nonetheless the objective consequence of their work. Tawney then rounds out his book with a detailed study of the Reformation in England, in which a particularly excellent section is devoted to the Puritan movement and its ethical system.
No doubt there are certain criticisms that can validly be made of Tawney’s book – but this is not the place for them and the present reviewer is not equipped for the task, But despite the weaknesses it may have, Tawney’s book is a first-rate work and an important contribution to the study of the origin of capitalist society.
It may therefore seem in bad taste to end this notice with an objection, but the truth is that the Penguin edition, inexpensive though it is, has one serious deficiency: its type is so small and its paper so grey and its pages so crowded that the book is terribly difficult to read. Penguin of course faces a problem here: how to get out for 35 cents a large book that is certain to have a limited sale. Perhaps that problem could be solved by striking a compromise between the expensive $3.00 and $4.00 editions, which so many people can’t afford to buy, and the present Penguin editions, which so many people find too difficult to read. Could Penguin put out paper-covered editions of those books that are not likely to sell in mass quantities, using larger type, slightly better paper and either more or larger pages, and then charging, say, 75 cents or $1.00 for them? People who want to own Tawney’s book, and others like it, might not find that TOO expensive and they would certainly find it more attractive.
 



Jan Masaryk’s suicide – or murder – was admittedly, a sad event, but the causes of that sadness are rather, more complex than, most newspaper comments have been willing to notice. [1]
Was it, however, suicide or murder? We have no way of knowing. We can only say what is obvious on the basis of the entire history of Stalinism: there is no, reason to believe that it couldn’t have been a murder. After all, such specialists in human enslavement and destruction as the Stalinists would hardly hesitate to rub out this weak, ineffectual liberal if there were any sign that he was trying to slip out of their grasp. They have murdered many in the past and before we are through with them, they will no doubt murder many in the future.
Yet we would guess – and that is all it is: a guess – that in this case Masaryk took his own life. If that is so, then the political implications of his action are extremely interesting. For one thing, he who only yesterday was being scorned by the American press as a coward and a traitor who had sold out to Stalinism is now depicted as a martyr to his country.
 
Was He a Martyr?
But what does his martyrdom consist of? Did he die trying to rally the people of Czechoslovakia against tyranny? Did he die fighting in an underground movement to free the Czechs? No; he died because he must have sensed the futility of his course; he must have sensed that he had worked himself into a hopeless position in which he was now completely the prisoner of the Stalinists. In fact, the last public statement Masaryk made was one in support of the Stalinist coup. And it was the weakness, the political bankruptcy of Masaryk and his like that made possible the seemingly constitutional rise to power of the Stalinists. Masaryk played the same role with regards to the Stalinists as did Von Papen with regards to Hitler. There is no heroism in either; and without heroism there is no genuine martyrdom.
Not all who die are martyrs.
Perhaps, as seems only too likely, we shall soon hear distressing news from Prague about the Stalinist regime’s persecution of Czech Trotskyists. If a Czech Trotskyist or a Czech socialist were to be murdered there would be an instance of genuine martyrdom. These people would be dying for something.
You may wonder why this emphasis on martyrdom. What’s the difference if Masaryk was a martyr or not? Insofar as Masaryk personally is concerned, it matters very little. But politically it matters a great deal.
For Masaryk’s suicide was not merely a personal act; it was a political event, both directly and symbolically. Masaryk’s act was the end of the road of bourgeois liberal politics.
Masaryk committed suicide when his political role seemed hopeless. He had been utilized by the Stalinists; he had no mass following in Czechoslovakia among either pro- or anti-Stalinists; he was at a dead end.
 
Weak and Pliant Fools
Suppose Masaryk had felt it was possible for him to rally masses of Czechs against Stalinist tyranny? Would he then have committed suicide? We cannot say, of course, but it seems unlikely. It seems, rather, that he would have found sustenance in this mass support, a basis on which to manage somehow to oppose the Stalinists.
But that is the whole point: bourgeois liberalism simply cannot compete against Stalinism in Europe. It can offer only words about democracy. Now the democratic rights that such people as Masaryk talk about are very precious to us. But precisely because they are precious we must recognize Masaryk’s helplessness in defending them from Stalinist attack. The Stalinists speak in the name of something new, something that seems to the masses anti-capitalism (and whatever else, their experience in Europe convinces them that capitalism, the old order, is helpless and hopeless) as well as in the name of something that seems to smack of socialism.
Bourgeois liberalism, whether represented by. someone as weak as Masaryk or someone stronger in personal traits, is helpless before Stalinism. And for those bourgeois liberals who try to cooperate with the Stalinists, the political end is the one which became Masaryk’s personal end: suicide, extinction.
Bourgeois liberalism has had a remarkable history. Once proud and defiant, it stood at the head of the great revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries, sweeping aside the crowns of kings, but already beginning to feel a bit uneasy about its brawny proletarian partner that jostled it in the battle while demanding a fairer share of the victory. Today liberalism is a weak and pliant tool, no matter how conscience stricken, of one or another of the ruling imperialist powers of the world. Its rhetoric is stale, its hopes illusory, its program antiquated.
Precisely because liberalism in general is best characterized by the act of Masaryk, is it all the more necessary for socialism to make its own, its precious unambiguous possession, those strands of belief of once vital liberalism that remain important for our day: its emphasis on democratic rights, on human individuality and human diversity. What they talked about we must make real.

Note by ETOL
1. The following issue of Labor Action contained the following correction:
The opening line of Comrade Irving Howe’s article on Masaryk in last week’s issue of Labor Action was dropped. The missing line reads: “Jan Masaryk’s suicide – or murder – was admittedly,” etc.
 



The hearts of all socialists were – it would be useless to deny it – sick with sorrow and apprehension last week. Who could watch the Stalinist coup in Czechoslovakia without suffering a sense of oppression? Who could avoid feeling that we are today repeating what happened ten years ago: a good part of Europe succumbing to the irresistible pressures of a mighty totalitarian power; the world preparing for war with that dazed, almost unfeeling response of a patient to whom pain and horror are so intimate that they are accepted as a natural part of the social landscape? And who, worst of all, could avoid the feeling of discouragement – to say it bluntly – which a socialist must feel about so many events in Europe?
For to be truthful and to avoid the various myopic and opiatic forms of “official optimism,” we must recognize that the world is today in a far worse state than it was ten years ago when Hitler overran Europe; and that the socialist movement is in an even weaker condition, less able to cope with the events in Europe than it was then. The very passage of time, of ten years from Hitlerism ascendant to a world war to Stalinism ascendant, is proof enough for this assertion. Only fools and scoundrels can keep talking about European politics as if all is well, as if the working class is reaching the peak of its road. The truth is otherwise.
And the recognition of this truth is the first essential for any discussion of what has happened. Only the most sober realism, only, if you will, the most honest pessimism can possibly serve as a basis for useful discussion. The “official optimism” of the Fourth International suggests something far worse than we maintain: it suggests that the political situation is so bad that it will not do to face the truth. And so instead of simple facts, we find incantations and ritual rites. That is the really corrosive variety of pessimism – the pessimism of self-deception.
*
Even a quick glance at the European situation recalls the upward surge of Hitlerism. When Trotsky declared that fascism and Stalinism are symmetrical phenomena, he was offering a remarkably brilliant observation, the full implications of which have not yet been explored. For what he was suggesting by means of his analogy was that fascism and Stalinism were neither identical nor antithetical; neither simply part of a vague, nameless, Unidentifiable terror such as the liberals would have it; nor enemies unto the death as the neo-Stalinists would have it. Instead they represent parallel, but different. aspects of the decline of contemporary society.
Recent developments have shown conclusively how different Nazism and Stalinism are socially: most important of all, in their attitudes to capitalist society. Where the Nazis by and large perpetuated and strengthened private property, the Stalinists by and large have destroyed it in the countries they occupied. Those who saw “capitalist” property relations in the Stalinized countries of Eastern Europe or those who poked around the Russian farm collectives searching for “capitalist” property relations, will either have to face the simple facts or else retire once and for all in an arena of private fantasies. Wherever Stalinism takes state power, it expropriates the capitalist class. If we do not understand that, we are lost.
But – and here is the second essential point in our comparison – the more Stalinist policy shows itself to be socially different from that of the Nazis, the more does it prove to be profoundly similar in its human consequences and techniques of power. And this is not an accident, for if we follow Trotsky’s suggestive remark that Stalinism and fascism are symmetrical we see that precisely through and because of the social differences do the totally reactionary human consequence follow. For the element of symmetry within the social difference is that both are completely totalitarian movements the primary aim of which is to suppress mass initiative – to utilize the deep stirrings of the masses while simultaneously depriving them of all initiative and self-will.
*
These general remarks acquire immediate significance in relation to the Czech situation. When the Nazis conquered Czechoslovakia they did so against the general opposition of the Czech workers. When tbe Stalinists conquered Czechoslovakia they did so with the general support, it would seem, of the Czech workers. This is a highly distasteful fact for a socialist to swallow; but it IS a fact. No doubt many Czech workers were terrorized into giving unwilling aid to the Stalinists, no doubt others hate the Stalinists; but the pattern of recent events makes quite clear that the Stalinists had the active support of the bulk of the workers and unions. Otherwise they could not have seized power.
 
How Can the Stalinists Win Workers’ Support?
Here we come to the central question: why do European workers support the Stalinists? Why did the Czech workers help the totalitarian bandits seize the government? For this is the first case, with the possible exception of Yugoslavia, where the workers actually seemed to favor the Stalinists – again, making all the allowances mentioned above. In Poland, to cite the sharpest contrast, the workers certainly did not support the Stalinists; they repeatedly showed signs of the bitterest opposition. If we can, to some extent, discover why the Czech workers supported the Stalinists, then we may also understand why the French and Italian workers do likewise.
I think the answer is that the support by the Czech workers of the Stalinists is based on a unique mixture of reactionary and revolutionary motivations.
It is certainly true that the workers of Europe still look upon the Stalinists as the inheritors of the tradition of the Russian Revolution and that this remains one of the Stalinists’ most valuable assets. There can also be no doubt that in the eyes of the workers the “revolutionary” character of the Stalinists is underlined by the fact that they DO expropriate factories that they DO drive out private capitalists in the countries they take over. And is that not supposed to be a quintessential characteristic of socialism? But merely to let the matter go at this is not enough. For if the support of the Stalinists by Europe’s workers is explained on the basis of their desire for socialism and their belief that the Stalinists will bring socialism, then one has the right to ask: why do the workers still think that there is socialism in Russia? Why have they not learned that the Stalinists are totalitarian despots? Why have they not learned these facts from their numerous tragic experiences with Stalinism?
It is easy enough to dismiss such questions as “subjective,” but I think they go to the heart of the matter. The workers support the Stalinists because they want socialism – that is certainly true; but they also support them because their conception of what socialism is has been debased and corrupted as a result of the cataclysmic declines and the barbaric experiences of recent history, in other words, the “revolutionary” kernel of their reasons for supporting Stalinism is encased in a reactionary shell. There are sufficient reasons for this situation. Ever since the great historic opportunity for a total victory of socialism in the early 1920s in Europe was lost, humanity has paid the consequences. The terrifying experiences of the intervening decades have tended to destroy, first, the initiative of the workers and, second, their conception of what the aim of their struggle was. More and more, as their self-confidence was shattered by the rise of totalitarianism, by the outbreak of war, by the development of the atomic bomb, the working class, and with it all humanity, has become an object of manipulation by totalitarian parties. That is the essential point of similarity between Stalinism and Hitlerism.
 
Recent Decades Leave Reactionary Heritage
The results of defeat are not merely the consolidation of the power of the ruling, classes, but above all the disintegration of the initiative and confidence of the rebellious classes. The European workers, subjected to the dehumanization of Nazism, to the barbarism of the war, to the numbing demagogy of Stalinism, are not the same workers who marched into the foreground of history thirty years ago. To deny this is to deny the movement of history ... and the cost of defeat.
Furthermore, the entire trend of recent history has been toward the creation of gigantic bureaucratic structures that weigh on the backs of the masses and impart to them a feeling of helplessness. How can I, a solitary individual in a totalitarian state, watched by the janitor who is an agent of the secret police, watched in the factory by who knows how many agents of the party, supervised even during my few hours of synthetic culture – how can I do anything against that state, how can I do anything requiring the high degree of initiative of cooperating together with the man on the next bench? That is the feeling which totalitarianism imparts. For the modern totalitarian state has developed unprecedented techniques of oppression – the result of a situation in which technology has far outstripped humanity’s success in controlling it for socially beneficial purposes.
This is the heritage the European working class has received from the past three decades. Stalinism consciously exploits this heritage. It denounces capitalism, for It knows that the workers of Europe, no matter what else, will never again be able to rouse any enthusiasm for capitalism. It promises socialism, for which generations have struggled. But it quite consciously and deliberately continues to handle the masses in precisely the same manipulative manner the Nazis did. It thereby exploits the still powerful yearnings of the workers for a new society within the context of the passive social responses inherited from the Nazi experience and the terror of the war where, as under the Nazi regime, the individual worker could only feel helpless before the power of exterior forces loosed against him from above.
In this sense, Stalinism is the legatee of Nazism; in this sense, it continues the decay of capitalist civilization begun by Nazism – driving it to the point where capitalist property relations are abolished while the worst social and human aspects of capitalism are extended to a point never before imagined.
And it is in this sense that it is necessary and permissible to lump capitalism, fascism and Stalinism in one category: for all their great differences, they are all part of a general, total decline of modern class society; for all their great differences, they all subvert the independence and initiative of the masses.
Here, I think, will arise the supreme point of difference between a reborn socialist movement and all defenders of class oppression: the revolutionary socialists will seek to restore the self-confidence, the democratic initiative of the masses of people while the bourgeois parties, the fascists and the Stalinists will wish only to manipulate them. Revolutionary, democratic self-initiative against all authoritarian movements – that is the central cry of the third camp of socialism. Until that is achieved, the “revolutionary-reactionary” appeal of the Stalinists will continue to win the European masses, or to drive them to the opposite revolutionary-reactionary appeal of fascism.
*
In the light of these general remarks, the attitude of revolutionary socialists toward Czech events becomes a relatively simple matter. Once and for all we can put aside the preposterous ghost of “what is your attitude toward nationalization of industry per se?” There is no such thing as nationalization of industry apart from a social context. Undertaken by a Stalinist regime, such nationalization cannot be separated from the total context of Stalinist totalitarianism. It is, in that situation, part of a reactionary historical process. Undertaken by a democratic socialist regime, it is part of a genuinely liberating process. The casuistic, theological nonsense about nationalization “in and of itself” should finally be thrown into the ashcan: there is no nationalization, or anything else, in and of itself.
The Czech events will provide a central testing point for any possible reinvigoration of the European and American socialist movements. The slightest support to, the slightest ambiguity about, the Stalinist coup is fatal. It removes those holding such a view – let us say it bluntly – from the arena of independent socialism into the arena, of left-wing and at times not so left-wing supporters of Stalinism, than which NO position could be more miserable.
We have no yet seen the response of the “official parties” of the Trotskyist movement. Yet it seems hard to see how a position holding that Stalinist Russia is a “workers’ state” (no matter how “degenerated”) can lead to anything but support (no matter how “conditional”) of the Stalinist coup. For have not the Stalinists driven out the bourgeois ministers from the regime? Have they not “taken over” the factories from their private owners?
Let us hope that for once inconsistency triumphs and the “official parties” do not take the logical – and catastrophic – consequence of their position.
As for us, we state quite without ambiguity that in Czechoslovakia we would apply the same position that we had for Poland in an analogous situation. we would protest together with all those who opposed the abolition of democratic rights by the Stalinist regime; we would march with the students who protested the closing down of the bourgeois democratic parties’ newspapers. Let anyone make of this what they will. But before any howling is raised, one question must be answered: when the GPU and its Czech assistants come to arrest oppositionists, be they Social-Democrats or members of Benes’ party or the students, would you stand with the cops or their victims, with the hunters or the hunted? For us, to ask this question is to answer it.
*
This does not mean, however, that we in any way give support to the political doctrines of the bourgeois democratic parties. For if the Czech events have anything at all to teach us, it is the complete paralysis and bankruptcy of the democratic capitalist parties.
In the eyes of the masses the parties of Benes and his counterparts defend the intolerable status quo; which is the truth. The bourgeois democratic parties have no social dynamism, no hope, no perspective. They merely repeat their hollow phrases about democracy, but they are unable to clothe these phrases with the reality of social program and accomplishment.
 
Parties of Capitalism Cannot Hold Masses
Was there anything ever more miserable than the way in which the bourgeois democratic parties collapsed in Czechoslovakia and in all of Eastern Europe? And together with them, the Social Democrats, half of whom folded like men with paper spines and the other half simply sold out to Stalin?
Why? Because they are congenital cowards? Perhaps; but not completely. For the truth is that the bourgeois democratic parties had lost their hold on the masses, especially the most militant, active and aggressive sections of the masses. – those who will come out on the streets.
To depend on Social Democracy, to depend on liberalism as a means of stopping Stalinism in Europe, is to guarantee the victory of Stalinism. Absolutely and without the slightest doubt, it is to sign Europe away to Stalinism. These are the parties which cling nostalgically to the Stable youth of capitalism, the parties that could shine in 1912, but which have proved themselves were paper dikes against the mass floods of fascism and Stalinism. These are the parties of the past: whoever wins, whatever happens, they are finished.
*
But if the phrases of a Benes – that wretched parody of Schuschnigg – cannot stop Stalinism, if the phrases of a Blum are equally helpless ... then perhaps U.S. bombs may do better. Here we must face the possibility that the rapid tempo of Stalin’s conquests may result in war rather sooner than had been expected. Thus far Stalin has merely consolidated bis power in those countries Russian troops had already occupied. That process of consolidation is now almost complete. If the Stalinists try to move further west, the possibility of a war in the immediate future becomes real.
What the compulsions forcing Stalinism to SUCH rapid expansion are, is at present impossible to say with any degree of definitiveness. Internal economic crisis? The hope of scurrying off with conquests when it is clear that the U.S. will offer no more opposition than formal diplomatic protests? The possession of the atom bomb secrets and thereby absence of fear that the U.S. alone could use this weapon in case of war? Whatever it may be, the Russians seem to be forcing the issue. If they continue, it means war, quickly. For there are no longer left any “luxury positions” for the capitalist powers: Italy, Western Germany, France cannot be surrendered without a serious loss in power.
 
Imperialist War Would Bring New Disasters
I know that there are many liberals and socialists of a sort who are flirting with the idea of war as the only way to stop Stalinism. I do not want here to argue this matter in detail, but only to ask a few, and not necessarily the most important, questions which arise from recent experience:

If the U.S. were to launch this “sneak” atomic attack, which tempts so many disoriented anti-Stalinists, would that not drive the masses of Europe even more into the hands of the Stalinists? Would that not insure the ideological victory of Stalinism for a long time?
 
The calculations of the “sneak” atom bomb theorists are that the Russians do not have the bomb. How do they know? Suppose the Russians do have it? Are they not. playing with a notion that then means the virtual destruction of all civilization?
 
What are the likely consequences inside the capitalist countries if they launch an atom war against Russia? What possibility is there of the preservation of democracy in such a case? The evidence from the last war is here insufficient: remember that this will be an atom bomb war.
 

*
One conclusion stands out above all: the evil of this world is indivisible. Stalinism engages in a death-fight with capitalism; but they each reinforce the retrogressive features of the other. The masses who adhere to Stalinism cannot be broken from it by the empty phrases of the capitalist states. The capitalist powers have nothing to offer the European masses – not even the temporary half-rations of the Marshall Plan can revive the remnants of European capitalism. And those workers who still support capitalism can hardly be broken from it by a policy of half-support of Stalinism in Europe (or of playing footsie with the Wallace movement).
 
Guard and Nourish Socialist Independence
The evil of this world is indivisible. That is the premise of the third camp perspective of socialism, and that, we think, will prove its eventual basis of victory.
We wish to fool nobody – neither those who listen to us nor ourselves. The perspective for Europe is in the immediate future dark, very dark. Yet there remains, in France and England, to cite but two possibilities, bases for socialist growth. In France as it becomes increasingly a battleground between Stalin’s Thorez and Washington’s de Gaulle (or, at the moment, Schumann), an INDEPENDENT socialist movement uniting all those who reject both imperialist monsters can grow ... If only it will be INDEPENDENT. In this country, too, what is essential is a regroupment of all those – parties and/or individuals – who are ready to work for a democratic socialist future as against both capitalism and Stalinism without supporting either.
Yet ... what are the chances? Does it not seem highly likely that the socialists of Europe will provide humanity with that one so essential example of the oppressed standing up as free men and taking their destiny into their own hands – before the war of the atom bombs breaks out?
That at the moment the war of atom bombs seems to be the more likely result of the current historical tragedy is, for this writer at least, too obvious to require iteration. But it is not inevitable. It is not unavoidable! It is still possible for men to act! Perhaps their action can forestall the atom war; perhaps it can only keep alive that spark of thought and hope that flickering but still beautiful socialist dream – with which those to follow us will try to rebuild from the ashes of the atoms. But even if it is the latter perspective which will be realized, to nourish and guard that spark seems to us the most worthy and useful of dedications.
 




I. Machiavelli and Modern Thought

II. Machiavellian Approach to Society

III. Machiavellian Political Theory
 




Despite the fact that it has pockmarked American life for decades and that it immediately affects a sizable group of our population, the status of the non-Negro colored minorities in this country has escaped the attention of even our liberal historians. This is understandable enough, since they are more concerned with composing lullabies than writing history. Only in comparatively obscure studies has the problem been discussed, and that in isolated form. Carey McWilliams’ Brothers Under the Skin [1] has, therefore the virtue of bringing together popular studies of the colored groups – Indian, Puerto Rican, Mexican, Negro, Orientals. In eight sketches he has traced the history of these groups, their segregation and exploitation, their pathetic efforts to integrate themselves into the American community and the rebuffs they have met. Regardless of the other merits of the book, it serves the valuable purpose of presenting the fact that there exist in this country Some 14,000,000 people who by virtue of the dark pigmentation of their skins are doomed to live as an inferior social caste from which, by definition, escape is impossible.
 
The Dualism in McWilliams’ Approach
McWilliams is not a footnoting sociologist; nor is he a particularly subtle social psychologist. He is a popularizer, which is quite acceptable, since he carefully documents his sources and does not sacrifice accuracy for popularity. His approach, unfortunately, suffers from that dualism which is indicative of the difficulties to which even such competent liberals as McWilliams are driven by the untenability of their present politics. He attacks color discrimination because

his sense of decency is outraged at the fact that men can be made to suffer indignities merely because of the color of their skin, because he realizes that the culture of the prevailing group is impoverished by discrimination, and because he realizes that no decent society can be built so long as racial and color fissures eat into the social organism; and
 
because he believes that the victory of the United Nations is partially dependent upon a progressive solution of the color and race questions.

Since McWilliams is a liberal, he cannot be expected to have a fundamental understanding of the war and it would therefore be pointless to argue with him when his main preoccupation is with another question; what is reprehensible, however, is to suggest in any way that the color problem needs to be solved primarily as a means toward winning the war. McWilliams, however, has not allowed his political preoccupations to divert him from his main task and, with the exceptions of the poor first and last chapters, his book is reasonably free from any attempts to pose the color problem as a function of the war.
McWilliams’ main approach is in terms of the cultural effects which the oppression of colored minority groups produces. He has a fine respect for the integrity and value of different cultures and his best pages describe how colored groups have had their social and cultural patterns debilitated as a result of the impenetrable economic barriers which American society has placed in their path. He appreciates the fact that the alien colored groups find themselves in an impossible position when they are thrust into a strange, hostile land in which their folkways are neither accepted nor tolerated, and they are, then, not allowed to become part of the American life-stream. Especially is this true in two contingencies:

where the immigrant group has succeeded in establishing a ghetto existence, such as the Chinatowns or the Hispanidad agricultural communes in New Mexico, and then these precarious structures are swept away by the appetites of American capitalism; or
 
where the second generation groups become alienated from the values of their parents and the new “democratic” values which they acquire during their scanty educations are never fulfilled in actual life, with personal and group demoralization as the result.

And though official society blithely pretends to be unaware of these situations, America is husbanding within its borders a minority which is degenerating into social and cultural atrophy. This situation is not true for the Negroes, or at least not as true; they are in a different position from, say, the Mexicans or Chinese because they have become, in a perverted way, an integral part of the American social structure, and therefore capable of resistance. But of that, more later.
It is pathetic to see with what eager credulity the Mexicans and Puerto Ricans, the Chinese and Filipinos have accepted at its face value the prattle of democracy and economic opportunity which American big business utilized when it needed additional sources of cheap labor. If ever there were peoples anxious to make themselves acceptable in their new land, it was they. Yet they have had to face the withering effects of that terrible provincial insularity and snobbishness with which American society has been afflicted.
There has resultantly developed a marginal caste, hemmed into poverty by the visibility of their skins, and living as a doomed group, unable to integrate itself into either the economy or society of the nation. Is it any wonder that the tightly knit family life of the Chinatown community has begun to disintegrate; that the Japanese group, once virtually free of crime, has begun to produce an increasing criminal element; that the Puerto Rican community in New York has witnessed an alarming growth of juvenile delinquency; that the Mexican community in California has produced the zoot-suiters; that, in short, degeneration, disintegration, demoralization have all been forced on these initially industrious and ambitious peoples by the “land of the free”? Is it any wonder that the second generations find themselves in the heartrending dilemma of having neither a heritage nor a future, a memory nor a promise, a cultural buttress nor a social guide? One of the most poignant passages of McWilliams’ book is his description of how even the primitive natives of Guam have been disturbed by the contrast between the “democratic” phrases of the American schools and the reality of colonial existence.
 
Source of Color Oppression
McWilliams’ cultural approach is in the main a worthy one since the final toll of national oppression is cultural: the oppressed minority has its native culture destroyed and is unable to develop an adequate substitute, while the oppressing majority fails to absorb the best elements of the minority culture. The great Marxists have also adopted this stress, but they have properly placed it in the context of a controlling social situation. McWilliams, while aware of the causal rôle of capitalism in producing color discrimination, consistently neglects to emphasize it. He adequately describes the economic effects of color discrimination and relates it to the less tangible aspects of that discrimination, but he is remarkably chary in dealing with its social causes. He even suggests, because of his liberal politics, that color discrimination was not in the interest of American capitalism; that, for instance, the Japanese truck farmers in California were not an economic threat to the native agricultural combines.
Yet it cannot be denied that color oppression arose as a social corollary to the growth of American industrial capitalism. This took several forms:

the colored minorities were used as a source of cheap labor and potential strikebreakers with which to threaten the standards of American workers;
 
they were used to fill menial tasks or labor in substandard industries which proved unattractive to American workers accustomed to a higher wage level;
 
they have formed an important element of the reserve pool of unemployed which capitalism finds useful to maintain even during “prosperity” periods;
 
they served as the convenient scapegoat on which the masses could vent their spleen as a result of their own economic difficulties while simultaneously adopting an attitude of social superiority.

These are a few indications of the way in which color oppression in general, and Jim Crowism in particular have been a vital part of the development of the American capitalist economy. Why does McWilliams skate around these questions? Perhaps we shall find an answer when we discuss his program of action.
While it might be expected that he would fail to stress the economic causes of color discrimination sufficiently, it is surprising to note that he has also neglected many of the psychological aspects of the situation. He has avoided the rich field of social psychology which is opened when the question is asked: Why do so many whites participate in the shameful acts of discrimination which so often erupt into open violence? As a result, his study is deprived of a good deal of necessary subtlety. Once these reservations are made, however, it is necessary to note the rich harvest of materials he has gathered. Within the limitations of his cultural approach, he has presented materials that are indispensable knowledge for any socialist.
The best chapters are on the Indians and Mexicans. He reviews the story of how America massacred the Indian tribes, as well as the recent policies of the government. These have fluctuated between two extremes, each of them disastrous: first, the policy of “cultural attack,” which attempted to destroy the Indian tribal community, suppress its native languages and customs, abolish the ownership of land in common and attempt to set up individual Indians as small landowners; and second, the attempt to recreate in miniature a bloodless replica of the old Indian life on the artificial basis of the reservation, which attempt no longer challenges the independence of the Indian cultural tradition but doesn’t foster any development toward modernity and views the continued existence of the Indian people as a sort of museum-piece anachronism. In a sense, the treatment of the Indian is the “original sin” which stimulated and served as the starting point for the American racist tradition.
It is somewhat different with the Mexicans. McWilliams ventures the estimate that there are about 3,000,000 of them in this country. They suffer nearly all of the difficulties that the Negroes do, but lack the social cohesion of the Negroes with which to resist. There are three main groups of Mexicans in this country:

the majority of them are the most miserable of the migrant workers of the Southwest and the South;
 
a group of nearly 500,000 has become stranded in such large cities as Chicago, where they lead the life of a marginal slum proletariat;
 
and most interesting of all, there remain the original Hispanos of New Mexico who have long been citizens of this country and who, in the obscure regions of that state, have continued until recently to live as a primitive semi-communist agricultural community.

McWilliams describes these latter as “communities which have remained almost wholly unaffected by world developments during the last two hundred years. Inhabited by the descendants of the original Spanish colonists, these villages still speak the Spanish of the time of Cervantes. To visit the villages is not only to form an intense admiration for the people themselves, but to become deeply impressed with the integrity of their social life and of their culture.” Yet even these havens have been destroyed over the course of years, the pressure of “Anglo” capital being too strong to resist. Today these three groups of Mexicans find themselves in a common state of economic despair, political inarticulateness and social disintegration.
 
The Question in the U.S. Colonies
Less worth while are McWilliams’ chapters on America’s colonies, the Philippines, Hawaii and Puerto Rico. They provide fine materials on the cultural suppression of the peoples of these islands (especially harrowing is his story of the Puerto Rican “educational system”) but are very weak with regard to the methods and policies of American imperialism. It is here that the scholar exits and the liberal enters, for McWilliams believes that independence for these peoples is a worthless chimera. He rationalizes this position by saying that the difficulties of a free Puerto Rico, for instance, would be insurmountable and that the solution lies in so liberalizing American life that the Puerto Ricans will desire to become a forty-ninth state. There is, of course, a grain of truth behind this reactionary nonsense. There is no doubt that the Caribbean island peoples would want to tie their fate in some way with a socialist America, but since that socialist America is at present lacking, it is incumbent upon all genuine democrats to support the right of Puerto Rico for national independence, without which any subsequent federation is merely a farce.
McWilliams is at his weakest in dealing with the Negroes. He gives a fair summary of the Negro in the post-Civil War period, based on Du Bois and Allen. But his contemporary interpretation is largely in legal terms – the increasing “rights” which Negroes have won in the courts – and fails completely to take into account such essential factors as the rôle of the Negro in the trade unions, the factors of resistance in Negro life, etc. Least adequate of all is a program of action, which is nothing more than a set of legislative perspectives without any realistic considerations of the means with which to achieve them. McWilliams is in a trap: his political opinions, lashing him to the war machine, prevent him from offering the socialist conclusions which his materials clearly suggest.
One final thought is stimulated by the reading of this book. We of the American Marxist movement have paid much attention to the polemics over the national question in Europe, but we have almost totally ignored the materials which this book contains. As part of that other-worldliness which has been a crucial cause of the theoretical barrenness of American Marxism, we have studied primitive communism in Engels and have not even been aware of the settlements in New Mexico. We have contented ourselves with agitational generalizations but have never attempted to apply the tools of Marxian method to the Negro question in this country. All of these problems – some of them, such as the Negro question, of burning importance, and the others of marginal significance but great theoretical interest – we have ignored in so far as any serious study is concerned. McWilliams has provided us with the materials; that is why his book is indispensable for every socialist. But these materials must be developed with the sociological precision and psychological subtlety that the skilled Marxist can furnish.

Footnote
1. Brothers Under the Skin, by Carey McWilllams. Little, Brown & Co., 325 pp., $2.75.
 




PART I
M. Proudhon does not know that the whole of history is nothing but the progressive transformation of human nature. – Marx
The past decade has brought not only the defeat of the socialist movement and the consequent desertion of the American intellectuals who had adhered to it, but also the rise of anti-socialist and anti-democratic voices propounding theories which were getting rather musty at the turn of the century. Such profundities as “human nature makes socialism impossible”; “collectivism inevitably results in tyranny”; “what we need is a mixed economy of balanced social forces”; “the masses cannot play a decisive r&le in history, only the elite can” – have filled the writings of the ex-radical intellectuals. Only a few have been conscious of the origin of these concepts, and we therefore have James Burnham to thank for a book [1] which synthesizes into a coherent system the theories of the “Machiavellians” – Mosca, Michels, Pareto. Possible some of our intellectuals may be a bit disturbed to find their stray thoughts so rigorously systematized as Burnham has, for the net result is not very pretty. What concerns us, however, is that his book provides an opportunity for discussion of concepts recently directed against us as part of the anti-socialist arsenal; it is that, rather than any desire to polemize against Burnham’s doubtful volume, which prompts the detailed discussion these articles will contain.
*
Machiavellianism, as used by Burnham, does not refer to the mass-manipulation which Machiavelli urged on his Prince and which has since been the supposed counsel of malevolent rulers. Rather he refers to a school of political thought whose credo is summed up in the following major propositions:

“The primary subject-matter of political science is the struggle for social power in its diverse open and concealed forms.”
 
“The laws of political life cannot be discovered by an analysis which takes men’s words and beliefs ... at their face value.” Machiavellianism claims that most men are deceived about the motives of their social activity and that “logical or rational action plays a relatively minor part in political and social change ... Non-logical action spurred by environmental changes, instinct, impulse, interest, is the usual social rule.”
 
All history is the history of the elite, the ruling group, “its composition, structure and the mode of its relation to the non-elite.” There is no realistic possibility of removing the elite, only of changing its members. This latter process is, after Pareto, the “circulation of the elites.”
 
All revolutionary attempts at changing society must inevitably substitute one elite for another, and may often result in an increase in tyranny because of revolutionary zeal to extirpate opponents. Democracy is both meaningless and impossible: self-rule is socially and organizationally impossible for the masses. All that can be done in this increasingly totalitarian and collectivist world is to preserve certain “juridical defenses” (Mosca), i.e., civil liberties.

The reader will perceive that all theories which categorically reject the possibility of a democratic, classless society and posit the continuation of class oppression as an invariable constant, must ultimately reside on a premise about human nature. Burnham may fancy himself an exponent of modern science – which he often equates with a genuflective idolization of crude empiricism – but there is no way of saying that a classless society is necessarily impossible without resting on a theory of human nature as immanently “evil” ... or proving that society is economically too primitive for socialism. Since the latter is an obvious absurdity, it is the theory of human nature which is at the foundation of Machiavellianism. True, Burnham attempts another argument: the argument from technique, which claims that the difficulties in instituting a classless society are insuperable because of the size and complexity of the modern societal unit. But this thesis, to be discussed later, can never be posed in terms of invariant constants but only in probabilities, thereby removing the “inevitability” prop from the argument. That is why we must turn to the argument from human nature in order to pierce to the root of Machiavellianism. We hope the reader will remember that if we discuss this matter at length it is only because recent years have seen a recrudescence of such thought among our most “scientific” political writers. The choice is not ours.
 
I – The Argument from Human Nature
Burnham is usually quite ready to rush in where angels fear to tread. There is, however, one question which he steadily avoids giving explicit treatment, and that is the very theory of human nature which is central to his approach. His reticence is understandable enough. To state explicitly as an organized thesis that human nature is static and “evil” is a bit too much even for him; he is simply too well educated. Yet elementary intellectual responsibility would seem to dictate a frank statement that the static concept of human nature is recognized as fundamental by Pareto when he writes that “The centuries roll by and human nature remains the same,” and when Pareto posits his concept of residues which is merely an elaborate terminological dress-coat for this same theory; and by Michels when he writes of the “natural love of power” as precluding a classless society. Nonetheless, Burnham cannot evade this central problem completely. He is forced by the very logic of his position to blandly slip in an occasional statement which betrays his full accord with his mentors. We quote a few such statements, since an explicit summary is evaded in the book:
If we review the history of humanity ... it is apparent that despotic regimes are far more frequent than free regimes, and it would therefore seem that despotism is more nearly than freedom in accord with human nature (page 150).
... Wars are a natural phase of the historical process (page 131).
... The aristocratic principle will always be asserting itself to some degree at least; it too accords with ineradicable human traits (page 106).
The Machiavellians have shown that the practical impossibility of democracy depends upon a variety of factors: upon psychological tendencies which are apparently constant in social life (page 236).
Willy-nilly, Burnham is forced to adopt the human nature premise which is central to Machiavellian theory. We can therefore proceed to a direct examination of this premise, secure in the knowledge that Burnham cannot possibly worm out of his adherence to it.
There has never been a progressive historical movement which has not had to contend with some variety of the human nature premise. Locke, with his theory of the mind as a “wax tablet,” and Rousseau, with his theory of the social contract, constructed elaborate psychological rationalizations to aid their advocacy of the then revolutionary bourgeois cause. Each declining social order has always attempted to identify the temporal ethics and morals bred of its uniqueness with immanent human nature.
 
The Attitude of Modern Psychology
Modern psychology is little concerned with the controversy about “human nature” which continues to rage among political writers. Ever since it left the adolescent realms of speculative philosophizing and embraced the disciplines of experimental science, modern psychology – acutely aware of its immaturity – has seldom ventured to propose such a definitive, closed-door answer to the problems of human existence as is given by Machiavellian theory. The most fruitful of modern psychologists and psychoanalysts have concentrated on experiment and measurement; their theories are hardly more than tentative hypotheses; there is certainly no scientific evidence whatever for the belief that there exists some core of inherited and intrinsic behavior patterns with which each man is endowed. It has rather been the philosophers and sociologists, like John Dewey (in his Human Nature and Conduct) and Bertrand Russell (in his Philosophy) who, more aware of its sociological implications, have turned their attention to destroying the human nature theory.
Yet, the evidence of modern science to the contrary notwithstanding, the Machiavellians have had to resort to the theory of endowed instincts. Pareto’s list of residues (the motive forces of human action which he identifies as the basic causal factors of history) are merely a socialized version of the thoroughly discredited list of instincts which William McDougall so laboriously compiled some years ago. It is a theory of human activity which is false because:

it is based on an unscientific failure to differentiate masses of activities lumped under generic but, in reality, unbinding classes and therefore prey to the Aristotelian procedure of explaining by classifying rather than by critical experimentation;
 
it ignores the recent evidence of contemporary psychological research;
 
it ignores the findings of modern anthropology;
 
it ignores the experiences of history.

As John Dewey points out in his monumental Human Nature and Conduct, the theory of inherited evil nature has its origin in the glorification of the divine and the accompanying disparagement of the mundane, as well as in the apparently necessary stage in human development which, expressing the compulsive quest for certainty, attempts to explain the unknown in terms of some mysterious motive causes within itself.
 
On the Concept of Instinct
Modern science, however, has largely refrained from accepting the concept of “instinct” (an inherited, highly complex behavior pattern which provides directive to the basic needs of life) which is at the core of the human nature theory. Under the sweeping headings of “sex,” “fear,” the “instinct of domination,” or the “instinctive drive for power,” have been lumped so many conflicting types of human experience, derived from so many different social contexts, that the generalized classification blurs rather than clarifies. As Dewey has so conclusively shown, even what might appear as the most elemental of “instincts” are acquired, social in their origin and learned in their developmental pattern. He writes in Human Nature and Conduct:
Why do we not set out with an examination of those instinctive activities upon which the acquisition of habits is conditioned? ... The query is a natural one, yet it tempts to flinging forth a paradox. In conduct the acquired is the primitive. Impulses although first in time are never primary in fact; they are secondary and dependent. The seeming paradox in statements covers a familiar fact. In the life of the individual, instinctive activity comes first. But an individual begins life as a baby, and babies are dependent beings. Their activities could continue at most for only a few hours were it not for the presence and aid of adults with their formed habits. They owe to adults the opportunity to express their native activities in ways which have meaning. Even if by some miracle original activity could continue without assistance from the organized skill and art of adults, it would not amount to anything. It would be mere sound and fury.
In short, the meaning of native activities is not native; it is acquired. It depends upon interaction with a material social medium.
If, then, habits or “instincts” are secondary and acquired, and not native and original, then they are clearly amenable to adaptation. Surely, also, if the primary activities of a baby are dependent upon a “matured social medium” for their expression, the complex activities of social classes and political movements cannot be explained by the generic catch-all instincts which fail to elucidate even the most simple of human actions. But are there not some basic “instincts” common to all men [2], the very motive forces which make for the continuation of the race? Here again Dewey comes to our aid:
Even in the case of hunger and sex, where the channels of action are fairly demarcated by antecedent conditions (or “nature”) the actual content and feel of hunger and sex are indefinitely varied according to their social contexts. Only when a man is starving is he under an unqualified natural impulse; as it approaches this limit, it tends to lose, moreover, its psychological distinctiveness and to be come a raven of the entire organism.”
It is clear then that there is no human nature in the abstract, apart from the social framework which encases it. By this statement we do not wish to suggest that it is necessary “to choose between innate ideas and an empty, passive, wax-like mind” (Dewey) but rather that “the innate apparatus of man consists of ‘reflexes’ rather than ideas; also that our sense organs and our glands and muscles lend to responses of certain kinds in which our organization plays a part ... as that played by the external stimulus” (Russell) and that both the human organization and the “external stimulus,” being historical products, are historically amendable.
 
A Limit to Human Adaptability?
Whether there is any limitation to the social adaptability of the human race has not yet been determined; and whether that limit, if such there be, precludes a classless society has certainly not yet been proved. One thing is certain: there is no positive evidence for such an assertion, and its conclusive proof is impossible short of the actual attempt to establish such a society. If anything, the teachings of history and anthropology demonstrate the wide range of adaptability which the human impulses or drives have been subject to under differing conditions. Even the very “instincts” themselves (following Dewey’s useful distinction, we use “instinct” as signifying a complex, highly organized behavior pattern, while “impulse” is a human drive or reaction, “something primitive, yet loose, undirected, initial” and exerting its “main force in the struggle for survival,” rather than in more complex societal situations) are so hazy and vague as to preclude any possibility of testing their validity.
In fact, also, every reaction takes place in a different environment, and its meaning is never twice alike, since the difference in environment makes a difference in consequences. It is only mythology which sets up a single, identical psychic force which “causes” all the reactions of fear, a force beginning and ending in itself.
Fear of the dark is different from fear of publicity, fear of the dentist from fear of ghosts, fear of conspicuous success from fear of humiliation, fear of a bat from fear of a bear. Cowardice, embarrassment, caution and reverence may all be regarded as forms of fear. They all have certain physical organic acts in common – those of organic shrinking, gestures of hesitation and retreat. But each is qualitatively unique. Each is what it is in virtue of its total interactions and correlations with other acts and with the environing medium. – (Dewey)
If then, again, habits are learned, are socially-conditioned and are unique in their forms and expression within each situation, the traditional psychology of “instincts” which set up a hard-and-fast preordained class under which specific acts are subsumed, was merely attempting to explain what it didn’t know in terms of its ignorance. It speaks of the instinct or capacity for fear or sex, but in what demonstrable way does that increase our knowledge of the primary qualities of fear or sex themselves? The entire instinct theory [3] is akin to defining words in terms of themselves; its causal factors (the instincts) are only names condensing into duplicate form a variety of complex occurrences; it reduces social custom to individual habit and offers the latter as explanation of the former by means of a covering term which explains neither. In his book, Pareto, Franz Borkenau neatly sums up this idea:
A century ago, Hegel turned his bitter irony against Kant, who explained every mental activity by assuming a specific capacity for it. Plato, in his turn, explains every psychological and sociological fact by assuming a specific instinct or sense for it in human nature. Now an explanation is the correlation of unknown phenomena with other phenomena better known to us. Is the “instinct of combinations” known better to us than the combinations themselves, the natural aversions better than the taboos they are supposed to explain, the sense of uniformity better than the actions enforcing uniformity? Certainly not! Those instincts, as Pareto assumes them, are simple doubles of the facts they are supposed to explain, queer psycho-sociological Dinge an sich which resemble on all points the phenomena they are intended to make intelligible, except the one point that they are unobservable and thus metaphysical entities, whereas the social phenomena they are meant to explain are observable.
We believe we have demonstrated the “instinct” theory of human nature, which Machiavellianism accepts, to be false to scientific evidence which shows that so-called basic instincts are learned from at least the moment of birth and social in their subsequent development; and self-contradictory and meaningless, as well, in its use of what is to be explained as an explanation and in its obscurantist lumping of a variety of unique experiences under generic and vague classes.
 
Individual Psychology and Social Life
There is still another serious methodological objection to the Machiavellian approach. Burnham speaks of “psychological tendencies which are apparently constant in social life” as one of the factors making democracy a “practical impossibility.” We must strongly object to the attempt to graft psychological conclusions formulated about the individual onto the social organism. The infliction of individual behavior patterns upon social groups or societies is as invalid as the attempts once made to explain organic changes by mechanical laws. For societies are not mere agglomerations of individuals; they have their own character and complexion, determined mainly by factors beyond the individual’s control. It may be fruitful to analyze the psychological effects of a given society’s development on certain individuals, but that is a far cry from describing social classes in terms of individual behavior patterns as do the Machiavellians in their attempt to show history as a monotonous mosaic in which the few inescapable “residues” repeatedly exert their decision. The very language of psychoanalysis is in terms of the individual; its application to social groups is at best analogically illuminating and often merely confusing.
 
Two Glances at Modern Science
Whatever relevant materials modern science has offered on this subject indicates that the Machiavellian approach is antediluvian, to say the least. We cite two such instances because they represent the general tendency of modern science, at least with respect to this particular problem:

Everyone is by now familiar with Pavlov’s experiments in conditioned reflexes. The connection between training a dog to find the beat of a metronome an adequate stimulus for his salivary glands and the problem of whether human nature precludes socialism, may not be readily apparent. But connection there is, nonetheless. For this initial experiment and its derivatives have demonstrated that even what one might think to be the most basic of human reflexes – connected with the most essential human function: eating – can be radically modified by conditioning. Why can we then not assume that there is at least a reasonable prospect that the “instincts” which men have acquired from the capitalist mode of existence and which are largely unique to it (as a contrast between the mores of capitalism and feudalism will so vividly demonstrate) can likewise be conditioned by a new society?
 
Without necessarily committing ourselves to his theories, it is worth noting that Freud’s concept of neuroses being bred in infantile experiences within the forbidding arena of adult life, opens incredible vistas for the development of the human race, if it is provided with a milieu which is stimulating and liberating to the child (and the adult!) rather than inhibitory and conflict-breeding.

James Burnham is a well educated man. He is without question aware of the latest developments in the fields of psychology and psychoanalysis. Yet his book is shot through with both the language and concepts of a psychological approach which is simply mediaeval in its essence. Is this not a fine example of how the attempt to rationalize reactionary politics results in abandonment of the heritage of modern science?
*
The Evidence from Anthropology
We have thus far discussed the human nature theory in terms of its own propositions and methodology. But it can be disproved not merely by internal analysis but also by reference to the experiential disciplines of anthropology and history. We shall not attempt to offer “primitive communism” as a rationale for a modern socialist society’s ability to satisfy man’s nature; “primitive communism” is too controversial an anthropological subject to suffice as definitive proof, and modern society is so different in its structure and relationships that the analogy is not convincing. But anthropology can prove something more important: the flexibility and adaptability of human nature:

Margaret Mead, in her Sex and Temperament, describes two New Guinea tribes, one of them, the Arapesh mountain dwellers, among whom mutual respect and affection are the norm, and among whom the concept of competition is unknown. On the other hand, “The Mundugumor man-child is born into a hostile world, a world in which most members of his sex will be his enemies, in which his major equipment for success must be a capacity for violence, for seeing and avenging insult, for holding his own safety very lightly and the lives of other even more lightly.”
 
Assuming perhaps that Burnham’s psychological constants in social nature do not, for some mysterious reason, apply to New Guinea, we turn to the American Indian tribes. Ruth Benedict, in her Patterns of Culture (perhaps with the presentiment of Burnham’s discovery that “wars are a natural phase of the historical process”) describes the Pueblo Indians, for whom warfare is the norm of social existence, and the Baffinland Eskimos, who not only never indulge in warfare but cannot – happy folk that they must be! – even understand its meaning when explained to them by an outsider.
 
Otto Klineberg, in his Race Differences, describes the Yakuts, a Siberian tribe, which leads so cooperative a social life that they cannot understand why – explain it to them, good Machiavellian scientists! – starvation can exist in Western civilization.

These are three instances we have chosen completely at random. There are others, perhaps even more striking. But even these are enough to demonstrate that, at some time, on every part of the globe, every kind of social form, every kind of social practice seems to have been praised or tolerated. As Dewey asks: “How is the tremendous diversity of institutions (including moral codes) to be accounted for? The native stock of instincts is practically the same everywhere. Exaggerate as much as you like the native differences of Patagonians and Greeks, Sioux Indians and Hindoos, Bushmen and Chinese, their original differences will bear no comparison to the amount of difference found in custom and culture.”
Why indeed? Why do certain men have this tendency and others its opposite? [4] “And then,” enters the mocking voice of Bukharin, who, in his Historical Materialism, faced some of these problems, “and then – oh horrors! – we must go back to the conditions of men’s existence ...” [5]
 
And “History Teaches Us ...”
But history, doesn’t history demonstrate that ... well, it is better to discuss history in terms of historical theory, and that we propose to do in analyzing the Machiavellian approach to history. One thing needs to be said: even the most cursory glance at recent historical experience will demonstrate that the human being has been capable of the most diverse and uncharted of behaviors, from the most base to the most noble. From the heroism and spiritual exaltation of the Russian proletariat in 1919 to the debasement of the GPU agent murdering defenseless Jews – that is the range of present-day “human nature.” Who can draw generalizations therefrom except to say once more that the human being is a completely adaptable organism, molded by the society in which he finds himself, and capable, under certain conditions, of changing that society? When Marx wrote, in his Eighteenth Brumaire, that history repeats itself, once on the tragic plane and the second time on the ridiculous plane, he was really expressing in epigrammatic form the concept that the flow of history is a continued process of unique configurations and that each historical situation and each social attitude it produces among people, must be considered in its own uniqueness as well as in relation to its past and future. Is there any approach more fruitless than that which sees history as a constant variation on a theme, a sort of continued derivation of Eve’s bite into the evil apple of knowledge?
*
We believe that we have shown that the psychological premise – without which the entire Machiavellian structure begins to wobble as if struck by an earthquake – is contradictory, meaningless, without empirical verification. We for our part entertain no rationalistic illusions about “human nature.” We are convinced, however, that we can make of it almost what we will, provided we furnish a societal seed-bed in which it can flourish. Trotsky, in his Literature and Revolution, speaks of the coming society as producing a race of men on the level of Beethoven, Goethe and Marx. Perhaps that is only a very distant perspective, a mere goal to aim at. Perhaps, on the other hand, we, dragged down by the barbarisms of capitalist civilization, are incapable of envisaging what a socialist society could accomplish. In either case, the perspective is there; the possibility acute; the task remains. Human nature is not a doom; it is an experiment.
*
In the second section of this article, we shall turn to the historical method of the Machiavellian theory as presented by Burnham, with especial emphasis on the theory of the elites.

Footnotes
1. The Machiavellians, by James Burnham. The John Day Co., 278 pages, $2.50.
2. No more definitive disposition of this notion can be found than in Robert Briffault’s anthropological study, The Mothers, which contains a wealth of material demonstrating that the modern attitude of romantic love is of recent origin and that mating among primitive peoples was without any romantic qualities, as modern man understands them.
3. The very attempt to explain societal phenomena by means of a human nature theory is itself conditioned by the then prevalent social attitude. As Sidney Hook writes in his A Portrait of John Dewey: “It is in social and moral terms that human nature is always constructed, especially by those most convinced of its fixidity.”
4. Without making too much of it, we wish to point out how the Machiavellian theory of human nature makes possible theories of racial supremacy. Admit once the concept of inherited characteristics and then admit that different races or nations have shown different traits (as nobody can possibly deny) and you must face the logical conclusion that it is possible that there are different psychological constants of social nature for each race or nation. That is the logic of the position, and Burnham’s character has little to do with it.
5. A lot of fuss has been raised by anti-Marxists about the fact that Engels used Morgan’s BY NOW outmoded anthropology in his Origins of the Family. Most of this is either demagogical or beside the point and has validity only when directed against those contemporary Marxists who insist on unquestioning adherence to every scrap of material which Engels borrowed from the scientists of his time. For what Engels sought in Morgan was above all evidence to demonstrate the diversity of human experience and culture, the dialectical transitoriness of all societies, the flow of change In history. In that approach be had more of the scientific spirit than all the academicians who now reproach him for not having used twentieth century anthropology which, as a matter of fact, provides even more startling evidence for what Engels was seeking than Morgan ever did.
 




I cannot recall having read a sadder article for, a long time than Arthur Koestler’s A Challenge to “Knights in Rusty Armor” in the New York Times Magazine Section of February 14. Koestler is the writer and ex-revolutionist whose fame rests on that exciting and provocative portrait of Stalinist bureaucratism, the novel Darkness at Noon. He writes this article frankly as a member of the “left intelligentsia,” which, in recent years, has abandoned its Marxist adherence in order to support the imperialist war, but which still maintains a sort of vague hope that somehow, somewhere socialism will result from the present world mess.
Koestler is refreshing because honest: he admits that which has been becoming completely apparent to the left intellectuals, but which they have refused to admit with an unholy fear – the war shows itself, on the part of the Allies, as well as the Axis, to be nothing more than a conservative struggle for the maintenance of the capitalist status quo. It is this fact which impels Koestler to indulge in the weary, dispirited reflections contained in his article.
 
Admissions That Buttress Marxism
He writes:
“... The nearer victory comes in sight, the clearer the character of the war reveals itself as what the Tories always said it was – a war for national survival, a war in defense of certain conservative nineteenth century ideals, and not, what I and my friends of the left said it was – a revolutionary civil war in Europe on the Spanish pattern.”
And again:
“Let us be frank; while we rejoice over the victory of our arms, let us recognize the defeat of our aims.”
And:
“The American elections, the burlesque Darlaniad, the melancholy Crippsiad and other events make it increasingly clear that the scales are moving more and more to the conservative side, almost in direct proportion to the approach of victory ... Thus, if nothing unexpected happens, the coming victory will be a conservative victory and lead to a conservative peace. It will produce no lasting solution of the minority problem in the European jigsaw puzzle. It will provide no cure for the inherent disease of the capitalistic system.”
These are, you will readily see, some rather remarkable admissions, especially from one of those who, not so long ago, were seeing a peaceful social revolution in England as a result of the war and who waxed indignant with old-fashioned Marxists who still dared speak of such things as imperialist wars. But here, out of the mouth of one of the most intelligent of these war-baby intellectuals, comes the very admissions that buttress our Marxist case against them.
Thus, if it be true that “our aims” (i.e., a better world) have been defeated even though “our arms” (the Allied armies) approach victory, then what will be the significance and value of that victory? Koestler is not bashful about specifying the signs that “our aims” – which were NEVER the aims of those who control the conduct of the war, but to which they partly paid vague lip service when they were in dire straits – have met defeat. “He understands the mockery of democracy which is the pro-fascist and anti-Semitic regime of Darlan-Giraud-Peyrouton in North Africa; he understands the mockery of national independence which is the British attitude toward India.
 
A Man Without Armor – Rusty or Shiny
And yet this one-time socialist intellectual, writing as if the very life-blood of his former beliefs had been sucked out of him, still grasps onto the slippery armor of the imperialist cause, even though he cuts his fingers and shames his heart in doing so. And why? Because he hopes that with victory there will come, at least, a “certain minimum of liberty, decency, security ... a new, perhaps slightly improved, edition of the pre-Hitlerian old order ...”
But the two phrases contradict each other, and the second answers the first. Koestler and his friends know that there “was neither security nor decency, and hardly enough liberty in the “pre-Hitlerian order.” He no doubt wrote plenty of articles in his day to prove that. And Koestler knows that if this is all that we can expect from victory – “that it will provide no cure for the inherent disease of the capitalist system” – then we must face the dreadful prospect of once more living through the same nightmare: Versailles, inflation, and eventually the new Hitlerism and the Third World War!
It is a sorry and pathetic spectacle, indeed, to watch a man like Koestler state all his disillusions in public print, with the partial purpose of berating those leftist intellectuals who, through cynicism or naiveté, still speak of the war as a crusade for a better world. The pro-war intellectuals are acquiring a nervous political itch: their eyes tell them that their tongues are lying.
A few, like Koestler, have the honesty, to admit: No, it is no crusade, it is the same old game, and there’s nothing new or wonderful to expect. That Koestler, who has lived through so many revolutionary defeats that it has become part of his psychological and political makeup, cannot see his way to return to the socialist camp is more a matter of pity than indignation. He may speak of us as “knights in rusty armor with a well-thumbed handbook of Marx-Engels quotations” which he feels are of but “modest use on this topsy-turvy battleground today” but the words we have quoted from his article show that he has NO political armor, rusty or shiny.
 




Total warfare affects the totality of human existence. There is nothing in our present social experience which is not corrupted and debased as a result of this total war. Some effects are obvious enough: millions die on battlefields; other millions starve behind the battlefields. But there are effects that are less immediately glaring but which in the long run can prove just as harmful.
We speak of such things as the psychological effects of the war on the young, the generations of tomorrow: those who are still in their childhood and those who are ready to enter mature life, only to find themselves on a one-way street to the battlefield. Of all the horrors of this war (and how easy it is to forget them, to gloss over them!) is there one more horrible than the report from England that some children there who experienced the air blitz must now be taught to SMILE again?
Here in America one can see a gradual loosening of moral standards, an increase of psychopathic excesses, a development of what is politely known as “juvenile delinquency” among the nation’s youth. Reports from, many states indicate an increased amount of so-called sex crimes. New York City is set agog by reports of the inability of teachers to maintain discipline in their classrooms, in which youngsters have even gone so far as to beat teachers. Boston reports a large number of teen-age girls seeking illicit relations with soldiers as a means of getting some excitement.
It is very easy to get upon one’s high horse of morality – provided you have it – and righteously. denounce those involved in such affairs. But doing that achieves nothing except add heat where light is needed.
 
Incidents Are Social in Origin
It is our opinion that most of these incidents are social in origin, that is, they are individual, psychological maladjustments which often lead to serious eruptions and which are caused, directly or indirectly, by the corrosive effects of a decadent and iniquitous society on its human victims. Often, as in the case of the sex crimes, it may be difficult to see immediately the social origin of the act. But a moment’s thought should indicate that the mental and emotional disturbances which lead to sex crimes – unless they are the direct products of physical diseases, such as syphilis, in which case they require not prison but medical treatment – are often the result of the inability of the individual to adjust himself to the society in which he lives.
But the social origin can be seen much more clearly in another example of the loosening of moral standards: the increase in “juvenile delinquency.” Take the case of the Boston girls. Who can deny that when they seek the company of soldiers from nearby camps that they are thereby trying to meet somehow the tragic fact that tomorrow millions of their would-be husbands will be rotting in graves all over the world? They feel the sense of desperation, of urgency, almost as much as the soldier before he enters battle; they, too, in their pathetically distorted way desire to taste a little bit of the pleasures of life, even if it be only in some shabby room with a soldier met a few hours ago. And they, too, just as their temporary companions, are paying the terrible price of imperialist warfare and the social system producing it.
Or, take the outbreak of violence in the New York schools. One does not approve the hooliganism perpetrated by some of these youngsters against their teachers, but it is necessary to understand why they act as they do. They are the victims of a society which has no place for them other than the battlefield; they see no future; they are emotionally disturbed by the tremendous and conflicting social pressures which are exerted on them; they are not allowed to live a normal and peaceful adolescence. If, then, they erupt in violent ways, is it enough merely to get righteously indignant?
Or, most obvious of all, take the case of Harlem youth. Born into poverty and discrimination, doomed under our present social setting to die in poverty and discrimination, doomed even to give their lives for an army which Jim Crows them unto the very grave – is it any wonder that criminal tendencies sometimes develop among Negro youth? (And that is purposely exaggerated in extent and degree by the capitalist press.) Is it any wonder that some of them – the Bigger Thomases – are trapped by society into doing things they would never dream of doing if they were given half a chance?
 
Capitalist Society Can Offer Nothing
Yes, the moral standards of our society, such as they are, are loosening; values become suspect and cynicism and violence uppermost. Little wonder. Capitalist society has nothing to offer these people; when they degenerate into criminals or delinquents they are merely aping in their personal behavior the social patterns of capitalism.
To build a society where children do not have to be TAUGHT to smile, where young people can find happiness in full, secure and peaceful living is the aim of socialists. The more we see of what present-day society does to people the more convinced we become of the necessity for building a new one. It is, after all, in these “little things” of which we have briefly written in this column that capitalism most graphically illustrates its rottenness.
 




The scandal of North Africa, where American officials bicker with and bolster up fascist and anti-Semitic officials, acquires a worse stench with each passing day. Perhaps the most ghastly twist to this whole filthy business has been given by an interview, which General Giraud, a reactionary and anti-democratic militarist puffed up into an Allied hero by propaganda, gave to the press on the question of anti-Semitism.
In response to the repeated questions which have been asked both in England and America as to why the Hitler-inspired anti-Semitic laws, originally, introduced by the Vichyites, have not been repealed, Giraud answered that:

Anti-Jewish legislation would be abolished “gradually,” since over-hasty action would “disrupt” the functioning of the North African administration.
 
He, Giraud, considered this an internal North African problem, which, as the ruler of North Africa, he must face alone; and he did not believe it the concern of outsiders.
 
He, Giraud, had full confidence in his new civil administrator, Marcel Peyrouton, the former Vichy Minister of Interior, who had been instrumental in enforcing anti-Semitic legislation in metropolitan France, as well as jailing thousands of anti-fascists and anti-Vichyites.

We believe these remarks of Giraud worthy of some study and comment.
 
“Gradually” Means What?
The phrase about abolishing, anti-Semitism “gradually” is an insult to human intelligence. Racial discrimination is repugnant, to every half-civilized human being as a matter of principle; discrimination against any racial or color group betrays an anti-democratic, an anti-human bias which is despicable regardless of whether it takes the form of subtle jokes or brutal murders. Anti-Semitism is either enforced as a governmental policy or it is not.
What does Giraud mean by abolishing it “gradually”? Does he mean that Jews will now be allowed into some of the amusement places from which they have been barred and not into others; does it mean that they will be allowed to practice some of the professions and not others; does it mean that some ghettoes will be abolished and not others? How can one justify the continuation of some discriminatory practices while proudly noting the abolition of others?
And where is the voice of President Roosevelt, he who has sent so many salving messages to American Jews protesting his hatred of anti-Semitism in Germany? Where is his voice denouncing the anti-Semitic practices in the land which Giraud nominally rules but which the American Army actually controls?
 
Washington Behind Policy
The New York newspaper PM declares in dispatches from its Washington correspondent, I.F. Stone, that Washington itself is behind the failure to abolish the anti-Semitic laws of North Africa. Writes Stone:
“If Murphy (the American Ambassador – R.F.) had told Darlan to repeal the anti-Jewish laws and to free the political prisoners ... the laws would have been repealed and the prisoners freed long ago. The real difficulty is that the State Department hasn’t made up its mind that it wants the anti-Jewish laws repealed and it isn’t sure about the political prisoners. It’s difficult at one and the same time to put a man like Peyrouton in power and then free the very men he hunted down and jailed as Petain’s Minister of the Interior.”
Some very “clever” defenders of the U.S. State Department policy in North Africa have attempted to justify the shameful attitude toward the anti-Semitic problem by saying that the abrogation of the anti-Jewish laws would inflame the Arab population. This statement, even if true, is profoundly reactionary and reprehensible. But the fact that it is nothing more than a miserable pretext behind which to hide the pro-fascist policy of the State Department can be seen when one considers that the State Department did not hesitate to accept the appointment of Peyrouton as civil administrator despite the fact that he is bitterly hated by the Arabs who remember his repressive regime as governor of Tunisia in 1936.
Be it remembered that this Peyrouton is also an old hand at concentration camps, having introduced them to quell those Arabs desiring national independence for their countries ruled by France. It is not for nothing that he found it so easy to fit into Hitler’s Vichy nest. What should, however, cause reflection is that this foul bird finds a welcome in the nest of the side of the Four Freedoms.
Giraud, for his part, continues to justify his association with the Vichyite colonial generals like Boisson. Nogues, etc. He accepts those, he says, who had good intentions, not those who really succumbed to Hitler. This criterion is also apparently accepted by the State Department, as can be seen by Secretary Hull’s bitter defense, last week, of the North African policy.
 
“Say It Isn’t So”
We now have a new criterion for judging the fascists. When one of them is brought to bay, he is to be asked: “Did you really mean it, old boy? Or was your heart always in the right place? Say, it wasn’t so, please!” And the fascist – Darlan, or Peyrouton, or tomorrow Franco or Mussolini or Goering – will merely have to say that bis heart was always in the right place while he was murdering workers and suppressing liberty.
What is really going on in North Africa can be gleaned from some revealing dispatches sent by Drew Middleton to the New York Times in which he reveals the fact that democrats, de Gaullists and anti-fascist forces – not to mention socialists and trade unionists – are still being persecuted and jailed. The mass of people, he reveals, have adopted an attitude of apathy and indifference since they are in a position to see first hand how the American liberators have allowed the Vichy scoundrels and fascists to continue their rule.
It is against this background that the recent Casablanca conference assumes additional importance. No newspaper has bothered to point to the fact that Roosevelt and Churchill met in a town where Jews are not assured of equal democratic rights; it is too embarrassing and tends to create some more doubt about the already shabby Atlantic Charter.
Yet these facts must be faced. Anti-Semitism still continues to be the policy of the Giraud-Peyrouton government, a government which exists solely by the sufferance of the United States. The anti-fascist political prisoners still rot in jails. The Vichyites and fascists still retain their power.
These are the facts. Let those who would proclaim this a war of freedom and liberation and not a war of imperialist rivalry, explain these facts.
 




Many minds have lost their balance and many eyes have acquired an unusual degree starriness as a result of the recent Russian military victories. People who had clearly seen, or had begun to see, the tyrannical and anti-labor character of the Stalin regime as well as the role which it plays in bolstering the international capitalist status quo, are now allowing themselves to be hypnotized into passive acceptance of the Stalinist dictatorship, because the Russian soldiers fight with ability and heroism.
The sight of men valiantly dying on the frozen plains of Russia, the sight of men who, even in the midst of the most horrible catastrophe of recent history, can fight and die with courage, is extraordinarily moving and refurbishes one’s faith in the capacities of the human race. But it proves nothing – absolutely nothing – about the justice, or righteousness of the cause for which they fight.
 
Heroism – and the Nature of the War
For, let us remember, it is not the Russian soldiers alone who have displayed heroism and enthusiasm. It is a depressing fact, but a fact nevertheless, that on many occasions the German soldiers have displayed the same qualities. And the Greeks, and the British, and the Americans, and many others.
Yet who would dare say that the countries for which all these soldiers fight have engaged in just and progressive wars? Who would dare say that because the German soldiers – filled with Goebbels’ verbal opium and prodded by Himmler’s blackjacks and bayonets – have on many occasions fought with tooth heroism and enthusiasm, that this in any way changes the fact that Hitler fights a reactionary war, which is against the interests of all humanity? Or, again, who would try to condone Britain’s imperialist record in India with references to the valor of the British troops fighting in Egypt? Or who could wipe out the memory of the exploitation of the Philippine people by American imperialists with reference to boys at Guadalcanal?
And the same thing is true about Russia. Because the Russian soldiers fight well, does that in any way change the fact that Stalin is one of the bloodiest dictators of modern history, that he is the grave-digger of the Russian Revolution and the aborter of many other revolutions? Does that change the fact that he is the murderer of the Old Bolsheviks, that he is responsible for the GPU and all which those three dreaded letters mean? Does that deny that he has enslaved the Russian workers, that he has deprived them of every possible liberty and democratic right? And does it deny that Stalin has besmirched and blemished the precious name of socialism by the practices of his bestial regime?
 
What Determines Character of War
The worker’s attitude toward Russia in this war must be determined not by such subjective factors as one’s admiration for the courage of the Russian soldiers, but by an examination of the role of Russia in relation to its allies, its war aims, the character of the struggle it conducts. The soldiers may fight because they have been deluded into believing that there is some kind of socialism in Russia, or because they have succumbed to Stalin’s chauvinist and nationalist propaganda, or because they see no alternative to supporting their “own” tyrant against the foreign tyrant, or because they simply have no alternative except to fight when the all-powerful state demands it. But the character of Stalin’s war does not depend on this.
The character of Stalin’s war is really illustrated by the fact that Stalin functions as a partner of the imperialist United Nations, by the fact that, in the words of the December 20 issue of the New York Times: “The slogans with which Stalin is spurring the Russian armies to ever greater efforts today are not the Marxist slogans, urging the proletarians of the world to unite, but slogans about patriotism, liberty and the fatherland.” The character of Stalin’s war is determined, too, by the events that led up to it: the imperialist-like invasions of Finland, the Baltics and Rumania – and the now all-too-often forgotten pact with Hitler.
And the character of Russia’s war is indicated by the bind of propaganda which he conducts among German soldiers – propaganda not of socialist revolution, but of nationalist braggadocio.
It is not for nothing that the New York Times of January 12 editorializes that “the Soviet Union is considered to have abandoned the aims of universal revolution which dominated the first years of its existence.” These people know whereof they talk.
Stalin fights as an integral part of an imperialist bloc. True, he has his differences with the other members of the bloc. But so, too, do the other members have serious differences among themselves.
We must, however, remember the past of the Stalinist regime. We must see, too, that its present internal character has not changed a whit. Brutal dictatorship, reactionary to the core, anti-labor to the marrow – that is what an objective examination of Stalinist Russia must lead to. And the fact that men die for his regime and its imperialist partners – be it because of an illusion of the mind or the prod of a revolver – cannot change the correctness of this analysis in any way.
 




When Czarina Catherine “the Great” decided in a fit of royal whimsy to tour the Ukraine in order to see for herself the wonders of life which her rule had brought to the people, her Premier, Potemkin, devised a clever scheme. He hired a crew of actors and technicians, and constructed a series of happy villages, with idyllic surroundings and contented, cheerful “peasants” – all of it make-believe and torn down once Catherine triumphantly passed by. The real Russia – the Russia of serfdom and misery – was spared her and her entourage. It was a triumph for her regime, and all that was lacking was a Walter Duranty to do it proud for the American press with references to the “Russian soul” – but then, Catherine could hardly expect such modern improvements.
And somehow, after this writer staggered out of the Hollywood Theater in New York City where Mission to Moscow is being shown, the picture which persisted in his mind was one of Potemkin villages, the lie substituted to camouflage the bitter truth, the conscious and deliberate manipulation of facts in order to justify a regime of totalitarian terror. From beginning to end, Mission to Moscow is nothing but a Potemkin Village, an elaborate fantasy of make-believe, donated by American imperialism, through its Hollywood vassals, as another lend-lease offering to its Russian partners.
 
A Sensational Revelation – When Davies Met Schacht
Mission to Moscow is not an ordinary film; it pretends to documentary stature; it speaks as if it were an historical oracle and Davies the very repository of final truth; it boasts of meticulous attention to every factual detail in order to present an accurate record of what has taken place in recent years. It pretends to explain the war, the Stalin regime, the rise of Hitler.
Yet, we say, it is a tissue of lies from the beginning to the end.
There are four major themes in the film: the role of Russia in the pre-war period and the development of events which led to the war; the internal situation in Russia; the Moscow Trials; and, of course, a strictly OWI presentation of the omniscient wisdom of President Roosevelt and ex-Ambassador Davies and the correctness of their war policy.
Let us leave the last of these for another article, though it is in a sense the most important, and take up here the first three, one by one.
Davies begins his film journey at the request of President Roosevelt, who entrusts him with a subsidiary mission that is as sensational as anything else in this film. Davies stops in Berlin on his way to Moscow and there makes an offer to Hjalmar Schacht, the then Finance Minister of Hitler’s regime. President Roosevelt, Davies tells Schacht, is willing to grant Germany her “reasonable” claims for additional foreign markets, outlets for finished goods, sources of raw materials, and colonies, provided Hitler enter a universal disarmament scheme.
This remarkable scene, in which the financial wizard of the early Nazi government is depicted in such a favorable light, is as revealing as anything else in this film. It brands as a lie all the endless rhetorical poppycock in which Davies and Litvinov indulge in the film: all the talk about forming an anti-Hitler bloc, of “collective security.” For it shows Roosevelt willing to strike a bargain with Hitler provided the latter does not want to grab up too many of the world’s imperialist spoils; it shows Davies impressed by Schacht (as responsible as anyone else in Germany for the rise and continuation in power of Hitlerism!). This is the true mentality of this missioner to Moscow: ready to strike a bargain with a “good” subsidiary of Hitler (just as Chamberlain did afterward, and as Stalin did afterward; just as all of them were ready to do so long as they didn’t have to give too much of the spoils to Hitler, and could still keep most for themselves).
Was Davies, and the Roosevelt Administration for which he spoke, ready to countenance the continued existence of Hitlerism, with its anti-Semitism and oppression of labor, its slavery and human degradation – was Davies ready to countenance this Hitlerism so long as he could strike a bargain with Schacht? The picture answers: Yes, and in this one respect it is historically accurate. And it is revealing too: the man who was willing to strike a bargain with Hitlerism ... saw Stalinism in a favorable light!
During the early part of the film – that is, before Davies reaches Moscow – there is another extraordinary scene. We see the League of Nations assembled to hear Haile Selassie denounce the invasion of Ethiopia by Mussolini. After him, Litvinov makes a speech for collective security and “in defense” of Ethiopia, which meets with the scorn of those assembled. What we missed, however, was a sequence to this scene showing Russian oil barges bringing oil to Italy to be used for the Ethiopian invasion. That would have added something to this part!
But the talk about European peace is intended in this picture merely as an embellishment for the Russian part, intended to show that peace could have been maintained if the advice of Russia had been followed. As if this world war didn’t flow from basic economic and social causes, from the great contradictions of world capitalism torn to bits by imperialist rivalries! Had the collective security policy been followed, the war would have broken out earlier – possibly to the advantage of the Allies, but even that is doubtful. Peace in a capitalist world was and is impossible, and all the cheap talk of Davies-Litvinov cannot hide that.
 
Building Potemkin Villages ... It’s Easy in the Movies
But let us turn to the main part of the picture: the construction of the Potemkin villages. Davies enters Russia and immediately sees a “land of plenty”: food delicacies await him; perhaps, after all, he was a bit hasty in bringing along those refrigerated cars filled with American food (not shown in the film). From this we are to infer that the Russian people eat well under Stalin. The famous “forced collectivization” which led to a famine from which millions died? No mention. Is this repast typical of the food of the average Russian worker or of the Stalinist bureaucrat? Davies is silent. HE was given good food; he saw that Litvinov, Molotov and the rest got good food. Who cares about the PEOPLE of Russia? And why pay attention to the statistics of the Stalin regime itself which prove that the people of Russia at the time of the Davies visit had one of the lowest standards of living on the continent?
Similarly on other counts. Freedom of speech in Stalinland? Treatment of those who dare disagree with omnipotent, omniscient Stalin? The right to organize opposition parties? Free elections ... with more than one choice? Freedom of discussion within the Communist Party?
All of these embarrassing topics are studiously avoided by Davies in both his book and the film. Instead, the film shows him taking an “unguided” tour (did Warner Brothers think the American people were really such suckers as to believe that the Stalinist regime would allow the Ambassador of the United States to take a tour through its industrial regions without making careful preparations to make sure that he saw just what it wanted him to see, and nothing else?).
And what impresses Davies? The fact that piecework and “incentive pay” and other exploitive devices are being introduced into Russia, and the readiness of the Russian industrial machine to transform itself to war production. That is, what really impresses Davies is the fact that Russia’s is not a socialist economy. He is tickled to death at the fact that “incentive pay” and the speed-up of Stakhanovism have been brought to Stalinland; these are things he understands and appreciates. Certainly if, for instance, he had been shown the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, which didn’t have so great an industrial development, but which had something more precious: factory democracy, shop councils, genuine socialist idealism, then he would have been horrified,
Davies’ trip through Russia convinces him that it really isn’t so far away from capitalist America; that, to quote from his book, “the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky – the Russia of the Bolshevik Revolution – “no longer exists.” It is his recognition that Stalinist Russia is also an exploitive society and therefore represents no revolutionary threat to the capitalist world, which fills Davies with joy. Hell, he isn’t dealing here with any wild-eyed radicals who want a world revolution; these people are “practical”; a good capitalist can strike a bargain with a fellow like Stalin.
As for the “unpleasant” features of Stalin’s dictatorship, well ... the GPU might have killed off a few million people who committed the one unforgivable sin: disagreeing with or standing in the way of Stalin; but in this “historical record” they are shown merely as guards for the Davies family ...
It is the overwhelming realization that Russia under Stalin represents no revolutionary threat to the capitalist world, that “the Bolshevik Revolution no longer exists” which fills Davies’ heart with such joy. Once they do not threaten his social system, he is ready to deal with them, and if that deal involves one of the most fantastic of whitewashes of one of the most bloody, barbaric dictatorships in history, well, a bargain’s a bargain ...
So what if hundreds of thousands rot in GPU prisons? So what if the overwhelming majority of the Lenin Central Committee is murdered by Stalin? So what if the land of terror is presented as the land of freedom? So what if the film shows nothing of the sycophantic idolization, which Stalin permits his lackeys to indulge in? So what it the time servers of Stalin, the stuttering ninny, Molotov, the idle figurehead, Kalinin, the pliable agent, Litvinov, are depicted as wise heroes?
 
A Few Things You Won’t See in the Film
Remember, runs the paean of joy through the Davies approach, we can deal with Stalin; he isn’t a Lenin or a Trotsky; he’s not a “red.”
Does the film neglect to show that historical meeting of Stalin and Ribbentrop where they signed the “non-aggression pact” for twenty years?
Does it neglect to show Molotov uttering his most famous words: “Fascism is a matter of taste”?
Does it neglect to show Stalin making his famous speech in which he blamed the war on England and France, and implicitly absolved his new-found partner, Hitler, of responsibility?
Does the film neglect to show Stalin addressing the Nazis with the immortal words: “Our friendship has been cemented with blood” after the partition of Poland?
Does it fail to show that not only Hitler but Stalin too invaded Poland, that this invasion was carried out in concert?
Does it fail to show the historic occasion when von Ribbentrop came to Moscow to sign the “non-aggression pact” and the bands blared out the Internationale and the Horst Wessel Lied together?
SO WHAT? Why do you keep harping on these embarrassing details? What do you expect when an American capitalist gets together with Stalinist murderers – the truth?
And does it show the arch Caligula, Stalin, as a kindly old man with gray hair, tolerant, wise, friendly? Well, at least the physical likeness is pretty good ... except for the fact that in the film there isn’t any blood on his hands.
 
Why the Double Forgery About the Infamous Trials?
Yet, when all is said and done, Mission to Moscow rests on one truly remarkable scene: the scene which depicts the trials of the Old Bolsheviks. It is here that it is most outspoken. Why not? If Davies, can in addition to his new-found friendship for the Stalin regime, also endorse its murder of the real revolutionaries, isn’t that killing two birds with one stone?
The picture commits a double forgery. It commits the forgery of his book, which accepted at its face value the legal methodology of the Stalinist regime (a man is considered guilty until proved innocent!), as well as the fantastic confessions. And it commits the additional forgery of never recording the doubts which his book contained. There he wrote that “the situation has me guessing.” He writes that “the trial and surrounding circumstances shock our mentality.” If the picture is a faithful report why isn’t he shocked there as well? He speaks of the second Moscow Trial as “the subordination of the individual to the state.” Why isn’t that mentioned in the movies? He says of the execution of the army generals that “facts are not now available and it is doubtful whether they will be for a long time to come.” Then, why does he so bluntly accept the “guilt” of the defendants?
Davies has committed one of the most unpardonable of crimes. He has doctored his own record! He now accepts as valid that which he had many doubts about previously. While in the book he said that the defendants were, by virtue of their confessions, technically guilty under
Stalinist jurisprudence, he permitted himself to doubt the charge that they had plotted with Hitler. In the movie he accepts Stalin’s case – hook, line and sinker. In the book he is incredulous at the report that Krestinsky, whom he had known personally, was guilty of plotting with Hitler. In the movie, Krestinsky is one of the loudest confessors!
 
Hollywood Changes Trial Scripts to Fit the Case
The trial, as staged by Warner Brothers, is even more fantastic than that staged by Stalin. The prelude is set at a diplomatic ball at which Radek, Bukharin and Tukhachevsky ostentatiously whisper with Axis diplomats. Now, were these men really so stupid as to conduct their alleged “intrigues” at diplomatic balls? But everything goes, as far as this great “historical record” is concerned.
At this ball, Bukharin makes an “appointment” with von Ribbentrop. Where did Davies and Warner Brothers get that one? It wasn’t even in the Moscow Trials themselves!
But the greatest forgery of the picture, its filthiest and vilest piece of intellectual dishonesty, is the “trial” itself. What were actually three trials are here condensed into one. Why does a film which boasts of such meticulous detail find it necessary to amalgamate the trials? The answer is simple: to avoid showing what is for the Stalin regime the crushing fact that the prosecutors of the first trial were the defendants at the second and third. Yagoda, who was supposed to have been marked for assassination by the defendants in the first trial, was himself a victim at a subsequent trial.
Ulrich, who was chief judge at the trials, was subsequently shot by the Stalinist regime as a “traitor.” That would have been embarrassing to the Davies whitewash; it would have been embarrassing to have to explain why Tukhachevsky was carefully exonerated at the second trial and subsequently shot in secret. Remedy? Combine all three trials into one. When dealing in fantasy and lies, a little more or less doesn’t matter.
Surprise! A new defendant is dragged in. Tukhachevsky “confesses” too. But at the time of the trials he issued a statement condemning the defendants. And he was TRIED AND SHOT IN SECRET! He never confessed; perhaps he was too much of a man to consent to that debasement. In the movie he makes a little speech which was really that of Muralov in the first trial. But what’s the difference? Mix up the trials, the defendants, the speeches ... it’s all the same!
Radek “confesses” that Trotsky was at the head of the “plot.” But why aren’t we shown the scenes from the trial in which Holtzman, the alleged go-between for Trotsky and Radek, “confessed to having met Trotsky at a hotel in Copenhagen” – which never existed. Why aren’t we shown that part of Piatakov’s “confession” in which he told of having flown to meet Trotsky in Norway during December 1935 ... when there is no record of any foreign plane having landed in Norway that month. And what about the Confession of Vladimir Romm in the third trial that he met Trotsky in Paris ... at a time when Trotsky wasn’t in Paris.
Mission to Moscow speaks of truth and other great ideals. In that case, why doesn’t it dare to show the voice of Trotsky (he wrote on these trials also, and he had something to say, too!) refuting the charges of the trial point by point? Why doesn’t it include a word of the findings of the Dewey Commission which investigated the trials thoroughly and found them a monstrous fraud?
*
This picture is an elaborate whitewash. It is part of the attempt of an important section of the American capitalist class to reach an agreement with Stalin not merely for the continued joint prosecution of the war, but also for joint action during the post-war period, action to organize a Europe devoid of revolution. If, in order to achieve this ambitious objective, it is necessary to indulge in a-little job of lying, hypocrisy, slander and corruption such as this film represents, that is certainly not too high a price to pay. Its basic ideology is reactionary to the core. Davies, the man who is ready to make a deal with Hitler, saw a kindred spirit in Stalin and his regime which was not too far away from the spirit of capitalism. That there was no freedom in Russia didn’t worry him nearly as much as the relief he felt when he discovered that there wasn’t any socialism there.
He saw, again together with Stalin, an enemy in the intransigent revolutionary, Trotsky, and in that he was correct. Trotsky was an enemy of capitalism and all its filth. Davies was ready to slander Trotsky by charging him to be an accomplice of Hitler while keeping quiet about the fact that it was Stalin who really made the pact with Hitler and thereby gave him the green light for this war!
This was Ambassador Davies and this is his film. Other than politically it cannot be considered; it is long, windy, pretentious, cheap, constantly agape in the presence of “great” men; in short, a bore.
But go and see it, by all means. It’s a good test of how strong your stomach really is.
 




In last week’s Labor Action we discussed the blow struck at Jewish rights in North Africa by General Giraud when he “abrogated” the Gambetta-Cremieux decree of 1870 by which Algerian Jews were granted equal rights as citizens of France. Due to limitations of space we had to refrain from discussing a vitally important aspect of the North African problem: the Arabs.
It is amazing that in all the reams of articles printed by American correspondents from North Africa so few words creep in about the Arabs. Tunisia is after all their country; it is being ravaged by two groups of foreign powers, for neither of which the Arabs have any particular affection. Occasionally there is a reference in some dispatch to the fact that Arabs are dirty (because they have no money for clothes and soap?) but otherwise one could never imagine that there are eight million Arabs in North Africa.
 
Arabs “Kept in Their Place”
We cannot here enter into detail about how they have fared under French rule. Suffice it to say that they have suffered under an imperialist domination as brutal as that of the British in India, or the Belgians in the Congo or the Germans in Poland. This domination has made North Africa a land of misery and unrest; sporadic and desperate rebellions against French rule and for the independence of their lands have marked their life in the past decades.
The Allied “liberators” have been particularly careful to see to it that the Arabs were “kept in their place.” At the very outset of the North African expedition, President Roosevelt made clear in a formal statement that those French colonies seized during the war would be returned to the French Empire afterward. Any illusion which the Arabs might have held about the Atlantic Charter applying to North Africa was thus immediately dispelled. And during the course of the North African campaign, the Allies have been particularly careful not to allow any arms to fall into the hands of the Arabs, who lack the training to distinguish between imperialisms.
When Giraud, therefore, annulled the decree which had set the Jews apart from the Arabs by allowing them automatic French citizenship, he defended this reactionary step as being necessary to placate the Arabs. Now, it is indisputable that there exist serious tensions between the Jews and Arabs in North Africa. These tensions have been aggravated by Axis propaganda; they have been steadily inculcated into the Arab population by a series of reactionary French administrators, such as Peyrouton and Nogues, over the past decade; and they are also the result of a complicated and unfortunate economic situation in North Africa whereby the Jews, as small business men who often acted as middle men between the Arab peasants and French imperialism, have appeared in the eyes of the former as the agents of the latter. Despite these acknowledged tensions, the Allied propagandists have steadily exaggerated the extent of Arab-Jewish antagonisms, for much the same reasons as the British exaggerate the extent of the Hindu-Moslem antagonisms. It is the old policy of divide and rule.
 
If Arabs Got the Franchise ...
Nonetheless, how did the Arabs profit when the Jews were deprived of their citizenship by the Bonapartist Giraud? Misery may love company, but company doesn’t alleviate misery. So that the simple question must arise: Instead of dragging the Jews down to the level of the Arabs, why not strike a real blow for freedom by also granting the rights which the Jews had held to the Arabs That is, give citizenship and voting rights to the Arabs.
But, as wise old Shakespeare said,, there’s the rub. As the March 22 New York Times says: “The extension of the franchise to the Arabs as well as to the Jews would mean that the French would be voted out of office.” But that’s democracy; that’s what the Atlantic Charter promises. And that is just where we see that the Atlantic Charter is nothing more than a piece of paper. The French would not grant the Arabs voting rights because they fear that they would thereby lose their imperialist grip over North Africa; and then in a clumsy attempt to placate the oppressed Arabs they take away the rights of the Jews as well.
And the American State Department gives its benign blessings to the tragic farce, occasionally turning to answer domestic critics with mutterings: “National independence? Why, yes, of course we American imperialists are for that ... with a few minor exceptions, you understand ... a few minor exceptions such as Puerto Rico, India, North Africa, Indo-China, a few countries in Europe, and a few colonies here and there where the natives have shown by their peacefulness that they clearly aren’t civilized ...”
 




A great battle of words, both the shadow of a more substantial battle within the world economy and a prelude to the even greater battle still to come, has broken out in the press of the United Nations over the rôle of commercial aviation in the post-war world. Though the popular imagination was first stirred by the now famous “globalony” speech of Representative Clare Booth Luce, largely because of the carefully premeditated publicity campaign given her by the Scripps-Howard and Luce press, the controversy has far deeper roots, extending into the very question of the inter-imperialist relations among the United Nations if they win the war.
It is difficult for a layman to estimate accurately exactly what degree of technical progress has been made in the construction and planning of large-scale transport aviation and those planes, such as the helicopter, which are planned primarily for private and small-scale business purposes. One thing is certain, however: tremendous progress has been made, a new technical era has been opened, already rivaling and showing signs of overshadowing in significance the rise of the automobile. This development is hailed by the apologists of capitalism as an indication of the continuing virility of that economic system. In reality, of course, it is a bitter indictment of capitalism that this tremendous development in the field of international transport and commerce, with its still incalculable possibilities tor the improvement of the welfare of humanity, was so stunted in its development during peacetime and began to achieve prominence only as a result of the tragic stimulus of the needs of the imperialist war. A few figures will indicate, however, what a potent factor the airplane industry has become in the American economy. In 1942, production, according to Charles I. Stanton, U.S. Civil Aeronautics Administrator, was some $6,250,000,000, nearly thirteen times as large as that of 1940 and more than fifty times that of 1938. Its 1943 production will be some $20,000,000,000. By contrast, the automotive industry in its greatest year reached an output of $3,700,000,000. These few key figures are sufficient to give an indication of the crucial rôle which this industry will play in the post-war period. The collapse of the airplane industry would immediately result in a major trend toward economic depression. Conversely, an imperialist success in obtaining world air bases, routes and trade, with the resultant need for continued transport production and the maintenance of a giant air industry, is a pleasing prospect for the imperialist planners.
 
Prospects for the Future
What, in brief, is the present status of international commercial aviation and its prospects for future development? At the present, America is indubitably in the most advantageous position for the conquest of virtual hegemony of the world commercial air routes after the war. She is producing today, in quantity, standard transport planes that can carry six-ton cargoes at about 200 miles an hour. According to reliable surveys conducted by Newsweek magazine and the semi-official trade magazine, Aviation, it may also be expected that in the near future planes will be produced that can carry 100 tons at a speed of about 350 miles, and that an average speed of from 275 to 300 miles an hour might even be expected on long runs. At present, because of the limitations imposed by the war as well as the inherent limitations imposed by the fact that capitalist economy functions with profit and not service as its main aim, the longer routes, broken up into frequent short stops and taken at considerably less than maximum speeds, are used. Thus, for example, what is theoretically the shortest, quickest and most feasible route – the Great Circle across the North Pole – is being developed for possible post-war use, but remains sidetracked to the advantage of the immediately profitable routes such as the “cross hemisphere” route from Chicago to Calcutta via New York, the Azores, Casablanca, Cairo, etc. This route provides more possibility of passenger trade and saves gasoline, since the shorter routes do not require such great expenditures of fuel and oil. However, from the long-range point of view of world economic planning – which is ultimately consistent only with the creation of a socialist economy – it is the Great Circle route that presents the greatest potentialities. Even within the limitations of capitalism, however, there will be growing importance for commercial aviation. While it will not succeed in supplanting railroads and ships in the immediate future, it will take over many important facilities: rapid mail services which would save the costs of cable tolls; transport of light, small but precious materials; transport of perishable materials; rapid passenger services.
When one translates this into the language of world politics and economics, it is more readily seen what tremendous importance commercial aviation has for the post-war world which the Allies are planning. An entire new growth of imperialist expansion into previously neglected areas such as many of the Pacific islands and large sections of Asia can be envisaged. Whichever power will have control of the world airways will be in a fair way of obtaining imperialist world dominance. And, inversely, those powers with the major bases and routes will be able to seize control of this vast new industry for the purposes of knitting closer together their present empires, profiting from the revenues brought in by the new industries (the rate of profit of the airplane industry in the United States last year was among the highest of any industry of the nation) and maneuvering themselves into position for further economic conquests. What is more, it is not too difficult to convert from transport to war plane production; the imperialists of every nation see in the plane a potent weapon for the continuation of their rule even in the most far-off areas. Is it any wonder that even now, before the United Nations have come anywhere near winning the war, and before they have heard what answer the people of the world will give to their post-war plans, they are feverishly planning, frantically maneuvering for strategic positions in the post-war aviation field?
 
“Legal” Restrictions in the Air
An illuminating instance of the fact that a decadent capitalist economy imposes intolerable restrictions on the development of world production and trade can be seen when one examines the fantastically intricate “rules” which govern present aviation trade and which threaten to either sharply limit it in the post-war period or push it into a bitter economic war. No more intricate set of restrictions, based on the inter-imperialist rivalries, has ever been developed in any other field of transport or commerce. At present, commercial aviation is governed by two “principles.” One is the so-called principle of “national sovereignty” – each nation holds sovereign rights over its own air space (legally, a plane cannot fly over any foreign nation without permission). Secondly, there is the “closed port” system, which, unlike the “open port” arrangement of sea commerce, does not permit a foreign plane to land at a base without permission of the government which controls that base. It is apparent, of course, that with two such crippling measures in effect, it is impossible at present for any substantial development of commercial aviation to take place without getting involved in a series of national restrictions, imperialist rivalries and struggles. The situation is not unlike that produced on international sea commerce by the tariff walls.
It is in the planning for the post-war status of commercial aviation that the conflicts between the various imperialist powers become most sharp. If the Allies win the war, and if their rule is not immediately toppled by socialist revolutions, then America and Britain will be the two main rivals for aviation hegemony. The defeated Axis powers probably will be grounded, France and Russia hardly will be in a position to enter the struggle, and the two small imperialist powers, Belgium and Holland, which did have some commercial aviation strength, will be so busy reconsolidating their power that they will not be able to even peep into the controversy. The only significance which all the talk about “freedom of the skies” and “closed and open ports” and all the other aviation jargon can possibly have, therefore, is in light of the mounting rivalry between American and British imperialism. What, then, are the relative positions of the two antagonists?
There are, first, some general politico-economic considerations. America has undoubtedly set itself the prospectus of coming out of this war as the leading capitalist power. This has been discussed at length elsewhere in this magazine and need not be elaborated here. For this perspective it has many advantages and, at present, in the opinion of this writer, there are only two possibilities which might annul those advantages: 1) a war of such inordinate length that America would be dragged down to the levels of sacrifice of Russia and Britain and would therefore be unable to take advantage of what it hopes will be its comparative post-war economic strength; or 2) an alliance between Britain and Russia aimed against any attempt of America to climb to the top of the imperialist pile. Otherwise, America will have the general advantages of superior financial strength, greater military power and far less of a toll exacted by the war.
 
British-American Conflicts
Specifically, however, there are a number of advantages which American aviation has. First of these is the fact that American imperialism has contrived to arrange the war production program so that Britain concentrates on the production of fighter and giant bomber planes, while America concentrates on certain types of bombers and transport planes. In the worried words of Peter Masefield, aviation expert of the London Times, “The government appears to be evading the issue and to be afraid of offending the United States, which not only is building up a virtual monopoly in transport aircraft among the United Nations, but is acquiring nearly all the operational experience ...” The second major advantage which America has is the fact that it has been building many bases in far-flung parts of the world, most of them adjacent to or within the British Empire, and that these bases are ideally suited for post-war commercial use.
It is therefore not for nothing that the spokesmen of British imperialism have been so agitated over this issue. For, at present, it is undeniable that they are coming off second best. The Tory MP Perkins says that “in the Pacific the Americans have a complete monopoly. In the South Atlantic the Americans have a complete monopoly. In the North Atlantic ... for every British-owned air liner crossing it there are at least two American ... In Africa the Americans were given an entrée ...” It is this situation which prompted the Lord Privy Seal, Viscount Cranborne, to declare in the House of Commons on March 11, 1943, that the British government had “a secret report” designed to safeguard her commercial aviation interests after the war. It was likewise this situation which prompted his threat that “If other nations (obviously the U.S. – R.F.) insist upon cut-throat competition, we are quite prepared to enter the fray against them.” And there is somewhat more than idle boasting, though there is plenty of that too, in this threat. For, although Britain is at present in an unfavorable position, it is by no means without resources for putting up a stiff fight in case the aviation struggle breaks out into the open after the war. Its main trump-card is, of course, the Empire. Regardless of the restrictions on air travel that continue to pile up, Britain can continue her air development so long as she holds on to the Empire. With the possible exception of the Pacific, where American refusal to allow foreign planes to land on the Hawaiian islands effectively eliminates any competition as long as America retains those islands, British planes can travel round the world and still be completely within the Empire. It is this great geographical-economic advantage which is Britain’s main trump card. It has already yielded results. In Australia, for example, the British have terminal rights which American interests have never been able to acquire. Likewise in New Zealand. (It is this fact which explains the agitation conducted by American Army officials for commercial rights for those bases they have constructed on British territory.) And likewise in Africa, air routes initiated by the Pan American system, America’s major air company, have been taken over by the British Overseas Airway. In Canada, the United States has agreed to turn over to Canada one year after the end of the war all permanent airport facilities built there with lend-lease funds. The one redeeming feature of this situation, from the point of view of American interests, is the fact that in places like Canada, and to a lesser degree New Zealand and Australia, the power of the American dollar is becoming stronger than that of the British legal tie.
 
Beginning of the Struggle at Home
With the status of this ripening struggle between America and British imperialism for control of the airways in the background, we can more readily understand the abstruse disputes over “freedom of the skies” and “closed and open ports.” Clare Luce to the contrary notwithstanding, it becomes apparent that American imperialism, even if it doesn’t know it yet, has found a spokesman with extraordinary vision in Vice-President Wallace. Mrs. Luce speaks up for a policy of “national sovereignty” in the air – that is, perpetuation of the present scheme, which is of temporary and limited advantage to American aviation. But when Henry Wallace proposes “freedom of the skies” he would give American aviation an even greater advantage than “freedom of the seas” gave to British merchant shipping. For, under this scheme, there would be allowed: the right of “innocent passage” over the air of any foreign country by non-military planes; the right of “free landing” or “open port” for refueling”; and similar measures. This is clearly a setup for a country which has the planes, the financial backing, the world influence that America has, and only lacks entrée into the bases now controlled by Britain. For Britain, there are no readily discernible advantages in this scheme. That Wallace tacks on his scheme for a United Nations Investment Corporation to operate a network of global planes, is not essential to the previously noted and main part of his plan; such a corporation has precious little chance of existence in the imperialist-rivalry-ridden post-war world, except perhaps as a means of militarily maintaining the might of world capitalism by using war planes against any revolution that might arise.
But while Wallace champions this “freedom of the air” scheme which would assure first place to American aviation, he is not in favor of an all-out commercial war against British aviation interests. Here again he shows himself to be a sensible statesman – from the capitalist point of view. For Wallace understands the need for some kind of capitalist solidarity on an international scale to organize against the threat of proletarian revolution, as witness his remarks against Trotskyism in a recent speech. He sees that if the Luce perspective of an all-out struggle against the British Empire is adopted, the result may be disadvantageous to both American and British imperialism. So he has adopted the perspective, and in this he appears to be speaking for the Roosevelt Administration, of a sort of post-war “limited hegemony.”
This is a brief and very incomplete sketch of the aviation situation as it now stands. It is by no means an independent equation; what will happen in the war and in world politics will in the long run determine the relationship of forces in this field, too. It is worth noting, however, that here is offered an incredible opportunity for progress on the part of humanity. The uses to which a socialist society could put the airplane are incalculable and stagger the imagination. That capitalism, on the contrary, can use the airplane only as a means of horrible destruction at present, and can plan for it only the rôle of a mechanism for the furthering of post-war imperialist struggles, is but one more indication that socialism today stands at the very top of the human agenda, and that not the slightest progress toward peace and security can be made without struggling for socialism.
 




Like a running sore with chronic discharges, a new twist of events in the North African political situation is brought to public attention every few weeks. Apparently, the “realpoliltik” diplomacy which began with the deal with Admiral Darlan and has not yet ended – the policy, which is the pride and joy of Secretary of State Cordell Hull – has not been as satisfactory as its sponsors desired. It is therefore necessary for them to add anticlimactic epilogues with the hope of adding a little democratic luster to the reactionary show. Such an epilogue is the recent speech of General Giraud which “adhered” to the Atlantic Charter and promised an end to the Nuremburg anti-Semitic laws which have existed, and still exist, in North Africa.
Despite the pseudo-idealistic prattle of the jelly-spined liberals, who try not to understand what they know very well: that an imperialist war can ONLY be fought by imperialist methods, and who therefore bewail the “treachery” of the Darlanist deals (they are always being “betrayed” – are they not? – these political Uriah Heeps), it is clear, from the point of view of the Allied bloc, that the Darlan and Giraud deals were militarily successful. They aided considerably in the conquest of French Morocco and Algeria.
However, the military asset of the deal with Darlan-Giraud incurred certain political liabilities. For one thing, there was a considerable outcry back home from those deluded folks who thought that this was a crusade for the purest democratic ideals and found themselves marching side by side with a crew of fascist cut-throats and anti-Semitic vermin, as filthy as any of the Hitler progeny, even though these particular fascists bore French names. Nogues, the colonial oppressor and strike-breaker and outspoken Nazi-admirer; Boisson, the fanatical Anglophobe and Nazi friend; Peyrouton, the collaborator of Laval, Pétain and Hitler, and the promulgator of the Nuremburg anti-Semitic laws of Vichy; Giraud, the anti-republican militarist – it was this gang of political blackguards who were now included among the “champions of the Four Freedoms,” together with America.
 
Applying an Ersatz Whitewash
Many folks back home were disturbed, to put it mildly. But even more important, the reports from underground France indicated what was to the Allies a catastrophic demoralization among the Frenchmen who had been most active in opposing Hitler. The Allies therefore went to work to have a coating of democratic whitewash applied to the Giraud administration. The whitewash, however – as can be seen from Giraud’s speech – is obviously of ersatz material and has been purchased on the black market.
Giraud came out for the Atlantic Charter. Well, that needn’t detain us, since this charter is as broad, vague and mysterious as the sea for which it is named, and can and does mean all things to all men.
But when it came to the question of the anti-Semitic regulations under which the Algerian Jews suffered, there it was that Giraud showed that he retained all of his old reactionary ideas and prejudices. He promised the abrogation of the Vichy anti-Jewish laws, though thus far there has been no sign of the execution of the promise or of the extent to which it will be lived up to. But in the same speech he “abrogated” (incidentally, where is his franchise from the people in either cosmopolitan France or North Africa to promise or abrogate anything?) the Gambetta-Cremieux decree of 1870, under which the Jews were granted equal rights as citizens.
Jews may apply for citizenship individually (sort of a yellow-dog contract!) but do not possess it automatically as a group. As even the conservative American Jewish Congress has been forced to point out, “The abrogation does not restore the Jews to their position under the Third Republic but relegates them to their position under the laws of Napoleon III.”
What is at least as significant in evaluating the Giraud regime – for such, by virtue of the buttress of American bayonets, it has become – is the fact that the same gang of corrupt, reactionary and anti-Semitic fascists remain in power, including Nogues, and Peyrouton. One can well imagine the zealousness with which Peyrouton, the man who brought about anti-Semitism to France at the behest of Hitler, will proceed to abolish it in North Africa!
A Pattern for the Post-War World
Strange are the ways of this war? Strange only for those who fail to see that the Giraud deal – as well as the flirtations with the Spanish murderer, Franco, and the Italian murderer-buffoon, Mussolini – sets the pattern for the post-war world which the Allies plan to establish. It is to be a conservative world, a world in which all the outmoded tyrants will return to power once more, in which any reactionary or near-fascist or actual fascist who is willing to make a deal with the Allies will suddenly blossom forth as a “democratic hero.”
 



When, six months ago, the British government! offered the Indian people the PROMISE of national independence AFTER the war, but refused to grant that independence immediately, the Indian nationalist masses viewed this attitude with complete cynicism. That cynicism is now being shown to have been more than justified. Recent reports from India and Britain indicate a stiffening of British policy toward India, as well as, the brewing of a new crisis in India, a crisis which may burst, at any moment.
The extremely plausible grounds on which the Indian nationalists based their cynicism may be thus summarized: If Britain, in the hour of its direst imperial crisis, when Japan threatens to wipe out completely its Far Eastern power – if at this time Britain refuses to grant independence to India, then what reason is there to suppose that she will live up to her promise of granting India, freedom in the post-war world, in which Britain’s position presumably would be strengthened and in which she would not need the military aid of India?
This reasoning is now being proved by events. In a dispatch to the New York Times, dated January 2, Herbert Matthews writes:
“The recent Allied victories in Africa and in the Pacific have made the Indians understand that their contribution does not mean as much as it would have meant last spring or summer, and hence their bargaining position has declined. The British all along have been taking the line that they are getting enough support through enlistments and war production to carry on and it is not worth taking the chance (what: chance? – R.F.) of transferring more power to the Indians. With the recent victories that feeling has been strengthened.”
 
Amery’s Statement on Princes
An even more dramatic indication of this situation is seen in the speech which Leopold Amery, British Secretary of State for India made on January 7 in which he maintained that “the ruling princes of India are an indispensable element of that country’s life” and that “they were bound to play a large part in any modification the constitution might undergo.” Said Amery of the native princes: “Their primary responsibility is the good government of their own people in accordance with such methods as suit the dispositions (sic!) of those people and in accordance with the spirit of the times.”
It is obvious, of course, that six months ago the British would never have dared make such statements; and it is possible that six months from now they will not dare to again. In the meantime, as soon as they feel a little bit more secure in their imperialist domination, as soon as their military position registers the slightest improvement, they immediately revert to their old hide-bound imperialist outlook – and thereby give the lie to all the fancy talk of a few months back with which they tried to delude the Indians into surrendering their fight for national independence and with which they fooled, a good many Americans into trusting their “sincerity.”
But India itself remains a keg of political dynamite. An extremely serious food crisis is now racking the country. As the magazine Time says: “For many Indians the line between perpetual hunger and real starvation is thin. Last week that line was thinner than ever.” There are appalling shortages of India’s three main foods, wheat, rice and millet. So serious is the situation that the Delhi Hindustan Times writes that “Profiteers, speculators, hoarders and the rest of the parasites are fattening on the vitals of the masses. The government has so far done precious little in terms of action to relieve their distress.”
When this conservative nationalist paper writes in such a harsh tone, it is easy enough to see exactly what the rule of British imperialism means to the Indian people.
 
What Will Phillips Do?
Into this explosive situation there now steps William Phillips, the special American envoy to India. What is he to do? Has he a new offer? No one knows as yet. One thing is certain: Try as he may, he will not be able to straddle the basic issue of Indian independence. The very first contact he had with the Indians must have convinced him of that, when in reply to his statement that he intended to confer with the leaders of all of India’s political factions, an Indian, reporter asked him: “How do you intend to see those who are detained in jail?”
The American liberals, of course, maintain an embarrassed silence on this topic. Their voices are stilled, their tongues tied and their consciences dulled. And then, too, they are too busy trying to explain – or figure out – North Africa and Darlan, without worrying about India as well.
In the meantime the crisis continues. The Indian revolution did not end when the great wave of mass agitation of six months ago temporarily receded. In fact, it has hardly even begun. There is still a great drama ahead in India, one in which temporary defeats may be interspersed with local victories, but one which can end only with the complete victory of the Indian struggle for national independence.
 



Seldom has there been as unscrupulously misleading a journalistic campaign as that conducted by sections of the daily press – especially the Scripps-Howard newspaper chain – on the problem of taxation. The New York World-Telegram, for example, has been campaigning long and loud for the so-called Ruml tax plan as a means of solving the taxpayer’s headaches. This plan has been put forward as a means of painlessly settling the painful problem of taxation by a mere wave of the Ruml hand.
On examination, however, one can see what a fraud the Ruml plan is and one can also see exactly what the motives of the capitalist press are in promoting this or similar taxation plans. The Ruml plan is really very simple. It proposes that the nation’s taxation be put on a “pay as you go” basis. Up till now, when you go to pay your income tax in March of one year, you are paying taxes for the previous year; that is, taxes paid in March 1943 count for the year 1942. Ruml proposes, however, in order to avoid the difficult situation whereby a person may have to pay the heavy taxes of the previous year out of the earnings of a greatly decreased income of the present year, that the tax paid in March 1943 be counted as the first quarterly payment for 1943.
Thus far, however, his proposal does not differ in any important respect from the proposals of other tax plans put forward by congressmen. Treasury Department officials of the President himself. They are all agreed upon the necessity of basing tax payments on present, instead of past, earnings. Where the distinctive feature of the Ruml plan comes in is in his suggestion that 1942 taxes be wiped off the books completely.
 
The Fly in the Ointment
At first hand this proposal may seem to be beneficial to the American worker. Wipe out 194w taxes? Why not? It makes it easier to get along and as everyone knows it’s pretty hard to pay taxes these days.
But a moment’s consideration will show that such reasoning is superficial. The United States is now conducting the most expensive war in its history. It is estimated that in 1943 America will spend some eighty billion dollars and that of this somewhat less than twenty-five billions will be collected by taxation. If the problem of getting this additional revenue is met, the major method will have to be increased taxation. Present estimates indicate that sixteen billion dollars of additional revenue will be secured by taxation.
Now it is clear enough that, regardless of whether these taxes are labelled “1942” or “1943,” they will have to be paid. If the taxes due for 1942 are cancelled, then what will happen is simply this: new, additional sources of tax revenue will have to be found.
The real problem involved in discussions of taxation is not the question of for which year taxes are to be earmarked, but rather the question: WHO is going to pay the taxes? Which section of the population, which economic class will bear the burden of taxation?
And when we ask this question we can see exactly why the Ruml tax plan is so reactionary. For it proposes that taxation be abolished for 1942, the year in which the war industrialists, the giant corporations and big business in general made the greatest profits of recent history. It is the year for which they would have to pay the largest taxes. The Ruml plan would offer them the gigantic lollypop of just erasing these taxes from the books. It would mean that the income that would have accrued from big business would now probably be extracted from the poorer classes which are less able to pay taxes. That’s why the Scripps-Howard press is so enthusiastic about this plan.
 
Program Weighted for the Rich
As it is, the nation’s tax program is heavily weighted in favor of big business. While, in the past year, the income tax paying section of the population increased to 27,000,000 as opposed to 15,000,000 in 1941, it will reach the figure of 50,000,000 in 1943. And everybody earning as little, as $12 a week will have to pay a five per cent “victory tax” on that wage. Not to mention the fact that there is now a movement afoot in Congress to increase the “victory tax” to ten per cent.
While the workers suffer these outrageous tax burdens, all of the mechanisms with which big business evaded payment of even that unequal section of the tax bill still remain: tax exempt securities, various depreciation and amortization allowances, the “alternative” method of calculating corporation taxes, etc.
These paragraphs are written before the submission of President Roosevelt’s new tax bill. But there is little reason to believe that this latest program will differ materially from the previous ones. While there is no doubt that the rich will have to pay quite a few pennies in taxes to keep their war effort running, they will not, we can state with certainty in advance, have to really cut into their fortunes of wealth the way the workers have to cut into their daily necessities of life.
A fair tax program would impose a 100 per cent tax on all war profits; it would exact a capital levy on accumulated fortunes; it would sharply raise corporation taxes. It would soak the rich. They, and not the workers, should be made to bear the financial brunt of this war; it’s their war and they can afford to finance it. The workers are having enough trouble just getting by.
 



The major preliminary consideration to an understanding of the significance of the North Africa affair is to establish the deliberateness, the premeditated character of the behavior of the Allied forces. This we must do in order to dispel the last fluttering illusions of those pathetic few who still wish to believe that the entire affair was accidental, the work of a politically naive general, the result of some unique situation; and also in order to make clear that this situation is part of a general political tendency.
When the invasion of North Africa was announced and the news of the Darlan deal subsequently broken, the first authoritative comment from American governmental sources came from Secretary of State Hull. With great glee he pointed to the Darlan deal and the ease with which the Allied troops took over the North African ports as proof of the correctness of his policy of placating, or, as the liberals put it, “appeasing” Vichy. Hull, however, spoke too soon and said too much.
It was only after the assassination of Darlan and Giraud’s assumption of power that there was some response to Roosevelt’s embarrassed statement urging freeing of political prisoners. For it was obvious from his statement that he considered the American policy in North Africa to be premeditated, deliberate and couldn’t see that there was any moral or political duplicity involved. He boasted that America had maintained diplomatic relations with Vichy in order to keep a spy system both in France and North Africa. He did not bother to answer the question, however, of why it was necessary to keep spies in France and North Africa if his appeasement policy was so effective that it could win over the Darlanists to the Allied side without a struggle. Or perhaps he was merely being reticent about the fact that, in imperialist diplomatic relations, it is almost as wise to spy on one’s partners as on one’s enemies.
After this one outburst of gleeful spite in which Hull took revenge on the liberal critics of his State Department, he never had another word to say. And those newspapers – especially the Hearst and Scripps-Howard chains – which seized upon his statement as grist for their editorial mills, also lapsed into silence. For it was the anxious policy of the Roosevelt Administration to make it appear as much as possible that the deal was not premeditated, that it had not been carefully worked out in the State Department, that it was a “temporary military expedient,” as President Roosevelt said, based upon immediate military necessity and made at the spur of the moment by the military leader in charge of the expedition, General Eisenhower. It was for this reason of basic policy that all the publicity which had been begun in the press glorifying the rôle of Robert Murphy, FDR’s representative in North Africa, was suddenly stopped. For it is clear that the fact that Murphy had been in North Africa, haggling with the French fascists and preparing the groundwork for the deal, was but another proof of the invalidity of the Roosevelt attempt to disclaim responsibility.
Even this disclaimer of responsibility, however, was worded in typically ambiguous Roosevelt fashion. After all, what does “temporary expedient” mean? Does it mean that Darlan was to rule until the North African campaign was over? Or does it mean that he was to rule until the war was over and thereby be entitled to sit at the peace table at which Henry Wallace’s brave new (airplane protected) world was to be constructed? The latter interpretation was apparently adopted by Darlan himself, who hinted that he expected to remain in power until the French people had an opportunity to democratically choose their own government. In other words, he was to be the dictator until a democracy would somehow be established in the vague and indefinite future.
Roosevelt was here playing a diabolically clever game. He knew of and had in advance approved the Darlan deal, but in order to maintain his liberal and labor support at home he was placing the responsibility upon the unfortunate General Eisenhower, who, it was obvious enough, was hardly the person who could either conceive or execute this masterful piece of diplomatic intrigue.
Even if there were not testimony to the contrary, even if every newspaper man were sufficiently discreet to keep his mouth shut, even then it would be clear that by the very nature of the circumstances the deal was worked out in Washington, it was the handiwork of the Administration. But there is a remarkable bit of testimony which buttresses this contention. This testimony is an article which the head of the Washington bureau of the New York Times wrote in that paper on January 3. With callous frankness he therein revealed the major motives and mechanisms of the Darlan deal. This article deserves extensive quotation: “When General Eisenhower landed in North Africa he had two sets of orders, with the privilege of using that which seemed more likely to further his objective. One was to set up a military government and break the chain of French sovereignty (on this latter sentence, more later. – R.F.). He chose the other – to leave civil government to constituted authorities.” It is dear from the above that Eisenhower was given two sets of orders, but that both of them were variants of action within the general framework of the idea that a deal was to be worked out with Darlan and the other Pétainists.
 
The Meaning of the Deal
Why the deal? Certain military reasons are obvious enough. It made possible a rapid advance for the British and the green American troops. It brought forces of some importance to the Allied side. Behind these motives was the political attitude that what counted was guns and not ideas, that it mattered not if one’s partners were democrats or fascists so long as they shot in the same direction; the political attitude that is demonstrated in the report of Newsweek magazine’s Washington correspondent who quoted an anonymous high official of the State Department as saying that if Goering brought enough airplanes with him he too might be welcome on the side of the Allies, who were, it is well known, fighting for the Four Freedoms.
But in addition to these military reasons there was one political reason for the deal which is of extraordinary importance and which is revealed in the article by Arthur Krock referred to above. Krock reports that a basic motive which the Allies had in making the deal with Darlan was a desire for continuity of civil government in North Africa.
“If,” he tells us, “North Africa had been formally occupied by the United Nations, with military government superseding civil (as necessarily it would), then the continuity of French sovereignty would have been suspended and interrupted. The claims of the native irredentists would attain a legal validity which otherwise they could not, and a most vexatious problem would afflict the peace conference, as well as a threat of valuable loss of territory to post-war France and disturbances in the Moslem world.
“It was to avoid the rise of such a situation that General Eisenhower was instructed to seek, and found, a legitimist government in North Africa with which, through the offices of the late Admiral Darlan, he was able to collaborate. That legitimacy has now passed to General Giraud ...”
It is impossible to be more frank. Roosevelt was interested in preserving the integrity and continuation of the French Empire; he feared that the abolition of the prevailing colonial governments would put ideas into the heads of the native Moslems; and therefore he was ready to collaborate with Darlan, yesterday’s partner of Hitler, in order to preserve the imperialist status quo in North Africa.
Krock doesn’t hesitate to admit that
“previously the French forcibly took away those very freedoms from the natives of North Africa ... A historian of French expansion in Africa had said that ‘it had to be wrested from the natives, literally yard by yard.’ And there are native irredentists in those lands whose aspirations have been stimulated by the advent of war and the war-induced collapse of French metropolitan power.”
Therefore, if, during the peace conferences that will begin with a long armistice – assuming the victory of the United Nations – native majority elements demand the restoration of their sovereign rights and self-government, an issue might be presented under the Atlantic Charter that would greatly embarrass the peace-makers of Great Britain and the United States.
“Should such a demand be made, and get the support of the Moslem world to which the vast majority of the North African natives belong, embarrassment might develop into the threat of a holy war, with the green flag of Islam raised on both sides of the strategic Mediterranean.”
These remarkable paragraphs underline with great clarity the predatory character of the war in general and the North African campaign in particular. Rather than face the possibility of a wave of movements for national independence in North Africa, rather than face the possibility of the disintegration of the French Empire (which, remember, might some day be useful to the United States as a counterweight to the British Empire!) the Roosevelt government chose to deal with Darlan.
 
Problem of Native Rebellion
Nor is Krock the only journalist who attributes a good part of the deal with Darlan to a fear of possible native uprisings. William Phillip Simms, foreign editor of the Scripps-Howard chain, says much the same in a dispatch of January 6. And Edward Bing, in an interesting article in the American Mercury, gives many details on the antagonism which exists in the Arab world toward the Allied imperialists. It is this situation which makes comprehensible the military raid, reported in the New York Times of November 16 by Frank Kluckhon, launched by American troops against an Arab village near Oran whose purpose was to disarm the Arabs “who had been picking them (guns) up in the confusion around the recent battlefields.”
Once the deal had been effected, the Darlanists continued to rule the colonies in practically the same fashion as they had before the Allied invasion. In his statement, Darlan declared that all those anti-Jewish decrees which had been put into effect as a result of the pressure of the Nazis (notice the “clever” ambiguity in this formulation) would be abolished. Yet two weeks after the invasion it was still possible for the military district of Oran, acting under the orders of Admiral Darlan, to publish a decree for military mobilization in the Oran Republican which specifically ordered Jews to report to a separate mobilization center, the Camp de Bedeau, and continuously referred to them as a separate, segregated category.
And, despite the presence of the armies of the Four Freedoms, the Darlan regime was in no hurry to release the thousands of political prisoners rotting in their jails even though, in the words of the New York World-Telegram reporter, Ernie Pyle, writing from North Africa, “we have left in office most of the small-fry officials put there by the Germans before we came. We are permitting fascist societies to continue to exist ... Our policy is still appeasement.” This referred to the promise on New Year’s Day by General Giraud that some political prisoners would be released, mainly Communists (Stalinists who could be handy here also). But, wrote David Brown, Reuter’s correspondent, on January 4: “None has been released yet.” And even this promise of release for some prisoners was conditioned by the Giraud statement that “We are prepared to release all those who give an understanding not to engage in political activity until after the war. We are not asking anyone to abandon political beliefs, but they must understand that they must restrain themselves while we are at war.” In other words, only those political prisoners would be released who would promise to make a yellow-dog pledge to keep their mouths shut and not to criticize or indulge in political activity. Even Hitler has released political prisoners at this price.
But the unfortunate forgotten men of the Spanish Civil War, the Loyalists and International Brigaders, were not to be released under any conditions, since that was “impractical.” To this day they, as well as thousands of French prisoners, continue to suffer in the prisons of Darlan-Giraud, while Henry Wallace continues to make speeches about freedom for this world being indivisible.
The picture of the internal regime of North Africa after the Allied invasion is completed by the statement of Darlan that it would not be necessary to revoke the anti-union legislation of Vichy, since the lack of industrialization in North Africa precluded the existence of any large proletariat and therefore there was no need for trade unions.
Was it any wonder that all the political gangsters of French capitalism began to gravitate around French Africa? Darlan, besides having a life-long record as a reactionary, had been the most active and vocal exponent, with the exception of Laval and Doriot, of collaboration with the Nazis. On March 8, 1941, the New York Times had announced: “Darlan Lays Basis of Collaboration. Reaches Agreement in Paris for Nazi Participation in French Key Industries.”
 
Darlan’s Bourgeois Backers
But Darlan was not an independent agent. Though he had built up a personal bureaucracy in the French Navy for a period of years, he had been acting, in recent years, as an agent of a certain powerful group within the French capitalist class. Darlan has been closely connected with the group which is based on the Banque Worms and the Banque d’Indochine with which are connected the French steel and iron industries, through the Comité des Forges. These French capitalists, once the defeat of France was obvious, decided to play a cautious rôle of see-sawing between the Axis and the Allies. Those journalists (such as Paul Winkler in The Nation of December 26, who gives much valuable information about this group) who believe that they acted out of an ideological affinity for Nazism are of course mistaken. They were trying to rescue what they could of their capitalist holdings and imperialist possessions and they therefore proceeded, through their agents such as Paul Baudoin, first Foreign Minster of Vichy and a power in the Banque d’Indochine; Pierre Flandin, attorney for the Comité des Forges, and Pierre Pucheau, once Pétain’s Minister of the Interior and also manager of the Franco-German Siderurgical Office (an organization to effect collaboration in the steel and iron industries) – they proceeded to effect a partial collaboration with the Nazis in order to hold on to what they had, but they deliberately refrained from the outright collaborationist policies of Déat and Doriot because they wanted to keep at least partially clear the road back to the Allies in case it proved profitable to retrace their steps. And so it did. That was why Darlan refused to give the French Navy to Hitler; it was the last bargaining weapon in the hands of the French bourgeoisie.
Now that the Allies have entered North Africa, many of these political servants of French capitalism, such as Flandin and Peyrouton, are reported trying to wriggle their filthy fingers into the pie. Others are still waiting to see what the outcome of the North African battle will be. But it cannot be doubted that with the invasion of North Africa, the Allies have rewon the allegiance of a considerable section of the atomized French capitalist class, as well as of their political hirelings.
The men who figure most prominently in the news from North Africa today have a certain independent status and power as colonial governors but their powers are essentially subordinate. Generals Nogues, Boisson, Juin and the rest of that gang are now hesitantly and unenthusiastically lining up with the Allies; they have little choice about the matter; but they still are not sure which way the wind is blowing and they are getting tired of picking the wrong horse. Nor is their enthusiasm for their new allies increased by the reports of the popular indignation existing in Britain and America against their continued rule.
For, once the consolidation of the Allied forces had taken place, Darlan as an individual and the Darlanists as a group were of little use to the Allies. Roosevelt still wanted the stable and continuous government in French Africa of which Arthur Krock wrote, but it would be better for him if less openly pro-Vichy leaders were in charge. President Roosevelt immediately expressed his indignation at the “cold-blooded murder” of Darlan. Yet it cannot be denied that objectively the murder of Darlan was of benefit to the Allied cause since it removed – one might almost say, painlessly – the most provoking symbol of Vichyism while allowing the Darlanist generals to retain control.
In his place steps Giraud. A great myth has been woven around this general: the simple, patriotic soldier without political interests or opinions who fights only for his country. The fact of the matter is that Giraud is a reactionary of long standing, that he was several times in danger of removal from his military post during the Daladier regime of 1935 because of his outspoken attacks on the republic. In contrast to others, he was always pro-British and pro-American. But he is ready to take in all French political factions, Vichyites and de Gaullists, and no questions asked about embarrassing pasts.
The situation at present is not entirely satisfactory for the American government. The conflict between de Gaulle and Giraud, or at least their inability to reach an agreement, makes difficult the establishment of a “stable” government behind the North African lines. It is this which leads Raymond Daniel, London correspondent of the New York Times, to write that “The belief is growing in certain circles here that, failing that happy solution (a rapprochement between de Gaulle and Giraud – R.F.) sooner or later the civil administration will be taken over by the United States or by some Allied body in which the French may be represented by Marcel Peyrouton, former Vichy Minister of the Interior.”
 
State Department versus Liberals
A few words of conclusion need to be said, even though the facts as recorded above speak for themselves. The major conclusion to be reached is that the Roosevelt Administration has finally decided upon the kind of war it wants to fight. For some time now, there have been two conflicting groups within the Administration with sharply different points of view as to how to conduct the war. One group, centered around Secretary of Commerce Jesse Jones, the War and Navy Departments, the party leaders in Congress and the dollar-a-year men in the production boards, has insisted that the war be fought along strictly old-fashioned, conservative lines – that is, by the accumulation of military power, by the attempted annihilation of the enemy and then by the imposition of the most severe peace terms possible. These spokesmen for an outright imperialist policy see little need for the conducting of what the New Dealers like to call “political” or “psychological” warfare; they are ready to consent to deals and intrigues, but that is all.
The second group, centered around Vice-President Wallace, the younger New Dealers and a very few congressmen, have adopted a much watered version of Harold Laski’s already watered concept of “war by revolution.” Laski had advanced the thesis that it was necessary to continue social reforms at home in order to convince the masses of the enemy countries by example and that it was necessary to attempt to win the German and Italian masses to the Allied camp by continuous political propaganda.
The Wallace group, with its talk of a “people’s war,” has attempted to apply the most innocuous parts of Laski’s theory to this country. At the time when American military fortunes were faring most poorly, their theories were most popular. Now, however, it is clear that the Roosevelt Administration has made its decisive choice. While Wallace will continue to make speeches about the “people’s century,” the war is to be conducted as a conservative war of big business. Big business is firmly entrenched in the Washington saddle; it has complete control of the war production program. And the North African affair is merely the external counterpart of the continued trend toward reaction in the internal affairs of the nation. Roosevelt has discovered the obvious: an imperialist war can be conducted only by imperialist means.
This trend, we believe, will become clearer as the war progresses. The New Deal has been completely shunted aside. It is not accidental that Wallace and his friends never say anything publicly about the North African affair. For with the Darlan deal, Roosevelt made clear that he was conducting the same old kind of war – and it was the involuntary recognition of this fact which terrorized so many of the liberals.
The effects of the Darlan deal with regard to European problems are also becoming clearer. It is apparent that America is cannily preparing for the post-war struggle by attempting to build up France as a counterweight to Britain, just as Britain built up Germany after the last war as a counterweight against France. The British realize as much and that is why they keep a bitter silence and continue to support the monarchist de Gaulle (who, in this strange political intrigue, poses as the “left wing” of the French refugee politicians!) against the American-buttressed Giraud. Thus, the British periodical, Time and Tide, speaks of Prime Minister Churchill’s silence as being more eloquent than words, and says that “no one will mistake this silence at this crisis.” And it speaks of the mission of Harold Macmillan to North Africa with the assumption that he will be a minority of one against Murphy and Eisenhower. The British are definitely unhappy about the whole situation.
* * *
A few words need be said about the sad plight of the American liberals. They, who in debates with the radicals always prided themselves upon being “practical” men, are new forced into the position of falling back upon vague generalities about morality paying in the long run, even if Roosevelt profited most with his policy in the short run. That is the plaintive cry running through the pages of The Nation and the New Republic. But the supporters of the Darlan deal have a powerful answer. Would you have us stand by general principles, refuse to deal with Darlan and thereby need[less]ly sacrifice thousands of American lives in a campaign against the French in North Africa? What reply can the liberals make? They are supporting an imperialist war and they cavil against imperialist methods. From the point of view of American military interests, the Darlan deal was a brilliant stroke. The liberals, being both “men of principle” and “humanitarians,” are caught in an impossible dilemma.
From the point of view of the revolutionary socialists, however, the situation is perfectly clear. The Darlan deal underlines the true character of the war: it is but another dramatic incident which must serve to teach the masses of the world the need for a socialist solution.

Note by ETOL
1. This text has been amended in line with the Editor’s Note in The New International, Vol. IX No. 2, February 1943, p. 64.
 




Many a political career has been launched in this country on worse wisecracks and if Clare Luce has decided to rise to public fame by coining that poetic and delicate phrase, “globaloney,” which has so excited the panting admiration of the Hearst and Scripps-Howard editors, we for one have no particular objection. After all, each trade has its own tools and those of congressional politics are none too discriminate. But behind the furor which Mrs. Luce’s maiden speech to Congress created – actually, of course, it was a completely premeditated publicity stunt by a combination of the isolationist press and the Time-Life-Fortune outfit – there is an extraordinarily important political issue which merits discussion,
Mrs. Luce fears that that wild-eyed radical, Vice-President Henry Wallace (who had just a few days ago made a speech declaring his faith in the “decency” of American big business), will, if his post-war plans are carried into practice, give away the great opportunity, for American imperialist world domination: the rule of the skies.
There can be no doubt that once the war is over, air transit and air power will play a role far greater than ever before. The airplane, while not supplanting other means of communication and transit, will certainly take a leading role. And whichever power will control the major resources of airplane production, the best air fields and the most efficient air lines, will have a powerful weapon in its attempts to attain control over the economic resources of the world. It is a prospect which the imperialists of the world view with trembling lips and feverish eyes. Imagine, if you will, what an incredible opportunity it appears to them! Control this new, magical means of transportation, this new, deadly and unsurpassed means of warfare – and perhaps they have found the means of perpetuating the rule of their tottering imperialisms!
Is it any wonder that correspondents from London record “official nervousness” at Mrs, Luce’s brusque and unladylike declaration that America must control the world airways and not be so sappy as to allow the British to rule the air as they rule the seas? Is it any wonder that the British loose Lady Astor on Mrs. Luce with an equally unladylike rejoinder? This is an issue of life and death for them; they see in air power what the aging Ponce de Leon sought in the fountain of youth: perpetual virility.
And Clare Luce was so terribly frank! She spoke openly of the “historic American air policy of sovereignty, of the skies.” And “sovereignty” is nothing but a two-dollar word for domination. As for this being an “historic American air policy” ... well, as The Nation of last week rather aptly remarked: “History is something that happened before Mrs. Luce’s time, and we have no wish to put her at a disadvantage.”
She speaks openly of complete American domination of its “own” skies – where’s your mortgage, Clare? – and at the same time of “keep[ing] the air supremacy it now has and tak[ing] henceforth in the skies the position of enlightened democratic leadership that Britain held and still holds on the seas.” Nothing could be plainer. Britain’s “enlightened democratic leadership on the seas” was the means by which she maintained and still maintains the greatest empire of recent history; America’s domination of the skies means the same thing to Mrs. Luce.
Nor does Mrs. Luce speak for herself alone. It is no accident that the Scripps-Howard press went into such spasms of rapture over her speech. She speaks for an increasingly powerful sector of American business. It is by no means isolationist in the Chicago Tribune sense; on the contrary, it is aggressively internationalist and imperialist,
This group is impatient with President Roosevelt’s domestic policies; it proposes a more severe anti-labor turn, though it is not in agreement with the Smith-Cox Southern Democrats, who want to start an open anti-labor lynch party immediately. For the Luce crowd realizes that it needs the support of labor, for a while at least. Its main difference with the Roosevelt Administration at present, however, is over the conduct of the war and the perspectives of the post-war world. The Luce thinkers want it made clear as daylight that they’re in this war for world domination, that America is entering its super-imperialist stage and that its magic weapon in achieving this aim is air power. It places great emphasis on aid to China, since it sees in the Far East a great field for imperialist penetration.
In line with this perspective, it is violently anti-British, recognizing in Britain a potential rival which might try to grab part of the post-war imperial spoils; it even toys with the idea of making some soft of agreement with Stalin whereby he would be entrenched in Eastern Europe ans parts of Asia, while America would get most of everything else, and Britain would retain its honor.
Of course, with much of this perspective the Roosevelt group agrees. But since Roosevelt and Wallace have the power, and hence the responsibility, they feel more urgently the need for placating labor and see more urgently the need for touching up some kind of attractive post-war aims. Hence, Wallace’s speeches. But the group for which Mrs. Luce has spoken says: “No! We must bluntly and frankly proclaim our aims and fight to achieve them. The coming American century will be the century of American imperialism – and don’t you be ‘making any speeches, Henry Wallace, which might put the slightest shred of doubt into anyone’s mind about that.”
 




Stalin has added two additional victims to the long list of working class leaders whom he has murdered – this time, Ehrlich and Alter, the Polish-Jewish socialist leaders. It has become a sort of gruesome roll of working class honor, this list of martyrs who fell before Stalin’s firing squads. And anyone with a spark of socialist idealism still burning inside of him, or anyone with just a bit of plain human decency, must have been filled with a sense of indignation when the news of this latest of Stalin’s murders was broadcast. The death of Ehrlich and Alter has, of course, a significance far beyond the fact that they, the two individuals, the two leaders of Polish socialism, are no more. (That, too, let it be said, is important: human life, we socialists must reassert, DOES have value, is not merely the pawn of omnipotent states and rulers.)
The special significance of this latest frame-up and murder is in the fact that it comes at the very time that the popularity of Stalin’s regime with the liberals and intellectuals of this country is at its peak, at the very time when there are whole brigades of apologetic whitewashers painting the Stalinist regime as the model of socialism and democracy and depicting Stalin as a mellow, wise and silent genius.
The murder of Ehrlich and Alter interrupts the completion of the movie, Mission to Moscow, which is scheduled to be the apology par excellence for the Moscow Trials specifically and the Stalinist dictatorship generally.
 
Bigger and More Fantastic the Lie
The details of the Alter-Ehrlich case have been reported previously in this paper. All that needs concern us is this: Alter and Ehrlich were two internationally known socialist leaders, men of unquestioned integrity. When the Polish government fled they organized workers’ resistance to the Nazis. Captured by Stalin’s armies, they were thrown into one of the concentration camps which the “workers’ state” has established. From THERE – how ironic in retrospect! – they urged the Polish workers to support Stalin’s war effort. Part of their manifesto was even printed in Pravda. Yet, last winter they were murdered by the Stalinist state. The partial political capitulation which their support of Stalin’s war represented availed them little; it was double or nothing with Uncle Joe.
Ambassador Litvinov and his American parrot, the Daily Worker, now say that they were agents of the GPU and “pro-Nazis.” (When Stalin was still in league with Hitler, Alter and Ehrlich were accused of being agents of the Sikorski Polish government!)
Why were Alter and Ehrlich killed? It is difficult to give a categorical answer. Undoubtedly they knew too much; they had seen too much of the erstwhile collaboration of Stalin and Hitler. Of course, no one, including the Stalinists themselves, takes seriously the nonsense about Ehrlich and Alter being Nazi agents. That kind of propaganda is based on Hitler’s principle: the bigger and more fantastic the lie, the more people will believe it.
A more fundamental reason, for the murder of these two Polish socialists is, we believe, this: They were ideological opponents of Stalinism within the working class movement, the existence of which opponents Stalinism refuses to admit. The Stalinists refuse to admit the possibility of honest, sincere disagreements within the working class. Either knuckle under to Stalinist domination, that is to say, give up the right to think for yourself or else face slander, calumny, assassination and, if you happen to reside in the “workers’ state,” imprisonment and death. Those who dare to dissent (there is no such word in the Stalinist dictionary!) will be called pro-Nazis or some such drivel. What does the truth mean to such people? ... There is always the firing squad to fall back on.
Despite the appeals of the American labor movement, of Wendell Willkie and many others, Stalin found it necessary to slaughter these two socialists. He has shown here once more for all to see – and let us not be the last to learn this! – that his regime has nothing in common with decency, justice or democratic methods, not to mention socialism. There wasn’t even a pretense at holding a trial or presenting evidence in this case: the “Holy Father” has spoken – and that should be enough for the faithful.
 
Stalinism – A Product of Corruption
Stalin has shown here that his regime, in its political methodology, differs in no essential respect from fascism and Hitlerism. They are both the products of decay and corruption. Only, fascism is utilized by capitalist society as a means of survival while the working class must destroy Stalinism if it is to survive as a free movement. Both have developed similar methodology, ethics and totalitarian approach; even though they differ with regard to the structure of their economic organization and their social origin.
Alter and Ehrlich apparently stood up as men, choosing death rather than the prostitution of their ideas. For that, despite the gravity of the differences which we have with those ideas, we cannot pay them too high honor. Let their tragic death be a lesson to those who allow themselves be swept away by the military victories of Stalin’s armies: Stalinism is the corruption, the totalitarian poison which has grown up in a working class disheartened by an epoch of defeats. Stalinism is not socialism; it is its very opposite. Stalinism is not a “workers’ state”; it is a workers’ prison, a prison of both the workers’ bodies and minds.
 




With last week’s announcement of the creation of a special presidential committee to investigate the manpower problem and the speech of Secretary of War Stimson justifying an 8,200,000-man army, great interest has arisen in the question.
There are numerous complications to this problem: the entire policy of the Roosevelt Administration on, the conduct of the war as well as its post-war policy is involved. Here we will indicate what we believe are a few of the political motivations which have led the Administration to champion an army of 8,200,000 men.
 
1. The Length of the War
Those who direct the war in behalf of American imperialism are not misled by talk of a short war; they are too realistic to be subject to the recurrent waves of optimism which sweep the country with each minor victory. They do not expect the Allies to lick Germany in 1943. Secretary Stimson speaks of “striking the decisive blow a year from now,” which would indicate that a second land front in Europe may not even be BEGUN this year. But since the opening of such a front – dependent on the successful completion of the lagging Tunisian campaign – is merely the beginning of the decisive part of the war, it is clear that the Allies must still retain the perspective of a long war. As for Japan, the BEGINNING of the real campaign against her must wait upon the completion of the war in Europe.
Resultantly, Roosevelt and his generals count on needing a large army; their spokesmen emphasize that there will be many casualties.
The opponents of the large army concept raise these questions, however: Can such an army be shipped overseas? Will not a large section of it stay in American training camps at the very time when crucial labor shortages will develop? If one thinks in terms of a 1943 war (an assumption implicit in the thought of those who believe that this army will not, for the most part, be sent overseas), then only a third or so, according to War Department figures, could be shipped. But if one understands that many of the men being trained now, or six months from now, are not scheduled to see action until 1944 or 1945, then the objection that they cannot be shipped is no longer tenable.
In summary, then, the fact that the Roosevelt Administration is set upon such a gigantic military force indicates that the war will be long; that Allied imperialism, incapable of destroying its enemy by political propaganda which could drive a fatal wedge between Hitler and the German people, can depend only on sheer military means and that such dependence means that, unless there is some startling turn of events, we are facing a long struggle.
 
2. The Post-War World
A second factor which prompts the Administration to create such a large army is its possible influence on the post-war world. The blunt fact is that America is preparing to “police” those territories in which its armies are victorious. Regardless of what Vice-president Wallace may say about a just peace being essential after this war to forestall a Third World War, the Army is preparing to extend its military domination – as a concomitant of the extension of American economic domination – over the defeated Axis powers.
According to this plan, the helpless people of Germany and Italy, who have already suffered so much at the hands of Hitler and Mussolini, are to be taught the virtues of democracy via the educating influences of American troops of occupation. This means, of course, that many American troops will not be able to return to civilian life even if and when America wins the war. Already. in Fredericksburg, Va., the Army is running a special school, stocked mainly with conservative business men and other “substantial citizens,” to train executives to rule occupied territories. This country is preparing to enter the business of imperialism to an extent that will make all its previous ventures appear picayune.
Some of the American leaders make no bones about it: the large army is intended as a “persuasive force” at the peace table against any possible attempt by Britain and/or Russia to grab what America intends to reserve for itself, the lion’s share of the spoils.
 
3. America After the War
Finally, not the least important of the motives for a large army is the fear that after the war is over, America will see a series of social convulsions of unprecedented scope. The ruling classes hope to use that section of the Army not overseas for the purpose of maintaining the capitalist status quo, and perhaps of even giving it a more reactionary and dictatorial twist. Sensational evidence along these lines is provided in some articles written by James Wechsler in the New York newspaper, PM, on March 9 and 10 in which he describes a series of special “orientation courses” given by the Army at Fort Leavenworth for big business men. These courses, Wechsler informs us, are designed to inculcate among the big business leaders who attend them the idea of accepting increasing military control of civilian life. Wechsler quotes one of the outlines used as saying that military control may become necessary in many civilian fields. This report becomes even more alarming when it is understood as symptomatic of a trend toward the increased militarization which is a by-product of the present war.
These, then, are some of the political and economic motivations which impel American imperialism to construct such a gigantic military project. American imperialism expects a long and bloody struggle; it hopes to come out on top and will not tolerate any rival playing more than second fiddle; and it expects to remain dominant at home.
 



On Native Grounds
by Alfred Kazin
Reynal & Hitchcock, Publishers; $3.75
Whoever is at all interested in the development of American intellectual life during the past half century – and more particularly, its prose literary sector – should read Alfred Kazin’s book. It is a serious, full-dress work, not a haphazard collection of essays. It is written with an enthusiasm and sympathy for the American writer and his work which is rare in contemporary American criticism, and at the same time it is critical rather than rapturous.
While Kazin’s basic thesis, the alienation of the American writer from his native social grounds and his struggle for re-integration, is stated in the preface and returned to in the last chapter, it is not a very powerful discipline binding the individual essays into a tight chain. While his thesis asserts itself to advantage in the brilliant essay on Dos Passos, it is perhaps to the good that it is neglected elsewhere. Kazin is not a critic strictly bound by a “school” or drawing strength from a homogeneous discipline; his major virtue is a youthful freshness and vivacity. He has perceived with some shrewdness, though without much originality, one of the primary molding influences on American literature: the inability of the writer, be he revolutionary or recluse, reactionary Southern agrarian or expatriate aesthete, to find roots for his life and work in a feeling of “belonging” to a rich tradition and vital community. Even those who at present have become the most hysterical or mystical defenders of the status quo (Macleish et al.) prove the validity of this thesis by barrenness of their output.
Interwoven with this thesis are a number of secondary ones. Kazin has borrowed from Parrington, even though he is niggardly in admitting it. The struggle against the genteel tradition, the revolt against the small town, the conflict between Jeffersonian equalitarianism and Hamiltonian aristocratism which had such a decisive influence on American life long after the original issues and persons involved were dead and which survives to this very day in our national life – these themes of Parrington creep through Kazin’s book.
But the reader will find a lot more than thesis in On Native Grounds. The richest yield is a number of individual essays, some of them extraordinarily brilliant, such as the pieces on Upton Sinclair, Jack London, Dos Passos and Ellen Glasgow. Kazin does not have the ability to penetrate ruthlessly the intellectual marrow of a writer’s thought nor is he especially competent at abstruse technical and stylistic analysis; his forte is his readiness to approach each writer as a distinct and unique creator, to visualize his problems, to establish a link of understanding between the strivings of the author and the reception of the reader.
 
A Criticism of Two Schools
Brief mention must also be made of the chapter, Criticism at the Poles. This is a savage and annihilating attack on the Stalinist “literary criticism” on the one hand, and an almost equally savage attack against the Tate-Ransom-Blackmur school which place an absolute premium on form. One involuntarily blushes at the memory of having in any way been connected with or sympathetic to the drivel which the Hicks-Schneder-New Masses school peddled during the “proletarian literature” days and it is little wonder that the Stalinists printed a vicious and stupid attack on Kazin in their magazine.
These are a few of the high points of the book. From the very sources of Kazin’s accomplishments, however, come also his shortcomings. For one thing, there is often a disturbing eclecticism of approach which is most obvious in his chapter on criticism. It is true enough that Schneider and Tate, for instance, represent two untenable extremes, but it is not sufficient to wish a plague on both their houses. Tate, at the very least, is a talented critic and his group has done much to reawaken respect for economy, discipline and technical competence during the age of gushers; Schneider, on the other hand, is not a literary critic, but a paid hack who slants his reviews in accordance with the Kremlin line. While the alternative would be a false one, we for our part would choose Tate in the field of literature any day in the week if he were the sole alternative to Schneider-Hicks; and Kazin, in his eclectic anxiety to chip away at all tendencies, fails to weigh properly their real significance.
Kazin’s shortcomings find their source in his abilities in still another respect. He has such a talent for the phrase, such a fertility of language and felicity of epigram that he often cannot restrain himself from making a quip at the expense of his theme. Many of his essays would profit from a friendly blue pencil. Sometimes he even loses the thread of his idea because of his fascination with the play of his language; there are one or two essays in which the musical rise and fall of the paragraph line is more obvious than the development of the idea.
 
The Book’s Shortcomings
But the most serious objection on On Native Grounds is the attempt made in the final chapter to inject a note of strained optimism about contemporary American literature (how unwarranted when one examines what is being written today!) based on a sort of New Dealish nationalism. It is not the strident, mystical nationalism of Brooks and Waldo Frank but a more rational, liberalistic nationalism. Nonetheless, it has no organic tie to the thesis which Kazin begins with, and if Kazin desires to suggest that it is by an attempt at identification with the liberalist-nationalism of the New Deal-directed imperialist war that the writer can solve those deep, knotted problems which are the inheritance of a cultural tradition twisted by a morbidly sick society, then he is making a sorry mistake indeed, and what is more, he knows better.
Kazin is still a very young man. He possesses great talents, and while this book is by no means a completely successful work, it has enough and promises enough for the future to claim the interested reader’s attention.
 




These lines are written immediately after the surrender of Italy and it is therefore impossible to guess what the military fate of that country will be in the next few weeks. In large measure, that depends on how much resistance the German army will be able to put up. Most likely, the country will be divided into two warring camps, with the front somewhere near the Po River line. In any case, Italy is doomed to be the battlefield for one of the bloodiest campaigns of the war, a war in which its people have no stake or interest either way.
The tragedy of Italy is manifold: national disintegration, economic prostration, political confusion. It is a nation which has been so bled white by the ravages of twenty years of fascism and war that it is like a stunned, punch-drunk boxer. Its only sign of revival – but a magnificent sign, nonetheless! – was the spontaneous mass demonstration in the big cities which arose immediately after the downfall of Mussolini, and most important, the wave of revolutionary militancy which swept the workers of Milan. This force has, if only temporarily, been negated as a result of the invasions from North and South.
How can the Italian people extricate themselves from this terrible position? In our opinion, the task of a genuine socialist movement in Italy today would be along the following lines:
The prime task of the Italian people today is to rid itself of all foreign domination. Only if the national arena is cleared of warring belligerents can the internal process of social development, which began so promisingly with the downfall of Mussolini and the rise of Soviets in Milan, continue its natural course.
Those who believe that Mussolini fell as a result of a “palace revolution” are fooling themselves. As in, all revolutions, the initial fissures in the old regime take the form of a move by the “least discredited” part of the bureaucracy of the old regime to set up a temporary stop-gap to placate the anger of the masses and to attempt to prevent their further revolutionary development. Such a regime was the Badoglio regime. Given the absence of foreign intervention, Badoglio would long ago have lost power and perhaps by now Italy would be experiencing the “Kerensky” period or, better yet, it might have been able to skip that altogether. But one thing is certain: the Badoglio putsch would never have come were it not for the deep and swelling unrest of the Italian people.
If, on the other hand, Italy falls prey to either of the belligerents, be it under the iron heel of the Gestapo or the more velvety domination of the AMG, its proletariat will be unable to finish the process of political fumigation which began with the downfall of Mussolini and for which there are many other candidates, not the least of whom are the House of Savoy and Badoglio and his clique of fascists and near-fascists.
The only possible force capable of generating new vigor and strength into Italian life is its working class; so long as either the Germans or the Allies dominate the country, they will make very certain that the Italion workers will be kept under heel.
The major slogan for the Italian people in the coming period is therefore: For National Independence of Italy! For an Italy freed of both warring powers!
It is obvious that a free Italy, playing second fiddle to NEITHER warring side, must be an Italy at peace. The people of the country demand it and they are absolutely right. They have no stake in the war on either side, and the first premise for the solution of their grave internal problems is that their country withdraw from the war and not permit any part of the war to be inflicted on its soil.
It may be asked: will not all the capitalistic politicians, the fake liberals, also clamor for “national independence” and for “peace”? But it is precisely in the differing contents which the socialists and the national liberals give to the slogans of peace and national liberation that the superiority of the former can be seen.
Do the nationalist liberals of the Salvemini and Scorza types really want peace for Italy? No, they merely want Italy to switch sides in the war. But that is a prospect, we are certain, which the Italian people view with little more enthusiasm than that of continuing the War on the side of Germany. Do the nationalist liberals really want national liberation for Italy? Then how can they support a set-up which entails AMG domination over Italy?
In reality, we can now see that the struggle for the most elementary demands and needs of the Italian people can be successfully led only by a militant arid maturing revolutionary proletariat. All bourgeois nationalist movements are by their very nature – the necessary and inevitable dependence upon Allied imperialism – incapable of achieving the aims they professedly desire. National liberation today for Italy is therefore a profoundly revolutionary task; it can come only as a product of a struggle against all foreign imperialist domination and the domestic agents and partners of that domination. For the revolutionary socialists, by virtue of their independence from all foreign imperialisms, are the only consistent democrats in Italy today.
It would, therefore, be a tragic error if revolutionary socialists in Italy or those in other countries attempting to estimate a program for it would allow themselves to be diverted into a sectarian impasse by mouthing valid but insufficient, generalizations about socialism being the only hope for humanity and thereby neglect the burning immediate issue of national independence, which is intimately tied up with the problems of peace, political freedom and economic rehabilitation.
If they prove themselves, in actual practice, the most valiant and consistent lighters for the national independence of their country and thereby demonstrate to the people of Italy the indissolubility of the national liberation and socialist class struggles, then the Italian socialists will succeed in forging a powerful chain linking them to the masses of Italy. That is the major transition they must effect in the political thinking of the Italian proletariat: the struggle for national independence can only be successfully achieved by a militant proletariat on the read to socialist power. And to do this, the revolutionary socialists themselves must understand the burning nature of the national liberation slogan and the urgent need for them to be its most consistent and bold champions.
 




Viewed in retrospect, the creation of a so-called National Committee of Free Germany under the aegis of Stalin is a far more important event than it appeared to be at its inception.
The immediate reaction of most commentators was to view it as a move in the struggle being waged under the political table between Stalin on the one hand and America and England on the other. And when one takes into account the most recent events in this struggle, all of which point to a cumulative deterioration in relations between Russia and the Allies, it becomes clear that an important motive behind Stalin’s setting up of this committee was undoubtedly to use it as a means of political blackmail against his partners when the questions of a second front and the post-war world come up for discussion.
Nonetheless, it is the opinion of this writer that the creation of the Free German Committee by Stalin is indicative of another, and perhaps as important, development – the entering of a new and intensified stage of imperialist perspectives on the part of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Before elaborating this idea, however, let us briefly examine the nature of this Free Germany Committee to see what clues we can discover about its real purpose.
 
The Purpose of the Committee
Writing in the New York Times, Arthur Krock quite correctly says:
“The Manifesto [is] carefully blank of any of the Marxian-Communist ideology which had many adherents among the anti-Nazis of Germany ... no reference to classes or class conflict, no attack on class enemies, no incitement to social revolution but instead mention of change as ‘a liberation struggle of all sections of the German people.’ All groups were addressed on the same level. Restoration of something resembling the free enterprise system of the Western nations [i.e., capitalism – R.F.] was pledged.”
The above paragraph is a summary of the ideological contents of the committee’s program. There is no point in belaboring the fact that Stalin no longer stands for socialist revolution; that has even penetrated the skull of Captain Rickenbacker (to the surprise of those who doubted that any idea could penetrate it).
What is remarkable is this: the manifesto of the committee does not even call for the old kind of Popular Front government. It quite openly appeals to a host of reactionary nationalists, including a section of the army leadership, when it says: “There are forces in the army that are loyal to the country ...” and when it urges the German soldiers NOT to turn their rifles against their own officers, but to “hold on to them under the leadership of those commanders who recognize their responsibility.”
And most revealing of all, Freies Deutschland, organ of the committee, carries on its masthead the red, white and black flag of the Reichswehr!
It is possible, of course, to become very indignant about this latest betrayal of the Stalinist regime. But for workers who understand the reactionary role of Stalinism in world affairs more is required. Just what is Stalin up to this time?
The first and most obvious explanation is that, dissatisfied by the lack of a second front, he is setting up the committee as a means of threatening Roosevelt and Churchill.
“If,” he tells them, “you don’t open up a second front in France, then I am quite ready to make a separate peace with some non-Hitlerite government, and I am not at all squeamish about how reactionary it may be. For I, Stalin, don’t have your perspective of attempting to dismember and destroy the German nation and its industrial machine, if only because it can be of great use to me as a counterweight against any ‘cordon sanitaire’ idea which may be flitting around the back or front of your minds. As far as I, Stalin, am concerned, a united but fairly subservient Germany might not be a bad thing at all ...”
The prospect of such a statement by Stalin does not please the Allied powers. Their slogan of unconditional surrender for Germany is based upon the idea of so destroying and dismembering a defeated Germany that she will disappear from the international scene as an industrial power.
Stalin, then, offers the POSSIBILITY of a separate peace with a non-Hitlerite German regime. Does this mean that he is ready for a separate peace right now? We doubt it. For though Stalin wants a united Germany with a sizable army, he doesn’t want a peace with a Nazi government which, if it defeated the Allies, could then jump on Russia once more.
Many things are possible, but at the moment it appears as if the whispers of separate peace are (1) partly induced by the Stalinists as a means of threatening the Allies, as witness the statement in Earl Browder’s recent speech that failure to open a second front would hurt the Allies more than Russia and (2) is used by isolationist elements in this country as a means of discrediting the Roosevelt concept of concentrating on the European war first and then attacking Japan.
 
What Is Stalinist Expansion?
The Free German Committee, then, is Stalin’s way of prodding the Allies to create a second front and also to demand a large share of the post-war booty. But, we believe, it is something more.
At the time of Stalin’s invasion of the Baltic countries, Poland and Finland, and Bessarabia, we analyzed those moves as part of an imperialist policy on the part of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Trotsky, though disagreeing with the theoretical framework of this analysis, supplied it with its real meat when he spoke of the invasions as being motivated by “power, prestige and plunder.”
The Stalinist bureaucracy, its collective ego inflated by an atmosphere of unlimited nationalistic self-praise, snatched up these slips of land as a means of increasing its European sway of power and interest, of finding new areas for its extensive economic difficulties by annexing some potentially rich territories. Of course, it was clear to us as the time that when we spoke of its imperialist policy we did not speak of it in the sense of a capitalist imperialism. That is, Russia’s main motive was not to find a source to invest profitably its surplus capital. But there are varieties, of imperialism, as history has amply demonstrated, and Russia’s was a more primitive, ACCUMULATIVE type.
This new imperialist appetite of the Stalinist bureaucracy – coming after the destruction of all internal proletarian opposition and the emergence of the bureaucracy as a definite exploitive ruling class – was not the only cause of the invasions, but it was an important one.
Stalin has begun to play with the idea of having, a post-war world in which Germany, with its rich industrial machine, its trained technicians, its skilled labor, its great resources, will play second fiddle to Stalinist Russia. That is truly a grandiose perspective for the bureaucracy. But it is a perspective which demands that Germany remain as an integral economic unit, that it be not divided into bits, as the Allies desire. That is why the committee’s manifesto demands the retention of a strong German army.
Why, then, doesn’t Stalin propose to set up a kind of Stalinist government in Germany, a fake “socialist” government which he would dominate lock stock and barrel? The answer is provided in incipient form in an interesting article by Joachim Joesten in The Nation for September 4, when he writes that:
“Stalin is much too smart to plan for a Soviet Germany because he is fully aware that such a Germany would eventually dominate Russia. The Germans, with their extraordinary talent for organization, their resources, and their central position in Europe, would soon get the upper hand ... by ... a Germany that was different. His purpose would be better served from, but friendly toward, the Soviet Union.”
 
Socialist or Capitalist Germany?
What the writer is driving toward is this: The creation of some kind of artificial “Soviet” regime in Germany, dominated completely by Stalin, is far too dangerous a game to play with. Revolutions are events which have a habit of leaving behind those who start them; and for Stalin to play even with the matches of social revolution in Germany might start a fire that would burn down even his own structure. He is far safer attempting to pull the strings from behind capitalist Germany, but a greatly weakened and dependent capitalist Germany, one which would be led by a coalition of Stalinist-controlled politicians and army officers and from which Stalin could suck the industrial technique which he so desperately needs.
To some minds, the thought of an imperialism which reverses the tendency of capitalist imperialism seems strange, but then, let it be remembered, Stalinist Russia is also a strange phenomenon.
We wish to emphasize that when we raise such possibilities it is by no means in the spirit of believing them to represent a definite chart of future events. Quite the contrary. For Stalin to be able to realize such a grandiose perspective as that of creating an imperialist overlordship over most of Europe with Germany as the key agent within that organization is a task which faces at least three tremendous barriers: the Axis, the Allies and the European proletariat.
Nonetheless, we believe that such a perspective does exist if only because the peculiar and unique situation of Russia as a society which is neither in complete harmony with capitalist society nor an ally of those attempting to abolish capitalist society, forces her to attempt the artificial solution of nationalist expansionism, which means the creation of as large a chain of buffer and subservient states as possible in Eastern and Central Europe.
At the same time let it be emphasized that Stalin still acts as much from fear as from aggressiveness; in fact, they form an indissoluble compound. He fears the possibility of Allied aggression in a post-war world via the “cordon sanitaire”; that, plus the internal contradictions of his regime, contributes to the development of the imperialist policy now taking shape in the Kremlin.
 
Allies at an Impasse
(It should be noted, in passing, that the creation of a powerful Russian military bureaucracy, flushed with some success, is another contributing factor toward the development of such a policy.)
One factor, however, stands out conclusively: whatever agreement may be patched up between the Allies and Stalin, they cannot agree as to what to do about Germany. There they reach an impasse. Each sees in the successful domination of Germany the key to its own predatory security. On that issue no agreement is possible between Stalin and Roosevelt-Churchill.
In all this maze of intrigue and diplomacy, it is clear, however, that the Free German Committee is merely a pawn in an inter-imperialist struggle. If it were to Stalin’s advantage, he would immediately choke it (like the Kuusinen “government” of Finland). At present it serves as a political blackjack against his allies and as an entering wedge to satisfy his ambitions with regard to the post-war world.
 




After years of having produced movies in which Negroes were portrayed either as Stepin Fetchit clowns or as dear old Mammies, Hollywood has made a “concession” to the Negro people by producing two all-Negro pictures, Cabin in the Sky and Stormy Weather.
These pictures should, by all means, be seen. There is a tremendous store of talent in them. It is thrilling, at least for me, to listen to Ethel Waters’ singing and quite as thrilling both to look at and listen to Lena Horne; Bill Robinson tap dances as no one else can; Katherine Dunham has a grace and agility which are remarkable; in a word, both pictures are rich stores of entertainment.
Yet truth requires that we speak in harsh terms of both films, for they carry on in the same old vile Jim Crow tradition which has characterized almost all of Hollywood’s treatment of the Negro. First of all, they are all-Negro in cast. But it is clear that any serious portrait of Negro life; even any portrait of Negro entertainment, even any portrait of the Negro idyll (whatever that may be) as Cabin in the Sky attempts, must necessarily include the whites.
The Negro in America contacts the whites everywhere, like it or not; the segregation of Jim Crowism is merely a FORM of contact. And to make an all-Negro film is merely to carry that form over into the movies.
But not only do these films continue the Jim Crow tradition; they are dishonest even within that limitation. Never is a Negro shown as a serious human being capable of the same emotions as anyone else.
Cabin in the Sky perpetrates the old myths – in that assumed “good-natured” way – about the Negro: the crap shooter, the razor wielder, the washwoman, the jitterbug. Do Negroes live and suffer, laugh and weep, love and hate as genuine human beings capable of depth in their emotional expression? Not according to Hollywood. The best that Hollywood can say for the Negro is that ... well, “some of them aren’t such bad devils after all (if they keep their place!).”
Stormy Weather doesn’t quite insult the intelligence in the way that Cabin in the Sky does. Its plot is so thin that it is merely a series of vaudeville acts; but even here, does anyone in his senses believe that the career of Bill Robinson can be adequately portrayed in terms of an all-Negro cast?
One wonders why such talented Negro actors consented to these Uncle Tom pictures. In a sense it is very irritating that they have done so. By the charm and grace of their performance they have made these pictures so attractive and enjoyable that their very talent serves to obscure the basic reprehensible characteristics of the film.
There are great dramas, and comedies too, to be made with the Negro as the theme. But they will have to be honest and human. They will have to escape from the Jim Crow straightjacket. And they will require Negro actors with a sufficient sense of dignity and integrity to insist on such a portrayal of the essential tragedy which Negro life in American is today.
 




Having just read Ernest Lund’s pamphlet, Plenty for All, I’d like to say a few words about it – especially to the organizers and activists of the Workers Party and the regular supporters of Labor Action.
For a long time you’ve been complaining – and justly so – about the absence of a popular, simple, but comprehensive booklet which you could give to a newcomer to the socialist movement. You know, the kind of pamphlet which doesn’t require a detailed knowledge of the history of the world working class or of the intellectual development of Marx; the kind of pamphlet which does not require verbal appendices explaining what Marx meant in the last section of the Manifesto when he was writing about Feudal Socialism or what Lenin meant in his commentaries about Kautsky in The State and Revolution.
You’ve wanted the kind of pamphlet which could state our case with a fair degree of completeness, while at the same time requiring no special knowledge of the history of the socialist movement, and its disputes and polemics, on the part of the reader.
Well, here it is. No kidding. It’s really here. It’s sixty pamphlet pages long, so that it can cover quite a bit of ground. It is simply written but not so simply as to make it appear as if the writer thinks he’s addressing a class of backward kindergarten kids.
And its great value is this: Lund has taken the general Marxist concepts of capitalist society – the conquest of nature by the industrial revolution; the expansion and decline of capitalism; the cause of crises; the nature of the war; the antagonism of the classes – and he has given them flesh and blood in terms of American experience which American workers can understand. You won’t find the Marxist jargon there, because it doesn’t belong there. And at the same time the pamphlet is written in English ... not the gesticulating pidgin-English which some socialist agitators mistake for English.
Another virtue: unlike most socialist agitation, Lund writes not only about what’s wrong with capitalism, but tries to show what socialism would be like. Maybe you wouldn’t agree with a detail or two of his little blueprint, but he certainly hits the nail squarely on the head; (You can take up one of those little details with Lund ... after the Workers Republic is established.) So I think everybody had better get on the beam and see to it that Lund’s pamphlet is spread far and wide. It’ll be gobbled up by your friends – if you just bother to show it to them.
I’m expecting to see the fifth edition of the pamphlet go to press in about half a year. No reason why it shouldn’t. In the meantime, better make sure that all of our friends get themselves a really important first edition.
 




Winston Churchill has spoken. Marshal Badoglio, he told the House of Commons, will receive the support of the Allied powers in his attempt to create an Italian government and it would be advisable, Churchill threatened, for “liberal and left wing” forces to support the reactionary marshal.
And then Badoglio spoke too. He asked the Italian people to support his regime in the name of ... the the House of Savoy!
The marshal’s speech was made over the Allied radio, so one may be sure that Badoglio’s attempt to palm off King Victor Emanuel on the Italian people must have met with the prior approval of the Allied governments.
 
What AMG Tried to Do
One does not have to possess an overly active imagination to guess what kind of reception this will elicit from the militant anti-fascist workers of Milan and Turin who at this very moment are continuing their remarkably heroic resistance against the Nazis. For surely – every Asst. Secretary of the State Department must know – when these Italian workers risked their necks in demonstrations and strikes which caused Mussolini to topple, they did not do this to put Badoglio in power.
Yes, indeed, the American and British “statesmen” are brewing themselves a terrific mess in Italy. Apparently they haven’t quite decided which course to follow:


to attempt to govern Italy by the AMG or
 
 to allow Badoglio to set up a puppet regime.


In either ease, they’re in for a headache.
The AMG has proved itself a thoroughly reactionary outfit, basing itself on the old ruling elements. In Sicily it refused to have anything to do with, the anti-fascists, but instead played ball with the local secondary fascist leaders. It retained the old “collective bargaining” contracts of fascism, the nature of which you can well imagine. It promised free collective bargaining ... “in the future.”
Apparently, however, a section of the Allied leadership has come to the conclusion that the AMG, with its explicit prohibition of political activity in areas it takes over, its ban on strikes, its narrow limitations on civil liberties, its generally reactionary and unattractive character, is too crude and raw to attract any support or enthusiasm among the people whom it rules. The result is that the AMG is being gradually played down.
The AMG, it now appears likely, will step aside in favor of a puppet Badoglio regime. It has been decided that. “Quislings” are preferable, to gauleiters. As a New York Times dispatch of September 22 put it:
“Of course the AMG is already in Italy, but there has been much less said about it than when the organization first moved into Sicily. It would be reasonable to guess that AMG’s’ role in Italy will not expand much, and may not even continue if the Allies can work out a formula revolving around Marshal Badoglio that will meet military needs without stirring up too much political dissatisfaction.”
We here see the beginning of a general political process which will be repeated, in one form or another, in a number of European countries when they are taken over by the Allies. The attempt of the Allied governments to rule Europe with AMG will soon prove a failure, at least in terms of soliciting the necessary support of the people involved; the next step will be to prop up reactionary puppet regimes with Badoglios, Girauds, Mikhailovitchs, etc.
But here enter two factors:

the peoples of the occupied countries have no stomach for these outmoded militarists and will insist on being allowed to decide their own destiny;
 
the Stalin government, in order to gain a wider sphere of influence in Europe for its own imperialist aims and at the expense of its partner-rivals, will attempt demagogically to utilize the genuine complaints of the European people against AMG and the various “Badoglios” for its own purposes.

The Allies will be in a terrific dilemma. But why speak in the future tense? They already are. As soon as they clear the German troops out of Italy, or most of it, they will face this dilemma: What kind of government for Italy? The pressure of the Italian workers, once again able to raise their voices, and the demagogic proclamations from Russia will make the regime of Badoglio decidedly uncomfortable.
Here is where people like Count Sforza come in. Sforza is the professional capitalist “democrat” who solves problems by letting them go up in clouds of words. He is puppet No. 2. When Badoglio fails, it will be Sforza’s turn, or someone like him. Certainly he, with his democratic words, will elicit a certain response from the Italian people. But, then, this will be no comfort for the Allies either.
 
The People Will Intervene
For once they might find it necessary to play with fire by actually owing some kind of democratic regime to take power in Italy, the process thus begun, as they know only too well, might not so easily be controlled. From the pliant Sforza, Italy might move to the more independent Salvemini, who has the unfortunate vice of honesty, if nothing else. And from him the Italian people could and might move to a workers’ government, a socialist regime.
Is all this idle speculation? By no means. Secondary only to the gigantic military problems they still face in Europe, the Allied leaders worry about how to control post-war Europe. As the London Tribune writes: “It is no victory for British Tories (and American Tories, either – R.F.) if the defeat of Hitler is purchased at the price of European revolution.”
There is the dilemma; attempt to rule Europe at the point of a bayonet, which cannot long be done; or attempt to set up puppet regimes, which have a habit of succumbing to popular pressure, which then in turn begins to play an increasingly dominant role.
 




Even though the war is far from over, there is much talk in this country about the veterans of tomorrow. No need to wonder why – every political movement realizes that the men who return from the battlefields by the millions are going to wield a potent influence on the future of this country.
Certainly the forces of reaction realize this fact. Every political quack, every nightshirt demagogue, is polishing up the pie-in-the-sky promises he plans to hawk to the future veterans. From the nightshirt Nazis like Joe McWilliams to important and semi-official spokesmen of big business like Captain Rickenbacker, they are attempting to lure the soldiers into the camp of reaction.
The danger is so apparent – and, to face the facts, the success thus far of the Rickenbackers is So obvious – that even the timid labor leaderships are beginning to realize that labor must meet the veteran problem if it is to continue to exist.
 
What Will Soldiers Return To?
Of course, the ideal solution would be for the soldiers to come back home and be absorbed into the normal channels of civilian life. It would be preferrable, for example, if the returning soldiers, shortly after their discharge, would return to their old status as workers or farmers or students or whatever they happened to be in civilian life. In that way, the artificial grouping of soldiers, which has been forced upon the men and which is the mark of their separation from the normal processes of civilian life, would more or less disappear. In that way, the great masses of soldiers would return to the ranks of the working class from which they came, there to participate in the struggles of their class side by side with their brothers; and the tiny minority of soldiers who come from the wealthy capitalist circles – well, let them return to THEIR class, too. That process of separation would represent a healthy development.
But it is one of the marks of the rottenness of capitalist society that it will not permit the soldiers to resume their normal place as civilians even after they are discharged. Everyone knows that the post-war world is not going to be a very pretty one. All that the experts differ on is whether there will be twenty million unemployed or twenty-five million – and even the most optimistic hardly dare speak of less than ten million unemployed.
 
The Soldiers Will Organize
The capitalist politicians, from Roosevelt down, speak piously of “providing” some kind of work for the veterans, thereby admitting that the capitalist economy will not be able to absorb both them and the millions of war workers thrown out of employment because of the decline of war production.
The returning veteran will discover that capitalist society has no place for him. The heroes of yesterday will be the outcasts of tomorrow; we may again see men with the highest military decorations for bravery in action selling apples in the streets.
This situation will necessarily provoke the veterans to maintain their group allegiance. If they cannot gain a place in civilian life, it will be only too natural for them to band together in the hope of being able thereby to better their lot and to express their indignation at the fact that they, who suffered most during the war, will have had to return to a life of insecurity.
It is clear, then, that the veterans are going to organize. Probably they will organize into a number of groups, and perhaps some new version of the American Legion will be formed. Regardless, therefore, of whether we socialists approve of the general idea of veterans forming their own organizations (a situation, we wish to re-emphasize, caused more by the inability of post-war society to give them a satisfactory life rather than by any necessary desire on the part of the veterans), they are going to do so. Some of them will probably be pretty close to fascism. Some of the soldiers have fallen for the anti-labor propaganda which has been so industriously pumped into them; others may fall for it when they come home to a life of disappointment.
 
A Job for the AFL and CIO
It is a dangerous situation for the American labor movement. If our AFL, CIO and railroad brotherhoods remain indifferent to it, we will come to regret it. It requires action – bold and imaginative and immediate.
First of all, there is the general consideration that the labor movement must immediately begin a concerted campaign to get its point of view across to the soldiers. It must he in the forefront of the fight for soldiers’ needs. And it must begin to consider seriously the problem of a veterans’ organization sympathetic to and largely based upon the labor movement. This latter point may not be an immediate one – but if anything is ever going to be done about it, some thinking has to start now.
For instance, the CIO Shipyard Workers Union, at its recent convention passed a resolution urging the CIO to organize a veterans’ auxiliary within its ranks. This union is to be applauded for at least being aware of the problem, although we think its specific solution is inadequate. For one thing, such an outfit would be too narrow. It would occupy the same general status as the CIO Women’s Auxiliary, which is clearly not enough for the veterans.
And what about the AFL veterans, the veterans who belonged to the railroad unions, to the mine workers union, and those thousands who didn’t belong to any union? Secondly, we think that the proposal for such a CIO Veterans Auxiliary shows a certain lack of imagination. The veterans, rightly or wrongly, will want their own independent organization, which won’t be an auxiliary to anything.
We think that the labor movement ought to give serious consideration to the idea of stimulating the creation of a Working Men’s Ex-Servicemen’s League (the name isn’t important, of course). Such an organization, while embracing worker-veterans and while sympathetic to labor, would be an independent outfit and therefore could take in members from any union.
 
A Proposed Program
In order to insure its labor base and make certain that it not be “captured” by any reactionary group like the Stalinists, it would be well for such an organization to be based primarily on labor posts organized among veterans within various local unions – including members from all unions in its ranks – and also permitting the organization of neighborhood posts composed of members not actively engaged in unions. What could such an organization achieve? To list only a few things:

It could reintegrate veterans into the labor movement and educate them in the spirit of trade unionism.
 
It could fight for the legitimate needs of the veterans, such as medical care, bonus, etc., without at the same time falling into the trap of pitting these demands against the equally legitimate demands of the working class.
 
It could utilize its varied experience to serve as the nucleus for union defense groups which will undoubtedly be needed in the post-war period to beat off the attacks of fascist hoodlums incited to destroy the labor movement.
 
It could serve as a counter-force against the reactionary veterans’ outfits which will undoubtedly be formed and which will pretend to speak in the name of all the veterans.

Yes, the veterans are going to organize. On the one hand, big business, and also the native fascists, are getting ready to try to corral them into their kind of veterans’ organization. Will labor counter with a bold, fighting, imaginative veterans’ movement of its own? That is the challenge.
 



The Moon Is Down
by John Steinbeck
Viking Press, New York. $2.00
Cheapness and bad taste are repulsive regardless of their literary application. But when they are characteristic of a book which deals with a theme so close to the sensitivities and passions of contemporary life – the struggle in underground Europe against the Nazi conquerors – there is no language too harsh with which to criticize the writer.
Nobody expects anything better from Hollywood. When “Joan of Paris” or “Mr. X” or John Garfield defeat the Gestapo single-handed, there is at least that opiatic compensation which is the major reason for the great popularity of the motion pictures. But when Steinbeck writes a novel about the underground in exactly the same preciously stylized grotesquerie as when writing of Georgie and the rabbits, anyone with a modicum of literary taste and a flicker of sensitivity must be instantly repelled.
There is perhaps no better way to describe this novel than by comparing it with a certain type of motion picture in which the hero – say, some aggressively masculine type like Tyrone Power – beats up seven or eight villains in a violent rough-and-tumble – and then proceeds to kiss the heroine with his profile about three inches from the camera, his hair immaculately spiffed, not a scratch on his Lux Toilet Soap skin and not a tear in his English worsted suit.
This novel has a theatrical cheapness that is positively appalling. Imagine, if you will, a small town Norwegian mayor (we are not sure that it is Norway; Steinbeck is incapable of making anything concrete or real) who goes to his death at the hands of the Nazis ... reciting Socrates’ final speech!
(What an effective third act curtain!)
Steinbeck is unable to etch one real, living character. They are all abstractions, types, puppets: the slow, but heroic mayor who is the “personification of freedom”; the small town philosopher of whose wisdom we are, fortunately, not given any samples; the cracked-up Nazi lieutenants (has anyone ever written a war book in which the lieutenants didn’t crack up?); the fanatical Norwegian woman whose husband has been shot by the Nazis ...
When three of these presumably Norwegian youths make their way secretly to England, they are given an anti-appeasement speech by the mayor which might have been written by Mike Gold in one of his sober moments!
There is no hint in this book of the motivations which might impel resistance to the Nazi conquerors. What does this “freedom” mean to these Norwegian people? Why is the local grocer a Quisling?
It is all enacted in the realm of airy abstractions and wordy pomposities – about as lifelike and individual as a Stalinist manifesto calling for a second front in Europe. Edmund Wilson some time ago pointed out that Steinbeck has a fatal inability to create real characters, that all his figures are vegetarian abstractions. But when this crucial literary inability is topped off by a theatrical vulgarity ...
Somewhere or other Steinbeck has read that a “good style” consists of writing “lean, nervous sentences.” He therefore writes “lean, nervous sentences,” with the result that his style is as preciously self-conscious as that of a high school sophomore trying to imitate Hemingway.
Well, it is all a colossal literary fraud which will be (and already has been) hailed by every critic and woman’s club in the country and will probably make a small fortune for Steinbeck, which is probably as good a reason as any for writing this book.
 



The most vicious twist given to Jim Crowism in a long time – and the most obvious exposure of the fact that its main social purpose is as a means of dividing poor Negroes and whites for the benefit of the Southern ruling classes – is seen in a report in the May 22 issue of the New York Daily News headlined “Shipyard Race to Pit White Vs. Colored.”
In New Orleans, the Higgins Industries, Inc., produces 15,000 ton freighters for the American war machine. We do not know exactly, but we’re willing to bet our last plugged nickel that Andrew Jackson Higgins, the owner of the plant, is doing very nicely for himself insofar as war profits are concerned. If he’s doing only as well as the other shipbuilding corporations, he’s wallowing in profits!
But Andrew Jackson Higgins faced a problem – the labor shortage. The way to solve that problem would appear to be obvious: hire Negro workers who have never before had a chance to work in skilled trades but who have been confined to the most menial tasks. This the South has previously refused to do; but the exigencies of the war crisis bring many changes. And it brought a change here.
 
How to Divide the Workers?
But, thought the wily Higgins, how shall we hire Negro workers for our shipyards and still maintain the color line? For if Negro and white worker toil together, right next to each other, then they’re liable to see that this color line is just a lot of malarky and get together for wage increases within one union.
And here Higgins had a brainstorm. He would set up two mile-long assembly lines, one colored, the other white. And then there’d be a race ... to see if the idea of “racial supremacy” were really valid. The foreman of the Negro workers would say: “Here’s your chance to show that you’re just as good as those white men.” And the foreman of the whites would say: “Are you white men going to allow those Negroes (only he’d used a less polite word!) to beat you, to show you up? Work faster!”
And who’d gain from all this? The Negro workers? The white workers? No, of course not! Regardless of which group won the race, what good would it do them? Would they get more pay? Would they have better working conditions? No, all they’d have would be more sweat from speeding themselves to death. If the Negroes won the race, that wouldn’t end Jim Crow. And if the whites won, that wouldn’t help them any.
 
The Boss Profits from Jim Crow
But regardless of which side won the race, the boss would really profit from it, because he’d get more labor done in less time and would therefore have to pay less wages! Because he’d succeed in keeping the Negro and white workers separated and inflame their racial prejudices, with the result that they wouldn’t work together for their mutual working class needs.
Was there ever an incident which so clearly showed up the fact that Jim Crowism is a weapon used by the Southern bosses to divide the white and Negro workers to the economic and social disadvantage of both? Was there ever a grosser incident illustrating the basic fact that Jim Crowism is a means used to perpetuate capitalist rule in the South, low wages and open shoppism?
We don’t know what the reaction of these workers will be. But they would do well to look at the example of the sharecroppers of Southeast Missouri, who have united, across color lines, in defense of their common economic interests as workers.
Whatever their present attitude, their experiences in being speeded up for the advantage of their common enemy, Boss Higgins, will necessarily bring closer to them the basic message that must be brought home to all workers: Jim Crowism is a means of splitting and destroying the labor movement! The road to salvation for the Negro people leads clearly along the lines of unity between Negro and white workers!
This is not merely a general idea. It is a concrete lesson which must be learned – and is being learned by the labor movement to survive.
 



Which road for American capitalism – an open, frank espousal of the methods of fascism in order to conduct its total war; or an attempt to conduct the war on the basis of continued reforms, partial maintenance of the people’s living standards and at least platonic adherence to the shibboleths of so-called “free” capitalism?
This vital question is posed in two recent speeches made by two prominent spokesmen for different sections of the American capitalist class: former President Herbert Hoover and Vice-President Henry Wallace.
Hoover advocates the first road. In his speech of May 20, he frankly says:
“We must start our thinking with a disagreeable, cold fact. That is, the economic measures necessary to win total war are just plain fascist economics. It was from the war organization developed by all nations, including the democracies, during the first total war that the economic department of fascism was born.”
And again:
“To win total war, President Roosevelt must have dictatorial economic powers.”
While this provoked a howl of dissent and righteous abuse from such “liberal” papers as the New York Post and PM, as well as the New Republic and The Nation, it was a reaction based not really on a genuine disagreement as to how to conduct the war, but rather a belief that such things should not be spoken of so bluntly. It might give people ideas.
Yet, it is a fact, becoming as plain as Hoover’s stiff collar, that each day’s progress of the imperialist war indicates that it cannot be conducted in any way other than by the imposition of totalitarian economic and political controls on the mass of the people. In the economic sphere this is already quite evident: President Roosevelt’s seven-point program, the labor-freezing proposal, the no-strike agreement – to mention but a few of the more obvious ones. Capitalism cannot organize itself for total war on the basis of a planned, mass participation of the people to run the industrial and military machines; that would spell the end of capitalism. Its only other recourse, if it is to win a victory, is to gain efficiency at the price of freedom.
 
Productive Efficiency and Freedom
Genuine productive efficiency and real economic and political freedom can now be reconciled only under socialism. When the capitalist regime faces the need to choose between the two, there is ho doubt that it will, choose the kind of productive efficiency based on totalitarian fascist controls.
A virtue of Hoover’s speech is its frank – if cynical – recognition of the fact that the development of fascism is connected with the decay of the capitalist economic system. He sees the interlocking connection between the First Imperialist World War, the development of fascism and the Second imperialist World War. He sees that cause and effect are in this case inextricably interwoven; that the decay of capitalism, the rise of fascism and the outbreak of war are retroactive characteristics of our society.
Only, since he is a frank spokesman for the ruling capitalist class, he is ready to sacrifice the remains of our freedom in order to establish American imperialism as the dominant force in the world.
 
Hoover’s Pious Qualifications
True, he qualifies this proposal with a pious hope that political liberties will be maintained and that the fascist controls he advocates should not be frozen into our post-war economy. But neither qualification can be taken seriously. First, because it is wrong to believe (as the experience of Europe conclusively proves) that economic totalitarianism will not, sooner or later, bring in its wake political dictatorship; and second, because it is just as wrong to believe that once the war is over, the pressing contradictions and difficulties of capitalism will suddenly dissolve and permit of the lifting of fascist controls. If anything, the contrary is more likely.
This, then, is the advice of Hoover to his class: march on the totalitarian, fascist road.
Vice-President Wallace, however, is not quite reconciled to that proposal. His speech is an effective piece of rhetoric designed to paint the picture of the war which only a liberal can ee. It is a war to end want, to bring a new, more beautiful world into existence.
“The people are on the march,” says Wallace. “Everywhere the common man must learn to increase his productivity so that he and his children can eventually pay to the world community all that they have received. No nation will have the God-given [?] right to exploit other nations. Older nations will have the privilege to help younger nations get started on the path to industrialization, but there must be neither military nor economic imperialism.”
 
What Wallace Really Advocates
It is for these generalities that Wallace has received such enthusiastic plaudits from the liberal journals. But when one examines the speech concretely, it is seen to consist of nothing but well-meaning and empty platitudes. How can, anyone possibly believe that the capitalist nations will voluntarily cease their imperialist competition after the war? (Certainly no such sanguine hopes are entertained by the New York Daily News, which urges women to bear more children in order to have new cannon-fodder for the Third Imperialist World War!)
Who can really believe that after such a bitter, war fought precisely in order to determine which imperialist bloc shall dominate the world, the victors will voluntarily relinquish their booty? Wallace’s co-cabinet member, Secretary of the Navy Knox, more realistically envisages the need for American imperialism to patrol the world for the next century if it is to establish itself as the dominant force.
We said at the beginning of this article that Hoover and Wallace proposed two divergent courses for American capitalism. Roosevelt and Wallace desire to fight what they please to call a “people’s war.” Hoover, representing the most reactionary section of the American capitalist class, proposes the outright institution of fascist economic measures – an essential ingredient of which is the destruction of the present standards of the working class.
But Roosevelt and Wallace, because they are pledged in principle to the maintenance of a profit economy, find themselves in greater and greater contradictions. In practice, they find it ever more necessary to move toward the economic program proposed by Hoover. The gap between them is bridged by the economic dictates of a decaying capitalist order: its war needs require constant movement toward totalitarian economy. That is the price which the people pay for its survival. And the role of the Wallace program becomes increasingly that of rhetorical mayonnaise with which to dress up the bitter dish of total war economy.
 




Irving Howe & Henry Judd
A Letter of Protest
Dear Editor:
Being not merely contributors to. but enthusiastic readers of Labor Action, we read Susan Green’s review of Native Land in last week’s issue and decided thereupon to immediately see the picture. Imagine, we said to ourselves, a movie that is favorable to labor!
Well, we went, we saw – and we think that Susan owes us a $1.30 refund for two tickets.
“The cumulative effect of the film,” writes Susan, “is even greater than the sum of these gripping incidents.” Now, how does she figure that one out?
What the Stalinist producers of this film have done is to put together a few reportorial scenes, depicting, for the most part, factual incidents with considerable accuracy. That’s OK. It’s a good thing to show the
Memorial Day massacre again, to re-enact the beating of Shoemaker and Poulnot by the KKK.
But when the Stalinists’ deliberately misuse thee incidents, when they deliberately lie about their social significance, that is another story. What the Stalinists are doing here is implying that the present imperialist war is merely a continuation of the struggle of the American workers and they should unite with their exploiters of yesterday (and today!).
When Susan Green sees the movie, she may remember the Memorial Bay massacre more vividly than the Stalinist blatherings spoken by Paul Robeson. But that is because she understands the politics involved. An ordinary spectator may quite easily be taken in by the political chicanery of this film.
Nor is it merely a question of disagreeing with the politics of the film’s producers. Their Stalinist politics protrude through every inch of! the film. This results in a hazy vagueness about who are the exploiters a positively embarrassing delicacy about the meaning of the incidents depicted.
Susan says that the “cumulative effect” of the film “is accomplished by the writing of David Wolff.” We beg to differ – and strongly – on this. The script is pretentious and impossibly wordy. It has neither beauty nor truthfulness; it is a typical job of a Stalinist hack, bearing the unmistakable signs of a close study of the prose style of Mike Gold.
Well, we suppose we’ve gotten across the idea that we think that Native Land is a big fake concocted by the Stalinist propaganda machine.
What about that refund, Susan?



 


Irving Howe
Henry Judd






Susan Green
Contributor Replies to Protest Letter
Dear Editor:
Allow me a few lines of precious space to answer Irving Howe and Henry Judd on the subject of the movie, Native Land, which I reviewed for Labor Action a few weeks ago.
I believe my good colleagues were so incensed at the Stalinist attempt to twist the struggles of labor in its own behalf into far-fetched war propaganda, that they failed to see two things. First, the subject matter of the movie is vivid, stirring stuff and remains that in spite of the Stalinist twist of the narrative. Second, the Stalinist effort to make a connection between the struggles of labor and the present imperialist war was a complete flop. Some reviewers in the capitalist press sensed this and – as indicated in my review – became alarmed for “national unity.” One might conclude from this alarm that at least some writers for the capitalist press give the ordinary worker credit for possessing the brains he was born with. The Stalinists do not. I do.
Furthermore, while my friendly critics give the impression that I had nothing but praise for the movie, the fact is quite different. At least half of my review slams at the very Stalinist palaver that made them so mad.
As for the $1.30 – try and get it!



 


Susan Green



 



With the removal of Philip Murray as vice-president of the United Mine Workers, the unleashing of an open attack on John L. Lewis in the CIO News and the counter-demand by Lewis that Murray “remove all Communists from CIO posts,” the internecine warfare in the CIO broke out into an open slugfest with Murray and Lewis trading verbal punches – and the Stalinist vultures waiting on the sidelines ready to capitalize on labor’s crisis.
The vitriolic and bitter charges and counter-charges flew thick and fast during this last week. The CIO executive board called Lewis a “disrupter” and Lewis in turn said that Murray should prove his sincerity by firing all CIO organizers who are communists. The Daily Worker fanned the winds of the inner-CIO struggle , by launching wild charges that Lewis was a fascist – this despite the fact that the Stalinists were playing, ball with Lewis until last year.
But all these verbal fireworks were mainly camouflage for the real issues at stake. And those real issues deserve serious consideration by every CIO unionist.
There are at present three main groups in the CIO – the Murray group, the Lewis group and the Stalinists.
The Murray group, which finds its main support in the newly organized United Steel Workers Union and in sections of the United Automobile Workers, has pursued the policy of consistent retreat before the attacks of the Washington Administration. It has capitulated on most labor issues: “no strike” agreement, Sunday double time. It has failed to put up an adequate fight for the demands of the steel workers (union shop and $1.00 a day wage increase) and has not conducted any major organizing campaigns. This all flows from a policy of labor appeasement – appeasement of those in Washington who are knifing labor’s rights in the name of “national unity.” The Stalinists, for their part, have played an open union-busting role. They have agreed to all of Murray’s retreats, only demanding that labor retreat even more. They have criticized Murray for putting “too much stress” on wage increases. The Stalinists, in pursuance of their policy of subordinating everything to the interests of the Russian war effort, have played the role of stool pigeons and strike breakers inside the unions. It is they who have helped inflame the inner CIO struggle to its present proportions; their obvious game is to get Lewis out of the CIO and then, through their union forces, they hope to make Murray their captive.
The Lewis forces have allowed the impression to be created among many workers that they are lukewarm toward the imperialist war, and that they oppose the surrender of labor’s rights in the name of “national unity” and the “war effort.” This they have done not by explicit statements but rather by silence. The United Mine Workers is one of the few CIO unions that has retreated on no important union issues. It has failed to endorse the surrender of double time for Sunday, though it has not attacked that surrender, either. In addition the UMW is the only force that has conducted a large-scale organization campaign through its District 50.
These, in brief, are the forces inside the CIO leadership. That there are important and serious disagreements between the Murray and Lewis forces is apparent. These differences must be settled by that internal union democratic procedure which marked the CIO at its founding and which is the only way to settle any differences of opinion.
One thing is clear, however: it would be a major tragedy for the union movement in America if the CIO were split.
Are the issues of difference serious enough at present to warrant a split? An examination of these issues must lead to a categorical answer of NO.
The demand of the UMW that unity negotiations between the CIO and AFL be reopened is not a demand which should lead to a split. If it were possible at present to effect one united labor organization, based on industrial organization of the mass production industries, it would be a great boon to the workers and result in a tremendous new wave of organization. American labor would then have the most powerful organization in the history of world labor!
If, on the other hand, negotiations with the AFL leadership were to reveal that unity based on industrial organization of the mass production industries is at present impossible, due to the backward and reactionary attitude of the AFL officialdom, then again there is little lost. But let these negotiations be held before the public view of the American workers, and not behind closed doors; and then we shall see. Surely, the demand that the two great houses of labor reunite should not be the cause of splitting one of them!
Nor is the second UMW demand, on the question of per capita payments, a reason for a split. Is it possible that the CIO will be split over the question of $60,000 a month per capita from the UMW to the CIO? Is it possible that the CIO should be split over the question of the debt that the CIO owes the UMW, according to the, latter? Surely, the ranks couldn’t tolerate such a situation!
And as for the third UMW demand – the cessation of personal attacks on the UMW leaders – it would be a good idea if both sides calmed down (and if the Stalinists’ filthy mouths were publicly washed with some strong soap!). Certainly, the prestige considerations, the personal grudges, the personal attacks, cannot be considered as a serious reason by the CIO ranks for splitting their organization.
What is imperative now is that the ranks themselves decide the issues before the CIO. In this respect, Murray, Lewis and the Stalinists are all past masters at developing bureaucratic machines which throttle the voice of their rank and file members.
Nonetheless, it is necessary that the CIO ranks be allowed to express themselves, in regular or special convention assembled, on the issues facing their organization. If that be done, we are certain that the ranks will express themselves in favor of a fighting industrial union organization; a ceaseless struggle in defense of and for the improvement of labor’s conditions; a new vast organizing campaign; and an attempt to build a united labor movement in America which can become a powerful force in defense of the common people.
 



During the past week a number of celebrations in honor of the first anniversary of Russia’s participation in the war were held in England. Important, let it be noted, not for the gallons of rhetoric spilled at these meetings about the glories of Stalin and his regime, but rather for their bearing on the domestic political situation within England.
For some time now, the Churchill cabinet has been in difficult straits. Representing a coalition of the various sections of the capitalist class together with the representatives of the reformist Labor Party, this cabinet has had great difficulty in working out a consistent policy with regard to both internal affairs and the war. It has been drawn in all directions at once by the different factions within the cabinet. In addition, it has suffered a series of staggering military defeats in recent months, the most important being at Singapore and Tobruk. It has succeeded in one department only: its official liar to the public (sometimes known as the Minister of Information) has invariably issued the most optimistic statements about those very fronts on which Britain was soon to meet a stunning defeat.
It is no exaggeration to say that the Churchill government has maintained power primarily because of the, support which Roosevelt has given to it. Roosevelt’s reasons for propping up Churchill are readily apparent: he finds in Churchill a pliant puppet who offers little resistance to the continually increasing domination which American imperialism exerts over its British partner. And Churchill, for his part, feels that the difficulties of the British military situation make such a course unavoidable.
 
The Tinderbox Situation in England
When this portrait of the British cabinet is placed against the background of the British political and economic crisis (described in detail in Henry Judd’s England’s Political Crisis, in the June issue of The New International) it is readily seen that there, is a tinder-box situation in England which can explode at any moment. The masses, “while supporting the war, feel an increasing sense of futility and desperation. They make every conceivable sacrifice while the disproportion between rich and poor remains and grows ever greater, the much-vaunted equalization of social classes existing only in the minds of American reporters.
And at the same time they feel a growing disgust with the British military situation. They resent the incompetence, the complacence, the red tape, the conservatism and the rank stupidity of the military apparatus. They look with great suspicion at the optimistic statements of the cabinet members, knowing full well that this is merely a sugar-coating for the facts.
It is in this inflammable situation that the coalition, which has been formed between Lord Beaverbrook and his friends of the extreme right and the Stalinist Communist Party, now enters. Beaverbrook is one of the most notorious of British reactionaries and has long been known as the British Hearst. For reasons that were never made quite clear he left the Churchill cabinet some time ago and has since been conducting a campaign in collaboration with the Stalinists and a semi-Stalinist wing of the Labor Party, led by Aneurin Bevin, MP, around the issue of a second front.
 
The Motives of Beaverbrook’s Campaign
In conducting this campaign, Beaverbrook has several motives. There is, of course, the desire for power, for the substitution of his clique for the Churchill cabinet. But there is a lot more than that, too.
Beaverbrook represents a group within the British capitalist class which desires the creation of a total war economy, together with the war dictatorship which such an economy requires. That is what they mean when they campaign for more “efficiency.” Such a regime would require the ousting of those elements which desire to “muddle along” (that classic description of Churchillian policy offered by Churchill himself) with a more or less democratic bourgeois rule, which means first and foremost, the representatives of the Labor Party. Beaverbrook speaks also for those in the British capitalist class who are becoming a bit worried about the fact that while British imperialism fights to prevent its annihilation by Hitler, .it finds itself being picked apart piecemeal by its American partner. They would very much like to cut down the influence of Washington in British affairs and may be counting on the support of the third section of the United Nations trinity – Stalinist Russia – as a counterweight against Washington. And the price of such a counterweight would be, of course, the second front.
Beaverbrook is also confident that Stalinist Russia represents no threat at all to the capitalism for which he speaks; in that, at least, he is quite right. That is why it is possible for him to say, as he did at a recent second front meeting: “We believe in Stalin’s leadership and this is the day to proclaim our faith.”
It is difficult to estimate the exact response Which this second front campaign has elicited, but there is no doubt that it has gotten considerable support among the English workers. This is due in the main to a feeling of desperation, a desire to have an end with the “muddling through” policy. The dangers which are, however, inherent for the British workers to support this reactionary Beaverbrook-Stalinist coalition are obvious and it is at present the task of the socialist forces in England to patiently explain these dangers and point out the need for a workers’ government as the solution to the problems of the English people.
 



Those who read James T. Farrell’s article, Literature and Ideology in the April issue of this magazine must have been impressed with the fact that Farrell is pretty much of a unique phenomenon on the American cultural scene: a creative artist of acknowledged talent and power who also possesses (and here is the rarity) the ability to seriously discuss the theoretical problems of literature and literary criticism in relation to the economic and political development of society, as well as that development itself. He is both the creative artist and the serious literary and political critic – that contemporary rarity genuinely deserving the title of intellectual.
The above is written not as a gratuitous compliment with which to amend a critical review, the conclusion of which will be that his book [1] is a failure. It is written rather because of the fact that a recognition of Farrell’s unique stature is central to an understanding of the reasons for the failure of this book.
Farrell’s position as a novelist rests for the most part on the Lonigan trilogy. That, regardless of the merit of his subsequent volumes, is as it should be. For Studs Lonigan is such a genuinely revolutionary work of creative literature, so powerful in its synthesis of the naturalist and symbolist methods and their application to the American scene, that it has rightly dwarfed his subsequent writings.
 
The Literary Methods of Farrell
In Lonigan, Farrell writes by accumulating routine experiences and by piling up objective reportage, the power of which is greatly heightened by his remarkable facility for recording daily speech; he adds incident after incident – and then there is the flash of the symbol, the insight. All the while, the maximum objectivity is maintained, the author’s personality or sympathies never intrude; and that is why he is able to evoke such sympathies for his characters.
This effective method, the above description of which is both brief and rough, requires several extremely demanding creative powers:

the ability to hold the reader’s interest through the long stretches of writing which the accumulation of his material demands;
complete objectivity in order to avoid the temptation of sentimentality, and in order to heighten the interest of his narrative and make more sharp and acute the flash of symbolic insight which illumines the lengthy stretches of the novel; and
extraordinary familiarity with the material and locale.

That Farrell does have the above in plenitude explains at least in part the success of Lonigan. But it is precisely in the difficulty of applying these powers to the short story form that we find a clue to the failure of the stories in $1,000 a Week. It seems to me extremely doubtful if a successful short story can be written by the long range accumulative method which Farrell has so uniquely developed. And if it can be done, it is very rare. Certainly Farrell has not succeeded in this instance.
Farrell’s method, while obviously most suitable for the lengthy novel, can also succeed perhaps when used for the writing of a sketch – written, I imagine, as if it were merely a section of a book. (Many of the stories appear to have been written with such an approach.) But a short story, in the sense of a complete exposition of an incident or a series of incidents involving a human relationship and a certain development of character, and resulting in an increase in the perspective sensibilities of the reader in the form of either an emotional or intellectual excitation – this appears to me a very difficult thing for Farrell to do with the method at his disposal.
 
How the Short Story Makes Out
This, I think, can be demonstrated by an examination of the stories in $1,000 a Week. Many of them lack organic development, few of them have any compelling reason to begin and end where they do. They appear to be chunks of a larger work, if not in the sense of having so been planned, then in the sense that they have been created with such an approach. At rimes, it appears as if Farrell hardly realizes the need for a beginning and an end, for a complete, organic developmental line which dominates the story, for the creation of a whole product. It appears as if the distinction between a section of a novel and a short story is not clear in Farrell’s mind, and if it is, he has failed to realize it in his work.
It is only in an occasional story that Farrell shows the ability to write within the framework of a brief, compressed story. The other pieces show the failure of attempting to transmit the leisurely method of accumulative detail to a literary form whose primary demand is economy and conciseness.
Some stories are chunks of a novel, incomplete and insufficient by themselves; others, such as Sorel, are really outlines for novels or very long stories; still others are sketches, minor in significance, partially because of the limitations of the sketch in general. Only one story stands out in the reviewer’s mind as being genuinely successful, Sport of Kings.
Therein, I think, is the basic technical cause for the failure of these stories. But the two other creative attributes which were listed above are also often conspicuous by their absence. For instance, there is a noticeable and disturbing lack of objectivity in such stories as Sorel and Getting Out the Vote for the Working Class. The former is an attempt at ridicule and sarcasm without the sharpness and subtlety necessary for such an attempt; the latter story, one of the few instances in which Farrell runs away with his bitterness, is a vitriolic attack against Stalinist intellectuals which often descends to the absurd and burlesque. It is precisely because of his abandonment of the method of objectivity in a story such as Getting Out the Vote for the Working Class and his inability to satisfactorily substitute another method, that Farrell cannot even obtain sympathy for his characters in this story. All that is left, then, is caricature, burlesque, diatribe.
 
What the Stories Lack
It is much the same with regard to material. Those stories in which Farrell departs from his usual type – the lower middle class – leave a feeling of dissatisfaction. To read Farrell on the expatriates in Paris and the rise of a French fascist leaves one with a feeling that he is borrowing material that is not native to him. To read him on the psychological tortures of a paralytic cripple returning to America from a frustrated life in Europe leaves one with the feeling that he is borrowing a method for which he is not, at least as yet, prepared. When he writes, however, of the life of the urban petty bourgeoisie – the domestic difficulties of a young couple (King of Sports) or the overwhelmingly ironic and pitiful joy ride of two couples attempting to escape their boredom (Whoopee for the New Deal) – he is far more successful. These stories sharpen the sensibilities of the reader and succeed in merging the specific experience with the general concept.
Thus far it might appear from this review that Farrell’s difficulties are mainly technical – the problems of methodology. But a moment’s though will show that also involved is a social and, to some degree, a political problem. That I am certain Farrell would agree to – even if he thought every other line in this review were nonsense. And it is here that I wish to return to my opening paragraph. For from the understanding that Farrell is both a creative artist and an acutely perceptive literary critic – as well as a serious student of politics – comes the conclusion that he is both conscious of and concerned with the problems of his own literary development.
Certainly, for instance, he must be aware of the problem involved in his inability to successfully move out of the milieu of his first work. Certainly he must be aware of the problem involved in his failure of write of the Roosevelt and pre-war periods. The petty bourgeoisie in the twenties and then in the depression – that is Farrell’s essential milieu. No one has even approached him on that score, but certainly if he is to continue his growth as a creative artist he must attempt to find new fields of experience, new classes and class strata to dissect. His ability to grasp new materials and integrate them into his creative product has not, I think, kept pace with his stylistic and technical growth. There is no widening horizon of subject matter corresponding to his increasing technical refinement.
 
The War and the Writer
Farrell’s work bears the marks of reminiscence – reminiscence of his earlier life, his experiences up until, let us say, his late twenties, and since then he has merely exploited this material to such an extent that it is running dry. The reader will gain the impression, I think, that Farrell requires a re-invigoration, a renewal of contact with new and important strata of our national life.
This, let it be admitted, is no easy task. Especially at present, when a writer of Farrell’s integrity will face the need of clashing, more than ever, with the powers-that-be and their sycophantic apologists. As an instance, let me cite the fact that thus far Farrell has not attempted to write about the war and its social effects. Certainly he is one of the few writers in this country who has either the competence or the elementary honesty and integrity to do so.
There are even more difficulties. Farrell is obviously not a wealthy writer. Quite the contrary. It is likely that one of the motives that impels him to write year after year so fecundly out of the same general source of experience must undoubtedly be the continued need to earn bread and butter. The leisure and time required to gain those new experiences and new contacts I have tried to indicate, would probably be very difficult for Farrell to acquire.
These, then, are some of the problems of the serious writer in the present period. Of course, if Farrell were a “Hollywood” Steinbeck ... But, fortunately, he is not.
This book must be considered a failure. But the reader of this review should not be misled. The failures of a Farrell are far more important, more valuable and more interesting than the successes of other writers. If only because of his rugged integrity, he towers over the rest head and shoulders. I am certain that the readers of The New International will want to read his book and will find it a valuable experience. The adverse critical judgment – and the reason I have tried to indicate for that judgment – should not deflect any reader from the fact that Farrell remains a precious jewel of competence, seriousness, integrity and promise in an utterly corrupted and decadent literary world, and that anything he writes therefore merits attention and respect.

Footnote
1. $1,000 a Week, by James T. Farrell. Vanguard Press, $2.50.
 



BEHEMOTH, the Structure and Practice of National Socialism
by Franz Neumann
Oxford University Press, 549 pages, $4.00
Franz Neumann, a German social-democratic refugee, has written a study of Nazism in the grand manner. It is serious and thorough; it is carefully documented with several hundred references to original sources as well as innumerable quotations from political theorists of all ages; it contains much valuable descriptive material; and it has that indispensable Germanic professorial style that makes each sentence taste like a chunk of raw cowhide. Nonetheless, Behemoth is a book of very uneven quality. Part of the major theoretical premises are, in the opinion of the reviewer, untenable, and this despite the excellence of many of the book’s sections.
Neumann believes that Nazism is a “non-state, a chaos, a rule of lawlessness and anarchy, which has swallowed the rights and dignity of man, and is out to transform the world into a chaos.” It is a society which has lost the compensating factors of even the most reactionary of all previous capitalist societies: rationality of social functioning and rational generality of codified law. It is a society which is marked by arbitrariness in its behavior toward the ruled classes and even toward subordinate sections of the ruling classes. Germany, Neumann claims, retains all the essential economic characteristics of capitalism; it has in fact an imperialist economy par excellence; but it marks a rupture with all previous capitalist societies because socially it marks a complete turn toward the “chaos of a non-state”! What is more, Neumann believes that “it is doubtful whether national socialism possesses a unified coercive machinery” since there are four conflicting social groups – the state bureaucracy, the party bureaucracy, the army leadership and the capitalists – all of whom are conducting an internal struggle among themselves which merely contributes toward the “chaos of the non-state.” We are not told how this “chaos” is capable of conducting such an immense venture as the present war, how this internal jungle succeeds in presenting such a dreadfully orderly and efficient front to the rest of the world. Germany, Neumann believes, is no longer a state. He writes on page 467:
If a state is characterized by the rule of law, our answer to this question (Is Nazism a state? – R.F.) will be negative, since we deny that law exists in Germany. It may be argued that state and law are not identical, and that there can be states without law. States, however ... are conceived as rationally operating machineries disposing of the monopoly of coercive power. A state is ideologically characterized by the unity of the political power that it wields ... I doubt whether even a state in this restricted sense exists in Germany ... There is no realm of law in Germany ... The monopolists in dealing with non-monopolists rely on individual measures and in their relations with the state and with competitors, on compromises which are determined by expediency and not by law. Moreover, it is doubtful whether national socialism possesses a unified coercive machinery ... The party is independent of the state in matters pertaining to the police and youth, but everywhere else the state stands above the party. The army is sovereign in many fields; the bureaucracy is uncontrolled: and industry has managed to conquer many positions. One might say that such antagonisms are as characteristic of democracy as they are of national socialism. Granting that, there is still one decisive difference. In a democracy and in any other constitutional system, such antagonisms within the ruling groups must be settled in a universally binding manner ... If it is necessary for the state to coordinate and integrate hundreds and thousands of individual and group conflicts, the process must be accomplished in a universally binding manner, that is, through abstract rational law or at least through a rationally operating bureaucracy. Under national socialism, however, the whole of the society is organized in four solid, centralized groups, each operating under the leadership principle, each with a legislative, administrative and judicial power of its own. Neither universal law nor a rationally operating bureaucracy is necessary for integration. There is no need for a state standing above all groups; the state may even be a hindrance to the compromise and to domination over the ruled classes. The decisions of the leader are merely the results of the compromises among the four leaderships ... It is thus impossible to detect in the framework of the national socialist political system any one organ which monopolizes political power.
And in order to understand something of the basis of this amazing theory, it is necessary to quote Neumann’s concept of law:
The average lawyer will be repelled by the idea that there can be a legal system that is nothing more than a means of terrorizing people. He will point out that hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of transactions in Germany are handled according to calculability and predictable rules ... culturally indifferent rules of a predominantly technical character ... Do we really mean such technical rules when we speak of law, however? Law ... is a norm, comprehensible by reason, open to theoretical understanding, and containing an ethical postulate, primarily that of equality. In other words, the formal structure of the law receives a significance independent of its content (page 440–41).
It is the doctrine of positive law which states that only a law which has a general character, applicable to all is a law, which Neumann adheres to, and since there is no general character to Nazi law, therefore there is no law in Germany at all.
It is then a lawless, stateless chaos, with four powerful sections of the ruling class competing for power and possessing parallel coercive apparati, in a word, a “chaos.”
It should be obvious that we are here dealing with a mind in which the cobwebs of legalism have gained a firm grip. Despite this, it is necessary to note that there is intermingled with this fantastic theory some very important insights. It is both true and important that fascism represents, socially, a qualitative change from previous forms of capitalist society. All pretense of equality, of the general welfare as a purpose of societal existence, of even formal rights, are destroyed. Socially the totalitarian structure of the Nazi society is comparable only to some of the ancient oriental despotisms when they were already reaching the stage of decay. This point is of great importance, since it serves as the most dramatic possible indication of the state of decay of the capitalist system, which does still exist in Germany. And to the degree that Neumann describes this, his book is valuable and worthy of study.
 
The Nature of Law
But the basic premises of this theory are dearly unacceptable. Law is not merely a codification which is general and universal; such a concept is completely the reflection of bourgeois democracy since general and universal law was first accepted, on a decisive scale, only with the advent of bourgeois democracy, which used it as a means of hiding its class structure and furthering its pretensions toward being a classless or supra-class society. As far as Marxists are concerned, law in its decisive aspects is merely the codification of the supremacy of the ruling class, regardless of whether it is universally applied or not and regardless of whether it also includes technical rules for the convenience of all (garbage collection, water supply). The law of the French monarchs was neither universal nor general yet is was certainly law. Nor is there ever a situation in which a society hesitates to go beyond the boundary of its formal law if it feels itself in danger. Whenever there is an element of grave stress within an existing society, that society abandons the usual rules of its procedure and dominates by open might; yet even within that “lawlessness” there is still a considerable element of formal law. There is law wherever there is organization; the content of law is determined by the class content of the social organization. That holds as true for Germany today as for any other class society, even though that law no longer makes the pretense to universality and generality.
 
Is There a State in Germany?
Nor can we subscribe to the notion that there is no longer any state in Germany today, that there are four parallel ruling groups coexistent and sometimes conflicting. Neumann is in error when he places the capitalists, the army leadership and the state and party bureaucracies on the same plane. The capitalists are a social class; the others are social groups within or dependent upon the capitalist class. It is impossible for the army bureaucracy to have as much social power as the capitalists; in point of fact they do not have that power, they seldom challenge that power and are in reality its supporters. As for the state bureaucracy, that is a parasitic organism swelling up on the basis of the needs of a completely centralized, monopolistic capitalist economy. This is especially true in Germany. As for the Nazi Party bureaucracy, Neumann himself admits and proves in his section on Nazi economy that the party bureaucracy is fast becoming absorbed in or dependent on the capitalist class and that the conflicts between them are decreasing.
There is a state in Germany today; it is a capitalist state; the capitalist class is the decisive ruling group, even though many of its secondary political functions have been taken over by the Nazi bureaucracy. In fact, then, not only has the state not disappeared; it has become more powerful as the German imperialist machine geared itself for total war. It has become more centralized, rather than diffused; only a many blinded by legal obfuscations can say that in Germany today there is “no unified coercive authority.”
What, then, is the purpose of these theories? Why are they presented? The answer lies, I believe, in the tender spot which Neumann retains in his mind for the Weimar Republic with its “pluralistic” (read: class collaborationist) approaches. For it is apparent that everything which Neumann says Nazi Germany does not have (the state as arbiter of social groups, universal law) did exist under Weimar. Clearly then, what is needed in Germany is a real “state” which will restore the checks and balances with which Weimar “restrained” the monopolists. The political program of our author is hardly more attractive than the theoretical mechanism with which it is justified.
 
Germany Capitalist Character
All that remains then, is the second section of the book describing the capitalist economy of Nazi Germany. This is by far the best part of the book. It is thorough and detailed; it contains excellent analysis of the structural development of German monopoly capitalism in the direction of continued centralization and cartelization. Especially excellent are those chapters describing the preparations of German business for the present war. Neumann has digested, in this connection, an immense amount of statistical material and has correlated it into an excellent picture of the present functioning of German capitalism.
“National socialism,” he writes on page 360, “has coordinated the diversified and contradictory state interferences into one system having but one aim: the preparation for imperialist war ... Preparation for totalitarian war requires a huge expansion of the production-goods industry, especially of the investment-goods industry, and makes it necessary to sacrifice every particular economic interest that contradicts this aim. This means that the automatism of free capitalism, precarious even under a democratic monopoly capitalism, has been severely restricted. But capitalism remains.”
One remark, however, in connection with the reasoning which Neumann uses against those who hold that Germany is no longer capitalist. If, he says, the means of domination in Germany have become purely political, since the laws of capitalist economy no longer function and the economy is run as part of the job of the state apparatus, then “we must also conclude that nothing but a series of accidents can destroy such systems. If the systems are held together only by political ties and not by any inescapable economic necessity, only political mistakes can destroy them. But why should political errors occur?”
I think this mode of reasoning is fallacious. It is reminiscent of the arguments used by those who believe Russia to be either a “workers’” or capitalist state. “If the laws of capitalist society, which explain why capitalism is doomed to inevitable crisis, no longer apply, then what laws do apply and what is the driving force, if any, that leads Russia (substitute in this case, Germany) to crisis?” That question is difficult to answer and it may be impossible because of the immaturity and national uniqueness of the Russian bureaucratic collectivism. If Germany were no longer capitalist, it would also be difficult to answer that question about Germany. But merely to pose the difficulty is not to prove that Germany remains capitalist, or that Russia remains a “workers’” or capitalist state. These questions must be decided on an empirical basis, by examining the economy of the countries concerned. If we are convinced that the economy of Germany is no longer capitalist or that of Russia no longer “workers’” or capitalist, but that one or the other of them is a new society, then it is truly difficult to present immediately the laws of its functioning and crisis. But Germany is a capitalist society, not because of the difficulties of a theory of non-capitalism, but rather because a concrete examination of German economy reveals it to contain the basic characteristics of capitalism.
 



The continuous defeats of the international Marxist movement during the past twenty-five years could not have passed without leaving their mark, not merely on the interpretations of the major strategical tenets of Marxian ideology, but also on what might at first glance appear to be the one constant factor within the Marxian system: the socialist ideal itself. This was inevitably so. The social decay of capitalist civilization has been so sharp and catastrophic since the First World War that even the most intransigent revolutionary movements could not fail to be affected by it – and that, not merely in their derivatory methodology but in the very heart of their existence as well: the character of their announced purpose.
True enough, the effects of this social disintegration on the basic perspectives of socialism have not been as glaringly evident as the effects on its political strategy; it is easier to observe that adherence to the theory of socialism in one country or to popular frontism is a betrayal than to see how the socialist perspective of a movement becomes warped and withered. The contemporary Marxist movement is chock full of annihilating polemics against revisionist or Stalinist deformations of Marxian policy; but it has failed to attack with equal vigor and wrath the at least as dangerous violence committed against the basic ideal of socialism in the minds of the working class – and in the minds of the most militant and revolutionary workers as well. But this failure of perspective can be understood only against the background of our movement’s failure adequately to view the present.
* * *
In his volumes on the Roman Empire, the historian, Rostovtzeff, remarks that hardly a person then living realized the extent of the decline of the Roman Empire, that it was almost impossible for a person suffering from the immediate and surface effects of that decline to realize its full extent. It is only from the vantage point of historical perspective that it is possible to see that the Roman Empire during its last days was, despite the faith which so many of its citizens still placed in its invincibility, a gaudy facade beneath which a thousand fissures were swelling, soon to erupt and destroy its whole structure.
 
A Propagandists and Agitational Crisis
Much the same situation exists today. Not even the boldest and most sincere revolutionists have fully absorbed into their consciousness the extent to which our society has decayed. We are the adherents of the world thesis which states that capitalism is in its “death agony” but we cannot, to some degree because of the very nature of the circumstances themselves, appreciate the literalness of that slogan. We cannot fully appreciate the social and cultural correlatives implicit in the concept that society has entered the period of counter-revolution in permanence, the decline of the West. Our imaginations cannot grasp that which our intelligence dictates. The alternative, socialism or barbarism, is not an exhortative admonition; it is a grisly fact. And yet, in this greatest human crisis since the capitalist merchant towns began to grow along the Italian coast, revolutionary Marxists, who alone have the only proper method for analyzing modern society and who alone have the only programmatic answer to its crisis, have failed to express in condemnation of what exists and especially in vision of what should exist, the gravity and urgency of the situation.
This is not, of course, merely a problem of propaganda efficiency – although it is that, too. Marxists, who rightly pride themselves that in a period of universal desertions to the latrine-society of capitalism, they have maintained their revolutionary devotions, have had their visions dimmed and hopes cheapened because they, too, have been victims of the effects of capitalist decay. And how could it be otherwise? How could a movement, tortured, betrayed, crushed and beaten as the Marxist movement has been in the past twenty-five years, come out of this ordeal (which it has not even yet donel) with its faith as pure, its morality as noble and its program as untarnished as when Marx and then Lenin first rang out the call to revolt?
Marxism is paying the price for the betrayals of Social-Democracy and Stalinism in more ways than one. Not only does capitalism owe its continued existence to them, but many of the present crises and deficiencies of the movement today are the results of subtle hangovers from those twin betrayers.
The most striking manifestation of this situation is the failure of revolutionary socialist propaganda to emphasize the TOTALITY of the world crisis. What began as a valid and necessary tactical approach – the need for emphasis on the immediate and concrete daily problems of the American working class as a means of reaching some common grounds of articulation – has grown to the point where the critique of capitalist society is hopelessly atomized and partial. Who is not familiar with the articles in the revolutionary press lengthily attacking some minor deformation of capitalist society and then lamely ending with the suggestion that this problem can be solved only by establishing socialism – some vague but, it is hoped, magically evocative chimera.
More and more, however, the problems of modern society become interdependent and intertwined. The simple economic demand of yesterday involves the gravest class struggles and threats to the structure of the state today. But, I wish to emphasize, my major purpose here is not to discuss the inadequacies of socialist propagandists, but rather to point out that these inadequacies are partially the result of the corroding effects which the decay of capitalist society has had on the movement – in this case, on the picture of what capitalist society is.
 
“Counter-Revolutionary Workers’ State” Theory
If the inability to graphically transmit abstract understanding of the present situation of capitalist society has had harmful effects on the movement, then how much more harmful have been the effects ot the well nigh universal deterioration of the socialist ideal. A whole generation of workers has been poisoned by the Stalinists and fascists. Millions associate socialism with personal despotism; millions think of communism and fascism as being twins; millions think of socialism as being the antithesis of democracy. The Trotskyist movement has long labored under the tragic delusion that it had but to convince the Social-Democratic and, especially, the Stalinist workers of the validity of its method of achieving socialism and the job would be done. But the fact is that Stalinism deformed and distorted the ideal of socialism in the mind of its followers beyond recognition, just as social-democracy diluted it beyond recognition. Millions of people could think Stalinism and fascism twins because in so many important political respects they are twins. And millions of people could think socialism synonymous with personal or bureaucratic despotism because the Stalinist regime, which the propaganda agencies of the GPU, Gestapo and democratic capitalism united in labeling socialism (and which we, until recently, called the “counter-revolutionary workers’ state!”) was actually synonymous with that kind of despotism.
That poisonous distortion of the socialist ideal crept into our system – and its main vehicle was the theory of Stalinist Russia as a workers’ state. Perhaps no more decisive proof of this can be cited than by quoting from a recent article of George Collins, a leader of the Socialist Workers Party (Cannonites) which is the most graphic available example of the situation we have discussed in the previous paragraphs.
Writes Collins with regard to the resistance of the Russian armies at Stalingrad:
“But the workers and Red soldiers of the Soviet Union fight with a bitterness unmatched in this war because they are defending the socialist achievements of a workers’ revolution. Factories, mines, mills, railroads, workshops belong to those who work them. The soil belongs to those who till it. A man who will not defend such treasures is either a coward or a traitor; a man who fights to the death for them is more than a hero – he is a socialist worker.”
We may well ask ourselves after reading this: Just what is the vision of socialism of a man who believes that in Stalinist Russia today (which is characterized by his own colleague, John G. Wright, as a “jail” in which the workers serve a “life-term imprisonment”), that in this despotic, bureaucratic oligarchy, in Stalinist Russia “the factories ... belong to those who work them,” that “the soil belongs to those who till it”? And that this is, to top it off, nothing more nor less than ... a “treasure”!
Is it impolite – or undialectical – to then ask how this “treasure” can also be a “jail”?
 
How Stalinism Corrodes Socialist Thinking
It is clear, I think, that a man who can write such sentences, regardless of his subjective integrity, has more than a little of the Stalinist virus in his political make-up. He is incapable of presenting the distressed workers of the world with a program for liberation and a vision of a new and better world because his own vision of that new and better world has been befouled with Stalinist excrescence. Those who camouflage jails as “treasures” can hardly be expected to usher in a new era of world history!
But more important than this extreme manifestation of the Cannonite susceptibility to the Stalinized version of socialism is the basic theory from which it partially flows: the theory that Stalinist Russia is a “degenerate, counter-revolutionary workers’ state.” It is only now, in retrospect, that it is possible to see the politically and morally corroding effects which this theory has had on the revolutionary movement.
It seems almost like a nightmare now to recall that the revolutionary movement could have labeled this bureaucratic despotism as a workers’ state. (It is interesting to note that while the defenders of this theory called Russia a workers’ slate, they never called it a dictatorship of the proletariat!) Now it is possible to see what an ideological buttress this theory was to the basic premises of Stalinism. The term “workers’ state” which had always been associated with a great, conscious seizure of power by the masses, a constantly increasing hold on the political and economic centers of power by the masses, a gradual destruction of bureaucratic forms, a continued rise in mass initiative, a gradual destruction of all inequalities until society would glide into socialism – this term was now associated with what the advanced workers could see as a monstrous despotism. The term “degenerate workers’ state” which Lenin had applied to the Russia of 1923, when he was insisting that “every charwoman should learn to conduct affairs of state,” was now applied to what John G. Wright has so aptly called the “prison state.” Once this basic concession was given to Stalinism, once we allowed that the concept and the contradictory reality could be coupled together, then we had fallen into the Stalinist trap. And then, the crowning absurdity of all was the discovery that while Russia was a workers’ state it was also a “counter-revolutionary workers’ state.” Now, while it is possible to admit that there will never be a workers’ state as pristine in its purity as we should wish, that there will even be workers’ states which for periods of time will become “degenerate workers’ states” (such a one was, as Lenin correctly pointed out, Russia of 1923), the term “counter-revolutionary workers’ state” is self-contradictory, the product of a movement whose concept of socialism and the transition thereto has been compromised and sullied.
And that is why, for the followers of the Trotskyist movement, the ideal of socialism tended to become not a goal of a classless society in which for the first time the human personality would find a fertile arena for expression, in which genuine human relationships would first begin to blossom and in which, as Marx wrote, the period of human history would first begin; but rather a kind of more or less benevolent police state (with the Stalinist version cast as the least benevolent) built on the treacherous fetish of nationalized economy. Nationalization of the means of production gradually became to be viewed as an end in itself, rather than as the Marxist movement had always seen it previously, as a means toward the socialist end. This political and moral degeneration was greatly retarded when Trotsky was alive by virtue of his incomparable revolutionary personality and his scrupulous morality, which often prevented the workers’ state theory from being developed to its logical conclusions. But now that Trotsky it gone, his Cannonite epigones have developed the workers’ state theory to its reactionary and absurd conclusions, of which the previously quoted Collins article is but one instance.
 
An Evolution in Cannonite Thinking
During the factional fight some two years ago in the Trotskyist movement, the Workers Party developed the opinion that Russia should not be supported in the present imperialist war. Trotsky was of the opinion that the question of the class character of the Stalinist state was the main issue facing the movement and that the question of defense or non-defense was purely derivatory. It was insisted then, and rightly too, that the immediate issue at stake was the question of political attitude toward the rôle of Russia in the war, which could be decided without a discussion of the class character of Russia.
For it was possible to consider Russia either a workers or non-workers’ state and still be either for or against its defense in the war. The question of its class character was used by the Cannonites as a red herring to obscure the immediate political issue at stake. But Trotsky was right in at least this: With characteristic perspicacity he saw that beneath this struggle on an immediate issue (though, in our opinion, not congruent with it) there was brewing a difference of opinion of the most basic and serious nature. That difference has now come to full light. It is my opinion that the Cannonite movement is in the process of developing the full and disastrous politics of this theory, as well as its moral effects on the organizational life of that party. It can now be seen, I believe, that the separation from the Cannonites raised an increasingly broad and serious issue, more important than any of the secondary tactical issues about which our debates take place. Separating us now is, I believe, a wide difference as to what the socialist perspective itself is. Theirs has been corrupted and distorted by their unquestioning adherence to the workers’ state theory which has served as the vehicle for the corruption of their socialist perspectives; and it has, together with certain other factors deriving from the native background of the Cannonite organization, gone a long way toward the corruption and Stalinization of their organizational life. [1]
 
On the Class Character of the Soviet Union
Now, too, we can see how false was the opinion held by many that the whole question of the class character of Russia was unimportant, that what was essential was the question of defense or non-defense. After all, they said, we all agree as to what exists in Russia; what is important is not what name one gives, that is merely a question of political semantics; what is important is what attitude one takes toward its r&le in the war. This approach, too, is radically false. For the purposes of the specific discussion two years ago it mattered little whether one considered Russia a workers’ state. In general, however, it is a question not merely of semantic interest; the motives behind the label are of basic importance. Though we and the Cannonites may agree on every detail of the organizational structure of the Russian economy, the different values which are placed on them reflect the most vital differences of attitude.
If then, as I believe, the movement is working around toward a restatement of the socialist ideal, untarnished by the social-democratic and Stalinist filth, but rather fresh and vigorous in its emphasis that the revolutionary and democratic aspects of socialism are inseparable, that socialism and the workers’ state which is the transition to it, is something more, something finer than that hell which exists in Russia today, then it is necessary to attempt publicly to state it, to reorientate our propaganda so that our friends and sympathizers will begin to see where we are driving. And though it is simple enough to see the basic situation I have tried to describe above, there is really little to say when it comes to practical conclusions. Once the understanding of the general problem seeps in, then writing and speaking will gradually be transformed. It will take on some of that inspiration and idealism which characterized the great Marxists, the writings of Lenin and Trotsky, because we will not have to indulge in tortuous rationalizations about “counter-revolutionary workers’ states,” but will rather be able to present the socialist ideal in the attractive form which it really is.
I know that talk about idealism and ethics and the like are looked upon with some suspicion in the revolutionary movement these days. And not without reason. Every scoundrel, every chicken-hearted turncoat who, at the very depth of capitalist degeneration, deserted the movement to return to the folds of Mammon and Babbitt, used those very words against us. But that is really no reason why we should surrender these words, and the concepts behind them, especially when we are most entitled to use them.
Our propaganda needs a new infusion of socialist idealism. That is now possible for us because we have thrown off the stifling bonds of the workers’ state theory. And it is eminently practical today as well. More and more, people think not merely in terms of the immediate partial problems which they face, but in terms of the world problem as a whole. One of the beneficial results of the world tragedy through which we are living has been to demonstrate to even the most insulated provincials that the problems of our world are indivisible. The returning soldiers of tomorrow will be attracted to our banner only if we can show them that we are out to build a completely new and finer world, that we make no compromise with any of the existing forms of reaction, that we alone bear the banner of uncompromising struggle.
This emphasis on the totality of socialism, on its promise for a better world, on the fact that it bears no resemblance whatever to the despotism which exists today in Russia, can help us rebuild that Marxist movement which alone points the direction out of the desert.

Footnote
1. An interesting and extremely significant instance of this corruption of the Cannonite organizational life is the fact that for the first time in the history of the Trotskyist movement, the Cannonites boasted that their recent convention was marked by “unanimity.” Aside from the question of whether or not this is accurate, there remains the fact that such boasting is a disgrace to the revolutionary movement. Since when has “unanimity,” – especially by the methods with which the Cannonites obtain it! – been an aim of any revolutionary movement? And listen to the bureaucratic voice of Cannon:
“Our unity is somewhat disturbing to certain people ... the medicine men of petty bourgeois radicalism ... They are greatly worried about the fact that we have so much unity in our ranks, that we are free from crises and factional fights and feverish struggle over conflicting programs. These quack doctors don’t understand that we are well ... because we cured ourselves of the petty bourgeois sickness in good time. We had the good fortune to have an anticipatory crises ... We secured our internal peace by a timely preventive war.”
Where have we heard this before? Is it not the voice of Stalin explaining the newly-found unanimity of the Russian party because of its purges of the “counter-revolutionary Trotskyists” and “liquidated Bukharinists”? The voice of the bureaucrat pompously, and falsely, boasting of “unanimity” is recognizable no matter in which organization it is heard.
 



American democracy won a battle last:week. Not in the Far East; not in the Atlantic; nor on any battlefield. American democracy won a battle in Sikeston, Mo.
It was the battle of American democracy vs. Cleo Wright and American democracy won.
Cleo Wright lost.
It was a great battle while it lasted – fought with that spirit of fairplay and good, clean fun which is so typical of American democracy. Cleo, Wright, aged 30, was a mill worker in Sikeston. That immediately makes him suspect: a mill worker. Cleo Wright was a Negro. That makes him even more suspect: a worker and a Negro, too.
Cleo Wright was accused of having stabbed and attempted to attack a white woman. The policeman who arrested him wasn’t going to bother with the formality of a jury trial, or an investigation. He wanted immediate justice. So he shot Cleo Wright three times.
Chalk up a round for American democracy.
The upholders of law and order of Sikeston, Mo., a city which has only the greatest respect for law and order, since it believes in American democracy: and is ready to send its sons to lick those yellow Japs and fight for freedom in the Pacific – the upholders of law and order took Cleo Wright to jail.
But why wait for the courtroom? So thought some of the city’s more upright citizenry – the two-bit crackers, the courageous storekeepers, the noble drunkards, the indomitable street bums – and the respectable, law-abiding middle class citizens – who decided that it was time to take justice into their own hands.
They did.
They dragged Cleo Wright, already riddled and bleeding to death with three bullet holes piercing his skin, and tied his feet to the back of a car. There were 600 of them – 600 upright citizens thirsting for justice (and “nigger blood”) who came to do their duty. They wanted to make sure that justice would win – so, they figured, that odds of 600 to 1 would be just about right.
(Those who thought that the odds might still be too small took a few nips of whiskey – to give themselves courage.)
They tied Cleo Wright’s feet to a car – he was still conscious – and towed him through the section where the city’s 3,500 Negroes live. (“Here, you dirty niggers,” they cried, these crusaders for justice, “here, take a look at what we’re doing to Cleo Wright.”) Here was the majesty and beauty of American democracy, with justice and freedom for all.
The driver sped the car 70 miles an hour through several blocks, outdistancing, the shouting followers.
They couldn’t keep up with the car ... but they could follow it by tracing the stream of blood – Cleo Wright’s blood – through the streets.
When the mob caught up, considerably grown by this time and finally feeling that it was now powerful enough for real business, someone got an idea, let’s finish it up! They got a five gallon can of gasoline and poured it over Wright's body. A ringleader applied a match, and there was an explosive burst of flame.
That was the end of Cleo Wright, millworker and Negro. Nothing remained except some torn flesh and charred bones.
American democracy came through.
“It was great stuff while it lasted,” they said as they dispersed.
The police took charge of the body. No Negro undertaker would bury Cleo Wright’s remains. They were afraid. No Negro dared go out of his house that night in Sikeston, Mo., where every red-blooded American is preparing to go out and fight for democracy in the Pacific and the Atlantic and the Indian Ocean and Magellan’s Straits and Iran and Burma and Cyrenaica and Balik Papan.
The district attorney gave out a statement the next morning. He said he couldn’t apprehend the mob, or its leaders. No, there wasn’t much that would or could be done. Why rake up old sores?
American democracy won. Yet – why were they so shy, so reticent, the trumpeteers and champions of American democracy? Where was the august and stately New York Times, with a majestic, editorial hailing the victory of Sikeston, Mo.?
Where was Archibald MacLeish, head of the Office of Facts and Figures, whose job it is to describe the victories of American democracy? And where was that peerless champion of American democracy, Secretary of the Navy Knox, who has so often proved himself a friend of justice and freedom, who in fact is today a leader in the war for justice and freedom ... in Timbuctoo and Malaya, in the Pacific and the Atlantic, in Iran and Cyrenaica?
And where was the head of them all, the Great White Father, the President of these United States, the proclaimer of the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms, whose voice quivers with indignation as he describes the horrors of racial persecution ... in Germany?
Why were they not proclaiming unto the skies the victory of Sikeston, Mo.?
*
You, Sacco and Vanzetti; you, victims of the Ludlow massacre; you, victims of Chicago’s Memorial Day; you, the lynched and beaten – move over and make room ... for Cleo Wright, who lost the battle of Sikeston, Mo.
 







One by one the war takes its political toll of the organizations and groups that were not prepared to meet it. First came the sensational case of the Lovestone group which voluntarily dissolved itself and went into the business of supporting imperialist war, man by man. It was followed by the “Stamm group,” which managed to collect enough people to a meeting to vote its dissolution. This in turn was followed by the vote of the Industrial Union Party to give up organized existence. The American Guardian, which had followed a semi-Populist, semi-socialist-isolationist opposition to war, gave up the ghost. Then came the collapse of the opposition to the war, such as it was, of the Socialist Party. All these groups suffered to one extent or another from the lack of a firm base in Marxian principle, as elaborated by the Trotskyist movement. As the great war crisis grew in seriousness, they all melted away, without the government having to lift a finger to accomplish its end. Now comes the case of the Partisan Review, which is dealt with in the following article, and has its importance not by any means for itself but rather because it is a symptom of the times – of how some people react in these times. – Ed.









“All a poet can do today is warn. That is why the true poets must be faithful.”
                                                                                                     –Wilfred Owen



In the four years of its existence, Partisan Review has served a unique function both in the revolutionary movement and the cultural world. Edited by a group of intellectuals who broke away from Stalinism because of their revulsion for its political and cultural prison life, PR was the only magazine in the country which attempted to relate Marxism to the cultural life of our time. In its introductory statement, PR declared its purpose to be that of an organ of expression for the revolutionary writers who grouped around it, announced its adherence to the basic political principles of revolutionary Marxism, while strictly affirming – the fingers of its editors were still burned from their Stalinist experiences – its intention to be “unequivocally independent” of any specific political organization. In conformity with its adoption of a general revolutionary Marxist position on political questions as well as its belief that “literature in our period should be free of all factional dependence,” PR announced that it welcomed the work of any serious or accomplished writer, regardless of his political point of view, while retaining the right to hew to its own political and social course.
As such, PR performed a number of valuable services to both the revolutionary movement and American culture. It served as a center for those intellectuals who broke from Stalinism and were moving – temporarily, at least – toward a revolutionary point of view. It opened its pages to obscure young writers and its editors exhibited that catholicity of taste and sympathy for innovation and experimentation that is essential for a left wing literary journal. It succeeded in bringing to a considerable section of the American liberal and radical intelligentsia a portion of Marxist ideas (a rather small portion, it is true, and often not too accurate or accomplished – but a portion nonetheless). And not least important, it brought literature and aesthetics a bit closer to the politics of the revolutionary movement.
If PR was often hesitant in its approach, if much of its creative writing was unsatisfactory, if it raised more problems than it solved – this should by no means be held to its discredit.
In its initial period, at least, PR played a stimulating and unique rôle.
 
The Founding Program of Partisan Review
After its very first issue, it became clear that the kind of magazine PR was and desired to be could not possibly steer clear of political polemics and disputes. PR stepped on too many toes and touched too many sensitive issues. The Stalinists appointed their culture expert, V.R. Jerome, to smear PR with some of his most choice language. The bourgeois intellectuals looked at PR with some distrust and disdain, though many of the more able among them were convinced at least of its sincerity and therefore agreed to contribute creative or critical writing to it.
The reception given PR by the Trotskyist press was warm but critical. The Socialist Appeal, the then Trotskyist paper, welcomed PR as a sign of “a revolt against Stalinism among the intellectuals,” but charged it with proposing “to remain independent, i.e., neutral and indifferent, not toward politics in general, but only toward revolutionary labor politics.” Thereupon the Appeal stated that PR should decide which “among the tendencies struggling for supremacy within the ranks of the American working class most clearly and consistently fights for the ideas, interests and aims of socialism and most faithfully carries on the best traditions of Marxism? Which must be considered the vanguard of the revolutionary movement?”
Ironically enough, the one other journal which agreed with the Appeal’s criticism was the genteel Poetry Magazine, which asked “whether a magazine professedly revolutionary in character can avoid having some definite political program ...”
To these criticisms, PR editorially replied – and its words are of utmost importance for the theme we are to develop – “Our program is the program of Marxism, which in general terms means being for the revolutionary overthrow of capitalist society, for a workers’ government, and for international socialism. In contemporary terms it implies the struggle against capitalism in all its modern guises and disguises, including bourgeois democracy, fascism, and reformism (social democracy, Stalinism).” It can readily be seen, then, that despite its desire to be “free from all factional dependence,” PR took a stand on a number of rather consequential political questions.
 
The Rôle of the Artist
The issue in dispute between PR and the Socialist Appeal at that time is a very old one; it will crop up every time a similar situation arises. It would appear to this author that a sensible position would be somewhere in between the haughty “independence” which PR assumed and the ultimatistic insistence of the Appeal writer. In a letter which the late John Wheelwright, a poet and himself a member of the Trotskyist organization, sent to the Appeal, he implied a position which appears to us the most valid under the circumstances. We would put it as follows: While art is clearly related to and, in some measure, dependent upon politics, it is necessary for the revolutionary artist to maintain complete artistic and intellectual freedom. Art, as Trotsky has stated, has laws of its own, and the discipline of a revolutionary party does not often function in harmony with those laws.
The writer or artist must necessarily take his stand with the revolutionary proletariat; both his social awareness and responsibilities as a human being and his special interest in protecting the existence and promoting the growth of culture require him to do so. But it is only in an exceptional situation where this stand can best be expressed through adherence to the party. And in the case of a group of intellectuals who have taken a big step leftward, it is clearly wrong and tactless to demand of them that they immediately label “the vanguard of the revolutionary movement.” It is far better to attempt to persuade the individual intellectuals concerned of the correctness of this “vanguard’s” program, rather than insist on a statement of adherence. What ultimately determines the relations between a revolutionary movement and a journal such as PR is primarily the political development of the editors of this journal.
And such turned out to be the case. For a considerable period of time, PR moved leftward. It specialized in literary criticism which attempted to relate the political backslidings of formerly radical, Stalinist and bourgeois liberal writers with their aesthetic development, while at the same time refraining from automatic literary condemnations because of political disagreements.
As examples of this dominant preoccupation of the magazine in its initial period, we may give the analysis of Malraux’s book on Spain, the various critiques of Thomas Mann from several conflicting points of view, etc. In addition, the main political editor of the magazine, Dwight Macdonald, published a series of essays of social criticism and politics in which he generally came back to the theme that true cultural growth required the victory of socialism. At that time, he had close organizational relations with the Trotskyist movement and guided PR, as best he could, in a general revolutionary direction.
 
The War – and a Turn
It is only after the outbreak of the war – approximately – that PR begins to stumble and equivocate. The literary section of the magazine plays an increasingly dominant rôle and the political section becomes subordinate. That difficult to define but very much present quality which can best be described as its “tone” becomes more timid. As Macdonald brings up the rear guard of the left intellectuals drawing away from revolutionary Marxism, some of whom retreat into the respectable folds of bourgeois liberalism, the magazine – to the degree that it notices politics at all – is concerned less and less with its former task of smiting those ex-radicals who jump onto the war bandwagon and more and more with Macdonald’s personal “theoretical” predilections – his fatal desire to criticize what he has failed to study and understand sufficiently; Marxism, his view of the nature of German economy and his rather pretentious espousal of an ill-digested and poorly understood “Luxemburgism” – and this to the exclusion of the far more important social themes arising from the outbreak of the Second Imperialist World War!
What the editors of PR had lectured so many writers about had now become the case with themselves: the intellectual in modern society cannot stand still; either he moves forward to a consistent and clear socialist doctrine and stands on the side of the revolutionary proletariat, or he must necessarily retrogress, willingly or not, into one form or another of support of or, what amounts to the same, toleration of the status quo. Their failure, both as a group and as individuals, to move leftward resulted in an abrupt turn toward the right. This may be a somewhat crude statement of the situation, but it is completely accurate.
The first explicit indication of this rightward tendency appeared in the November–December 1941 issue, wherein one of its editors, Philip Rahv, violently attacked an article in the previous issue written by two other editors, Clement Greenberg and Macdonald. Rahv attacks, in a completely unbridled and cynical manner, their Ten Propositions of the War (which, by whatever circuitous routes, came to the conclusion that the present war is reactionary on both sides, deserves no political support from the workers and that the road for the liberation of humanity is socialism).
Were such a display of bad polemical taste to appear in a Marxist magazine, Macdonald would undoubtedly yell blue murder about the “bad tone” characteristic of the Marxists. But, as the old saying goes, in the house of the hangman ...
Rahv attacks revolutionary policy in regard to the war; he also attacks the reformist policies of Laski and Williams and their American counterparts. He sees no solution at present (since there is no large revolutionary movement, therefore a revolutionary policy is at present illusory, he cogently argues) other than support (critical, to be sure) of Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin in the war.
 
Partisan Review Adopts a New Program
It is in the next, and most recent, issue of PR that the trend toward surrender and compromise takes its full expression. We print below the entire statement of the PR editors on the entry of America into the war – rather brief for such a portentous occasion, even if the necessity for printing the insipid, gossipy purrings of Marianne Moore about the old Dial did crowd the editors ...
The country is now actually at war. Partisan Review, while mainly a cultural magazine, has always been concerned with politics. A question, therefore, as to our future editorial policy naturally arises.
For some time, as recent issues of the magazine have made clear, the editors have disagreed on major political questions. The complexity of the world situation, indeed, is reflected in the fact that no two editors hold the same position on all major questions. The actual outbreak of hostilities has not altered this line-up. It is clear, therefore, that Partisan Review can have no editorial line on the war. Its editors will continue to express themselves on the issue as individuals.
We believe that a magazine like Partisan Review cannot undertake the kind of programmatic guidance one expects of a political party. Our main task now is to preserve cultural values against all types of pressure and coercion. Obviously we cannot even speak of the survival of democratic civilization apart from the survival of our entire cultural tradition. This includes the fullest freedom of expression on political matters. All of us can at least agree on this: that in times like these it is a necessity, not a luxury, for Partisan Review to continue to give space to radical – in the literal sense of “going to the roots” – analysis of social issues and the war. No intelligent decisions can be made without a full consideration of alternatives.
Even the casual reader, not acquainted with PR or its history, will see what a far cry this statement, in its flaccid and timid equivocations, is from the initial bold and challenging statement of position. We are convinced that this statement is not merely timid and equivocal, but also – and we choose our words advisedly – intellectually misleading and dishonest. It goes well beyond the bound of even a rotten compromise; if is the beginning of a surrender. Let us dissect it, almost sentence by sentence, to prove our charges.
1) “We believe that a magazine like Partisan Review cannot undertake to present the kind of programmatic guidance one expects of a political party.”
This sentence we submit as Exhibit A to substantiate our charge of intellectual dishonesty. We are only too well aware of the attacks to which we lay ourselves open by such a charge: “You Trotskyists accuse everyone with whom you disagree of intellectual dishonesty.” But Dwight Macdonald, we are certain, will understand fully why we say that such a sentence is intellectually dishonest, why we say that it goes even beyond the needs of a rotten compromise with Rahv and the other pro-war editors.
Let me first illustrate from an article by Macdonald himself in the very same issue of PR. He reviews James Burnham’s Managerial Revolution and comments on Burnham’s complete abandonment of Marxism to the point where Burnham even “forgets” that Trotsky had a theory of the “permanent revolution.” Burnham had written that the outbreak of the revolution in backward Russia was “contrary to the opinion of all socialist theoreticians prior to 1917” and that once the revolution had taken place in Russia “the leaders of the revolution itself” expected it to develop steadily toward socialism. Macdonald expresses amazement that a man as familiar with Leon Trotsky’s works as Burnham is (or was) could possibly write such preposterous nonsense. And then he says: “The most charitable explanation is that Burnham is suffering from ... ‘cultural amnesia’ ...”
Exactly the phrase! And it is the most charitable explanation for Macdonald signing a statement which contains a sentence such as the one under examination – he, too, is suffering from “cultural amnesia.” For Macdonald knows only too well that the need for a magazine such as PR to adopt a position on the war is not in any way connected with an expectation that it furnish “the kind of programmatic guidance one expects of a political party.”
 
What Is Fundamental and Subordinate
If we were to insist that PR take a position, say, on the class character of the Russian state; if we were to insist that PR take a position on the Murray Industry Council Plan; if we were to insist that PR take a position on the role of Chinese colonial nationalism in the war; if we were to insist that PR take a position on any number of other strategical or tactical issues facing the revolutionary movement – then it would be true that we ask PR to give “the kind of programmatic guidance one expects of a political party.” But nobody asks PR to do anything of the kind; we do not believe that anyone should.
But a position on the most fundamental and important fact of our times, a fact which is not without relation to the future of our cultural life and inheritance – that is a different matter. If not because of any political impulsions or responsibilities, then certainly from the point of view of an exclusively aesthetic and cultural preoccupation, PR is obligated to take an editorial position on the war.
In its very inception PR took a position on: 1) Marxism, 2) the revolutionary overthrow of capitalist society, 3) Stalinism, 4) social democracy and 5) capitalism in all its guises and disguises, including bourgeois “democracy” and fascism. Nor were these mere editorial generalizations which had no relation to the life of the magazine. On the contrary, they vitally affected and molded the character of the entire magazine; they gave the magazine its political and cultural “tone.”
Now PR faces the greatest test of its existence; and not only does it fail to take a stand on the war – it even denies any obligation to do so! But it will not solve its problem so easily. PR will have to say something about the profound repercussions which the war will have – in fact, which it has so clearly had already – on precisely those cultural matters with which it mainly concerns itself. Will it merely be satisfied with campaigning for freedom of expression for everyone and then not attempt to probe deeper into the problems of the war? Will it be satisfied to serve as a sort of cultural civil liberties magazine?
It is not, on this occasion at least, the ultimatistic demands of some sectarian revolutionary group that insist on PR’s taking a stand on the war; it is the pressure of life itself. The war is one issue on which nobody can be neutral. Even, we venture to predict, the most esoteric and detached literary magazines – those that have never had the political pretensions of PR, nor plunged nearly so heavily into political issues as PR has done – will be forced to take some attitude toward the war.
2) “The complexity of (he. world situation, indeed, is reflected in the fact that no two editors hold the same position on all major issues. The actual outbreak of hostilities has not altered this lineup.”
Again, we reiterate: these sentences are deliberately misleading. Macdonald and Greenberg, at the very least, know better. And Rahv, from his point of view, knows it at least as well. For the statement here deliberately confuses, as in the previously quoted passage, the distinction on which the editors of PR so carefully insisted in their old polemic with the Socialist Appeal: the distinction between taking a position on the general class issues facing society and taking a position on the subordinate issues which are better left to a political party.
 
A Clear Cleavage on the War
Of course the five editors of PR disagree on all major issues. But there is a clear cleavage on the one essential, most determining issue: Is the war imperialist or not? Should one give political support to Allied imperialism or not? In the answer to these two simple questions there is enough to draw the line. (We do not wish to suggest that merely shaking one’s head one way or the other in response to these questions solves all the problems of our time – but it certainly helps!) Macdonald and Greenberg, despite their disagreements about the nature of German economy and the character of Russia’s participation in the war, saw sufficiently eye to eye to jointly write Ten Propositions on the War. And we are certain that the other editors who support the imperialist war can agree on enough fundamental issues to be able to draw up their basic statement.
That is how the lines are joined in reality; that is how they are joined in the editorial committee of Partisan Review. To speak of other subordinate disagreements is sheer sophistry. For or Against the Imperialist War – that is the issue. And Macdonald and Greenberg are not unaware of this fact.
3) “Our main task now is to preserve cultural values against all types of pressure and coercion. Obviously we cannot even speak of a survival of democratic civilization apart from the survival of our entire cultural tradition.”
Here again, we must insist, Macdonald surrenders his entire intellectual position when he signs his name to sentences like that with people who support the imperialist war, and one of whom at least, is openly cynical about the possibility of achieving socialism in the near future and believes the revolutionary perspective to be an illusion.
 
Out of Macdonald’s Past
Why, it is precisely such vague and weasel-worded pronuciamentos of good will that Macdonald has spent a major portion of his literary time in attacking. Only in the previous issue of PR he wrote in his splendid article on Van Wyck Brooks’ call to burn the books:
Confronted by a frustrating historical situation – the breakdown of the political, social and cultural values of the bourgeois order, and the simultaneous impotence of any progressive revolutionary force to sweep clear the debris – our intellectuals have for the most part either tried to find their way back to the long discredited values of the bourgeoisie, or else have begun to move toward a totalitarian solution. But for the values they instinctively want to preserve, both roads lead to historical dead ends. (Our emphasis – I.H.)
And again, in the statement of the short-lived League for Cultural Freedom and Socialism, which every editor of the Partisan Review signed, we read:
It goes without saying that we do not subscribe to that currently fashionable catchword: “Neither communism nor fascism.” On the contrary, we recognize that culture is inseparable from the liberation of the working classes and of all humanity. Shall we abandon the ideals of revolutionary socialism because one political group, while clinging to its name, has so miserably betrayed its principles? Shall we revert to a program of middle-class democracy because the Kremlin government, in obedience to its own interests – which are no longer the interests of the Soviet people or of the masses anywhere – directs us to do so? On the contrary, we reject all such demands. Democracy under industrial capitalism can offer no permanent haven to the intellectual worker and artist. In it’s instability it becomes the breeding ground of dictatorship and such liberties as it grants us today, it will violently revoke tomorrow. The idea of democracy must come to flower in a socialist democracy. In the revolutionary reconstruction of society lies the hope of the world, the promise of a free humanity, a new art, an unrestricted science. (Our emphasis – I.H.)
This is a far cry, is it not, from the more recent editorial statement on the war, (Incidentally, it is interesting to compare the first sentence of this quotation: “We do not subscribe to the currently fashionable catchword ‘neither communism nor fascism’” – with the statement about PR not undertaking “to present the kind of programmatic guidance one expects from a party.”)
Macdonald has always emphasized: the prerequisite for a genuine defense of culture is opposition to imperialism and its war and support of the struggle for socialism. The attempt to divorce the struggle to preserve culture from the struggle to build a new society is an illusion. But how is Macdonald to fight in defense of culture with Rahv, who believes that socialism is an illusion for the near future? True, he can make a “united front” with Rahv against a given act of literary suppression, but he surely cannot unite with him on any serious, long range programmatic scale, when they have two such diametrically opposed concepts of how to “preserve cultural values.”
Does not Macdonald remember what he signed not so long ago – “Democracy under industrial capitalism can offer no permanent haven to the intellectual worker and artist ... In the revolutionary reconstruction of society lies the hope of the world, the promise of a free humanity, a new art, an unrestricted science”?
Is not every word of this as true as when it was originally written? What, then, is the value of his promise to jointly “preserve cultural values” with Rahv and to fight with him for the “survival of democratic civilization”? Doesn’t the war and one’s attitude have anything to do with all this? Are they not, in fact, the basic determining factors which give specific content and direction to these generalizations?
 
What Future For Partisan Review?
For there is a more general consideration involved here. While the major preoccupation of PR was with cultural affairs, the specific impulse toward its creation and its unique raison d’être were essentially political. Now that PR has no particular political position on the decisive issue of our time, what special role can it play which any number of literary magazines do not already play? Are its literary contents so superior to those of, say, Kenyon Review or Virginia Quarterly or the Antioch Review that they give PR a special reason for existence? It will be free and tolerant of all points of view. But what will it say? It was created because it had a unique political attitude and because it desired to apply this attitude as sensibly and as sensitively as it could to cultural life. Now that this political attitude is gone, what is left?
As a matter of fact, the most recent issue of PR already shows that it contradiction is insoluble. To the degree that there is political content in the magazine it is all pro-war. There are several letters from England which are uniformly pro-imperialist. One of them, by George Orwell, even makes the assertion that “to be anti-war in England today is to be pro-Hitler.” And this preposterous statement – fit for the garbage pails of the New Republic or The Nation – goes unchallenged by the editors!
Marianne Moore contributes a particularly vacuous piece of obnoxious literary gossip – which really belongs in the Saturday Review of Literature – and has the gall to append a footnote declaring her disagreement ... with Macdonald and Greenberg’s Ten Propositions on the War. Nor do the editors bother to reply to this insulting humiliation.
How unresponsive to the world about us is this issue of PR! A month after the entry of America into the war a magazine which raised the banner of “Marxism” and “international socialism” in its first issue appears with its lead article ... a study of Stendhal. It is a very good study, it should be published, but tell us, Macdonald and Greenberg, did you honestly feel that when you published an issue with this article as your lead in such a situation that you were really fulfilling your social and intellectual obligations?
The magazine has no future, no perspective, no axis around which to revolve. For an esoteric literary magazine – say one such as View or Kenyon Review are, or such as Transition or Dial were – to ignore the war is perhaps possible, but for Partisan Review it is fatal.
 



The Ground We Stand On
by John Dos Passos
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 420 pp., $3.50
If we did not believe that John Dos Passos is a serious and conscientious writer, it would be fairly easy to poke fun at his latest book. Were it not for his explicit statement that he does have an ideological purpose for writing the book, it could be dismissed as a very confused and discordant attempt of a novelist to enter the field of early American history, which would have been better left in more expert hands. But such an easy approach cannot honestly be used, if only because of what Dos Passos has not succeeded in doing.
He has written a series of biographical sketches of American colonial and revolutionary figures, together with an introduction which explains the purpose of these sketches. At the outset, it should be noted that the book is not a potboiler; it is not an attempt to capitalize on a reputation in order to make some extra change. Despite the evident sincerity and seriousness of purpose, it will, however, reveal very little about American history. All that it will reveal is that Dos Passos, an honest and conscientious student of contemporary life, has gone back to “the roots of the American tradition” in order to find some set of guiding principles with which to solve the problems of our day. “In times of change and danger,” he writes, “when there is a quicksand of fear under men’s reasoning, a sense of continuity with generations gone before can stretch like a lifeline across the sorry present ...” But nowhere does our author succeed in either locating or making visible this lifeline.
No one can dispute, of course, the indispensable relevance of the past, either in terms of historical experience or intellectual creed, for an understanding of the present. But what is first needed is an understanding of the events and creeds of the past in the context of their intrinsic and internal development and in relation to their own times; otherwise, it is foolish to expect to find any relationship to the present. And it is this failure to comprehend the events and creeds of colonial and revolutionary America in their historical context that explains Dos Passos’ failure to contribute, to even convey a conviction that he believes he is contributing anything that will help humanity in its present dilemma. In turn – the paradox is only apparent – it is his failure to understand the present which blurs his picture of the past. If there were any annihilating proof necessary of the thesis which Dos Passos professes with an air of virtual supererogation – the intimate connection between past and present and the necessity of learning from one in order to solve the problems of the other – it is provided, with complete irony, in the difficulties in which Dos Passos finds himself because of his inability to comprehend either the present or the past in terms of themselves or their interrelations.
What does interest us here, however, is Dos Passos’ claim to have found in the creed of his heroes (Roger Williams, Sam Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson and Joel Barlow) a theory of political science which should be substituted for Marxism by liberals and radicals in solving the problems of present day society. And what is even more interesting is Dos Passos’ failure not merely to prove the validity and relevance of this creed, but his very failure to even state its principles and contents.
For the nearest that Dos Passos comes to any statement of the creed of Williams, Adams and the rest, which he would propose for present-day America, is the idea that there is a “struggle between privileged men who have managed to get hold of the levers of power and the people in general with their vague and changing aspirations for equality, for justice, for some kind of gentler brotherhood and peace ...” and that it is necessary to side with the latter. But merely to restate so loosely (”the people in general”!) what we Marxists categorize as (in what Dos Passos politely calls the “double-talk of the Marxist ideology”) the existence of class societies in all previous history is not very much of a contribution to an understanding of either the past or the present.
 
Dos Passos Owes a Debt
It is not, of course, that Dos Passos is without a guiding creed completely. Insofar as it is possible to divine his intentions from his statement of introduction and his sketches, we Would say that it is essentially a version of Parrington’s concept of the “generic liberal.” This concept, which, by the way, Parrington was continually forced to qualify and at times virtually abandon because of its inability to actually explain the changes and growing complexities of American life, holds that there is a certain attitude toward societarian problems which is essentially static despite the dynamic character of society. It has never been very specifically defined; and Dos Passos is far less successful in his attempts than was Parrington. Parrington had an acute sense of the developmental line of American society and hung onto the concept as a sort of safety anchor in a world whose problems he found increasingly complex and insoluble. But Dos Passos cannot even blow a breath of life into the concept; it is for him merely a dead abstraction. To merely state, as he does, that it is necessary to find a “gentler brotherhood” and to respect civil liberties is very noble, but who would maintain that it provides a straw, let alone a lifeline?
On one occasion, Dos Passos attempts to concretize his belief with the statement that “when property rights conflict with human rights, human rights must be regarded first.” But Dos Passos never attempts to show, not once, how this doctrine was applied and interpreted by Williams, Adams, Jefferson et al.; how, if at all, they held contradictory views about it; how, if at all, the doctrine changed in significance and content for them as they matured in years and American society took the vast historical leap from colonial dependence to national independence; and, most important of all, how the belief in this doctrine can affect American life today or how it can be used as a tool for social action.
[Any amateur, incidentally, could tell Dos Passos that his manner of posing the question is sloppy, unhistorical and raises more questions than it answers. To what degree do property and human rights clash today? To what degree did they clash in 1776? To what degree is this clash incidental to our form of economic organization, or basic to it? What is a property right, and can it also be considered a “human right”? ETC.!]
 
Narratives for History
We are therefore left with a residue that consists of unintegrated narratives of portions of the lives of Williams, Adams and the rest. There is no skeletal guiding line in the book. It may be in Dos Passos’ head; but it most certainly is not in the book.
Dos Passos might object: “But my method was not to write an explicit history of the ideas of these men, but rather to show through portraits of the crucial and representative moments of their lives how they reacted to their problems in order to provide a guiding lesson for ours.” This method, a legitimate if inferior one, must also require considerable discussion of the intellectual antecedents from which these men derived and developed their ideas, not to mention some critical discussion of the ideas themselves and in relation to the social forces of the times.
But even here Dos Passos fails. One can learn more from Parrington’s dozen or so pages on Roger Williams than in Dos Passos’ 138. Imagine a discussion of Williams which scarcely mentions his mysticism, or attempts to explain its relation to his democratic creed; which does not once attempt to explain both in terms of theological doctrine itself as well as their social causes and reflections, the several religious shifts which Williams made during his lifetime. Williams, it is true, deserves the rôle of hero, but we are never told why, other than that he believed in religious toleration. But what is really important is why he came to believe in it, and on that there is silence. And it would seem that it is not too difficult to trace the connection between his Seekers’ creed and his belief in religious toleration or to explain what the Seekers believed as well as their connection to the English social scene!
This disregard of, or lack of interest in, the ideological spurs to the actions of the men he partially describes, becomes quite ludicrous when Dos Passos spends pages detailing Jefferson’s architectural tastes as a reflection of his democratic concepts, but does not once discuss that Jeffersonian creed itself, for which we are to abandon Marxism; nor its antecedents, nor its present-day ramifications. Now, whatever else one may think of Jeffersonianism, no one can deny that it possesses a considerable body of ideas nor their right to serious examination, especially when a writer is asking people to accept it in place of a creed which they are to reject!
 
Rejection of Marxism Brought Forth the Book
The rest of the book is open to essentially similar criticisms, so there is no need to repeat them. It is only necessary to add that whenever Dos Passos turns from character sketch to a portrait of society, he is in an even worse mess. Peculiarly enough, he does not write of American society but rather drags in lengthy and involved descriptions of the Cromwellian period in England and of the French Revolution. The former is characterized by a chaotic jumble of details; the latter by a Girondist bias and a vile portrait of Robespierre worthy of Hilaire Belloc. (Robespierre, we are informed, was just a bloody villain ... like Lenin.)
Dos Passos has succeeded in none of his aims. He has not portrayed the lifeline from the past to the present. He has not given a relevant or useful picture of revolutionary America, or even adequate character sketches of its leaders.
Even his writing seldom comes to life. He lacks that quality best described as “historical feel” – the ability to portray the drama and the significance of an historical period in a related whole, which provides details without losing itself in them – mainly because he is not dear as to what was or is. (How different from the Dos Passos who wrote Body of an American or Woodrow Wilson or Randolph Bourne!) He has moved from a vague belief in a vague Marxism to an even vaguer confusion, and that confusion is only occasionally congruous with Jeffersonianism.
The book, then, is a complete failure. Its sole virtue is that it is the failure of the conscientious groping of a man whose mind at present can only be described as in a seriously preoccupied muddle.
 



Not the least interesting of the various reactions to the horrible lynching of Cleo Wright in Sikeston, Mo., was that of the Daily Worker, organ of the American Stalinists.
This lynching was understood by every progressive Negro and white worker as but another link in the chain of Jim Crowism in the South. It was understood – how else CAN is be understood? – as but another instance of the terrorism which the Southern white ruling class (in some instances the planters, and in this particular case, the small town business men) exerts to keep the Negroes “in their place.”
Was there anything unusual about this lynching? Even its sadistic ferocity is not without a precedent. Was it an exception? Everyone knows of the many, many lynchings of the past years – those widely publicized and those which do not even get three lines of publicity in the press.
This lynching is merely a manifestation of a rotten social system; it is an integral part of Southern capitalist society. Everybody – even the most war-mad liberals – must admit that!
Everybody, that is, except the Daily Worker, which in its hysterical jingoism and pseudo-patriotism is second to none in this country, not even to the yellow tabloid press.
 
What It Doesn’t Say
For the Daily Worker the Sikeston lynching is significant not primarily as a manifestation of a decadent society which exerts its “justice” by burning black bodies. That is not even a secondary aspect of it, for it. The Daily Worker has not a word to say about the connection between the lynching and Southern society; not a word to say about the connection between the lynching and the Southern Democratic political machine (a machine which President Roosevelt not only tolerates, but actually leads!).
For the Daily Worker the lynching is important ... in terms of the military struggle which American imperialism is conducting today. The lynching, says the Daily Worker of February 2, “must be judged in an entirely new light – in light of the requirements for military victory against the Axis enemy.”
It continues: “It is a conscious deed of sabotage and interference with a domestic phase of the military program for the defeat of the enemy; it is a political crime against the U.S. government.”
This statement is a lie! If the Negro people follow the advice in this statement they can only prepare the ground for new sufferings for themselves.
Lynching is not a “conscious deed of .sabotage and interference with a domestic phase of the military program.” Nor is it a “political crime against the U.S. Government.”
 
Who Are the Lynchers?
Every Negro knows that the elements which perpetrate lynchings in the South are among the most substantial sections of society, at least in their leadership; that the “respectable” business and middle class elements are generally behind these lynchings.
Every Negro knows that these same “respectable” elements are precisely the most “patriotic,” the leaders of the Democratic machines in the South who condone the lynchings, who uphold Jim Crowism.
Nor is lynching a “political crime” against the U.S. government! Every Negro knows that Congress has refused to pass even the mild anti-lynching bill; nor has the President ever said a word to prompt Congress to pass such a bill!
 
What Worries the Daily Worker
What worries the Daily Worker is not so much that there’s been a lynching ... but that Hitler may use it as propaganda! The DW says: “The Tokio and Berlin short wave radio stations are already citing this lynching as ‘evidence’ of the treatment in store for the colored races of South Africa and the East – allies of the United States – in event of a victory of the democracies.”
What vile stuff this is! Of course Hitler can use this as propaganda; of course Hitler lies and offers just as bad a fate for the Negro. But isn’t it true that under the rule of the great “democracies” – England and America – the Negro people ARE enslaved, ARE humiliated both in Africa and America.
This doesn’t mean that the Negro people should support Hitler; he is their enemy. But it follows also that the Negro people shouldn’t give support to the British and American bosses; they have also shown themselves as the enemy of the Negroes.
Jim Crowism is an integral part of Southern capitalist life. It is the way that the Southern capitalists prevent the cementing of unity between white and black workers; it is the insidious method of “divide and rule” which helps retard labor organization in the South – and that is clearly to the bosses’ benefit. It is the way they maintain their low wage policy. It is the way they maintain their plantations. It is the way they maintain their social position and prestige – in a word, the way they maintain their system!
 
The Capitalists’ Stakes
And the entire capitalist system of the country, including both capitalist political machines, has a stake in the preservation of this system. This is true of the Administration, which can get the votes of the Southern Democratic machine any day to make every section of the world safe for democracy ... except the South!
That is why the Daily Worker commits such vile treachery against the Negro people when it hails “the promptness with which Governor Forrest Donnell reacted in ordering an investigation of the lynching ...”
Why does the Daily Worker lie? Why does it hide what it knows so well, and has previously written about, that such “investigations” which the governor of Missouri ordered are merely bluffs to quiet and soothe the indignation against the lynching, to smother the issue in red tape.
 
The Stalinists’ Treachery
Why? Because the Daily Worker, faithful agent of the Kremlin dictator, is interested in one thing only: the military victory of Russia and whoever its allies may happen to be at the moment. When Stalin was mousing around with Hitler, then
the Daily Worker suddenly understood that lynching is an integral part of capitalism, that the way to fight lynching is to organize a united front of black and white workers against the bosses and their system and their agents who instigate the social conditions that give rise to such barbarisms as lynchings.
The Daily Worker can blow hot and cold at will. It can recognize social evils in America ... when Stalin is on the opposite side of the diplomatic and military side. But when Stalin is on the side of America ... then all is milk and honey – even if there is an “occasional lynching.”
 
Negroes Can’t Relax
But the Negro workers live and suffer under Jim Crowism regardless of which side of the war Stalin may happen to be. They cannot relax their hatred and opposition to Jim Crowism merely because it is to Stalin’s advantage.
The Negro workers must brand the Daily Worker and the Stalinists for what they are: accomplices of the political party which tolerates lynchings in the South – the Democratic Party!
The Negro workers must brand the Daily Worker for what it is: the accomplice and supporter of the social system which tolerates and produces lynching!
And they must turn their backs on the Stalinist fakers and continue the fight for full social, political and economic equality for the Negro people!
 



What is most completely apparent from an examination of Churchill’s latest speech, and what is sinking into the consciousness of. humanity, is the fact that the war is no nearer to a decisive solution than it was on the day Hitler’s troops marched into Poland.
The war has spread like a plague – from Poland to New Caledonia, to Madagascar and to Wichita, Kan. For the first time in history there is literally a world war.
*
In this connection, we are reminded of two people we once knew – two young men who had a “thorough understanding” of the world political situation. They saw that another world imperialist war was on the horizon. But they, being clever intellectuals, would not allow themselves to be sucked into this hell of war the way the common mass of humanity would. Rather than surrender, or rather than struggle for a better world, they applied their wits and determined to escape. They decided to go to Tahiti, firm in the knowledge that, imperialist war or not, the peaceful native shores of Tahiti would remain untouched.
Unlike so many other dreamers, they actually carried out their plan. They left for and arrived in Tahiti. We do not know what their fate was; it is of slight importance. But we cannot refrain from noting the irony in the fact that this Pacific isle which they chose for their retreat has seen some of the most violent fighting which the imperialist war has yet unleashed.
There is no escape. We live in an international capitalist society; we suffer from an international imperialist war; we will build international socialism or perish.
*
The war drags on; Churchill boasts that there have been more German casualties on the Russian front than in the entire last war; Hitler gives out. a monotonous series of announcements of killings in the occupied countries. But there is no end.
None of the Allied propagandists speak of the war ending in 1942 or 1933 or even 1944. And Hitler too is reticent about predicting a final victory. They are both locked in a titanic struggle of international proportions; one half of the world against the other. And in the meantime, millions suffer and die.
U.S. Price Administrator Henderson announces that we shall soon be down to our 1932 standard of living and that our standard of living will continue to go down; Hitler announces another of his endless cuts in food rations.
We are living through the literal last convulsions of capitalist society in decay – a spectacle of horror and madness. Neither side has any solution except interminable warfare; neither side is capable of undermining the other by political methods because both sides fight for the retention of their reactionary status quo and not for the creation of a new, free, peaceful society.
All that Churchill could promise the German people was ... poison gas. Is that the way to break the tie between the weary German soldiers and Hilter’s regime? Is that how to inspire them to revolutionary sacrifice against Hitlerism? Yes, it is an attractive program indeed that Churchill has lined up for the German workers: poison gas, the super-Versailles Treaty to grind them down as they were ground down after the last war, national dismemberment ...
And Hitler’s promises? We need but glance at Athens, where hundreds perish from starvation in the streets; at the Eastern front, where the youth of Germany is being decimated; at the firing squads in France, to see once more that Hitler’s “New Order” is nothing but slavery and barbarism.
*
Where then shall we go? What shall the mass of suffering ordinary folk do?
There is a hope. In this world of chaos and destruction, the star of socialism shines with constancy and promise. Not the ceaseless wars, the chaotic post-war disintegration, the dictatorial brutality which capitalism promises; but the peace, the freedom, the human brotherhood which socialism alone can bring.
That is our road. That is the path on which we travel as the third year of the imperialist war – inaugurating, perhaps, the era of poison gas – continues on its course.
 



We do not know for certain, but we suspect that only a small portion of the story about the financial deals of America’s Merchants of Death has yet been told. The cartel agreements of Remington Rand, Standard Oil, ALCOA and General Electric have shocked the American people; their cynical deals with the German trusts have shown once and for all that all this double talk about “wars for democracy” which the capitalist class uses is just so much camouflage for profiteering.
Yet, shocking as these revelations are, annihilating exposes of the true nature of American Big Business as they are – how much is being held back? It took, you must remember, 15 years for the truth to come out about the last war – that it was a deliberate profit swindle in which thousands of American lads died to make the world safe for Morgan.
Thurman Arnold, Assistant Attorney General, has said that “in most basic war materials we find similar cartel agreements ...” A pretty serious statement. It says, in effect, that all of American Big Business has been playing the same nefarious game as Standard Oil. But if that is so, why aren’t the American people told about it? Let us have names and dates and places; let the American capitalist class – the master of our destinies thus far – stand exposed under the glare of truth. Let us see these profit-hungry, greedy murderous profiteers as they really are.
If and when more information is supplied about our native Merchants of Death, we are certain that they will be shown to be just as competent in their gruesome game as their European brothers.
Don’t you remember the story of how, during the first crusade to make the world safe for democracy, English soldiers would pick up bits of shell fired from German guns and identify them as made in Britain. (Today, American troops can have the consolation of knowing, likewise, that they are being shot at by bullets made ... from New York’s 6th Avenue El.)
It gradually became common knowledge in recent years that the Germans and French had an agreement in the last war that the Germans wouldn’t bomb the Dombasie iron basin and the French in turn wouldn’t bomb the Briey iron basin in Germany (which was owned by French capitalists!).
After all, business is business.
And in this Second World War the same thing was repeated.
 
Trade Between Enemies
In a remarkable article which Frank Hanighen wrote in the March, 1940, issue of Harper’s Magazine, he described in detail how, while the present war was being fought (yes, this war “to make the world safe for democracy and to destroy fascism”) the French and German industrialists were continuing their profitable trade, supplying each other with ingredients necessary for war production.
Hanighen wrote:
“German coke has been shipped to France via neutral Belgium. German coke has been shipped to French industrialists in neutral Luxemburg.
“French iron ore has been shipped to Germany via neutral Belgium and Luxemburg.
“French industrialists in Luxemburg have been shipping Germany iron ore from their Luxemburg mines and steel from their Luxemburg mills.
“French and German directors three months before the war (and today too, so far as it is known) are sitting on the same banking board in Luxemburg.
“Tools, machinery and implements have also been exchanged between Germany and France via Belgium.
“A Franco-German agreement, tacit or otherwise, to refrain from shelling each other’s factories, seems to be in force.”
And all the while French and British lads were bleeding on the battlefields to “save democracy” and the German boys were dying to “smash the plutocrats.”
 
The Real Winners
But it was the giant plutocratic capitalist cartels – the ARBED and HADIR – which had interests in steel and munitions factories on both sides of the fence that were really winning.
It was the Banque International de Luxemburg with four Frenchmen (representing the Schneider munitions interests) and three Germans representing the Dresden bank and the Nazi munitions cartel that were cashing in on both sides.
This is the picture of the capitalist world gone mad – profits, profits above all. Everything else is just so much hogwash designed to trick the unwary into surrendering their lives for these profits.
And cannot the same be said for Rockefeller’s Standard Oil, for du Pont’s Remington Arms, for Mellon’s ALCOA?
They are the Merchants of Death, the traders in blood who pile their fortunes atop mountains of skeletons. They are the true representatives of this wretched capitalist system – the capitalist class in the ugly nude.
 



May 18, 1942
Editor,
California Eagle,
Los Angeles,
California
Dear Sir:
May I reply to your May 7 editorial attacking Labor Action? I believe that it is a grave distortion of the facts, containing slanderous innuendos about the character of Labor Action.
First, your editorial is inaccurate as to the sponsorship of Labor Action. It is not, as you state, “the official organ of the American Socialist Party,” nor does it have any connection with the Socialist Party. This obvious factual error, which your writer could have checked had he been interested in establishing the facts instead of slandering a paper because he disagrees with its point of view, is merely indicative of the carelessly inaccurate manner in which the entire editorial is written.
It is a vile slander, of the kind which we had believed possible only in such rags as Coughlin’s Social Justice or the Stalinist Daily Worker, to say that Labor Action is “deliberate fascist propaganda.” It requires either monstrous ignorance or deliberate lying to say such a thing. Let me inform, you that Labor Action and its supporters were fighting against fascism when many others advised an ostrich policy. We were in the lead in the famous anti-Nazi demonstration at Madison Square Garden in February, 1938. We were fighting against Nazism when Winston Churchill praised it (see his speech of November 6, 1938) and when the American government was tolerating the shipment of scrap steel to Japan (which today lands in the bodies of American boys).
Our paper has taken the lead in exposing the fascists, native and foreign. The writer of your editorial need but have glanced over a few copies of Labor Action to see that!
The same process of misstatement and distortion is used in your editorial with reference to our position to the war. Since when does a belief that this is an imperialist war on the part of both sides, mean that we are hi favor of “letting the Japs win”? Since when does a belief in the “Third Camp of socialism” mean that Labor Action “plays Hitler’s game”? Now you may disagree with our position; you may think it ineffective or incorrect; that is your right. But it hardly warrants the abandon with which you hurl the epithet of “fascist” around. It hardly warrants the amalgams which you attempt to create by insinuating that those who believe in socialism are partners of Hitler – the greatest enemy of socialism!
We must likewise categorically reject your insinuation that we are in favor of a victory of fascism. On the contrary. We are in favor of the defeat of fascism. We believe, however, that an indispensable prerequisite for that defeat is the establishment of workers’ and farmers’ governments in the Allied countries, which, by freeing the colonial peoples now enslaved by the Allied imperialist powers and extending the hand of socialist brotherhood to the German workers oppressed by Hitler, can alone effectively fight a revolutionary war to smash all forms of fascism.
Your charge that Labor Action “means to stir Negroes against whites, whites against Negroes, capital against labor, labor against capital” is absolutely preposterous. Labor Action doesn’t try to set workers against the capitalists; they’re set against each other already; they’re in deadly opposition already in this society in which we live. Labor Action tries to teach the workers how to achieve liberation, how to throw off the yoke of capitalist oppression.
Likewise with the question of Negro-white relationships. If your editorial writer had been interested in the truth instead of concocting gross slanders in the fashion of the Gestapo or GPU, he would have seen that week after week Labor Action tries to teach Negro and white workers that their salvation lies in UNITY. But those antagonisms which do undoubtedly exist, how dare you say that we “mean to stir” them?
Why don’t you read your own paper? Why don’t you look at the front page of the very issue in which you slander Labor Action? Read your headlines: “2,000 U.S. TROOPS GUARD RIOT AREA.” “YOU HAVE TO BE WHITE TO VOTE IN TEXAS.” “BLOODY RACE FRICTION IS RACE RIOT RESULT IN DETROIT,” etc., These are the facts of racial antagonism; Labor Action reports some of these facts, just as the California Eagle reports them in more detail. By what peculiar logic do you infer therefrom that we wish “to stir Negroes against whites, whites against Negroes?”
Labor Action has constantly championed the struggle for full equality for Negroes. It has tried to educate both white and Negro workers to the need for cooperation and unity. Thus, our program says:
“Down with Jim Crow and anti-Semitism! All discrimination against Negroes in the Army and Navy, or by employers in industry, must be made a criminal offense!
“For full political, social and economic equality for Negroes.”
You say that “Labor Action’s policy appears to this paper as fascist as Father Coughlin’s.” In that case, how do you explain the fact that Labor Action has just finished printing a series of articles attacking Father Coughlin and that Coughlin’s paper has often attacked the Trotskyist point of view with which Labor Action is associated?
Let me say one more word. I believe that you are playing with fire by launching this kind of unsubstantiated, slanderous attack against a minority radical paper merely because you disagree with it. A paper such as yours – speaking for a minority group, the Negro people, and itself only recently under the surveillance of the authorities because you were so aggressive (and rightly so!) in the fight against Jim Crowism – should be the last in the world to unleash the hysteria of intolerance against groups and papers with whom you disagree.
I hope that you will be fair enough to print the above reply in full in your paper.
I am also requesting the West Coast representative of our paper to visit you personally in order to discuss the matter in full.



 


Sincerely yours,
IRVING HOWE,
Managing Editor,
Labor Action



 



Who are the defenders of the Merchants of Death which made cartel agreements helping Hitler?
Why, you will answer, everybody with one eye open knows that!
It’s the boss press – Hearst, Scripps-Howard, the New York Times, the Chicago Trib and the others – who hug du Pont’s Remington Rand to their bosoms.
It’s the poison radio commentators – H.V. Kaltenborn, Lowell Thomas, Gabriel Heatter and their ilk – who apply big slabs of verbal whitewash to Rockefeller’s Standard Oil.
But wait – add another, brother.
Add the Daily Worker, organ of the (Stalinist) Communist Party to the ranks of the pen prostitutes attempting to throw a smoke screen of yes-but, if-then-again and maybe verbiage to cover up the Merchants of Death.
All along, while every labor paper was giving front page spreads to the sensational disclosures about the monopolists’ deals with Hitler’s I.G. Farben and Krupp, the Daily Worker was maintaining a discreet and oh-so-dignified silence. When it did print a story about the disclosures it buried it on an inside page, so insignificant in size and place that only the faithful party-liners could find it. In this, the Daily Worker went along with the New York Times, which front-paged a story about 16 shipping clerks going on strike in Pittsburgh, but just about buried the Standard Oil and Remington Rand dynamite in between the women’s menu and the art critic.
The only such story that the Daily Worker carried on page one was ... the lying denials of Parish, Standard Oil boss!
 
A Whitewash of Monopolists
Finally, the Stalinists had to carry some comment. So they printed an editorial on April 24.
And it sure was a whopper!
The Daily Worker begins with an admission that the actions of Standard Oil and the others “certainly were not and are not in the interest of the country.”
Then the whitewash:
“It is true that certain American monopolies did pursue an earlier policy of pro-fascist appeasement ... But it is also true that the wreckage of this Munichism, and the peril it created for the very existence of the whole country, including these monopoly corporations, did result in a transformation into an opposite policy.”
This is a lie. The Merchants of Death have NOT broken their cartel agreements. There has been no “transformation into an opposite policy.” On the contrary, they are still working on the basis of agreements with Farben and Krupp which will give these Nazi vultures post-war rake-offs for American war products made under the cartel agreements.
And what does the Daily Worker mean by that puffed-up bunkum about “transformation into an opposite policy?” When it utters that kind of nonsense it is spreading the illusion that the Merchants of Death function as capitalist vultures out of choice and can therefore “transform” their practices once their hearts are won over to sweetness arid light, in reality, they function according to the inexorable economic laws of capitalism – and the only way to abolish their practices is to abolish their economic system.
 
The Daily Worker’s Motives
But what is the Stalinist paper getting at when it whitewashes the monopolists in this way? We see that in the next sentence of the editorial:
“So today, even though they may not always be the most dependable forces Within the anti-Axis camp and retain characteristics inherent in finance capital (sic!) nevertheless these large corporations are as a whole part of the camp of national unity ...”
Now we got it. The Daily Worker is worried lest the workers get steamed up about the Merchants of Death, begin to do something about it and in that way disturb “national unity.” (For the Stalinists, “national unity” means having labor surrender all its fights, kowtow to the bosses 24 hours a day with double time on week-ends, so that “unity” can be maintained between the workers and the bosses.)
So while they are forced to admit that these corporations are pretty smelly, still don’t get excited. Remember “national unity,” even if Standard Oil is rooking the people, even if they’re freezing your wages. Smile, brother, smile – says the Daily Worker – and don’t you annoy our good friends, the monopolists.
(By the way, if you read the above sentence, you notice that the large corporations “retain characteristics of finance capital.” From that we may gather that while some characteristics are retained – after all, you can’t expect Morgan to abdicate right away, especially while Browder is in jail – there are a number which have ... evaporated. Where to?)
 
Some Audacious Demagogy
But if the Daily Worker is reticent about attacking Standard Oil, it has no such hesitation about lambasting into the New Republic and The Nation for their exposes of the Merchants of Death. And then, in an audacious piece of demagogy, it writes: “Trust-busting propaganda is not always associated with progressivism; Hitler did not hesitate to use ‘anti-monopoly’ demagogy when he needed it, and Charles E. Coughlin also knows the trick.”
But Hitler used it as a trick to gain mass support. When in power he did not bust the trusts; he strengthened them. Those who would genuinely bust the trusts by busting the trust system, the socialists, stand on the opposite side of Hitler. Why does the Daily Worker lump them together?
The answer is clear. The Stalinists in their frantic anxiety to aid Uncle Joe of Moscow will go to any lengths against the interests of American labor.
They supported the “no-strike” proposals. They support FDR’s “freeze” program that would put labor behind a great big eight-ball of ice.
And now they whitewash the Merchants of Death.
Move over there, Kaltenborn, Hearst, McCormack and Pegler. Make room for Earl Browder.
 



A national sensation has been created by the publication of Milton Mayer’s article, The Case Against the Jew, in the Saturday Evening Post of March 28.
If nothing else, it has served to bring into the open a national discussion of the subterranean anti-Semitic currents swelling at the base of the American social structure. The very title is so dangerously sensational, the writing is so skillful that one is certain that this article will be discussed everywhere for weeks.
Mayer begins with a bitter indictment of those Jews who attempt to “assimilate” themselves into the prevalent social structure.
“In his unstinting effort to adjust, he [the Jew] had moved away from the ‘kikes’ ... He changed his name in New York and his nose in Los Angeles ... He reformed his ancient ritual and then abandoned it altogether, just like the gentiles, for the movies, the rumba and night clubs ... He changed his day of rest and contemplation from Saturday to Sunday and gave up the rest for golf and the contemplation for fried chicken, just like the Gentiles ...”
And again,
“There was nothing that a Gentile would stoop to that a Jew wouldn’t if he could ... Jews in the South exploited Negroes as callously as gentiles did. In New York’s Harlem and Chicago’s Bronzeville, tremendous anti-Semitism has developed in the past decade because of the Jew’s tenement profiteering ... There are few employers as conscienceless as the Jewish sweatshop operator …”
 
Is Their Number Finally Up?
And now, Mayer tells us, the farce is over.
“The Jews of America are afraid that their number is up – if not today, then tomorrow or the next. They know that war breeds chauvinism and that chauvinism breeds bigotry ... they know that the post-war collapse will remind a bitter and bewildered nation that ‘the Jews got us into the war.’
“And they are not fooled by the lull in anti-Semitic activity since the beginning of the war ... They know that there is something tentative and temporary in the notion that ‘we are all Americans now’ ...”
This, then, is Mayer’s description. Let us consider it before we discuss his “solution.”
First of all, who are “the Jews” of whom Mayer writes? The growing number of Jewish factory workers? The hundreds of thousands of Jewish garment workers? The Jewish lower middle class at the very brink of the poverty in which the Jewish workers find themselves?
Of course not! These Jewish people – the great mass of the Jewish population in America which is composed of ordinary workers or lower middle class elements – have never been bothered about “assimilating into country clubs.” They have never exploited Negroes in the South or anywhere else. On the contrary, they have themselves been exploited – exactly like the rest of the American workers.
 
How Many Jews Can Afford to Play Golf?
How many Jews in this country can afford to play golf? How many own sweatshops? How many could afford to spend $50 to change their names, even if they wanted to?
To merely ask these questions is to show the vicious character of Mayer’s assertions. To speak of “the Jew” as synonymous with that small section of the Jewish people who are members of the capitalist class is a slander against the Jewish people as a whole. To charge against the Jewish people the practices of those Jews who are capitalists – practices which they commit in their capacity of being capitalists and not as adherents to any race or religion – is vile.
Of course, there are some Jews who behave as Mayer describes. (And so are there Catholics, Protestants, Hindus, Mohammedans Parsees, Seventh Day Adventists, Buddhists who are also capitalists.) They are the tiny minority of capitalists and upper class merchants whose class role, economic methods, ethics and habits are exactly the same as those of other capitalists and merchants, no matter what their religious affiliations may be.
 
Most Capitalists Aren’t Even Jewish
But as a matter of fact the basic capitalist strength in this country happens to be non-Jewish. The most important trust, the steel trust; the most important banks, the Chase National and National City; the most important financial oligarchies, the Morgan and Rockefeller – all non-Jewish.
But whether the percentage of Jews who are capitalists be 2 per cent or 3 per cent is of no real importance. What is important is that Jews who are capitalists exploit workers in their capacity of being capitalists (their religion plays absolutely no role in the process of production) and that non-Jews who are capitalists behave in exactly the same way. There is no such thing as “the Jew”; there are rich Jews and poor Jews, Jewish workers and Jewish bosses.
It is true of course that in America even a Jewish capitalist may occasionally suffer from anti-Semitism; but it is quite a different thing to be black-balled in an exclusive Palm Beach country club and to be discriminated against in a war industry when one’s livelihood is at stake.
Mayer’s description might have a grain of validity – IF he were to say which class section of the Jewish population he is writing about. But then he would have to admit that it is a tiny minority (insignificant as compared with the capitalist class as a whole).
Then he couldn’t call his article The Case Against the Jew. At best he would have to call it The Case Against Some Jewish Members of the Capitalist Class. And the Saturday Evening Post wouldn’t like that; it is very sensitive about capitalists – even Jewish capitalists.
 
Who Will Read This Article?
And it is this monstrous attempt to identify a national grouping with its capitalist section which makes Mayer’s article so vile. Doesn’t he know where he is writing? Doesn’t he know that his article appears in a magazine which is read by every Babbitt in the country, by the mass of middle class elements, many of whose latent anti-Semitic prejudices will be stimulated by this description of “the Jew”? (“After all,” they will think to themselves, “even a Jew says these things about his own people ...”)
When we reach Mayer’s proposed “solution” we can first see how bankrupt and false his article is. The Jews, he tells us, are neither worse nor better than anyone else. And it is in this that their downfall lies. The Jews, Mayer says, must return to the faith of their fathers to the “radical righteousness” of Isaiah so that they may prepare for the suffering ahead by having something worth suffering for.
There is something positively vile about this argument. Why SHOULD the Jew be any “better” than anyone else? Why should he necessarily have an ounce of righteousness more than anyone else? Here is where Meyer’s REAL surrender to the anti-Semites takes place, a thousand times more than in his libelous descriptions of “the Jew.”
 
The Double Standard of Mayer
For Mayer is reconciled to the victory of the fascists and the anti-Semites. Mayer accepts the race-haters DOUBLE STANDARD. The Jews, in order to exist, Mayer says, and in order to have an ennobling faith, must really prove themselves the “chosen people.” This is the doctrine of Goebbels in a peculiarly inverted form. It is not enough that they are ordinary folk, as all others. They must all be little Isaiahs – otherwise they won’t even be “better” and won’t have spiritual solace when they fall under the stormtrooper’s blows.
Mayer’s counsel is the counsel of despair and surrender. He does not suggest how to fight anti-Semitism. He merely offers a guaranteed solace for future persecutions. But why should we assume that the victory of anti-Semitism (that is, of fascism) is inevitable?
Nor do we have much confidence in the value of Mayer’s solace for those Jews in Europe who today suffer under the heel of anti-Semitism. The problem is not how to bear anti-Semitism; the problem is how to destroy it.
Mayer does not touch on this question because he does not know the answer. Only once does he even hint at a possible cause of anti-Semitism and that is when he tells the anecdote of how, after Hitler had started his national boycott against the Jews, a mayor of a North Sea town telegraphed: “Send us a Jew to boycott.”
There is more to be learned from that anecdote than from all the rest of Mayer’s article.
Anti-Semitism, as any other racial hatred, is a deliberately and consciously provoked prejudice, utilized always by reactionary societies desperately trying to deflect mass discontent away from themselves and towards some chosen scapegoat.
In the development of capitalist society, anti-Semitism has taken its most severe and virulent form at precisely the time when the world revolutionary movement is at its lowest ebb and has sustained the greatest number of defeats; at precisely the time when capitalist decay takes its most cruel and brutal form: fascism. And that is not accidental.
For the future of the great mass of Jews – as the future of all national minorities – is inextricably bound up with the fate of the working class. Anti-Semitism is a symptom of a society in decay; only by the replacement of that society by a new, healthy, rational society can anti-Semitism be wiped out.
 
How to Remove Anti-Semitism
Anti-Semitism is a blind, irrational and desperate attempt on the part of those who sincerely believe in it to blame their ills on another section of society (“The Jews are responsible for this evil or that difficulty”). But it becomes dangerous only when it is deliberately fostered by capitalism (or its fascistic section) in order to turn the masses of non-Jewish workers-away from their real enemy – the capitalist system – and have them vent their anger on the Jews.
The only way to remove anti-Semitism is to remove the conditions which make people so desperate as to practice it.
Remove class exploitation; end wars; remove the inequality of wealth; abolish unemployment; substitute instead a socialist society of democracy and freedom, peace and security. Then; even if there were an anti-Semite left, his talk would fall on deaf ears.
Socialism makes possible a society where there are no national prejudices or racial antagonisms or religious persecutions. It removes the CAUSE of these poisons. It makes possible a free society of human beings – all with equal rights and opportunities. Anti-Semitism is only possible when men are looked upon as slaves to exploit or cannon fodder with which to gain imperialist conquest. It receives its deathknell once humanity as a whole gains socialist liberation.
 



The following letter has been sent to the editor of the Christian Science Monitor:
*
Dear Editor:
May I, as managing editor of Labor Action, one of the periodicals attacked in E.H. Markham’s article in your issue of March 26, 1942, say a few words in reply?
I do not wish to comment on Mr. Markham’s general thesis other than to say that it is a dangerous denial of the basic liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights – There is nothing incongruous about radicals fighting to preserve civil rights, such as freedom of speech, while simultaneously attacking the capitalist economic system; on the contrary, we believe that the capitalist system is a hindrance to and eventual destroyer of democratic liberties and that it is only in the struggle for socialism that such liberties may be fully realized.
I am here, however, concerned with matters of far graver importance. It seems to me both slanderous and an instance of questionable journalistic ethics (especially for so generally careful a newspaper as the Christian Science Monitor) to assert that Labor Action takes a “neutral attitude” toward fascism, Hitlerism or Japanese imperialism.
Labor Action and its supporters were struggling against fascism when many others advised an ostrich policy. We were in the lead in the famous anti-Nazi demonstration at Madison Square Garden in February 1938. We were fighting against fascism when Winston Churchill was saying: “I have always said that if Britain were defeated in war, I hoped that we should find a Hitler to lead us back to our rightful place among nations.” (Speech of November 6, 1938) We were fighting against fascism when the American press was filled with praise for Mussolini because “the trains were running on time.” And we were opposed to Japanese imperialism when American business interests were shipping scrap iron to Japan (now landing in American bodies) and when that policy was well-nigh universally approved.
We have, it is true, a different analysis of the cause of fascism and a different proposal as to how to destroy it than does Mr. Markham but that hardly warrants his saying that we are “neutral.”
Nor is it true to say that Labor Action “ is devoted to denouncing everything everywhere and always.” There are plenty of things we are FOR; your reporter could have discovered them very easily had he approached his assignment with a modicum of fairness.
He would have discovered that we have a positive program in defense of labor’s rights, a positive program on how to destroy fascism, a positive program on taxation, a positive program in respect to racial discrimination But to show that he would have had to do more than quote one sentence out of context.
But your reporter was more interested in wisecracks – and slanders.
He was more interested in making such utterly lying and vile statements – more fit for Der Deutsche Beobachter than for the Christian Science Monitor – as his statements about the Militant and the Socialist Call, whose anti-fascist integrity we defend despite our political disagreements with them. It is a slander to say that the Call tries to persuade anyone “that the better course for Americans now is to accept the teachings of pro-Nazi Americans and do nothing.” Or that one gets “exactly the same impression, from a file of the Call that he does from a file of any Nazi periodical published anywhere.”
If Joseph Goebbels were Mr. Markham’s employer, he would pat Mr. Markham’s cheek for this kind of slanderous amalgam, but what does the Christian Science Monitor have to say?
I request immediate publication of the above letter in order to reply to the utterly false assertions made in Mr. Markham’s article.



 


Sincerely yours,
Irving Howe,
Mng. Ed., Labor Action



 



The Age of Fable
by Gustav Stolper
369 pp. Reynal and Hitchcock. $3.00
The reception which this book received from the bourgeois reviewers was one of unanimous enthusiasm. Both in the daily press and in the magazines it was hailed as a clarifying force in a world of confusion, a book which destroyed obsolete social myths and which contributed the fine edge of precision to a world in which sloppiness and musty thinking are the rule.
The author has for his purpose a two-edged literary war against the outlived ideologies of the 19th century laissez-faire capitalism and what he designates as the oversimplified, scholastic, utopian, rigid formulae of Marxism. Most of the book – as might be expected – is concerned with the latter. After all, it hardly requires much argumentative skill or factual material to prove that 18th century capitalist thought is outlived; that is pretty much a matter of beating a dead horse.
But as for Marxism, that is something else again. Despite the ceaseless “annihilations” to which it is subjected these days, Marxism manages to continue to disturb the mental peace of the powers that be.
Stolper is really out to slap the Marxist dragon. But since he knows that such an announced purpose won’t do very well for circulation purposes, he veils his book with references to “the age of fable.” Most of the “fables” turn out to be parts of Marxism. He argues not directly against the premises and conclusions of Marxism, but rather by attempting to show that Marxism constantly oversimplifies complex phenomena and ignores facts which contradict its thesis.
 
Another Anti-Marxist Diatribe
We hope that we shall not be accused of either intolerance or impatience when we say that it is simply not worth while to attempt a lengthy refutation of the book; certain anti-Marxist works have at least the value of having marshalled some array of factual material or of having a finely developed theoretical argument. Stolper’s book has neither. It is a compendium of every cliché hurled against Marxism since 1848, containing the most blatant puerilities, innumerable non sequiturs, irrelevancies and a fair-sized dose of plain ignorance. The best way to substantiate this harsh judgment is to cite a few choice sentences from a book which is supposed to expose the loose thinking of Marxism:
1) In arguing against the Marxist theory of the economic causes of war and the concept that the world was divided, at the time of the outbreak of the war in Europe, into “have” and “have-not” imperialist powers, Stolper writes: “You cannot quite refrain from wondering whether Germany, the powerful leader of the Have-nots, looked at Poland as a Have nation when she invaded this neighbor and thereby started the Second World War.” (Page XIV)
This incredible argument, used by many bourgeois observers, ignoring the simple fact that when Germany invaded Poland she did so merely as an initial military step in a war involving global stakes, is offered as proof that the basic cause of war is not economic or imperialist! Presumably when Japan invades Burma that likewise disproves that the war is an imperialist struggle between the Have and Have-not powers. What Stolper does is to play the semantic game – he confuses the relation between imperialist powers and the strategy of war, subsidiary territorial seizures with the main objectives, and because of his unscientific approach, searches for the explanations of these phenomenon in subjective factors in no way controlling the current world situation.
2) In discussing the American democratic tradition, Stolper writes of the last war: “There were labor unions; they were either conservative or were disregarded altogether.” (Page 11) Here again Stolper shows that he knows little or nothing about American history. The American labor movement was divided during the last war between the conservative AFL and the radical anti-war IWW. The AFL made possible America’s war effort by pledging complete support to Wilson and his administration. A close liaison was established between that section of organized labor and the government. So far as the IWW was concerned its militancy brought the forces of reaction and the state into operation against it. Long prison terms, dark-of-the-night assassinations, physical attacks were the measures employed to “ignore” the IWW in 1917 and 1918!
 
An Authority on Bolshevism
3) In discussing the Bolshevik Revolution, Stolper informs us that “Utopia was organized over an area covering one-sixth of the globe by methods of massacre and terror compared to which even the terrors of war seemed to pale.” (Page 13) Isn’t this really too precious – this comparison of the Leninist revolution with imperialist war, especially coming at a time when imperialism is literally devouring generations and countries?
4) In discussing Marxism, Stolper writes: “Those who believe in the fable of collectivism do not seem to care about the accomplishments of the 19th century; they are only shocked by its shortcomings.” (Page 33) Doesn’t this historical expert know that at a time when England was shaken by the powerful writings of Ruskin and Carlyle, which attacked the evils of industrial capitalism out of a desire to return to pre-industrial times, it was precisely Marx who emphasized the progressive aspects of the bourgeois revolution (”the 19th century”) despite its toll in human misery? And isn’t it a fact that it is the Marxists today who point to a progressive phase of early capitalism, in contradistinction to its present decadent phase, indicating a completely objective approach to history?
5) In discussing Bolshevism, Stolper states: “Only against the historical background of the Russian state can the reality of Bolshevism be understood. The fundamental psychological attitude of the average Russian has not been much changed by the revolution.” (Page 31) One must really be an expert and a former economic correspondent for the London Times to be able to write that the psychology of the muhjik and worker was not much changed by the Bolshevik revolution, that the Soviets stimulated the same psychological reactions as czarism.
6) In discussing British imperialism, Stolper attempts to show that it wasn’t so bad after all. He trots out all the old puerilities about building roads, etc. And then he has the gall to inform his readers that Britain – which doesn’t really have an imperialist apparatus in India, because there are only some 500 members of the British civil service residing in India! – has been aiding in all the attempts of the Indian people to improve their conditions. Thus, in writing of Gandhi’s fasts, he says: “In this great humanitarian work for the suppressed classes Gandhi is offered and accepts the full collaboration of the British.” Which is partly true, at least in the sense that the British were willing to provide jails for him in which to fast.
These illustrations ought to be enough to give the reader a glimpse of the character of this book. It is really a pathetic illustration of the desperation of the bourgeois intellectual world which attempts to seize on every straw for support, even if that straw be as crumpled as this one is.
 



In recent weeks, America has been rocked by a storm about the “battle for production.” Each day has seen new disclosures of extraordinary inefficiency in the production of war goods, often with the result that consumer products made with the same materials have been curtailed.
In this article the problem is thoroughly discussed and the real cause of inefficiency and “business as usual” is probed.
The article shows how the individual capitalists are slowing down their own production needs, essential for their own imperialist war, because of their wild rush for profits.
And here is the sharp challenge which socialism offers – its ability to organize production better, for peace and not for war.
We socialists have always contended that capitalism should be abolished because it mismanaged the means of production so that a very few – those who own the means of production – reaped great profits while the masses of the people were deprived of a secure standard of living. We would often prove this assertion by demonstrating the tremendous capacities which the modern industrial machine has; how it could satisfy the needs of everyone if it were run for that purpose; and how capitalism, instead, ran the industrial machine for profits.
What the capitalists called overproduction when they could not sell their ptoducts at a profit – Was invariably accompanied by the greatest need for these very products on the part of the people. Often large portions of the country’s industrial capacity would lie idle because the capitalists could not sell their products for a sufficiently attractive profit; despite the need for these products. Look, we socialists would say, if only the people could run these industries themselves, they could produce enough to satisfy everyone’s needs.
 
Capitalist Inefficiency In War Production
All that was and remains completely true. It remains the great and tragic paradox of our age – poverty in the midst of plenty. But now it is underlined by the situation which the war has brought about. We do not refer to the general paradox of a social system which cannot satisfy the most elementary needs of the people, while it squanders billions of dollars for war: That is the greatest indictment of world capitalism.
We are, for the moment, interested in the inefficiency in war production which capitalism demonstrates – even in a war conducted for its own interests. This situation has been brought to a climax by some recent dramatic events – notably those in the auto industry.
American capitalism has set itself the task of transforming its peacetime economy into a war economy. It has set itself the task of building the greatest war machine in history.
 
“Business as Usual” Continued
Yet despite what is for the capitalists such an all-important objective – they have continued in old, inefficient ways, in what is called “Business as Usual.” They continue to resist what is for them the inevitable necessity – the transition to war economy – in order to continue their tremendous intake of profits.
To some “liberals” this has been a great source of dismay and indignation. But no such emotions are warranted. Because they fail to understand that the main objective of capitalists is to make profits; the war itsself is merely a great imperialist foraging expedition to enable the American capitalists to make more profits; and within the framework of the war they are all determined to make as much profit as they can. All this was succinctly put by Pierre du Pont during the First World War: “... We cannot assent to allowing our own patriotism to interfere with our duties as trustees” (of the corporations).
This fact, that for the capitalists patriotism only means a grand opportunity for more profits, is vividly illustrated by certain recent events. Let us summarize a few:
 
What Happened in the Rubber Industry
1) THE RUBBER INDUSTRY – As far back as two years ago it was foreseen that in a war in the Far East, rubber supplies might be cut off from America. This eventuality could have been met by building plants for synthetic rubber production, by cultivation of the “guayule” (a Mexican plant which yields rubber) and by building up large reserves of stockpiles of rubber. Not one of these methods was used, in each case because of capitalist greed and incompetence.
Synthetic rubber was not produced because the large rubber companies did not want to risk the higher cost of production involved! This higher cost of production in comparison to raw rubber produced in the Far East is due mainly to the higher labor costs of America.
Fortune magazine of August 1940 estimated that 600,000 tons of synthetic rubber (the amount consumed in America) could be produced within two years. Nothing of the kind was ever done, for it conflicted with the interests of the giant rubber monopolies, which saw the destruction of their private capitalist interests in these projects.
Even when the Reconstruction Finance Corporation offered to build gratis plants capable of producing 100,000 tons, it was turned down by the rubber companies. Today, only 10,000 tons of synthetic rubber are produced in America. A similar situation exists with regard to “guayule.” The rubber bosses said that such production would be uneconomical; what they really meant was that they would have to pay higher wages in America, and thus risk lower profits.
It is only now, when it is far too late, that an attempt is to be made to produce synthetic rubber. And these plants will not be ready till late in 1943.
 
Capitalist Machinations for Post-War Advantages
With regard to providing a reserve stock pile, the capitalist hindrances are just as clear. It was mainly through the machinations of the British capitalists who control raw rubber production in the Far East that American stock piles were kept low. “It is no secret that British interests did what they could to discourage the stock pile program,” writes Prince M. Carlisle in the New York Times of December 21, 1941, because of fear that American capitalists might be left with post-war surpluses of strategic items and thus “enjoy an economic advantage over Britain in the fight for domination of the post-war foreign trade structure.”
Here, then, is clear evidence that the only reason that the American people are today deprived of the use of rubber is because of the lack of foresight, the selfish profiteering interests and the competitive machinations of capitalism.
 
Coining Gold from Copper
2) THE COPPER INDUSTRY – Numerous copper companies, such as the Anaconda, the Bunker Hill and the Douglas, have in recent months deliberately withheld production of products essential to the war machine because they wanted to dodge the excess profits tax. After a certain point, the RATE of profit of the copper companies declined if they continued maximum production, although the TOTAL AMOUNT of their profit increased.
As a result, these companies produced merely enough to guarantee a maximum rate of profit, even though their capacity for production was greater. This decision deprived thousands of workers of jobs, and will deprive the people as a whole of many necessary civilian products which are made of copper.
Senator Harry S. Truman described this situation:
“I believe there is an organized effort on the part of the producers to bring things to a crisis so the government will have to offer a bonus or higher prices: The same situation prevails in copper as in aluminum – a monopoly wants to stay in control after the war.”
The real low-down was given just the other day when the copper companies agreed to increase production – but at prices increased by 40 per cent!
 
Profits Come First for Auto Magnates
3) AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY – This is the most dramatic instance of the profit-grabbing and inefficiency of the capitalists. Here hundreds of thousands of workers face unemployment because of the policy of the auto magnates.
The attitude of the auto manufacturers has been chaacteristic of all of the capitalists. They had the attitude that they were making sufficiently tremendous profits on the production of autos: the profits of the 11 largest auto corporations increased 278 per cent from the third quarter of 1940 to a similar period of 1941. As C.B. Wilson, president of General Motors and spokesman of the auto magnates declared, they could make 32 per cent profit on the manufacture of autos and only a mere 9 per cent on war production. It is clear from this that the auto magnates prefer to continue producing autos; unless, of course, the ante is jacked up a bit on war production! As a result; the auto magnates have continually stalled off the government order for conversion to war production, have refused to engage in the industry-wide pooling and planning and sub-contracting to smaller producers which is necessary for the success of such conversion. Today, after a year and a half of the war program, the quota for the production of autos has been doubled for the month of January from 102,000 to 204,000 autos, although that is supposed to be the last month of auto production.
The excuse which the auto magnates give for this is that the parts for these autos have already been produced, and only assembly work is necessary. But this is only another way of saying that they have been building parts for more cars than were allowed by past production quotas in their reckless surge for profits.
* * *
What are the conclusions to be drawn from these facts? Many of the “liberals” have said that this means that the capitalists were not really interested in winning the war, that this proved that the war was a “people’s” war and not a capitalist war. Such an approach completely misunderstands the nature of capitalism.
 
The Transition to a War Economy
The primary interest of the capitalist, we have said, is profit. As a result, the given group of capitalists – say, the auto manufacturers – are primarily interested in the profits for their group and, within their group, for their company. The capitalists cannot conceive of a war without profiteering, because war profiteering is merely an intensified form of their peacetime activities and because they understand that the acquisition of profits for the capitalist class is the main purpose of the war.
However, if the requirements of victory for the capitalist class as a whole dictate the subordination of the interests of a group or an industry within capitalism, it may be expected that sooner or later such subordination will take place. The present conflict within the OPM between the dollar a year men and the “liberals” is mainly as to the pace with which that subordination should be effected.
What can, however, be proved by demonstrating the facts of capitalist greed and inefficiency in the transformation from a peacetime to a war economy are the following:

Capitalism is a wasteful and inefficient system. It cannot plan on either a national or an international scale. It deprives the mass of the people of products, under the guise that they are needed for war production; but in reality because of its selfish profiteering. It causes hundreds of thousands of workers, in another case, to lose their jobs because of this selfish profiteering. And the very existence of war in the world today is a damning indictment of capitalism – when most of the world’s resources are used for mass murder instead of constructive purposes.
 
Socialism could plan better, provide the people with all necessities and. if need be, conduct a revolutionary war against a capitalist aggressor with incomparable efficiency. Under socialism, forced into a war by some remaining aggressor capitalist country or countries, there would be no shortages or priorities unemployment created by the greed of a few owners of the means of production, because the people would own the means of production.

And even more important, in a socialist world, that crowning and most damnable instance of capitalist greed and inefficiency – imperialist war – would be a thing of the past. Socialism could take the vast resources which are available and use them for constructive purposes.
The inefficiency due to capitalist competition; the shortages and high prices due to capitalist monopoly; the wars due to imperialist rivalry; the inefficiency and economic inequality due to the impossibility of constructive economic planning under capitalism – all would be things of the past. In their place could arise the new society of peace and plenty.
That is why socialism is the burning need of the hour.
 



One of the most interesting results of the war in domestic political life has been, the reaction of the Coughlin movement. This native fascist organization, which reached a peak about three years ago only to subside into a comparatively routine existence in recent months, has been developing an extremely clever and dangerous line with regard to the War – a line which requires the wary attention of all workers.
The approach of the Coughlinites, until the entrance of America into the war, was patterned along the classical lines of fascist demagogy. Appealing primarily to the lower middle class elements of the population – those who had been hit hardest by the depression and who were most susceptible to reactionary prejudices – the Coughlinites combined a surface “radicalism” with a basically fascist program, as Hitler did. Coughlin spoke with bravado against the capitalists – or at least the Jewish capitalists – even though his program proposed the continuation of capitalism.
Coughlin mumbled something about a fair wage for workers, but showed himself an unceasing enemy of the trade union organizations, like the CIO, which the workers were building. Coughlin attempted to capitalize on the discontent that was arising in the country by harnessing it to the most despicable prejudices, such as anti-Semitism.
Recently, Coughlin’s major line of attack was on the war issue. He was the ideological inspirer of the fascist section of the America First Committee. Coughlin’s paper, Social Justice, carried pages of isolationist propaganda, liberally mixed with anti-Semitism. Isolationist Senators Nye, Wheeler and Clark were its heroes.
 
Reasons for Isolationism
The isolationist position of the Coughlin movement was motivated by several considerations. The most important were:

The Coughlinite movement had not yet received the support of the major section of the American capitalist class, which was interventionist and which did not utilize the Coughlinites because it did not yet need a fascist movement to save its economic system. Accordingly, the Coughlinites received support only from some of the capitalists in whose interest it was not to enter the war against Germany. This, of course, is one of the reasons why the Coughlinites stagnated in recent year – the lack of a need, from the capitalist point of view, of calling up a fascist movement, left the Coughlinites without what must necessarily be their main financial and ideological support if they are to be the fascist movement of America.
 
The Coughlinites reflected the opinion of that minor section of the American capitalist class that was in favor of appeasing Hitler in order to form a” world bloc of capitalist powers to fight against Russia. But the main enemy of American capitalism – as the overwhelming section of the American capitalists correctly realized – was Germany, and therefore the advice of Social Justice was not heeded.
 
The Coughlinites were trying to develop mass support on an issue which would excite people – and the most important was the war issue. They adopted their violent isolationism as a means of attracting the tremendous latent anti-war sentiment that existed until the entry of America into the war. The purposes for which they were going to use this Sentiment were clearly fascist.
 

Not Like Wheeler and Taft
Now that the war is here, the Coughlinites have not abjectly surrendered to the Roosevelt Administration, as have Wheeler, Taft and other former isolationists.
Just as Lindbergh played a long chance in making an anti-Semitic speech which he knew would bring a shower of abuse on his head, but which he hoped would help pave the road to playing the role of America’s future Fuehrer; so the Coughlinites are now taking a long range perspective by voicing such an extremely critical attitude.
They ridicule the shift of the New York Daily News, which has resurrected Stephen Decatur’s slogan about “my country, right or wrong.” No, says Social Justice, we will support our country only when it is right, and not when it is wrong. The implication as to which case applies at present is plain.
Social Justice appears in its December! 22 issue with a sharp attack on the “war profiteers”; it attacks the “filthy internationalist gold-mongers,” the “motion picture artists living on fat salaries of $100,000 a year,” etc. The old fascist demagogic technique is apparent: develop a mumbo-jumbo, mixing in popular prejudices against movie actors’ high salaries with the popular prejudices against “gold-mongers.”
But Social Justice makes no attempt to explain to its readers the cause of the war. It makes no attempt to tie up the existence of capitalism with the outbreak of war, because it dares not do so; it is pledged to rescue capitalism.
 
Try to Exploit Legitimate Complaints
The Coughlinites are playing the game of keeping mum about their attitude toward the war itself, while demagogically attempting to exploit the legitimate complaints and distress which will undoubtedly arise among the people as the war proceeds.
It is necessary for the working class movement to keep a sharp eye on the Coughlinites. Those who really want to build a new and better world of socialist freedom must see to it that the fascist demagogues do not succeed in enticing the people with their false “radicalism.”
The fascists must constantly be exposed for what they are. It must be made clear that for all their fake criticism and attacks on the war-makers and profiteers, that they aid in maintaining the continued rule of the war-makers and profiteers because they stand for the retention of capitalism in its most vicious form.
 



The Truman Senate Investigating Committee report deserves the attention of every worker. It reveals much of the real character of the present war. Unfortunately, Labor Action has been forced this week to cut out a lot of its material on this report because of the need for printing full comment on the labor unity situation. We shall return to this report in more detail next week. In the meantime, a few initial observations:
1) This is only the beginning. We’ll bet our last dollar against a doughnut that the committee failed to reveal more than it did; that when the true story of capitalist inefficiency, waste, graft, nepotism, selfishness, routinism and sheer -stupidity gets out, this report will appear mild by comparison. And the truth will out, sooner or later!
2) The report proves to the hilt what we have been hammering away at in Labor Action: CAPITALISM IS THE REAL ENEMY OF PRODUCTION! The report confirms the charges made last week in Labor Action – that low production of copper, lead and zinc, all basic war materials, was caused by industry’s refusal to produce more until prices were jacked up and taxes eased.
 
Profits as Usual
The report gives facts and figures on how the automobile industry insisted on profits as usual, how it refused to convert to war production because it was coining tremendous profits in civilian auto production.
Each industrial group within the capitalist class, and each company within that group, is utilizing the war production program as a grand opportunity tor profiteering. This results in a situation where – as in rubber – not only are there inadequate war supplies but civilian needs are cut into as well. And the only reason is the greed and inefficiency of the capitalists, concerned not with the needs of humanity but with profits for themselves.
And what more damning indictment of capitalism can there be when we see that privately built battleships cost $8,000,000 to $10,000,000 more than government built ships – and yet most of the war program’s ships are to be privately built. (It is for this that workers are asked to cut their standard of living by increasing taxes.)
How much point these facts give to the demand Labor Action has been raising: CONSCRIPT THE WAR INDUSTRIES UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL!
3) The report attempts, unsuccessfully, to absolve President Roosevelt of all responsibility in the fiasco it describes. As a matter of fact, the President is directly responsible. He knew what he was doing when he let the dollar-a-year men run;the show. He knew what he was doing when he appointed Bill Knudsen.
For instance, the Truman committee attempts to save the President’s political face by declaring that he could not be held responsible for the mirage of red tape, shifting responsibility and inadequate powers since the OPM never asked for an improvement of the situation. A lame excuse! The President appointed the dollar-a-year men; he presumably received reports on what was going on; he, too, is responsible.
4) The report has only one recommendation – that the dollar-a-year men sever their connections with the companies they were formerly employed by. Coming after so much factual dynamite, this is sugary indeed. Because the Truman report itself indicates why this panacea is meaningless. Suppose the dollar-a-year men do resign their posts with the large corporations. They will still continue, in the words of the report, to deal “with matters involving the welfare of the class of clients by whom they were formerly employed and by whom they naturally expect to be employed in the future.”
 
Suppose They Do Quit?
Will the following description, offered by the Truman committee of the dollar-a-year men, be changed if they quit their company posts?
“The dollar-a-year men and non-compensation men subconsciously reflect the opinions and conclusions which they formerly reached as managers of large interests with respect to government competition, with respect to taxation and amortization, with respect to the financing of new plant expansion, and with respect to the margin of profit which should be allowed on war contracts.”
As a matter of fact, it may be expected that a number Of dollar-a-year men will be cleared out. But that will change nothing, fundamentally.
The only administration that could really end this profiteering, waste and inefficiency would be a workers’ and farmers’ government. Such an administration could really end all the scandals described in the Truman report, because it would abolish,the root cause of these scandals – private ownership of the means of production, for private profit – and substitute in its stead communal production for public use.
 



In the midst of a time such as the one in which we live, it seems almost inconsequential to discuss the death of any ONE man – even if it be the suicide of as noted an author as Stefan Zweig. The capitalist world in which we live values human life so little – far less, for instance, than a good lathe part or a few Garand rifles – that one becomes hardened, almost indifferent to the phenomenon of premature death. When the casualties are numbered in figures too large to have any vivid significance in the minds of those who remain, one is tempted to ask: what is the importance of another death – and the death of a man who lived his entire life in comfort and was not forced to die with the horror of the battlefield as his last image of consciousness?
Yet there is an importance to the suicide of Stefan Zweig – an importance which even the casual commentators of the capitalist press could not fail to note; and it was that which made them so uncomfortable in discussing Zweig’s last act.
Zweig was not really a great writer. Nothing that he wrote bears promise of living much beyond the present; and much of what he wrote – the biographies and historical sketches – were little more than pot-boilers.
Zweig’s forte was the minutely polished short story, the stylistically meticulous work – perfect in its small way, but adding little to the reader’s emotional or intellectual stature.
To a degree this method was the reflection of the class to which Zweig so completely adhered: the Viennese petty bourgeoisie with its light facade of culture, its freedom and its shallowness. Zweig never made any pretense at being interested in social or political life. He was the respectable and successful author throughout; not even the First World War, apparently, affected his literary development to any vital degree.
It was only the Second World War – the TOTAL war, which leaves nothing untouched – that finally brought Zweig face to face with the reality of our times. And his one great act of intellectual decency is the statement he left at his suicide, in which he admitted that he was incapable of meeting that reality.
Zweig – be it remembered to his credit – did not attempt to rationalize when he left this world. Even in his exile he had lived handsomely; material or financial cares never entered his life, and he was honest enough to so admit in his parting statement.
His Europe Could Never Return
He had come to the end of his day. The Europe, he wrote, which he had known and loved – was devouring itself; the language which he loved was now the property of the fascist maniacs. Whatever would happen, one thing was certain: his Europe could never return. Rather than a painful and dubious attempt to reorientate his life to these new conditions, he had decided to leave. It was the end of his day.
Zweig, never interested in politics, was yet the victim of politics; but even in his death he could not analyze in political terms. We would say that Zweig was expressing, in his farewell letter, the end of a culture and a society; that, regardless of his realization, his suicide epitomized the blind alley of the culture he personified. Whatever was fine and beautiful in it can only find new expression in the cultural renaissance which is the promise of socialism; or it can find permanent burial in the concentration camps of fascism. But the verdict of history does not permit it to live again as it did once before.
That, then, is the choice as we see it. We can hardly blame Zweig for not seeing the same way. His entire life precluded such an understanding. We can at least honor him in this: his final act in life was his most understanding – and far more courageous than many others of his genre who live on as useless, dried out skeletons.
Never able to break beyond the bounds of the bourgeois world, Zweig was both one of its most accomplished personifications and cruel victims. He was no less a casualty of the Second World War than any of the American, British, Dutch, German, Russian or Japanese boys who may be dying at this very moment.
 



The following letter has been sent by the managing editor of Labor Action to the editor of the St. Louis Star-Times. It is reprinted here for the interest of our readers:
March 21, 1942
Editor, St. Louis Star-Times
St. Louis, Missouri
Dear Sir:
My attention has been called to an article in your issue, dated March 10, in which Labor Action – a weekly labor journal in whose name I write this letter – is both incorrectly connected with a certain organization and an extremely serious and vicious implication is made about its character. In order to clear this matter up, I wish to make the following points:
1) Labor Action is not, as your article asserted, the “official organ of the Socialist (or ‘Social’) Workers Party,” nor has it ever in any way been connected with that organization. Until recently, Labor Action was the official organ of the Workers Party, and though no longer such, is still regarded as a partisan of the Workers Party’s principles. A simple check by your writer of these facts would have prevented this error.
2) A slanderous and vicious implication is created about Labor Action by your writer by using one of the oldest tricks in journalism. He writes a paragraph about “Japanese agents ... promoting pro-Japanese Pacific Movement among Negroes of this area.” He then follows immediately with a description of the alleged activities of the Socialist (or “Social”) Workers Party in New Madrid County and of Labor Action. Thus, by “cleverly” making two utterly unrelated assertions, one immediately after the other, he creates the obvious implication that the alleged activities of the Socialist Workers Party and/or Labor Action are in some way connected with the “pro-Japanese Pacific Movement”
I do not have any way of knowing if the Pacific Movement is active in New Madrid County, but I do know that it is a vile and libelous slander to connect in any way a labor newspaper, such as Labor Action (which has always been opposed to Japanese imperialism – even when many people were selling, or sanctioning the sale of, scrap steel to Japan, which is today landing in the bodies of American boys) or a labor organization such as the Socialist Workers Party, with this Pacific Movement. It is true that Labor Action printed an exposé of the Sikeston lynching and it is possible that copies of that issue were read in Sikeston itself. But what connection has that with “pro-Japanese activity?”
Certainly, the Star-Times does not believe that anyone opposing a lynching or advocating better working conditions for sharecroppers is thereby “pro-Japanese.”
What makes this matter particularly sinister is the fact that Mr. Carl Pretschold, the author of the article in question, is fully acquainted with all of these matters, and could not possibly be ignorant of the above-mentioned facts.
I insist on immediate publication in full of this letter in order to clear up the slanderous impression created by Pretschold’s article.



 


Sincerely yours,
Irving Howe
Managing Editor, Labor Action



P.S. – I am enclosing for your information a copy of the March 23 issue of Labor Action containing an article which gives the point of view of Max Shachtman, national secretary of the Workers Party, on this matter.
 



In some rather bashful news items, the American press announced two weeks ago that President Roosevelt, credited with being the originator of the Atlantic Charter and its promise of the Four Freedoms, had extended the brotherly hand of friendship to the Spanish fascist dictator, General Francisco Franco ... credited with having murdered tens of thousands of those Spanish: workers and democrats who dared oppose his 1936 fascist coup.
President Roosevelt said, only a few days after the celebration of the first anniversary of the Atlantic Charter, that it was his intention to give the Franco government financial aid in order to rehabilitate those art treasures, libraries and other cultural institutions which were damaged during the Spanish Civil War. The sole price which the President demanded for this aid was that Franco should not enter the war on the side of Hitler.
Roosevelt’s cynical concern over re-establishing Spanish culture will probably occasion many a snicker in Washington diplomatic circles.
 
What Is Really Involved
What is really involved here is an attempt by Roosevelt to bribe the Spanish dictator into remaining neutral for the duration. Franco, who has never been averse to having some grease smeared over his filthy palms, is apparently ready to take money from all comers, even if disguised in an enveloped ridiculously labeled “For Culture Only”
Franco has his own ideas about culture – as witness his famous massacre of 20,000 unarmed Spaniards in the Toledo bull ring during the Civil War. Is not such a man truly worthy of the aid of the leader of the camp of democracy, freedom, culture, the Four Freedoms, etc., etc.? And if FDR can bribe him with some of those magical American DOLLEROS to not OPENLY and COMPLETELY side with Hitler is that not a great step forward for the democratic cause?
And why, pray, are the liberals biting their lips so much? Don’t they KNOW that FDR did this before, that when he imposed an EMBARGO on shipments of arms to Loyalist Spain during the Civil War he did as much to aid Franco as did Mussolini. And don’t they know that Franco wouldn’t feel too uncomfortable in the camp of the United Nations? As a good fascist he would find companionship, to put it mildly, with anti-Semite Sikorsky, with Dictator Vargas, with Royalist de Gaulle and with that white hope of humanity (“only 500 Indians killed”), Imperialist Winston Churchill.
For those poor devils who have the unenviable task of composing enthusiastic little homilies about the United Nations to be printed in the “liberal journals,” we have a certain sympathy.
 
A Picture of the World to Come
But there is one other aspect of present world politics that is somewhat clarified by Roosevelt’s offer. That is the question of war aims. Many people have complained that FDR and “my friend Winston” have been too vague and hazy about the kind of world which they want after the war. The last few weeks have given at least a partial answer.
It will be a world where “Fellow Democrat” Vargas will crack his brutal whip over South America. It will be a world where Winston Churchill will be able to boast of the tranquility and civilized advancement which Britain brings to India, citing as evidence the fact that ONLY 500 Indians were killed in the past month by the British police. And it will be a world in which General Francisco Franco will rehabilitate Spanish culture with the aid of FDR’s magical American dolleros.
(And who can foretell the possibilities for cultural advancement under such a set-up? Perhaps after a while, when enough of those magical dolleros have passed through Franco’s palms, he will even send over a few samples of Spanish culture ... in exchange for some of FDR’s postage stamps!)
We have but one suggestion to add to this idyllic picture. Macabre, perhaps – but pertinent. We suggest that when Franco begins to unearth those Spanish art treasures – with the aid of FDR’s magical dolleros – he send to America, as evidence of his works, some specimens of the bones and skeletons of those millions of Spanish workers whom he murdered, starved and enslaved, so that FDR can show the American people how he helped spread the Four Freedoms across the earth.
 



When a novel is as completely concerned with political problems, as all of Silone’s are, the critic faces the alternatives: Is this book to be evaluated as a work of art or as a draft program for a political party? Is it to be judged by the pleasure and stimulation afforded the reader or is it to be analyzed as a political document?
It is easy to say that a work of art deserves consideration on the basis of its intrinsic merits, to acknowledge Trotsky’s formula that “art functions according to laws of its own.” But the application of this formula is a rather more difficult task. For instance, the question immediately arises: To what extent do the faulty politics of the writer result in a deterioration of his work’s literary merit?
Nor are these difficulties lessened when one remembers that in recent years many novels have read like political programs, and many political programs like novels.
The above truistic remarks are prefixed to this review because of a fear that The Seed Beneath the Snow [1] is likely to be cavalierly dismissed by radicals as merely another instance of intellectual backsliding reflecting Silone’s retrogression from Marxism to a strange variety of primitive, revolutionary Christianity. Yet such an attitude, despite its political good intentions, would result in a failure to appreciate a literary masterpiece of our times.
The reader will recall that there has been a certain developmental line observable in Silone’s two previous novels. Fontamara is an epic of mass awakening and struggle against the scourge of Italian fascism. It is objective and impersonal to the point of adopting the characteristics of a folk tale; it breathes with fire, hope and confidence. This is the Silone, who, while no longer an adherent of the Third International, is still a revolutionary Marxist. The political pivot of Fontamara is the revolutionary section of the urban proletariat even though its main characters are peasants: it is the peasant who goes to the city, there to be tinged for the first time by revolutionary ideas, and who returns to the countryside to plant those ideas among his fellows.
 
Silone in His Earlier Works
In Bread and Wine we meet a vastly different Silone. He has lost his easy optimism; defeat is complete; the period of struggle is at an end; there is only despair, resignation and obeisance to authority. The novel’s protagonist, Pietro Spina, who largely reflects the opinions of his creator, is a revolutionary leader returned from exile to the peasant areas of the Abruzzi in order to re-establish ties with his people and test his theories in the experiences of actual life. Bread and Wine is largely a book of dialogue, of sparkling, brilliant dialectical interplay – more mature and provocative than Fontamara, though less dramatic – tracing the ideological transformation of Spina, the Marxist, into Spina, the revolutionary Christian saint.
At the end of Bread and Wine (in the by-now classic dialogue with his old teacher, Don Benedetto) Spina concludes that his old life has been barren, chained to an exiled apparatus which failed to understand those workers and peasants whose liberation it claimed as its end. Spina adopts as his guiding principle the ethical ideal of primitive Christianity, “a Christianity denuded of all religion and all church control.” He now refuses to recognize any duality between means and ends; the only way to achieve the good life is to live it and thereby inspire others to live it. The task is not to propagandize, not to organize parties, not to preach, but to live as saints, revolutionary saints.
“No word and no gesture can be more persuasive than the life and, if necessary, the death of a man who strives to be free, loyal, just, sincere, disinterested. A man who shows what a man can be.”
It is on this note that Bread and Wine closes. And it is to show the actual living-out of the doctrine which Bread and Wine only stated, that The Seed Beneath the Snow is written. It is even slower in pace than Bread and Wine; it contains none of the fascinating dialectics of political and intellectual debate which made Bread and Wine such a brilliant novel.
In a way, it returns to the objective method of Fontamara. Just as Fontamara depicted the living-out of one approach to life, so does The Seed Beneath the Snow depict another approach – with Bread and Wine as the intermediary explanation of why Silone abandoned the first approach for the second. The trilogy is now complete – a masterwork of literature.
As everyone knows, Dostoievsky’s Crime and Punishment can be read merely as a detective story. It can also be read on at least one other plane as well – as a profound exposition of Dostoievsky’s views on morality and human conduct. So, too, can The Seed Beneath the Snow be read merely as a realistic novel of peasant life in fascist Italy or as that and as an exposition of Silone’s views on how to meet the problems of contemporary society. It is with extraordinary skill that Silone weaves and interweaves these two motifs – not conflicting but co-extant and even complementary.
 
The Plane of the New Book
On one plane, The Seed Beneath the Snow is a realistic novel of the life of a people. It is therefore more illogical, more contradictory, more twisted than Bread and Wine; not because of any perversity or light-mindedness of the author, but rather because of its faithful adherence to life.
Nothing – not even Silone’s previous books – can compare with The Seed Beneath the Snow for a picture of the concrete effects of fascist society on daily life. It concerns itself not with the more sensational and crude horrors of fascism, but rather with showing how fascist society corrodes and destroys the most elementary relationships and the most basic values of life. Fascism is hateful not merely because of its rubber hose, its concentration camps, its castor oil; but also because it makes each man suspicious of his neighbor, because it exalts ignorance and stupidity into a system, because it makes of its subjects ever-fearful beasts instead of men. Some of the most remarkable sections of the book portray the life of the town petty bourgeoisie and office holders: their spiritual corruption (”What has that to do with it,” queries the local judge when asked by a friend if he sincerely meant his lyrical panegyric of fascist “national mysticism”!); the constant toadying to superior authority; the solemn development of the most arrant nonsense into a system of logical absurdities (Does the state exist for man? No, man exists for the state. Does the pharmacy exist for the sick? No, the sick exist for the pharmacy. Does the handkerchief exist for the nose? Of course not, the nose exists for the handkerchief.)
Silone blends violent realism with the broadest and most scathing satire. All the rotten parts of fascist society – and by inference, all of contemporary society as well – are shown in all their ugliness, filth, corrosion. The only person who retains a degree of freedom is the much-envied village idiot, who is certified by the state as being a simpleton and therefore has the right to tell the truth about it!
But to read this book merely in this light would constitute an act of irresponsibility for the serious reader. It is at least as necessary to consider the idea as the picture, even though we find far more to quarrel with in the former.
 
A New Spina Returns
The plot of The Seed Beneath the Snow is deceptively simple. Spina returns to the town of his birth, spiritually reinforced by his new life-creed; he effects a reconciliation with his old grandmother, finding that her strong, unbending and literal Christianity coincides with his humanistic creed with regard to problems of practical morality; he convinces her of the moral loss involved in gaining a pardon from the state at the price of a humiliating “admission of guilt”; he spends his time now, not by wondering about the validity of Marxism, which he has already abandoned, but rather in developing his friendships with a rural rebel, Simone the Polecat, and a pathetic deaf mute, Infante. He gradually gains the confidence of many of the peasants, never by talking politics, but rather by stimulating them into decent, honest and fearless friendships, the very existence of which comes to represent a threat to the local authorities; and finally, he sacrifices himself for the deaf mute Infante as a last gesture of humility. And that is all.
Silone is convinced that the use of propaganda and agitation in fascist Italy are completely useless as a means of overthrowing the dictatorship. People have been misled too long and too often by words and slogans; they automatically distrust and disbelieve all phrases. It is useless, again, to point out the stupidities and lies of the official propaganda because nobody believes that either, least of all the government propagandists themselves. Humanity has become so utterly corrupted, so cynical and hopeless, that it is useless to speak of programs, of platforms, of parties. One cannot organize a revolutionary party in a town where no one is certain that his neighbor will not betray him for so much as making a joke about the head of the state.
It is necessary to show the people once more how to live. One must show them that it is still possible to live honestly, decently; that friendships can be cultivated for their own sake and not as the means toward getting a favor from the local fascist secretary; it is necessary to teach them the meaning, not by words but by deeds, of those most elementary human decencies which have, until now, been taken more or less for granted. Then, and only then, can the régime of Etcetera Etcetera be wiped out. When people have regained their respect for themselves and others as worthy human beings, when they understand the meaning of trust and friendship – fascism is doomed.
 
Spina Speaks for Silone
And that is the significance of the plot. Spina’s friendship and sacrifice for Infante is the symbol of the book: the symbol of the revolutionary saint bringing back to life the most lowly of the oppressed (Infante was even exploited by the poorest peasant, ate potato peels and lived in a cave with a donkey); teaching him the simplest words, the basis for human communication; giving him dignity and joy; and finally making the supreme sacrifice in his behalf. Infante is the symbol of the Italian people degraded to muteness and deafness; his resurrection is the triumph of the intellectual, Spina.
“To our newly discovered friends,” says Spina, “we should not bring theories but only our friendship. What better gift can we offer them? Nor must we indulge in any more distrust than is strictly necessary; to take it for granted that a man is a coward means to make him into one, to cover him with shame. If our friends are demoralized by their long isolation, we must seek to reawaken their pride and self-esteem and they’ll see to the rest. The main thing is to watch out that we don’t fall into rhetoric and bluff.”
And again:
“An old, faithful and disinterested friendship is in itself a total negation of the relationships in vogue today, just as life is a negation of death.”
The perceptive reader immediately asks: Is this theory intended merely for the unique situation in Italy today, or is it Silone’s “program” for contemporary society as a whole? Is it based merely on a conjectural situation or does it have more basic roots and premises?
Though there is no explicit answer to this question in The Seed Beneath the Snow, we are forced to conclude that the latter is the case. Silone has relapsed into a variety of what he seems to think is primitive Christianity, an abstraction of the absolutist moral creed of the love-concept of parts of the New Testament, with which is mingled elements of the philosophical idealist theory, held by Christians and Confucians alike, that the pre-condition for social liberation is individual ethical regeneration. Together with this, there is Silone’s profound disillusionment with Marxian politics, resulting from his identification of Stalinism with Marxism. (In this respect alone he is akin to the contemporary intellectuals.) Silone’s disillusionment does not, however, take the form of a surrender to the powers that be; there is no evidence that he has become a hawker for bourgeois democracy, that he has sold his soul for another Versailles Treaty. For, whatever one’s opinion of his new creed, it is necessary to emphasize that” if he has ceased to be a social revolutionary, he has remained an implacable rebel against contemporary society – more of a rebel, it needs be noted, than many professing to be Marxists. He has not made his peace with Mammon; he accepts no lesser evil. Silone’s disillusionment takes, on the contrary, the form of absolutist suspicion of the party. He is obsessed with the dangers of organization, the inevitable bureaucracy of the intellectuals which he believes parties produce.
 
Fears of Bureaucracy, a Universal Phenomenon
But there remains a residue of a certain revolutionary practicality in Silone’s outlook. When Spina begins to “organize” the peasants on the basis of friendship, he displays much of the shrewd method which Silone’s newly revolutionized leader did in Fontamara. On a more general plane, it may be admitted that much of what Silone says about approaching the Italian peasantry at present is undoubtedly true. Especially in a situation where we find a lone, isolated revolutionist in a peasant area who is not in contact with any revolutionary party (perhaps because none exists), would he not, if he had some sense, act similarly to Spina in many practical aspects? He might not indulge in so much rhetoric, which the actual peasants of Italy, unlike Silone’s peasants, would appreciate very little, but he would undoubtedly try to gain their respect as a human being, and their confidence. He would try to prove himself, to demonstrate in actual practice his worth as a friend, a confidant, a leader.
“Ah,” Silone might now say, “here is where we part roads. For you, gaining the friendship and confidence of the people is merely a means toward an end, a means toward enrolling them under your political banner. While I seek their friendship as an end in itself; I have no ulterior motives.”
We are now at the crux of the argument. We have the right to ask: Once you, Silone, and your fellow saints, whom you presumably wish to spring up in other parts of Italy, have gained the friendship of the peasants, what will you do then? Is it really merely enough to exist as martyrs, is it really true that your very existence would then obliterate fascism? Would you not yourself tend to organize a party, a peculiar kind of party, but a party nonetheless? Would you not contact the saint, with his flock of peasants, in the adjacent towns? In a word, wouldn’t you yourself organize? And once organized, what guarantee – of the kind you ask of the Marxists – would there then be that your morality would not become party (or church or whatever else you would call your organization) morality? What about your organization would guarantee the non-existence of bureaucracy and dishonesty and deceit, unlike a Marxian party? Would it be the fact that your organization or sect would be based on love, on friendship and not on dialectical absorption with the seizure of power? But is it not possible for a sect based on love and friendship – especially when one considers its temptation for Messianism – to develop a bureaucracy at least as vile as certain “Marxist” parties have developed? As witness, the greatest of all bureaucracies in human history: the Christian Church, which, according to your belief, started with a creed similar to your present one!
 
The Inadequacy of “New” Piety
We are forced to come to the conclusion: the only way to guarantee the non-existence of a bureaucracy is to refrain from organization; the refusal to organize together with one’s fellow men can mean only either constant subservience to the powers that be. or isolated, futile acts of individual heroism. And is that not what Spina comes to at the end of this book? True, Silone says, but his act will be remembered and revered by the peasants; it will inspire them to ... to what?
This, then, is Silone’s dilemma: the dilemma of defeat. Let it be remembered that Silone argued not against certain kinds of parties, certain features of parties – but as against parties per se. And that, we believe, cannot reach any other conclusion than the one we have outlined above.
How, then, was it possible for Christianity to retain such a hold on millions of people with the creed of love and friendship when it never organized to give them concrete and real meaning. The answer to this question will help us explain Silone’s other great error: his misunderstanding of the nature of Christianity. When, in its inception, Christianity, as the creed of a revolutionary sect, had a certain specific, historical r61e, which helped produce its moral creed, which in turn served as its ideological banner – then Christianity organized into a tight, intolerant, bureaucratic and homogeneous force.
It did not believe that merely to live righteously was enough to cast evil out of the world; it knew that evil was personified in corporeal forms and social forces and went out to do battle against them. When, afterward, Christianity degenerated into a solace for existent misery and a handmaiden of reactionary social orders, it maintained its hold, first, by its support from the social system it helped sustain, and second, by its opiatic creed of salvation in an after-life. It doped men to live “righteous” lives not, primarily, as a means of bringing heaven to earth, but as a means of getting into heaven. And those rare thinkers who took the premises of Christianity seriously found it necessary, as does Silone, to break from the church and rebel in one way or another.
 
In Search of the Non-Existent
Thus we see that Silone’s admiration for primitive Christianity is based on a complete misunderstanding of its real character and subsequent development. Christianity never proposed passivity – until it became the organ of the status quo. Silone has attempted to reconcile the rebelliousness of primitive Christianity with the passivity of later Christianity – and they do not blend.
Baldly stated and abstracted from its context in the novel, Silone’s ideological creed does not appear very attractive to the radical reader. What does remain is a man of great sincerity and honesty, a man who in a period of intellectual surrender remains an uncompromising rebel and a man (most important of all) who is one of few genuinely great writers of our time; The Seed Beneath the Snow, we do not hesitate to say, is his most mature and finest novel to date. Let it be remembered that two of the world’s literary masterpieces, Dostoievsky’s Crime and Punishment and Tolstoy’s War and Peace, are expositions of reactionary ideologies. That does not prevent any sensible person from reading them again and again.
For our part, we hope that Silone will yet be stimulated to new revolutionary consciousness by the events which undoubtedly lie ahead. We see the future, not in Spina’s resignation and sacrifice, but in the unity and joint struggle of Romeo, the revolutionary worker of Bread and Wine, and Simone, the rebel peasant of The Seed Beneath the Snow. That Silone has brought them to the pages of literature is in itself cause for gratitude and rejoicing.

Footnote
1. The Seed Beneath the Snow, by Ignazio Silone. Harper & Brothers, New York: $2.75; 360 pp.
 



All of the smoldering conflicts between America and Britain on the one hand and Russia on the other will reach a head at the meeting of Foreign Ministers in Paris on June 15. There is a general feeling in diplomatic circles of America and Britain, a feeling which readily finds its way into the press, that a failure to reach agreement on the reorganization of Europe at this conference will make impossible the construction of a peace treaty and will indefinitely perpetuate the present stalemate of disorganization and confusion.
The crisis is chronic; it is deep; and no rhetorical flourishes can ease its severity. For what is at stake is nothing less than the question: who will control Europe, Anglo-American capitalism or Stalinist Russia? Concretely, at the present moment that means: who will control Germany which, despite its partial destruction by bombing, remains the industrial heart of Europe; and who will control the strategic port of Trieste?
When the question is posed this way, as one involving basic imperialist conflict, it can be seen how vacuous and infantile has been 99 per cent of the comment in the daily press on the stalemate among the “Big Three.” That Molotov is an obtuse dunderhead parrotting the ‘ instructions of the Stalin dictatorship; that Byrnes is a cracker politician of (to put it delicately) limited vision; that Bevin is an obstinate bureaucrat distinguishable from his Tory predecessor only by his lack of manners – this is of tenth-rate significance. The superficial foreign correspondents seize upon the admittedly none too admirable personalities of the negotiators as an explanation for the diplomatic deadlock, because they are unable to understand the basic issues.
 
The Struggle to Control Trieste
Take, for instance, the matter of Trieste, the important port which lies between Italy and Yugoslavia. It has been a bone of contention between the Italian and Slavic imperialists for many decades; its conglomerate population, predominantly Italian, has recently been subjugated to a virtual civil war, in which British troops have buttressed the otherwise weak Italian government. The Stalinist-supported Tito dictatorship of Yugoslavia has kept troops mobilized on the border to contribute its share to the war of nerves.
For the disposition of Trieste is of first importance in the determination of the political character of Europe. Trieste is a terminal port for central Europe. Whoever controls it, also controls the Adriatic sea. That means that if Tito got Trieste, Russia would in effect have acquired control of the Adriatic and would have gone a long way to closing the vast pincer movement, flanked on the left by its infiltration of Iran and its designs on Turkey and on the right by its penetration to the Adriatic, with which it has been menacing British domination of the Middle East and the eastern Mediterranean. (Russia’s insistence that the Italian navy be obliterated acquires additional significance in light of this situation; the absence of an Italian navy would make basic domination of the Adriatic.) This, then, is a vast imperialist squeeze play by the Russians and against which the British are fighting desperately.
Trieste, one of those pivotal port cities which, like Danzig, seems to bear the tragic destiny of becoming the focal point around which the drift to imperialist war is centered – this city will itself play no role in determining its future. It would seem obvious that if the disposition of a city or area is in dispute that the people in that city be allowed themselves to determine, their destiny by plebiscite. But the victors of the Second World War, whatever their differences, are agreed that the determination of the future of Trieste and other disputed places must be made in secret conference by diplomatic fencing and military threats. The talk about “democracy” and “self-determination” was useful during the war when it was necessary to lead men to death; but surely now, when the booty is being divided and idealistic rhetoric is at an end, no one can seriously expect that the people of Trieste will be allowed to determine their own destiny!
 
Trieste and the European Tragedy
The tragedy of Europe is concentrated in this city. Constant guerrilla warfare cripples Trieste. The British administration is inept and bureaucratic. It is probable that a plebiscite in Trieste itself would result in a majority for the Italians: the forty day reign of Tito’s terror last May and June left a bitter taste in the mouths of many of Trieste’s people. But that is of secondary importance. What is important is that the workers of Trieste are being demoralized by nationalist propaganda from both sides, that they are being subjected to a nationalist tug of war.
The Stalinist Party of Trieste is in a most uncomfortable position. It has to decide between the position of its Yugoslavian sister party, which is heatedly in favor of annexation to Yugoslavia, and the position of the Italian Stalinists who urge annexation to Italy. (This is the Stalinist version of internationalism!) The Trieste Stalinist movement, despite internal dissensions, has officially come out for annexation to Yugoslavia, a decision which rapidly followed the official Russian declaration in favor of the same position – and which earned the Trieste Stalinists the embarrassed condemnation of the leader of Italian Stalinism, Togliatti.
In the meantime, the functioning of the port is in a state of virtual paralysis. The Italian and Yugoslavian governments subsidize demonstrations – men will shout almost anything if they are hungry enough.
Multiply this situation indefinitely, and you have a picture of the tragic, heartbreaking situation of Europe today: a continent prostrate and victim to a ruthless and ceaseless struggle between the former victorious war partners. And the Foreign Ministers Conference meeting in Paris this week will see this issue of Trieste, and the other similar issues, brought to a climactic discussion. The imperialist powers will make a perhaps final attempt to reach some working agreement, but whatever that agreement or non-agreement may be we can say in advance: the domination of Europe by either Russian Stalinism or Anglo-American imperialism or both will result in the further disintegration of the continent. That is why the first duty of the revolutionary movement in Europe must be to take the lead in the struggle to drive out ALL armies of occupation from their borders so that the workers of Europe can begin once again painfully and slowly to reassert their needs.
 



French reaction, heartened by its defeat of the constitution which the Stalinists and Socialists had proposed and by its ascent in the recent election to the position of France’s largest party, has indicated that it may now be preparing to play its trump card – General Charles de Gaulle. Le Grand Charlie has come out of his sulking “retirement” in order to make a speech on June 17 in which he played on the familiar notes: France needs a “strong” government, a “strong” executive who shall be “above parties” and ... well, a “strong” government and a “strong” executive, etc.
You see, de Gaulle, being a military man – a profession in which political intelligence is usually considered a scandal – has only a few ideas, which he repeats with an air of ever-increasing wisdom. He never does say for whom the government should be strong, but when one recalls the imperialist bravado which his regime displayed, as well as its attempt to act the big power despite the lack of a basis for doing so, then it isn’t difficult to understand that de Gaulle’s ideas are simply this: A “strong” government in behalf of French capitalism which will attempt to recoup France’s former position in the imperialist world, salvage what is possible of its empire, and put an end to “disorder,” that is, working class militancy, at home. De Gaulle, though his advisors are shrewd enough to realize that such an attempt would be ludicrous and suicidal at the moment, fancies himself in the role of a modern Bonaparte saving his nation from decay – just as he once fancied himself in the role of Joan of Arc.
 
Why His Resurrection?
More important, however, is the question: Why has de Gaulle suddenly come out into the open again? The move is shrewdly calculated. France has recently experienced a SLIGHT political turn to the right, or, more accurately, sections of the middle class which, had previously been politically indifferent or apathetic have been roused in support of the right-wing parties. And, in turn, there has been a decrease in the intensity of working-class support for the two major left parties, the Socialists and Stalinists. Thus in the recent constitutional referendum, the working-class sections of Paris while continuing to vote as “their” parties directed them, registered a total vote less than the combined SP-CP total in the October, 1945, elections.
In a word, the working class in the recent election continued to support the Socialists and Stalinists. The Socialist vote dropped slightly from its October 1945 percentage, from 23.5 to 21 per cent. The Stalinists remained at 26 per cent. Since there was a greater total vote – also indicative of increased political participation by the middle class – this means that the total SP vote remained the same, despite its percentage decline, and the CP vote increased by 300,000. The SP-CP total vote was 47 per cent.
But it was the Catholic MRP vote which registered a considerable increase, from its 23 per cent in the October, 1945, election to 28 per cent in this election. Its total increase was 1,000,000 votes. Part of this increase was probably brought about by the last-minute appeal which the Pope made in behalf of the Catholic parties in Italy and France – an appeal which, while it did not move the French workers from their traditional “left” allegiances, undoubtedly succeeded in rallying middle class and rural votes for the MRP.
 
Right-Wing Parties Formed Bloc
Another reason for the better showing of the MRP is the fact that the right-wing parties combined into blocs in support of both the MRP and the even more reactionary Popular Republican Party. In a large number of constituencies, the other right-wing groups withdrew their candidates in behalf of the MRP.
But while the above factors are of some importance, they are not basic. The basic factor is this: the French middle class is gradually abandoning whatever partial allegiance it gave to the “left” parties. Shortly after the triumph of the Resistance, considerable portions of the middle class and the peasantry gave their support, for the first time, to the “parties of the left.” This support was based on a feeling of social desperation, an urge for sharp and thorough change. As in all critical turning points in history, the middle class became atomized and was split up into a number of tendencies.
In this condition, when it breaks out of its social inertia and routine, the middle class is ready to follow bold leadership which makes a decisive break with the past. But this the SP and the CP did not and could not do. On the contrary, they continued to maintain a coalition with the MRP, they participated in a government which brutally suppressed the Indo-Chinese nationalist revolution, they served in practice to maintain and reorganize the capitalist status quo. And thereby they failed to provide the middle classes with the bold leadership for which they were confusedly searching. The result, as shown in the recent referendum and election, is that the middle classes have relapsed into the camp of the capitalist parties; that, in fact, they have apparently been rallied to support those parties with some enthusiasm.
So that France remains at a virtual standstill, split in half between the MRP and the other capitalist parties as against the, Socialists and Stalinists. This situation, which makes for governmental disorganization and impotence, bears within itself the danger that there will arise a desire among many Frenchmen to find a “strong man above classes” who will end the stalemate and rule in the name of the nation. And for that role de Gaulle has nominated himself this week.
It would be false to believe, however, that there is any serious likelihood of the immediate establishment of such a Bonapartist regime based on extralegal power. De Gaulle might be called back to power; his government might have SOME of the features of a Bonapartist regime; but it would still not be able to go beyond parliamentary means. For so long as the French working class has any powers of resistance left in it, so long as it contains any capacity for struggle, it will not permit a dictatorship of Le Grand Charlie to be established. And we believe that the French workers do maintain such capacity for struggle.
France, therefore, faces for the next period a continued period of uneasy balance between the leading parties, of flimsy coalition governments, and also of increasing social crisis. The opportunities for a revolutionary party remain. In light of that, the vote received by the French Trotskyists – 45,000 votes in about one-fifth of the election districts – indicates that there are possibilities for the growth of such a revolutionary party. In its rapid development lies the hope for France and ultimately of Europe.
 



A series of extremely important electoral contests has recently taken place or soon will take place in several European countries. These elections will help to determine exactly what the political climate of the continent is, the knowledge of which is indispensable for any serious attempt to develop a socialist polity.
*

Right Wing Parties Win in Holland
The general election in Holland which took place two weeks ago continues the trend of those recent elections in Europe which have been relatively free. As in Austria, Hungary and parts of Germany, the conservative parties scored decisive victories while the Social-Democrats more or less held their own. The Stalinists, on whose vote most attention was focused, received what was for them a large vote in Holland, but not a vote large enough to suggest that there has been as decisive a shift to their banner as certain commentators have suggested.
Specifically, the Catholic Party in Holland, a conservative but not a fascist party, received 1,466,510 votes and 32 seats in the States General (Parliament); the Social-Democratic Labor Party received 1,347,664 votes with 29 seats; the four Protestant parties, 1,121,153 votes with 23 seats; the Liberals, a bourgeois party, 305,935 votes and six seats; and the Stalinists, 500,000 votes and ten seats. The Stalinist vote, ten per cent of the total, was large when one considers that their movement has never before amounted to much in Holland; and their 30 per cent of the total vote in Amsterdam and 18 per cent in Rotterdam indicate that they succeeded in getting some support from the working-class sections of the population.
Nonetheless, the basic swing was somewhat to the right of center. The Social-Democratic Premier, Willem Schermerhorn, has resigned as a result of the plurality of the Catholics, but it is believed that either he will be recalled to office or that a coalition with the Catholics will be formed. The Social-Democratic Party of Holland is even more right-wing than its sister parties in Europe; it played an ugly and shameful role in the suppression of the Indonesian revolution and has absorbed in recent months several small outright capitalist parties which give it an even more conservative coloration.
*

Italian Elections, Plebiscite on Monarchy
During the first week in June, Italy will hold general elections and a plebiscite on whether to continue the monarchy or to establish a republic. The monarchists, in a frantic attempt to gain some support, had the senile King, Victor Emmanuel, abdicate and replaced him with his not much brighter son, Humbert. Indications are that the monarchy will be decisively rejected; even the Catholic party, the Christian Democrats, at their recent congress voted against the monarchy by a two-to-one margin.
In the recent municipal elections, the Christian Democrats were by far the strongest party: out of 5,000 local municipalities, they gained a majority in nearly 2,000. The Socialists and Communists together gained majorities in 2,000 municipalities, the Socialists capturing control of the local government of Milan, the most important industrial city in Italy. The extreme monarchist groups and the neo-fascist “Uomo Qualunque” did very poorly, gaining control in only 200 towns, none of them large or important
Whatever the result of the coming Italian election, it seems likely that the present uneasy three-sided balance between the Christian Democrats, the Socialists and the Stalinists will be continued.
While the presence of British troops in Italy gives the Christian Democrats basic support, and insures at least the temporary continuation of the Italian capitalist class, that country remains wracked in a terrible social crisis which no electoral result or parliamentary maneuver can solve. Starvation, disorganization of production, tremendous black markets -- these remain the problems of Italy, problems basically insoluble within the framework of the capitalist economy which all of the dominant political parties of that country desire to maintain.
*

France Faces a Crucial Election
But the most important election in Europe will take place in France on June 2. The entire working class of Europe will look to France to see which way the political wind is blowing. Five major parties are in the field: the Catholic MRP, the Socialists, the Stalinists, the bourgeois democratic Radical Socialist Party (they whose name describes the exact opposite of what they are!), and a new reactionary coalition called the Republican Party of Liberty. Relations between the Socialists and Stalinists have become progressively worse and a bitter polemic is brewing between them. The recent referendum, in which the proposed constitution providing for a unicameral legislature supported by the “left” parties was defeated, indicates that France, too, may see a slight swing to the right. But France is today the most important stronghold of European Stalinism and there seems little doubt that it will continue to hold the support of large sections of the industrial workers.
A greatly encouraging feature of the French elections is the fact that the PCI (Parti Communiste Internationaliste), the French Trotskyist group, has entered the elections with candidates in several districts. The difficult electoral laws require a party to put up the large sum of nearly 1,000,000 francs in order to run candidates. This our French comrades succeeded in doing by dint of great sacrifice. In the elections last fall, the French Trotskyists polled about 11,000 votes in the two districts where they ran candidates. A large vote for their candidates in the coming election would be the most encouraging sign that could come from Europe that the revolutionary movement is making headway.
The results of the elections, held thus far in Europe and the anticipated results in those yet to come give general support to the position put forward by the Workers Party with regard to the present political situation in Europe: the masses of the continent, staggering under the weight of continuous starvation, suffering still from the effects of years of fascist domination and disoriented about the future by the reformists and Social-Democrats, are in a period of skeptical testing of programs and comparing of parties. They continue, on the whole, to give electoral support to the traditional parties of the left, but this support often stems more from desperation and lack of alternatives than from a thorough enthusiasm for these parties.
The masses of Europe are concerned with immediate problems: bread first and foremost; democratic reforms, for they have learned from the experiences of fascism that the struggle for economic gains requires a simultaneous acquisition and defense of democratic rights; and the struggle for national liberation, which in many European countries means the ousting of the military occupation of Stalinist Russia and the Anglo-American bloc. The revolutionary parties of Europe, still small and isolated as they are, can make contact with and convince the masses of their competence and seriousness only by conducting the most thorough struggle along these lines – a struggle which, in the present potentially explosive situation, can lead to posing the ultimate solution to Europe’s problems: socialist power.
 



The bitter assault against American labor into which Harry Truman has catapulted his administration reached its peak this week. Gloves were abandoned, syrupy talk was at an end; seldom before in recent history had an administration so openly proclaimed its role as a strike-breaker in behalf of America’s Sixty Families who own and exploit this country’s wealth.
It looked like a finish fight – and the odds were high, very high. The war between the needs of the people and the greed of the capitalists which had recently broken out In a rash of strikes – this war, involving our future security and right to exercise the workingman’s greatest weapon, the strike, was now open. And everybody knew where the Little Man in the White House stood. Harry Truman stood revealed as a strike-breaker; he had broken the rail strike, was threatening to break the coming maritime strike and had proposed to Congress the most vicious piece of anti-labor legislation in American history. The Little Man in the White House could think only of cops’ billies, of soldiers’ bayonets as answers to the cry of America’s workers for a decent wage.
Here, in brief, were the main events of the week:

Congress had passed the rotten Case anti-strike bill. At the moment this article is being written, it is not yet known if the Little Man in the White House will sign or veto it.
 
Labor had at last rallied to condemn both the Case bill and the even more outrageous “strike-draft” proposal of the Little Man in the White House. Philip Murray, president of the CIO, wrote a stinging attack on the Case bill.
 
In the meantime, America’s most progressive and aggressive union, the United Automobile Workers, announced that it was preparing to fight for new wage increases in order to meet ...
 
The rising cost of living, which spiralled upward once more last week, with milk up a penny a quart and butter 11 cents a pound.
 
The Little Man in the White House – “Hell hath no fury like a mediocre politician unable to cope with his problems” – threatened to break the strike of the maritime workers scheduled for a few days hence.
 
Never before was there a more urgent need for labor to break from the two old capitalist parties and form its own Labor Party. The PAC policy of supporting “good” capitalist candidates had come to its bitter but logical conclusion when many of the men whom it had helped put in Congress voted for the Case bill.

*
And now to fill in the details of the picture:
1) The Anti-Strike Legislation
Two pieces of anti-labor legislation had passed through Congress. The first was Truman’s “labor-draft” bill which had been shoved through in two hours in the House of Representatives with only 13 opposing votes. (This was the House which the PAC had hailed after its election as a “progressive victory.”) In the Senate, the bill was passed by a vote of 61–20, though there one of the worst of its sections, which would have allowed the President to draft strikers “against the government,” was cut out. As it stands, however, it is still a rotten, vicious blow at labor’s rights. Some of its worst provisions:

Federal judges would have the power to issue injunctions in order to break strikes. Experienced veterans of the labor movement will recall that the injunction, until its limitation by legislation in 1932, was one of the most potent strike-breaking weapons of the bosses and their judges.
 
The President may proclaim a “national emergency” in case of a strike, “take over” the factory or plant or mine (while the bosses continue to clip their coupons of profit) and end the strike.
 
The President could then order the strikers back to work and arbitrarily set wages and working conditions.
 
Not only would unions be penalized if they refused to knuckle under, but even individual workers would lose their status as employees, their rights under the Wagner Labor Act and their seniority if they refused to return to work. In the words of Senator Pepper of Florida, “this is the first time Congress has made it unlawful for a lone individual worker to quit work.” Such a worker would be subject, he said, “not only to criminal prosecution,” but could “be tried by a single judge in contempt procedure without any limitation on the penalty.”

This bill, then, is the proposal of President Truman. Even with the omission of the “labor-draft” provision, it is vicious. Now it goes up for conference between members of the House and Senate to “iron out” the differences in their versions of the bill. If it passes, it will be a catastrophe for the trade unions.
 
2) Labor Rallies Against Case Bill
Let’s take a glance now at that other labor wrecking bill, the Case bill, which is waiting for Presidential signature. Here’s how this nifty cuts into our rights:

It prohibits a union from striking for 60 days after its request for collective bargaining conferences. This is known as “cooling off.” What it means is this: one of a trade union’s most effective strike weapons, SURPRISE, is lost to it. The union has to give the boss two months’ notice of its intention to strike, which gives him plenty of time to prepare for it. This provision also makes possible this situation: the boss, having received the notice of your union that a strike is to be called in two months, tries to provoke a strike before that time by making life miserable for his workers. If he succeeds, the workers are “guilty of having violated the law” and are no longer covered by the Wagner Labor Act. Either way, then, this main provision of the Case bill is a crippling blow to labor.
 
Section 6 of the Case bill provides that in a dispute in a public utility (which it defines very loosely), the President may create an emergency commission to investigate the situation and report back to the President. During this investigation and report, utility workers are prohibited from striking. This amounts, in the words of Philip Murray, to “an indefinite cooling off period at the will of the President.” It means, as the CIO head puts it, that “the government steps in to protect the employer in any position the employer wishes to take, however unreasonable, in the negotiations.”
 
Section 8 of the Case bill prohibits an employer from paying money to a union, except for a trust or health fund, which, the bill insists, must be jointly run by the boss and the union. This section is aimed at union health funds to which some employers have been contributing.
 
Section 9 eliminates from the protection of the National Labor Relations Act all foremen and “supervisory employees.” This section is aimed at creating dissension among various groups of workers.
 
Section 10 opens labor organizations to suits for alleged violations of collective bargaining agreements and makes unions legally liable for the acts of their agents even when those acts were not authorized by the unions. These provisions mean that unions would constantly be hailed into court in order to milk their treasuries and that all kinds of provocateurs would be able to commit acts “in the name of the union” for which the union would be held responsible.

So far, there is no definite news as to whether the Little Man in the White House will veto this bill. His political advisors, who know that he is finished as far as re-election goes unless he has labor support, have been urging a veto. But labor should stay on guard for one possibility: Truman might veto the Case bill, only a little later to sign the anti-labor bill he himself has sponsored.
 
3) UAW Asks for Higher Wages
The United Automobile Workers Union wasn’t asleep at the switch. Stating that its recent 18½¢ raise had already been eaten up by price jumps, it has served notice on the Chrysler Corporation that wages would have to be hiked if prices keep going up. The UAW executive board meeting was expected to raise similar demands for the entire industry.
Once again the UAW, with its advanced program during the GM strike – which we have called the GM program – which had urged that wages be tied to profits and prices, has pointed the way. That program made clear that wage raises were next to worthless if price jumps continued, and that it was the job of the union movement to fight to raise wages and keep prices down. Now, however, that prices have gone up, the UAW is planning a fight for additional wage increases, a demand which points the way to the whole labor movement. Only by unceasing struggle can the vicious wage-price circle be broken; a struggle which involves more than mere picket line victories.
 
4) Prices Keep Rising
It was no accident the UAW chose this week to ask for reopening of wage negotiations. For when the workers of America came home from their benches this week, they were told by their wives that the price of milk had gone up a penny a quart and the price of butter had gone up 11 cents a pound. The pay envelope was worth less and less.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics released figures which showed that the rise in the cost of living had gone up 50 per cent since August 1939. But, as Sylvia Porter, economist for the New York Post, wrote in its June 3, 1946, issue, “even that rise fails to tell the full story ... It fails because the barometer of the Bureau of Labor Statistics does not reflect the disappearance from the stores of hundreds of low-cost products; it fails because the official index cannot and does not mirror the terrific deterioration in the quality of goods ... The impact of these and other ‘invisible’ items upon the average family’s cost of living has been immense.”
When these wage-consuming price jumps are compared with profit figures for 1945, then you have a true picture of the situation. For in 1945 wholesale and retail corporations had profit percentages double those of the boom year 1929, while manufacturing corporations had a profit take equal to that of 1929.
Was it any wonder that America’s workers stared with anger and amazement at the attempt in Washington to deprive them of their one great weapon, the strike, by which they could try to remedy this situation?
 
5) Maritime Labor May Strike
The next big crisis was expected to come in the maritime industry, where the CIO unions had raised demands of from 22 to 35 cent increases per hour – and where the Little Man in the White House, sizzling with anti-labor venom, had threatened to call out the Marines, Navy and Army to break the strike. But just as coal can’t be mined with bayonets, so ships can’t be sailed with rifles. And the men who work the ships, from boiler room to top deck, were determined to stick it out for better wages.
Truman sizzled, Truman spluttered, Truman threatened – but against the might of labor, the might of thousands of workers determined to fight for a better life, how ridiculous seemed this mediocre haberdashery salesman whom accident had catapulted to power.
 
6) Need for Labor Party
And now in the last section of this article, let’s try to tie the knots together. In this crisis, which had brought to a head all of the conflicts of the post-war period, labor needed a lot of things. It needed an aggressive, fighting policy. It needed a militant, united leadership. It needed to make its own the GM Program by which the auto workers had plunged into the lead of the American labor movement.
But it needed one thing especially, one thing which could give added power to all the others: it needed a political party of its own. This was put quite well in the words of John Christensen, head of the AFL lumbers workers in the Northwest, who wrote:
“The fact that only 13 Congressmen dared to support labor’s rights by voting against the President’s bill certainly proves that the working people can no longer trust the old-line politicians and their political parties. I believe this brazen attack on American democracy may force organized labor to discontinue its present political policies and launch its own independent political action. I see no ether way in which the working people can guarantee their right to strike, their right to bargain collectively and all other fundamental human rights which are jeopardized by the existence of a political set-up that operates solely in the interests of big business. Unless the workers organize politically under the banner of organized labor, this nation may soon become a fascist police state.”
Yes, that was putting it pretty well. The blatherskites of both old parties which had been elected with the aid of the CIO-PAC had shown their true colors. The overwhelming vote for the anti-labor bills showed that most of them voted against labor. And what else could you expect? When the PAC supported these birds it was supporting capitalist candidates of capitalist parties. And when a fundamental crisis, such as the present one, arose, it was to be expected that they would vote against labor.
That was to be expected. But how much longer will labor continue its fatal policy of supporting “good” capitalist candidates? Many sections of the labor movement have turned against Truman; that’s fine. Whitney has said that his union will spend 2½ million dollars and that the Railroad Brotherhoods have 47 million dollars to lick the Little Man in the White House; that’s fine, too. But whom are they going to support? Some mildewed politician in the Republican Party? A so-called liberal with a collapsible spine?
No; it’s about time we stopped that sort of thing. We need our own party, an independent Labor Party representing the masses of American workers, firmly based on the trade union movement. Such a party would be on the political field what the trade unions are on the economic field.
We are facing grave days of crisis. Never before has labor faced such a hopped-up administration whose inept leader is out to “get” the unions. Never before has labor so needed a policy of struggle and aggressiveness to halt the price spiral and jack up wages.
But above all, labor must begin to move in the political arena. We need a clean break. Our own independent Labor Party aiming at the establishment of a workers’ government which can begin to solve some of these problems!
That, in the first week of June – when the little-minded Little Man in the White House vented his anti-labor spleen – was the burning need.
 




The Letter
Editor,
In your polemics with the SWP over the past nine months, there can be little doubt in the readers’ minds on the question of relative democracy within the two parties. The principle of democratic centralism seems to me to be an attempt to solve the inner contradiction between the necessity for power to meet the opposing power of the reactionaries on the one hand, and the democratic aspirations of socialism on the other. You have published the SWP minority’s testimony as to Cannon’s orientation toward centralism versus the Morrow-Goldman-WP orientation toward democracy. There is a further question, however, which I think lies at the bottom of the SWP-WP differences upon which I would like the WP explanation.
The Marxist justification for the rise of capitalism and for its victory over feudalism is that, at that stage of technical development, only by satisfying the rising capitalists’ selfish material interests could the productive capacity of society as a whole be increased. According to the materialist conception of history, those property forms, which at the given stage of history are capable of raising the general standard of living, are justified and will in the end supersede existing property forms which have reached the limit of their ability to raise the standard of living.
Therefore, if the Stalinist bureaucracy has increased Russia’s industrial capacity (whether or not this has yet appreciably increased production of consumer goods, or has only affected heavy industry so far), it is progressive, in the same way that at one time the selfish interests of the capitalists were progressive. History does not seem to take much stock in subjective motives, but does take stock in objective material progress. How does the theory of bureaucratic collectivism account for Russia’s industrial development under Stalinism, how does this development contradict the materialist conception of history, and how does the bureaucratic collectivist explanation of this differ from that of the degenerated workers’ state theory? How does the bureaucratic collectivist theory deal with this objective situation, quite apart from world revolution versus socialism in one country (upon which the SWP and the WP agree in strategy)?
The answer to this question seems to me to be the key to the SWP’s closer orientation to the CP than that of the WP. That is the reason that this question seems to me to be the most pertinent issue in the SWP-WP differences, and nowhere have I seen it dealt with in your press. Unfortunately, so far I have been unable to get hold of a complete exposition, or even a complete outline, of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism.



 


Dixon Adams,
Calif.



*

The Reply
Dear Friend:
The Editorial Board of Labor Action has asked me to answer your extremely interesting letter. At the outset, I want to emphasize that our differences on Russia in no way precludes unity between the WP and the SWP. That is the Workers Party position. I wish to state that what follows is a personal opinion for which I alone am responsible; our party has not taken a position on many of these questions and I see no reason why, as a party of practical political activity, it needs to take a position, for example, on a problem involved in the materialist conception of history.
(1) Is the Stalinist bureaucracy “progressive” for having “increased Russia’s industrial capacity” in the same way as capitalism was progressive in its early stages because it increased “the productive capacity of society”? The comparison does not seem to me to be a valid one. When capitalism appeared on the historical scene, it resulted in tremendous changes in human society: the rise of the world market, the unparalleled stimulation of technological development, the resultant knitting of the world into one economic unit; in short, the lifting of society from feudal stagnation to the point where the development of capitalism made possible for the first time in history a society of abundance and security.
In that sense, despite its inhumanity, EARLY capitalism was historically progressive. That is, it increased man’s control over nature which was a prerequisite for removing man’s domination over man. Today, however, that great historical task has already been accomplished. The technological, economic and historical prerequisites for socialism on a world scale already exist, and in view of that fact the Stalinist dictatorship cannot be characterized as progressive when one bears in mind that it bears the terrible onus of having been mainly responsible for the many defeats of the world working class in the recent decade. The Marxian conception of progress is not merely a matter of technological index; it is technological index within a social reference.
The development of the productive forces by capitalism on an unprecedented world scale made possible the liberation of humanity from class society; the comparatively puny development of productive forces by Stalinism has come as part of the development of a totalitarian dictatorship which made a mockery of socialism and destroyed the world revolution. If one thinks of the matter only on a narrowly technological basis, then consider how insignificant is the development of Russia’s productive forces by Stalinism as compared with the set-back to the productive forces of the world as a whole which resulted from the Stalinist betrayal of the revolutions during the past twenty years and which resulted in the perpetuation of the economic system that destroys the productive forces today, namely capitalism.
(2) Just what is meant by saying that Stalinism has developed the productive forces of Russia? If you mean that it has developed more than would have probably have taken place had Russia remained capitalist in 1919, that is correct. But Stalinism arose as an alternative to a genuine working class regime, and not as an alternative to capitalism. Viewed concretely then, does it not seem highly likely that a democratic and genuine workers’ government, giving stimulation to the initiative of the working class rather than ruling it by terror and, above all, helping the workers of the advanced European countries come to power and thereby providing revolutionary assistance to the working class government of backward Russia – does it not seem likely that such a government could have achieved far more even on a narrowly Russian scale in terms of its industrial capacity, not to mention its people?
(3) The development of the productive forces under bureaucratic collectivism in Russia in part may be explained (in accordance, I believe, with the Marxist approach to history) by the following factors:
By virtue of its perpetuation of nationalized economy, bureaucratic collectivism succeeded in overcoming some of the economic contradictions of capitalism. By starving its people, by unprecedented brutality, by siphoning everything into the war machine, by the vicious speed-up it called Stakhanovism, the Russian bureaucracy succeeded in enlarging its industrial plant and gearing it for war. But, let me repeat again, it did so at the expense of the Russian working class and its revolution, as well as at the expense of the world revolution.
The criterion of productive expansion as an index of the progressiveness of a society can be applied only on a world scale and over a long- range period of time. For otherwise, we would be forced into the absurd conclusion that the economic development of Japan during recent years, in the era of capitalism’s world decline, makes Japanese imperialism historically progressive. Despite our difference of sociological characterization of Russia, we would often agree with the SWP on some of the specific factors which permitted of Russian industrial expansion. Only we assign different significance and give different interpretation to those factors.
 
Historical Quirk on World Society?
(4) I fear that you will not find “a complete exposition” of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism if you mean by that a highly detailed and thorough working out of its “economic laws of motion” such as Marx made of capitalism. If that is what you mean, such an exposition seems to me at present impossible to write, for the following reasons:

Russia is the most thoroughly totalitarianized country in recent history and there is simply not enough information available, such as Marx found about capitalism in the British Museum, with which to attempt such an analysis;
 
and more important: when Marx wrote Capital, the economic system he described had existed on the world arena for many years and it could be observed in its historical world genesis and in its internal developments from commercial to manufacturing to industrial capitalism, unlike Russian bureaucratic collectivism which has existed in an isolated context for only a few years and which has thus far been merely a kind of historical aberration. Whether it will continue as such an isolated historical quirk or may perhaps become a possible successor to capitalism on a world scale I shall not attempt here to say. The latter possibility can only arise on the basis of a future complete failure of the working class to achieve the socialist revolution; that is, bureaucratic collectivism could arise on a world scale only in a situation where the total decline and disorganization of world capitalism and the failure of the working class to rise to its historical task would produce a sort of social vacuum from which there would follow what Marx called “barbarism.” That is a meaning which can be assigned to Marx’s phrase that humanity will either move forward to socialism or retrogress into barbarism. It is for these reasons – the fact that bureaucratic collectivism’s historical future, if any at all, is still to be determined by the result of the present day class struggle, unlike the situation when Marx wrote, in which capitalism was clearly the dominant world economic system – that one should not expect a detailed economic exposition of the internal laws of bureaucratic collectivism.

However, a number of worthwhile and suggestive statements about the nature and possible perspectives of bureaucratic collectivism have been made by leading members of the Workers Party. In that sense, you may find a “complete exposition” of the theory of bureaucratic collectivism. The articles of Max Shachtman in The New International over a period of years, beginning with his article Why Russia is not a workers’ state in the December 1940 issue; the discussion articles by W. Kent and Joseph Carter in The New International for 1941 and 1942; editorials in recent issues of The New International; and Max Shachtman’s essay, The Struggle for the New Course printed in book form together with The New Course, will provide interesting material for you. That there is much additional theoretical analysis to be done on this problem would be absurd to deny; but we have done the basic preliminary work, I believe.



 


Irving Howe



 



A sordid incident in international politics came to an end last week when the Stalinist-dominated dictatorship of Tito in Yugoslavia ordered the Chetnik leader, Mikhailovitch, to be shot as a war-time collaborator with the Nazis. The bitter struggle in Yugoslavia between the forces of Tito, representing a mass peasant movement under Stalinist domination, and the forces of Mikhailovitch, a monarchist serving the interests of Anglo-American imperialism, has come to an end; and Tito is the victor.
It is impossible to say in America just how much truth there is to the charge that Mikhailovitch collaborated with the Nazis; it is possible to say that such collaboration is by no means inconceivable. For Mikhailovitch was engaged in a bitter fight with Tito’s Partisans and he may well have worked out informal truces with the Germans in order to oppose Tito more effectively. That a monarchist reactionary should make deals with Nazis is neither inconceivable nor unlikely.
However, let us also remember that Tito comes from the camp of Stalinism: the very same Stalinism which made the infamous green-light-for-war pact with Hitler. Tito is a political brother of Molotov who made the classic remark that fascism was a matter of taste. Tito is the agent of Stalin who played the Horst Wessel Lied when von Ribbentrop came to Moscow. Tito, at the time of the infamous pact, adopted the line that Hitler was not responsible for the war.
In a word, it comes with poor grace – to put the matter most politely – for Tito to denounce, let alone shoot, anyone for having collaborated with Hitler; for that is precisely what his own movement did.
 

Tito – Vyshinsky’s Pupil
Nor can we have much confidence in the trials staged by Tito; he has apparently attended some of Vyshinsky’s classes in Moscow. Without in any way defending Mikhailovitch either personally or politically (quite the contrary!), without taking the slightest responsibility for either his politics or his past actions, we say nonetheless that it is impossible for anyone to get a fair trial from a Stalinist-dominated court; and that therefore the Mikhailovitch trial must be labeled a frameup. A frameup which does not nearly affect the working class as vitally as other Stalinist frameups, such as the Moscow trials, but a frameup nonetheless. We are neither Mikhailovitch’s defenders, nor are we Tito’s apologists. Thus far, one political bandit, Tito, has succeeded in murdering another political bandit, Mikhailovitch. We tell the truth about that murder: it is a condemnation on both sides – Mikhailovitch as a reactionary and a possible collaborator; Tito as a dictatorial frame-up artist.
The American liberals are sharply split on this matter, some of them supporting one side and some the other. Both groups thereby show their lack of political intelligence and imagination: they can think only in terms of which kind of dictatorship is preferable, which ruler is more charitable.
We are dealing here with a very complex situation, and any attempt to explain or to take a stand on the execution of Mikhailovitch must weigh the many factors quite carefully. Shortly after the war began and Hitler had succeeded in overrunning Yugoslavia, there was organized in that country a guerrilla resistance under the leadership of Mikhailovitch, a general in the service of that country’s reactionary monarchy, the House of Kaganowitch. This movement was highly nationalistic in nature, confining itself largely to Serbs and not very friendly to the minority national group in Yugoslavia, the Croats.
For a while it fought quite brilliantly against the Nazis and it became the darling, with Mikhailovitch the gilded hero, of many of the American liberals who were subsequently to support Tito and denounce Mikhailovitch as a traitor. The Stalinists, too, it should be noted, were ecstatic in their praise for Mikhailovitch and his “Chetniks.”
 

Organization of the Partisans
As the war progressed, however, and the fortunes of the Stalinist armies took a turn for the better, there developed an internal split in the Yugoslav resistance. Organized under the leadership of Tito, a Stalinist of long standing, and rallying considerable numbers of peasants and workers to its support by its use of reform slogans, the new “Partisan” movement gradually gained control of most of Yugoslav’s resistance. Supplied with arms and support by all three of the major allies, it pursued a bold military policy of open clashes with the Nazis; while Mikhailovitch apparently played a more passive role by retreating to the hills. The Partisans charged that Mikhailovitch had collaborated with the Nazis and it was on this charge that he was recently brought to trial.
For in the interim, with the support of the advancing Russian troops which arc the most powerful military force in eastern Europe today and with the Anglo-American imperialists more or less helpless in the situation, the Partisans had established a government, broken with the government-in-exile, dethroned the boy king and created in Yugoslavia a miniature replica of the totalitarian bureaucratic regime of Russia, which serves as the western-most outpost of Stalinist imperialism.
While for purposes of public palatability the Tito regime nominally allows opposition movements to exist, in actuality these oppositions are severely restricted; the dictatorship becomes, as in Russia, increasingly tight and criticism of it involves the danger of loss of work, imprisonment and persecution. Whether or not this regime really enjoys the support of the masses it is impossible to say: no free election has been held in Yugoslavia. A policy of agrarian reform has been instituted, somewhat similar to the land divisions achieved by the classical capitalist revolutions, and some of Yugoslavia’s meager industries have been nationalized.
But the country remains essentially a police dictatorship, resting ultimately on the support of the Russian army bayonets which if not physically present arc always within striking distance. Of freedom, of working class initiative or rule – there is none in Tito’s Yugoslavia.
 



A brief glimpse behind the “iron curtain” of Eastern Europe was possible last week. Reports from Stalinist Russia indicated that a new purge was about to begin; a typical story of fraud and corruption by industrial managers was aired in the Moscow press. Such stories are always the prelude to purges of one extent or another. Simultaneously Moscow announced the “dissolution” of two of its “republics,” Crimea and Chechen-Ingush. And, finally, fragmentary reports filtering through from Poland indicate that a virtual civil war was in progress in that Russian-dominated country which might reach its peak in a national referendum scheduled for this week.
And so once again reports have begun to come through that in the land of Stalinist terror all is not well. Purges, dissolution of republics, repression of dissident nations under Stalin’s imperialist yoke – these are just the few bits of information that manage to leak out. Imagine how much more there must be!
These reports should give cause for thought to those people who have adopted an attitude of helplessness toward the Stalin regime. Just as many people were fooled by the external stability and power of the Hitler regime into believing that it would exist for an indefinite period, almost accepting thereby the Hitlerian boast that the Fourth Reich would exist for a thousand years – so have some despairing liberals begun to talk about the “stability” of the Stalin dictatorship.
Now we have no desire to exaggerate the scope or significance of these recent events. There is no indication of an immediately acute crisis which could threaten the stability of the Stalin regime. In that sense, it is for the moment secure. But the Stalin regime, we have always insisted, was no more secure, ultimately, than any other government based on terror and the whip; it too would suffer deep-going crises, it too would be wracked by internal disorganization and difficulties. The Stalin dictatorship – no matter what the liberals thought: either the liberals who worshipping it or were cowed by it – was not omnipotent nor immune from social crises.
 

The “Crimes” of the Managers
Examine, in the light of these ideas, the news reports that have recently come out of Russia. First, the purges. The Moscow papers report “widespread dismissals and fining of factory directors, engineers and accountants as a result of the discovery of evidence that industrial-production figures had been faked, bonuses had been distributed illegally and factory funds had been misappropriated.” These are highly serious charges. The purges have taken place in such widely-separated areas as Moscow, Leningrad, Stalinsk and Tomsk in Siberia. Thus far, there is no talk about a “plot”; that may come later.
But the very extent of the dismissals, their spread over major industrial Russian cities, indicates that there must be a deep-going internal crisis. Among the charges launched against the plant managers is “mismanagement of industrial plants and poor quality of production.” That means that the level of production and the quality of consumer goods must have become so intolerable that the bureaucracy found it necessary once again, in typical fashion, to find a scapegoat for its own ineptitude.
For surely everyone understands that in as highly centralized an economy as Russia’s this kind of thing can’t go on for very long without the top layers of the bureaucracy becoming aware of it – assuming, of course, that the whole business isn’t a mere frameup with the sole intention of deflecting popular dissatisfaction with consumer goods. But that is the price of a dictatorship: no one dares move, no one dares utter a word of criticism even when aware of dishonesty or nepotism; everyone waits for the bureaucracy to decide on top.
(One interesting parenthetical aspect: The local Stalinists use the official Russian statistics – which, alas, the Russian workers cannot eat – to “prove” all kinds of glorious things about the Stalinist fatherland. But if, as is now charged by Moscow, these statistics are often falsified by plant managers, then how can Stalinists claim them to be reliable?)
Why were the “autonomous republics” of Crimea and Chechen-Ingush abolished? The official reason given by Moscow is that in these Southern regions many inhabitants, most of whom are Tartars, supported the Nazis during the war. But that is a remarkable admission. For the propaganda of Stalinism – often shamefacedly echoed by those who were not Stalinists and should have known better – continually harped on the claim that the peoples of Russia fought so heroically because they realized that Stalin’s dictatorship was the nearest thing to Paradise which this world could bring to them. If that is so, how explain the failure of the Tartars to appreciate this fact as much as, say, the Azerbaijans or the Ukrainians?
A strange admission which the Stalin bureaucracy has made – and a damning one.
 

The New Army Code
Together with these developments came the announcement that discipline is to be tightened in the Russian army. In a decree signed by Stalin, a new military code has been announced. This code provides for stricter discipline, including a greater emphasis upon saluting (at the very time when mass discontent of the American soldiers has forced the Washington brass-hats to loosen saluting regulations a little in the American army!). It also provides for special officers’ courts to try offenders.
Surely if there were not rather serious breaches of discipline and low morale somewhere in the Stalinist army, such measures would not be required. Possibly they are provoked by a desire of the bureaucracy to “liquidate” sections of the officer caste which, flushed with victory, may become a little too independent.
The reader will notice that on many of these matters one can do little more than speculate, because the censorship in Russia is one of the tightest the world has ever seen. But a bit of news leaks out every now and then – and we learn that all is not well in the Stalinist prison camp, that there too faint rumblings of discontent may perhaps be heard. Or rather, that if the rumblings of discontent themselves may not be heard, we can see the repressive measures which the bureaucracy takes, the presence of which proves beyond a doubt that some discontent does exist.
 



The British Labor Party Government has a new Minister of Food and John Strachey is his name. Strachey has a personal and intellectual history as checkered and erratic as few prominent men of his time. He achieved notoriety some years back when he was refused entry into America on the ground that he was a “dangerous Communist.”
Strachey began his career – career is just the word – as the son of a conservative editor who moved to the left. He joined the Independent Labor Party after the first world war, later to become a follower of the British fascist leader, Sir Oswald Mosely, when the latter was still a member of the Labor Party; and when Mosely broke away from the Labor Party in 1929 to form his “New Party” Strachey tagged along. After his flirtation with Mosely’s brand of politics, Strachey suddenly became converted to what he called “Marxism” – really Stalinism. During the mid-thirties Strachey was a fervent writer, though not a very profound one, in behalf of Stalinism, one of its most “distinguished” intellectual apologists.
With his usual ability to sniff the direction of the political wind, Strachey attached himself several years ago to the Labor Party. During the imperialist war, he forgot what he had written in his books and expressed his aspirations towards heroism by serving as an air-raid warden. Now he has completed the circuit and is in the Labor Cabinet where, at the age of 44, he may aspire to greater bureaucratic glory. This man – whom the left-wing Labor journal of London, The Tribune, calls without a hint of irony “the most formidable Marxist theorist of this generation” – personifies in himself the political opportunism and hypocrisy of our times. From Mosely to Stalin to Bevin: the evolution of a careerist.
 

The “Revival” of the Second International
Our readers may have noticed items in the daily press about a meeting in England several weeks ago of the European Social Democratic Parties. We did not comment on this conference because we lacked information: the reports from England were very skimpy and the one report of great interest which the New York Times printed – that the Conference was going to refrain from reconstituting the Social Democratic Second International for fear of antagonizing Stalin – was unsubstantiated. We still have been unable to find any real information about this conference, but have picked up two bits of information which give a sufficiently damning picture of the present state of European Social Democracy: (1) The Conference refused to admit the Spanish Socialist Party because it is an “émigré” party! In other words, it refused to give status to a sister party because the latter had been run out by Franco’s dictatorship and was therefore an “in emigration.” (2) the German Social Democratic Party was also refused admission, even though the Canadian delegates proposed that it be invited. This, presumably, was because the German Social Democrats came from the same country as Adolf Hitler, even though Hitler had put them in jails, concentration camps and murder chambers.
It would be superfluous to say much about the brand of “internationalism” displayed by this gathering of the Social Democracy.
 

Stalin’s Recognition of Peron’s Argentina
An item which has passed almost unnoticed in the press is the fact that Stalinist Russia has resumed diplomatic relations with Argentina. The two worthy democrats, Stalin and Peron, have found that there is no reason for antagonism – as, in some ways, there isn’t! What is interesting is that Stalin made overtures to the Peron dictatorship in the most ostentatious manner directly after Washington had expressed its distaste for Peron’s regime. The incident is merely another maneuver in the worldwide imperialist conflict of American and Russian imperialism. Stalin’s new friendship for Peron is motivated largely by a desire to embarrass Washington, as well as a desire to make economic inroads into South America which has until now largely been dominated by America and Great Britain.
How the Stalinists will now characterize Peron’s regime is an interesting question. Will it become “democratic and peace-loving”? – the label given to all governments in diplomatic harmony with Stalin, regardless of their internal character. And what now remains of Molotov’s righteous indignation against the Argentine dictatorship when he opposed its admission to the UNO at its San Francisco conference?
 

Conference of the British ILP
The small British Independent Labor Party, somewhat similar in political character to the Norman Thomas Socialist Party in this country, recently held a conference to determine what to do with itself. The ILP is a “centrist” organization; that is, it vacillates between the outright reformism of the Labor Party, which is now in power, and the revolutionary socialism of the British Trotskyists. With the victory of the Labor Party in the last election, the ILP faced a difficult choice: what to do now? A section of the leadership, the right wing under Maxton and Brockway, favored liquidation of the ILP and entry into the Labor Party, there to function as an educational group. Another section of the ILP, the so- called “left,” opposed liquidation.
At the recent conference, the Brockway motion was defeated and the ILP decided not to apply again for admission to the Labor Party. In a sense this can be interpreted as a defeat for the right wing leadership since its anxious desire to lead the ILP back to Bevin and Attlee has been set back. On the other hand, the motivations involved in the discussion – as reported in the ILP weekly, The New Leader – reveal the amusing situation that the “left” offered reasons for its stand which are very sectarian while the motivations of the “right” were, on the face of it, correct. Maxton and Brockway proposed entry into the Labor Party on the grounds that the great masses of British workers adhered to the Labor Party and that it was the business of the socialists to work inside of it to move it to the left. The “left,” on the other hand, pooh-poohed the mass support of the Labor Party and spoke vaguely of “independent” socialist education; it didn’t think the Labor Party an important arena.
The only flaw in the Maxton-Brockway position (we do not discuss here the tactical advisability of entry into the Labor Party) is that its proponents are not revolutionary socialists and would probably enter the Labor Party merely to become an occasionally critical tail to the Bevin-Attlee kite. The “left,” on the other hand, by offering arguments against entry into the Labor Party on principle, reveals a thorough sterility.
The ILP, as all its sister parties throughout the world, totters to eventual disintegration because it is unable to choose once and for all which path it desires to tread: reformism or revolutionary socialism. But this vacillation in itself insures that it will almost always follow the former in practise. The ILP plays the role of a political Hamlet – minus the tragedy.
 



Is the lion nestling against the lamb?
Are the imperialist powers voluntarily surrendering their colonial possessions, suddenly convinced – as if by a miraculous conversion – that the peoples whom they have exploited and enslaved for decades should now be “given” their freedom?
This is the eager interpretation which the capitalist journalists, including the inescapable liberals, have given to recent events in the Philippines and India. They point to the Declaration of Philippine Independence and to the British plan for India as proof that imperialism is gradually becoming obsolete, that it “doesn’t pay” and that the free brotherhood of man is soon to appear – all these blessings the result, not of a socialist revolution, but of capitalism’s magnanimity.
A pretty and touching picture, with one flaw – it isn’t true.
 

The Economy of the Islands
Let us take a glance at the Philippines. The sugar economy of these islands is intimately connected with and at the mercy of American Big Business. In the Philippines a native variety of semi-feudal agriculture is buttressed by American dollars and bayonets (not to mention American rhetoric and religion which provide moral solace to accompany inhuman economic exploitation). The islands’ economy is dependent on American investment. To rebuild slightly the destroyed cities such as Manila – victims of World War II – the Philippines must borrow from the U.S. government, thereby placing themselves still more at its mercy. American naval and army bases dot the islands. And in return for U.S. loans, American businessmen receive equal economic rights in the Philippines, which in view of America’s vast financial superiority, means unquestioned American domination.
The Philippine laborer still breaks his back to enrich America’s Trusts. The “suggestions” of the American ambassador – which are given point by the twin symbols of this country’s civilization: the dollar sign and the bayonet – are the same as commands.
Why then the formal declaration of independence? – which, of course, whatever its limitations, we support. For several reasons:
(1) It is a great moral-political advantage for American imperialism to be able to point to its action in “freeing” the Philippines.
The substance of its economic exploitation remains as before, but the removal of the more blatant political form of colonial dependence is a good talking point for political press agents and other scoundrels. In a world increasingly sensitive to colonial problems, the U.S. can point to its behavior in the Philippines secure in the knowledge that only such rude people as write for Labor Action would mention America’s economic domination of most of Central and South America.
 

The Methods of Imperialism
(2) The move is calculated to head off the continued movements for total independence among the Philippine people.
Though not generally known in America, there has been a series of violent struggles for independence in the Philippines ever since Aguinaldo defied the Americans when this country, took the islands away from Spain. During the Second World War this desire for national independence spread like a prairie fire through the Far East – a fire which touched Philippine hearts and which is not yet halted. Happy though the people may be at their formal separation from American overlordship, they will not long be satisfied with the mere shell of freedom; they will want their meat too. And that means to rid their country of American domination, be it through the dollar or bayonet. Which leads us to the most important point:
(3) We are witnessing, this writer believes, a modification of the methods of traditional imperialism. In its infancy capitalist imperialism found very often that political-military domination was a necessary prerequisite for economic exploitation. Thus, the marines were often sent by Big Bluster Theodore Roosevelt to help United Fruit in Central America. The British ruled politically so that they could milk their pounds and shillings from those whom they claimed to be civilizing.
Today imperialism does not always need to resort to such methods. Some of the weaker powers such as France and Holland have used force, brutally and without restraint, to suppress colonial revolutions in Indo-China and Indonesia. But in both the Philippines and India, the ruling powers have been forced, when pressed, to surrender formal political rule to maintain their economic control. For we are living in a world in which the processes of concentration of wealth and power develop at an increasing pace: real independence of action on the world arena is increasingly the privilege of two or three great powers alone. Even countries themselves once imperialist come under the domination of the irresistible powers: Poland and Czechoslovakia under Russian sway; Belgium, Holland and to a lesser degree France under Anglo-American influence. (Britain itself, though still the possessor of the largest empire in the world, jigs to America’s tune; in a sense, Washington is the receiver of London’s empire.)
The world comes under the sway of the few major super-powers. If Bulgaria is formally independent – it even has its own flag! – is it not actually a pawn in Russia’s hands? If Egypt is formally independent, is it not still under Britain’s thumb? And does not the American dollar throw its long shadow over the whole world?
Imperialism then can in certain circumstances forego direct political rule. Its economic grip over the colonial world persists nonetheless. It may be a new style of imperialism, but there’s still the same smell to it.
To say however that formal independence attained by the Philippines and perhaps tomorrow to be attained by India does not yet mean full and true national freedom – this is not the same as saying the struggle for national independence is meaningless or futile. On the contrary, it merely underlines the fundamental Trotskyist idea that for the colonial nations to reach full independence, their struggle must be led by the colonial working-classes who will drive out every wedge of imperial domination and struggle against their “own” capitalist class which is every ready to compromise with the foreign imperialists.
 



Striking evidence has recently come from all parts of the world that the Stalinist parties have taken a position towards the Jewish question which, if not openly anti-Semitic, is certainly a dangerous kind of flirtation with that poisonous racial doctrine. Were each of these incidents taken alone, it might be brushed off; but together they form a pattern which cannot be considered a mere accident.
Here is the evidence on which we base these charges:
(1) Reports in the daily press this past week told of the harrowing story of a new pogrom in Poland. In the town of Kielce 23 Jews were murdered and many others injured. This pogrom, reminiscent of the worst days of Polish anti-Semitism, took place in a country ruled by a Stalinist-dominated government – and one, furthermore, in which there are hundreds of thousands of Russian army troops. Now it is impossible to say exactly who inspired these pogroms.
The Warsaw government charges that they were the work of the underground armies which remain loyal to the former government-in-exile. The latter in turn hint that the pogroms were the work of agents of the Warsaw government and of the Stalinist GPU, who deliberately provoked the pogroms in order to use them as a political weapon by blaming them on their opponents.
Both charges can well be true. There are numerous anti-Semites among the followers of General Anders, who is opposed to the Warsaw government. And it is possible that the pogroms were instigated by the Stalinists – that isn’t incredible when one remembers the methods they have used in the past in and out of Russia: political gangsterism, terrorism, assassination, mass imprisonments and deportations.
 
Where Is “Red” Army?
But one thing is clear: Poland is ruled by the so-called “Red” army. There are hundreds of thousands of Russian troops scattered through that country. These troops, with their GPU appendages, are remarkably efficient in smashing any attempt at independent proletarian political organization. The Russians, it will be remembered, kidnapped and murdered the two famous Polish Jewish Socialist leaders, Ehrlich and Alter.
We therefore ask: if the Russians were so efficient in persecuting socialists, if they were so efficient in persecuting dissidents, why are they so lax in stamping out anti-Semitism? The N.Y. Times reports that it is unsafe for Jews to live in the smaller Polish towns and villages. Why? Where is the “Red” army? Why can it not afford protection to the few remaining Jews of Poland?
This much is certain. If the “Red” army were as vigilant in its attitude towards anti-Semitism as in its pursuit of dissident-revolutionists, anti-Semitism could not exist in Poland. And that is a damning indictment of Stalinism!
(2) We ask you to read most carefully the statement of the leading French Stalinist journalist, Pierre Hervé, printed in a box adjoining this article. This man writes a daily column in the French Stalinist paper, L’Humanité. He is a responsible spokesman for French Stalinism. If you read through the mass of verbiage in this statement, you see clearly the vicious anti-Semitism of this Stalinist leader. For what does it mean to insinuate that 80 per cent of the Trotskyist leaders are Jews? (What difference does it make what percentage are Jews? It’s the policy that counts.) To say that is to indulge in the same kind of anti-Semitism which the American reactionaries indulge in when they accuse the Communists of being Jews.
We repeat: Pierre Hervé is a leading responsible spokesman for French Stalinism. What he writes is no mere quirk. How can the Stalinists explain this? What have they to say?
 
Anti-Semitism in Ukraine
3) In an article in the Sunday Times, July 7, Brooks Atkinson, recently returned from Moscow, reports the presence of widespread anti- Semitism in the Ukraine. Let us grant that this anti-Semitism is not stimulated by the Stalin government. But if Atkinson’s report is true, then what is one to say of the widespread Stalinist ballyhoo that they have effectively eliminated anti-Semitism from Russia? Surely the fact that there’s a law against anti-Semitism in Russia is not important; there’s a law granting free speech in Russia, and everyone knows how little of that there is! The Stalinist bureaucracy has not succeeded in eliminating anti-Semitism from among those whom it rules, despite its 20-year rule.
4) In its July 8 issue, Labor Action reported that at a session of the Refugee Committee of the United Nations a motion was introduced by the Lebanese delegate that would PREVENT Jewish immigration to Palestine. The Ukrainian delegate spoke for the motion and the entire bloc of Stalinist-dominated countries – Russia, Poland, Ukraine, White Russia, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia – voted for the motion.
What explanation do the Stalinists have for their scandalous behavior at the Refugee Committee of the United Nations?
The above are damning facts. But think of them against the background of previous Stalinist behavior on the Jewish question.
Remember the Stalinist refusal only a few years back to admit Jewish refugees from Hitler Germany.
Remember the references of Lombardo Toledano, Mexican Stalinist leader, to Leon Trotsky as the “Jew Trotsky.”
Remember the fact that at the infamous Moscow Trials all defendants who were Jewish and who for reasons of revolutionary security had decades ago adopted pseudonyms were then called by their original Jewish-sounding names.
Stalinist workers reading this article may recoil with indignation and say: “We are not anti-Semites; we hate anti-Semitism.” That is true of course. The masses of workers who follow Stalinism are opposed to anti- Semitism.
But the above facts, all of them irrefutable, indicate that Stalinism is not above using or flirting with anti-Semitism when it is convenient for it. Every Stalinist worker owes it to himself to inquire about these matters, to insist upon an explanation from his leadership. These matters are too grave to be ignored.
* * *




The Voice of French Stalinism
“... I consider the assertion of Jewish particularism as nefarious.
“... It is normal that, as a result of their situation, the Jews should be more receptive than others to the cosmopolitan which seems to be becoming the offensive ideal of a certain overseas mercantilism. To the extent that Jewish particularism detaches the French Jews from the interests of the Frenchmen taken as a whole and renders them more receptive to propaganda which might threaten our independence, I consider this a dangerous fact.
“IS IT SACRILEGE TO ASK FOR WHAT POLITICAL AND SOCIAL REASONS SUCH AND SUCH A PARTY HAS IN ITS LEADERSHIP A LARGER PROPORTION OF JEWS THAN THIS OR THAT OTHER PARTY?
“IS IT SACRILEGE TO ASK WHY 80 PER CENT OR MORE OF ALL TROTSKYIST AGITATORS ARE JEWS?”
(Extract from an article by Pierre Hervé, daily contributor of L’Humanité, published in the paper Fraternité, February 21, 1946.)



 



Karl Marx: His Life and Work
by Otto Ruehle
New Home Library, 98 Cents
One of the best book buys on the market is this reprint of Otto Ruehle’s biography of Karl Marx. Though there is much in it with which one disagrees, it is a most valuable study of an intellectual titan of modern times, second in its field only to Franz Mehring’s magnificent biography of Marx, which is now out of print.
Perhaps it is unfair to compare Ruehle’s book with Mehring’s. For the latter is one of the jewels of socialist literature, a careful reading of which can provide a quite thorough Marxist education. But in the absence of a readily-available edition of Mehring’s book, the interested reader can turn with profit to Ruehle, provided he maintains a certain critical attitude toward Ruehle’s unfortunate tendency to indulge in amateurish psychology.
For the most part, Ruehle writes in the tradition which sees a biography of a great thinker as a history of intellectual development rather than an account of personal experience. Himself a trained Marxist, Ruehle traces in brief, succinct but encompassing sections the development of Marx from his position as a student under the influence of the liberal Young Hegelians to his position as a fully matured revolutionist and social analyst: the passionate defender of the Paris Commune and the rigidly careful analyst of capitalist society. Many intimate details of Marx’s life are given but these are usually subordinated to descriptions of his ideas and writings.
 
Marx as Thinker
Ruehle is clever enough to let Marx speak for himself in those instances where summary could result only in vulgarization, though the reader should be warned that he has an unfortunate habit of quoting paragraphs from different sections of a book which often do not quite hang together because of the omission of intervening material.
The full stature of Marx as thinker and intellectual pioneer again strikes the eye after rereading this book, which is by no means uncritical in its approach. One grasps the aweinspiring extent of the genius of a man who was deeply learned in the work of the best minds preceding him but bold enough to establish his own syntheses of ideas. But above all we are impressed by the picture of the thinker who is also at the same time, the doer: there is no longer in himself – as he urged in his famous Thesis on Feuerbach – the crippling divorce between thought and action which had characterized so many great minds before him. One is further impressed by the catholicity of his intellectual interests, the breadth of his mind which is such a vivid contrast to some of the intellectual moles who were afterward to take his name in vain.
Marx was a great economist, a brilliant historian and politician; but above all else, a totally devoted revolutionist. And for that devotion he suffered throughout his life. Some of the most moving pages in this biography describe his never quite successful struggle against want, because of his dogged devotion to the work and cause to which he dedicated his life.
One cannot leave this book without saying a word about Ruehle’s unfortunate psychologizing on Marx’s personal traits. There is conflicting testimony on Marx’s personal character. The valuable little memoir of Wilhelm Liebknecht speaks of him with veneration and love; Engels too painted a picture of him which is warm and endearing. Others, especially his opponents, wrote of him as being vain, egocentric, arrogant and extremely difficult to deal with. Ruehle leans to the latter interpretation.
He attempts to explain what he considers Marx’s neuroticism by applying the method of historical materialism to individual psychology, but the application seems to this reviewer not very successful. For Ruehle engages in a rather crude transference of materialistic criteria: he traces Marx’s “neuroticism” to his bad liver condition, his sense of inferiority caused by his Jewish descent, and his position as an only child. Now all of these three factors may and do play various roles in aggravating personality disturbances, but the mere assertion of their simultaneous existence is not yet proof of either the existence of the alleged symptoms or the operation of the alleged causes. Ruehle has by far oversimplified the factors in Marx’s personality; he has chosen to emphasize only those which permitted him to deprecate Marx; and; worst of all, he has substituted general factors for an analysis of their specific applicability.
If, however, one ignores Ruehle’s psychologizing and concentrates on his political sections, this book is a fine introduction to Marx and his thought; and in this cheap reprint it should find a wide circulation.
 



A great deal of attention has been paid in this column to political developments in Austria because they have now become the classical position of imperialist exploitation and bureaucratic mismanagement by the victorious Allies in post-war Europe. Extraordinary corroboration is given this statement by a dispatch appealing in The Nation of December 7, 1946 and written by G.E.R. Gedye. We urgently recommend to all of our readers interested in an appraisal of the European debacle created by the Big Four occupation, that they read this dispatch.
Gedye begins by painting the social disintegration of Austrian life since the Allies took over and divided that unhappy nation into four occupation zones, each of them with separate and conflicting policies. The Viennese are living on a diet of 1,200 calories a day, which is below a reasonable subsistence level and 300 less than even the Germans have.
“In the last week of October,” he writes, “all train services were suddenly suspended ... All through last winter the authorities struggled to restore gas for cooking; it is still only available for a few hours daily ... For three days in nine every house, office and shop is to be deprived of current from seven a.m. to four p.m.; one never knows when current will be cut off even after dark ... candles of course are unprocurable ... power shortage is causing more factories to work part time ...”
 
“The Crisis of Confidence”
The Austrian people are thoroughly rid of any illusions they may have had about Allied “liberation.” Gedye writes: “Now nobody believes the Allies are united in seeking any goal; a really ‘free and independent Austria’ seems to be the last thing some of them desire ... The real crisis in. Austria is one of confidence. The Austrians see no reason to believe that the Allies either intend to help them to their feet or will allow them to rebuild the country out of their own resources.”
Accordingly, the Austrian government – a coalition of Social-Democrats, Stalinists and the Catholic Volkspartei – declared its impotence at a secret Parliament session and its readiness to abdicate in favor of direct rule by the military occupations. (It was after this statement that the Austrian parliament passed a resolution requesting immediate withdrawal of occupation troops – excellent sentiments which it did nothing to put into action.)
Gedye has come into possession of information of some of the disclosures made by the cabinet at the secret session of parliament. They provide a damning picture of what imperialist despoilment by all the powers has meant to the people of Austria. Apparently hindered by censorship from naming names directly, Gedye writes by indirection but it requires no special wit to gather his meaning.
He writes:
“Austria is so short of all kinds of textiles that the ordinary citizen can purchase no clothing whatsoever. Yet for eighteen months one of the Allies has been forcing the government to hand over from one province alone an average of 100,000 yards of textiles monthly ... by paying for it in schillings requisitioned from the National Bank for ‘occupation needs’ or by even shadier methods. Payment has never been made in foreign currencies or goods.”
Gedye continues:
“On October 22, General Körner, the Socialist burgomeister of Vienna, announced, ‘The Viennese can have only one pair of boots repaired in twelve months; only one pair of new boots will be available every five years.’ A survey of Vienna school children showed that 13.7 per cent are entirely without shoes; 7.3 per cent are kept from school by the lack of shoes. At the same time one of the Allies takes from, one factory alone from 14,000 to 15,000 pairs a month of its output of 20,000 ... From one rayon factory one Allied power has exported 500 tons of rayon, enough to keep Austrian women in stockings for years.”
The coal crisis in Austria is due to similar outright imperialist looting. “One power” holds large stocks of Austrian coal but refuses to sell it to Austria at less than the world price – exactly twice as much as the domestic price, above which the Allied Commission forbids Austria to buy. And of course the power which asks double the domestic price participated in the decision to prohibit Austria from buying at ... more than the domestic price.
“For months one power has insisted on the export of Austrian power to Germany to feed factories there in which it is interested. One power, because it considers that another is preventing it from obtaining for its zone its due quantities of Austrian oil, holds back Austrian coal and Austrian livestock ...”
 
Victims of Outright Thievery
The bureaucratic mismanagement, the confusion resulting from four separate and conflicting zones is endless.
“The Viennese feel as baffled and angry when the Americans are unwilling to let UNRRA stores or Austrian livestock enter the Russian zone as they do when the British hold back Austrian steel in Syria, the Russians hold back Austrian oil in Zisterdorff, or the French mulct them of the milk, cheese and butter of Tyrol ...”
*
Here then are the fruits of victory and if any of you wonder for what you spent years in puptents and foxholes, read Gedye’s dispatch. The situation in Austria at the moment is so tragic and desperate that “hunger strikes and demonstrations may break out at any moment among the enfeebled and despairing workers.”
In this situation, so politically explosive and fluid, the position developed by the Workers Party and expounded in previous issues of Labor Action on the European situation is particularly relevant. We have said that one of the major ways for the tiny isolated revolutionary groups of Europe to make contact with the masses was to become the foremost champions of national independence and liberation in those countries where there remained the slightest degree of imperialist oppression. Such slogans as “Drive Out the Imperialist Occupations” are of tremendous significance in a country like Austria today.
For everyone in Austria can see that it is being robbed and wrecked by all of the occupation powers and that no economic recovery of the slightest kind is possible so long as this kind of imperialist domination continues. That is why it is incumbent upon revolutionary socialists in such situations to take the lead in the democratic struggle for national liberation, which means first and foremost driving out the occupation leeches. It means to make politics dependent upon the reality of the Austrian situation described by Gedye: “Austria is weary of all foreign armies; it considers that they devour its substance and make self-government a mockery ...”
 



The torturous and drawn-out negotiations among the “Big Three” victors of the Second World War seem to have come to a turning point during the past week. A whole series of new patch-work agreements have been reached, none of which fundamentally solve any problem but which apparently provide some basis for collaboration among the three imperialist powers – the U.S., Britain and Russia – in the immediate future.
In a few weeks, announced the meeting of foreign ministers, peace treaties will be signed with a number of the former minor Axis powers. These treaties with the five satellite Axis powers – Italy, Rumania, Bulgaria, Hungary and Finland – provide, among other things, for the following:
1) The most pressing and difficult problem of Trieste has been worked out on a basis which will probably prove unsatisfactory to all concerned but which represents a horse-trading agreement among the major imperialist powers. The Adriatic port of Trieste and its immediate vicinity will be taken from Italy – a tremendous blow to that country’s imperial aspirations – and made into a Free Territory. The United Nations Security Council will appoint a Trieste Governor, with strong powers including control of the police. There will also be a popularly elected Legislative Assembly with ill-defined powers. Occupation troops – American, British and Yugoslavian – will be evacuated from the area “after the Governor decides that they are no longer needed.” (N.Y. Times – a paper which not only prints “all the news that’s fit to print” but also has a highly developed sense of irony.)
 
Expect Continued Conflict
It should be noted that the Russians have won a considerable concession in being allowed to import 5,000 Yugoslav troops into Yugoslavia, a prospect which does not fill supporters of U.S. imperialism with delight.
The western imperialist powers have won a victory, however, in the granting of strong police powers to the Trieste governor who will in all probability be either a direct representative of their bloc or someone from a small country amenable to their pressure. Expected result: continued internal conflict in Trieste between the governor and his police, defending Western imperialist interests against the Yugoslav troops, who will of course be handpicked ‘ representatives of Tito (i.e., Stalin.)
In the meantime, it should be noted that not one of those deciding Trieste’s fate even consider – fantastic notion that it seems to them! – the idea of asking the people of Trieste themselves what they wish; of organizing a plebiscite to poll them for their desires. For as in all the other recent border changes, the peoples involved are shifted without consultation.
2) Reparations: Very steep reparations have been exacted on the already bankrupt and disorganized satellite powers. Italy is to pay $100,000,000 to Russia; $125,000,000 to Yugoslavia; $105,000,000 to Greece; $25,000,000 to Ethiopia; and $5,000,000 to Albania. Rumania is to pay $300,000,000 to Russia and Hungary is to pay $200,000,000 to Russia. If these reparations are ever carried into practise, they can only mean the further disorganization and destruction of European economy and the further debasement of the already pitiful standard of living of the workers and peasants of southeastern Europe.
3) A whole series of border revisions – again this playing fast and loose, with people without consulting them on their own fate! – was decided on. Rumania is to cede Bukovina and Bessarabia to Russia, but since Stalin’s armies have already taken these areas the pact merely confirms the reality. The Dodecanese islands are granted to the Greek Monarchy. Southern Dobruja, a strip of land between Rumania and Bulgaria, is ceded by the former to the latter. The loss of the port and the province of Petsamo, Finland, to Russia – over which the Western “democrats” once shed such piteous tears – has been confirmed.
 
“Free Navigation”
And finally, the Big Three agreed upon the “principle” of free navigation of the Danube, which has been hailed as a victory for the Anglo-American bloc. Just what that bloc will be able to do with the “principle,”’however, so long as Russian troops control the countries along the Danube, remains to be seen.
The agreements summarized above elicited squeals of delight and heavy “think pieces” on the part of newspaper columnists, whose sole handicap is that they have to write on subjects of Which they understand very little. These columnist pundits – in between trying to blow down the walls of the miners union with their rhetorical wind – have expressed their delight at the new “reasonable” attitude shown by the Russians. But this “reasonable” attitude and the “amity” shown among the Big Three is nothing more than a mutual agreement that some sort of compromise of imperialist rulership would have to be worked out. The Russians made some concessions, as did the U.S. and Britain; but all of these maneuvers have meaning only if understood in the context of the fact that they are inter-imperialist in nature, part of the shifting kaleidoscope of big power domination and that nowhere was there any genuine democratic expression of people’s sentiments or regards for people’s needs.
But more responsible voices among the capitalist commentators – like the managing editor of the N.Y. Times, Edwin James, in his December 8 article – warned against the assumption that the rivalries among the major powers had come to an end. He pointed – and correctly so – to the continued existence of numerous sore spots: the major peace treaties with Germany and Austria (in Berlin a Stalinist appointed city administration refused to make way for an elected and anti-Stalinist administration); the state of near-civil war in Greece and the border clashes between Greek monarchist troops and Yugoslav troops; the question of what attitude the UN is to assume toward Spain, etc.
For though there is no prospect of immediate war – none of the major imperialist powers is ready for it or wants it yet – the conflicts between them are sharp, severe and permanent and cannot be wiped out by mere treaties or statements. They will continue to exist so long as the spectres of capitalist imperialism and Stalinist imperialism threaten the future of this world; nothing short of the abolition of these two monsters can remove the threat of an eventual Third World War which endangers the very future of the human race.
 



The subject for today is Bilbo – Theodore G. Bilbo, United States Senator from the state of Mississippi. Admittedly a most unpleasant subject, but still one it would be well for us to think about.
You have of course read about the current hearings, held first in Mississippi and then in Washington, D.C. We shall not here pile up all the evidence of his role as agent for war contractors, his nepotism, his personal profiteering.

That Bilbo received $26,200 from F.T. Newton of the Newton-Glenn Construction Co. In return for helping it get war contracts;
 
That Bilbo received $5,000, a Cadillac automobile and a specially-constructed artificial lake from Mike T. Morrissey, another war contractor;
 
That Bilbo received house furniture, handsome gifts for the Juniper Grove Baptist church whose finances he alone controlled, and occasional checks ranging into four figures from various manufacturers and constructors whom he had helped dip into the war profit pork barrel;
 
And that Bilbo took $1,500 from a dope addict, John A. Carr, for a narcotic permit which didn’t cost him a red cent.

– All this and more we are ready cheerfully to acknowledge. Knowing Bilbo for what he is, we are quite ready to believe almost anything about him.
 
What System Does Bilbo Represent?
Bilbo is admittedly involved in shady practices. It is possible, though not at all certain, that he may even be removed by the Senate, and in that way the Democratic Party may be spared a particularly embarrassing spokesman. But here we must ask the central question:
If Bilbo Goes, Does Bilboism Remain?
For let us remember that what is most reprehensible about Bilbo is not merely his personal shadiness; not merely his incredible ignorance; not merely his sewer-minded vulgarity; in a word, not merely his personal characteristics. They are disgusting enough, of course, but there is something even more important.
Bilbo represents a pattern of society and a way of life: Bilbo is the Southern antl-Negro and anti-labor politician in his ripest and vilest form. Bilbo is the system of discrimination brought to its filthiest fulfillment. Bilbo is the system of lynching and race hatred and poll taxes and cheap labor and poor schooling and union-busting and Ku Klux Klanism brought to its most revolting, pus-like, vermin-infested, dung-heaped but still classical conclusion.
If you want to see what happens to a society which is filled with hatred for and fear of a people whose skins are another color; if you want to see what happens to a society which makes of such people victims of terror, constant butts of humiliation, and exploited, cheated cheap labor on whose sweat and misery there is constructed the edifice of wealth, superstition and power –
Then look at Bilbo. He is American capitalism in its most revolting self-portrait; he Is the realisation in practice of those beautiful phrases: liberty and justice for all; this nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal; land of the free and home of the brave.
And so we ask again:
If Bilbo goes, does Bilboism remain?
Will not the whole structure of cheap labor, of Negro discrimination, poll taxes, terror, segregation, inured and irrational hatreds and fears continue? Will not the entire pattern remain even if Bilbo is ousted.?
Of course, we favor driving Bilbo from public life. But the way in which the Senate Investigating Committee is approaching the matter is a fraud. They are for his hide on the pretext of his personal cheating. But suppose Bilbo were on honest man, would that make Bilboism any the less hateful.
WE are out to smash Bilboism as a system, as the pattern of capitalism in the South where it Is crudest and in the North where It is just as persistent even if more subtle.
But the Senate Committee, while it may discredit Bilbo the individual, dares not attack Bilboism the system. For then it would have to indict the whole southern delegation, the bulwark of the Democratic Party. It would have to indict

Barkely of Kentucky, the Senate Democratic leader;
Ellender of Louisiana, just as much an advocate of Jim Crow;
Pepper of Florida, so-called liberal and darling of the Stalinists, but still a defender of Jim Crow;
In fact every one of the Southern spokesmen.

So let us remember: if Bilbo goes, pleasant as that will be, it does not put an end to Bilboism. And so long as Bilboism continues, our struggle is not yet at an end.
 
Capitalist Parties Buttress Jim Crow
Now one word about the Northern Democratic leaders.
Some of them, who call themselves liberals, have expressed their disgust at Bilbo. Very well. Yet they remain in the same party with him; they attend the same party caucuses that he does; they meet with him and his ilk to nominate Presidential candidates. The Northern capitalist politicians, whatever their personal inclinations and liberal pretensions, are intimately tied up with the Southern Jim Crow machine. The whole structure of American capitalist economy and political life buttresses Jim Crow; and the two major parties, Democratic and Republican alike, are two of its most powerful pillars.
*
This, then, is what we think you should remember about Bilbo. Take a good look at this specimen of American statesmanship, this contemporary spokesman for what was once Thomas Jefferson’s party. Examine this befouled and debauched version of the Southern gentleman.
And then remember: Not only Bilbo is the enemy; Bilboism itself must be wiped off the earth.

So long as one man suffers indignity or humiliation because his skin is dark or his nose is crooked or he prays or refuses to pray in a way distasteful to some one else;
 
So long as cheap labor and “open shop” towns and job discrimination remain;
 
So long as the poll tax and the grandfather clause and “white primary” continue;
 
So long as there remains the hooded nightshirt, the swinging rope, the charred body, the inflamed mob

THEN BILBOISM HAS NOT YET BEEN WIPED OUT!
*
This is the enemy. We socialists say Bilbo is the most terrible representative of a system itself rotten and decayed. Let us summon our hatred of injustice and let us burn this filth of Bilboism off the skin of the land.
And then let us use the plenty and riches of this land to build a new society of peace and equality, of plenty for all, of the brotherhood of all men, where the children of tomorrow will play in the streets and the fields unaware of the deforming hatreds that now poison our lives.
 



On Election Day, in the East Harlem area of New York City, where the former ally of fascists, present darling of Stalinists and ruthless local machine boss, Vito Marcantonio, rules, a Republican district captain, Joseph Scottoriggio, was murdered while on his way to the polls.
Since then the case has become a cause célèbre in the city. It has been eagerly seized upon by the Republican opponents of Marcantonio as a means of trying to discredit him in the public eye. Governor Dewey paid a personal visit to the widow of the murdered man in order to express his sympathy – in the presence of camera men, of course. The Republicans, convinced that the murder or their local leader could be traced or at least plausibly laid at the door of the Marcantonio machine, have continuously demanded investigations.
 
Police Shakeup Results
As a result, a major shakeup has just been announced in the New York City Police Department. Assistant Chief Inspector John J. De Martino, for twelve years head of the uniformed police force of Manhattan’s East Side, has been forced to “resign” and the ranks of the cops have been thoroughly shaken up after the charges of District Attorney Frank Hogan that “high ranking police officials in Harlem were hampering the investigation into the Election Day murder.” (New York Times, December 12)
Though Tammany Hall, with which Mayor O’Dwyer is politically associated, has made repeated deals with Marcantonio, it has not relished the need to share patronage and power with this local political martinet and accomplice of the Stalinists (Marcantonio is chairman of the New York ALP). O’Dwyer, both as a result of powerful pressure and a fear that anything less than a forceful investigation might lead to the case blowing up in the face of the local Democratic Party, then put the spurs to Police Commissioner Wallander and the police shakeup was the result.
In the meantime, several local East Harlem toughs have been held as material witnesses. They are: Joey Rao, big-shot aide during Prohibition to the late Dutch Schultz; Michael (Trigger Mike) Coppola, strong-arm man for the late Vincent Coll, Harlem beer runner; and Emilio Tizel, a local tough who is being held in custody for fear that he may be “rubbed out” because of the information he has allegedly given to the police. The former two have had their bail reduced from $250,000 each to $40,000 each – by Democratic Judge Aaron Levy.
 
Facts Are Sordid
These are the facts at the time of writing. Now let’s try to unravel the meaning of this sordid situation:
1) Who Killed Scottoriggio? According to all observers, the killing of this insignificant little man was probably an “accident.” The skilled crime reporter of the N.Y. Times, Meyer Berger, offered on December 12 a conjecture which seems reasonable:
“...it might develop that the Republican district captain’s death from a beating at the polls may have been the mistake of overzealous East Harlem ‘muscle men’ assigned, as underworld argot would have it, ‘to just give it to him once over lightly.’”
It is common knowledge that Marcantonio’s political domination in East Harlem, a neighborhood populated primarily by the most poverty-stricken elements in the city, is based on an alliance between his local political machine WITH the Stalinists and WITH local gangs of toughs. For in no other part of the city are gambling, prostitution, vice, dope-smuggling and other racketeering so common – and so undisturbed by the police.
In the recent election, the Republicans were for the first time in years a major threat to Marcantonio. Republican meetings were constantly disturbed by his goons and in several cases violence was used against Republican election workers. It is then possible that some of these goons got a little too rough; or that, in addition to fulfilling an assignment they had a personal grudge against Scottoriggio and therefore added a few blows for good measure – one of which proved fatal?
2) What Is the Role of the Democratic Party? The Democrats are in a very ticklish situation – for Marcantonio is their ally. He captured the Democratic primary and has often worked with Tammany Hall. If they could be shown to be lax in finding the killer, it would be a tremendous political blow at them. Mayor O’Dwyer has therefore, like it or not, had to put the squeeze on the police’. But one fact is already clear: Tammany Hall has played ball with the Marcantonio gang, has been an ally and accomplice in its corruption; it has winked its eye at the events in East Harlem – at least until the going got too hot.
3) What About the Police? The blunt statement of DA Hogan about “high police officials ... hampering the investigation” is virtually an open admission that the police have looked the other way when things happened in East Harlem. Otherwise, why the shakeup? There then is a damning commentary on New York’s finest.
It is interesting to compare the frantic activity in this case, where the political stakes are high, with police indifference and routinism in the case of the unsolved political murder of Carlo Tresca, anarchist leader, a few years back. The police department, in addition to its traditional sympathetic attitude to local racketeering, is manipulated by the dominant capitalist party according to its passing interests.
4) Where Do the Stalinists Come In? The Stalinists, themselves experienced hands at political murders, who have puffed Marcantonio up from a small-time political wardheeler into a national figure, are worried stiff lest he be implicated, however indirectly, in the affair. The Daily Worker has blown hot and cold in the matter, in its December 11 issue it suggests the possibility that De Martino’s resignation was provoked “because he would not go along with certain ‘suggestions’ made to him to ‘get’ Marcantonio?”
Now the possibility that a move is on to “get” Marcantonio politically by means of cooking up a case in which he would be implicated and that pressure to that effect was put on De Martino, cannot be summarily denied. But that possibility does not remove the fact that Marcantonio has worked together with unsavory elements and that rough-neck tactics have been used, by his supporters – the consequences of which for the Scottoriggio case are suggestive. And that is why the Stalinists are in a stew – and rightly so, for they too are deeply implicated in this mess of capitalist political corruption.
5) And Now: Enter the Republicans. For the Republicans, all of this seems a golden opportunity. To implicate, no matter how Validly, the Marcantonio-Stalinist-Tammany alliance in this murder would be of tremendous help to them; which is why Governor Dewey has been putting so much pressure on the city administration. But the hands of the Republicans are also soiled in this affair. For Marcantonio was the protege and darling of the former Republican Mayor, Fiorello La Guardia. As the New York Post of December 13 writes: “Mayor La Guardia ... closed his eyes to the goings-on in the bailiwick of his favorite, Marc, and the police naturally followed suit.” We could not say more ourselves.
Furthermore, the Republicans in this situation have been soiled by the propaganda methods they have used. They have not refrained from none too subtly veiled references to the national groups living in East Harlem – Puerto Ricans and Italians – which were of an inflammatory character. They have been eager to cook up a case regardless of whether there really was one. And they have kept a deadly silence on their own ties to the corruption which is now gradually being exposed.
6) What Does All This Add Up To? Here again we wish to quote the New York Post of December 13:
“... while crime is fostered by faulty or dishonest police work, it is bred by slums, race discrimination, poverty, disease – and in no area of New York do these evils, exist in greater profusion.
“This is a neighborhood of the dispossessed and hopeless. It is a natural haven for gangsters ... Here is the highest tuberculosis death rate in the city; here the overcrowding is three times as great as in the rest of the city, and here live the mass of New York’s Puerto Ricans and many Negroes – last to be hired and first to be fired.”
Accurately put! But the “liberal” Post, of course, does not understand or does not wish to understand what all of this means.
Bred in this “neighborhood of the dispossessed and hopeless,” there has arisen a political machine of cynicism, corruption and demagogy; this machine may now have been involved in outright terrorism; both capitalist political parties are themselves involved and simultaneously trying to use it against each other; the police department is shown to have been involved.
Could there be a more damning and eloquent demonstration of the corruption of capitalist municipal government – what was once called “The Shame of Our Cities”? For here on a local and limited scale have been reproduced all of the features which make of capitalism in general such a corrupting and degrading social system.
 



Language, it has been said, reflects the state of a civilization, its health or sickness. If that statement is true, then we can find an extraordinary index of the decline of capitalist civilization in the recent influx of new terms into our language. Think of some of them: Blitzkrieg; concentration camp; buzz bombs; radar; atom bomb; bacteria warfare. These are the verbal reflection of a society which has sunk to such depths that – at the very moment when it has advanced man’s mastery over nature to an unprecedented extent – it threatens quite literally the very existence of the human race itself.
Accordingly, there is still another new word: genocide. It was popularized at the recent Nuremberg trials where Hitler’s cronies were accused of having attempted to destroy entire peoples – the Jews and the Poles. But the conception of genocide is not merely applicable to those peoples that fell victim to Nazism. Increasingly, it becomes descriptive of capitalist civilization as a whole. Not, of course, that the conception of genocide can be applied literally and immediately to the United States, for example. But if you will read the reports of starvation in Europe, the terrible prospects for the coming winter, then you will see how capitalism is providing a sort of genocide-in-extension for humanity.
Almost a century ago the two founders of socialism, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, wrote that capitalism was doomed, that it contained in itself the seeds of its own destruction and that humanity faced the choice of socialism or barbarism. In the subsequent heroic period of socialism, when the movement grew and success seemed assured, and later when in fact there took place in Russia the first successful working class revolution, little attention was paid to the second half of Marx’s prediction: “socialism or barbarism.” For when socialism seemed so surely on the order of the day, when the mighty armies of revolution were rallying under Lenin’s inspired banner, what cause was there to inquire into the phrase: “or barbarism?”
 
Decline of a Social System
But today when we are living after the most terrible series of defeats for the working class and for socialism; today when the previously unheard-of and unimagined symmetrical totalitarianisms of fascism and Stalinism have arisen as the end-products of the decline of a social system putrifying for lack of a force powerful enough to overthrow it; today, then, we must begin to inquire what meaning can reasonably be assigned to the latter half of the Marxian alternative: socialism or barbarism.
And when we see the popularization of the term GENOCIDE, its casual acceptance by a world acclimated to accumulating social horror, we have at least a symptom, a SIGN of what that phrase “OR BARBARISM” can mean.
Surely, no one can say that he has in his mind or heart fully registered. and assimilated the meaning of the corruption, the absolutely stinking decomposition of modern society. It is too much for one mind to try to grasp.
Who could have foretold or imagined twenty-five years ago what has happened to Europe in the past decade? Who would have believed that six million Jews could be murdered in the center of modern culture? Who would have believed that Stalinism would arise, having at its command the loyalty of millions, of devoted, workers who sincerely believe that this totalitarian monster is the symbol of socialist liberation? Who would have believed that the continent would today be a maze of homeless peoples, shifted first by the Nazis and then by the Allied victors, millions uprooted; a plague-spot of terrible hunger where millions of children are being doomed to tuberculosis; a miasma of corruption and despair, half of it gripped in the vise of the totalitarianism which arose over the grave of the Russian revolution?
 
The Meaning of Genocide
When we think of socialism or barbarism, we must not fall into the trap of imagining that barbarism means the human descent into some form of primitive life in which technology exists only as a vestigial remnant of a previous society. That is a possible future degeneration from the contemporary barbarism which threatens humanity, a barbarism which is highly organized and utilizes technology. But today the threat is real: it is the threat symbolized by such simple words as atom bomb and genocide.
Think again of the facts: Europe starves. No rational organization has come as a result of the war; none is possible. Capitalist economies crack at the seams and in many countries measures are required to keep it together which are ultimately additional attacks on it. The whole world shudders at the possibility of atomic war – and at the fact that preparations for such a war continue.
Do not think of the alternative socialism or barbarism as some hypothetical aspect of the future; the barbarism of modern society has already begun.
And what are the odds in this race between the bright rational future society of plenty and leisure and peace which is the promise of socialism as against the decline into neo-despotism, or barbarism or whatever you wish to call it?
The odds are in part what we make them. It would be the height of folly to say that upon a world scale at the present moment the socialist movement – that is, the real socialist movement and not the horrible contrary of it, Stalinism – is flourishing or on the verge of success. The black days are still with the socialist movement internationally and they will remain for some time yet. Only rogues or fools attempt to deny this simple fact.
The Future of the Working Class
But still there is reason for hope and possibility for victory. For so long as the working class – the only source of potential revolutionary socialist power – remains capable of revolt, so long as it is restive, so long as it exists as a working class, there remains the possibility of a socialist triumph.
What do we mean by that phrase, “so long as it remains as a working class?” So long as the working class retains its central position in the process of production, the position which simultaneously makes it indispensable and yet constantly prods it to active revolt because of the intolerable conditions of life to which capitalism dooms it, then it is to this class that we must look as the power which can overthrow all of the old social rubbish and start afresh.
There is nothing automatic about this; there are no guarantees. First and foremost it is necessary to build a movement which dedicates itself to rebuilding the socialist cause on a revolutionary and democratic basis. The very course of struggle opens new possibilities of victory. Every human being who desires to put an end to this society of corruption and decay, of war and starvation, must find his place in the reassembling revolutionary socialist movement, at the head of which in the United States stands the Workers Party.
 



In one day’s news reports, those of November 27, 1946, there are three items which, if taken together, provide a vivid picture of how persistently and tragically acute remains the problem of Europe’s Jews. These three items are:

A report from Palestine describing the frenzied resistance of 4,000 Jewish refugees on board the ship, Jewish Resistance, to the attempts of British troops to seize them for internment in Cyprus. One refugee Jew was killed and twenty-one British soldiers hurt in a pitched battle in which the soldiers used tear gas and the Jews retaliated by throwing cans of food. Wrote J.E. Meltzer in the N.Y. Times

“Soldiers who took part in the operation ... said they had experienced nothing like the opposition given today. The refugees seemed almost frantic in their desire to beat off the troops and make a mass break toward shore and freedom, although barbed wire blocked them.”

At a meeting of the Jewish community of Vienna, Dr. David Brill, its president, charged that “Nazism was getting strong in Austria, that when the doors of the refugee Jews’ home was opened this morning the entrance stairs were strewn with paper swastikas.”
 
After a four-week trip to Europe, Edward Warburg, chairman of the Joint Distribution Committee, said that “the number of displaced Jews in Europe has doubled in the last year and has now reached 250,000, or 25 per cent of the total number of homeless persons there.”

Perhaps a fourth news item should be added to complete the picture. Secretary of State Byrnes and Foreign Minister Bevin are planning a conference “in several weeks” to discuss what to do about the problem of Palestine.
 
The Jews Are Barred Everywhere
That is where it stands: the Jews of Europe have no home; they do not, for the most part, wish to remain in the countries which they associate only with terror and persecution, concentration camps and yellow badges. They know now that the mere removal of Hitler has not ended anti-Semitism in Europe; that all the social poisons, the seemingly irrational but socially definable prejudices and passions of which they were the victims, still fester among the misguided and disoriented of the continent. In Poland, anti-Semitism has been rife and open; in Germany and Austria persistent if somewhat subterranean; and even in France it has shown surprising virility. For anti-Semitism is one of the most powerfully ingrained social toxins of our time: the desperate, hate-filled and almost deliberately irrational response of people grown frantic with insecurity, poverty, war and national oppression. The Jew has been the scapegoat of Europe for centuries – and Europe, in its present condition, still needs a scapegoat ...
For the time being, then, most of Europe is finished for the Jews. This statement represents neither a wish nor a conception on our part; it is merely the recognition of a fact. We would have it otherwise: it would have been better if the Jews of Europe could have been integrated into the nations in which they lived, with whatever cultural autonomy they might have desired, as part of a free and democratic socialist continent. But that was not the case. The bankruptcy of the 2nd and 3rd Internationals gave fascism the green light; and fascism has made most of Europe uninhabitable to the pitiful remnant of the Jews still alive.
And to they turn elsewhere. First and foremost, they turn to Palestine. This statement, too, is not a matter of wish; it is a simple fact. We revolutionary socialists are not Zionists; we are opposed to political Zionism with its nostalgic nationalist pretensions and its disregard for the rights of other nationally oppressed groups. But between the nationalist nostalgia and political chicanery of Zionism and the simple natural desire of Europe’s Jews to find a home for themselves in Palestine, there Is a wide gulf. Socialists oppose the former; the latter we support.
Why the Jews turn to Palestine at the moment is not of first importance. Whether because of desperation, or a resurgence of religious messianism, or an increased acceptance of Zionism, the fact remains that as a people, who look, upon themselves as a nation, they wish quite overwhelmingly to go to Palestine. And just as we socialists support^ the legitimate democratic-national aspirations of oppressed minorities everywhere, so must we support the right of the European Jews to migrate to Palestine while simultaneously defending the rights of the Arab masses on,which most of the Zionist leaders would trample.
 
The Hypocrites and Sycophants
But that is not enough. We live in the United States; our ears are burdened with rhetorical pap about this “great land of democracy.” We must make clear that the indifference – that compound of occasional after-dinner speeches about the “plight of the poor Jews” and a failure to take any action whatever – of this country’s political leaders and parties is today the most damning and decisive refutation to their democratic claims. So long as the doors of this country remain shut to all but a trickle of Europe’s Jews, their talk about sympathy is simply a lie. A lie, a vicious, hypocritical, damnable lie!
That is the pattern of the treatment Europe’s Jews are receiving. From the U.S., bushelfuls of rhetoric and no action. From Britain (and oh, the shame of it that the gang of imperialist scoundrels which calls itself His Majesty’s Government should appear in the eyes of the world as “Socialist!”) repression, bullets, concentration camps in Cyprus. We are tempted to ask those who justified their support of Allied imperialism in the recent war in the name of the plight of Europe’s Jews – is this the salvation of the oppressed for which you led the soldiers to their graves? But of that another time. At this moment, the question that must agitate every thinking person in whom there is still a little area of the heart not deadened by the contemporary cynicism; the question that we perhaps vainly hope disturbs at least a few minutes of the sleep of the mighty, remains:
And what of Europe’s Jews? Will they be left to die?
 



The first meeting of the Security Council of the United Nations Organization – hailed by its supporters as the one force which could bring peace to the world – has turned into a bloody verbal brawl between Britain and Russia.
This brawl, a thousand times more than diplomatic platitudes about “international cooperation," reflects the true state of the imperialist struggle taking place among the nations which won the war – and are now fighting so sharply with each other for the lion’s share of the booty.
The conflict came to a head on the issue of Greece. Russia, represented by Andrei Vishinsky, the infamous prosecutor of the Moscow Trials, charged that British troops were being maintained in Greece in order to prop up an unpopular and weak reactionary regime. against the wishes of the Greek people. But surely nobody – not even the London correspondent of PM or The Nation – could take seriously the spectacle of a creature like Vishinsky shedding tears over the lack of democracy ... in Greece. There are limits to everything, and even vaudeville performers sometimes show restraint. And for the Stalinist dictatorship, which had installed puppet regimes in Eastern European countries without the slightest regard for the wishes of the peoples of those countries, now suddenly to become indignant about the lack of democracy in Greece – well, that was something for the books.
 
A Clash of Empires
Yet it IS a fact that there is no real democracy in Greece, that there has been a reactionary terror buttressed by British tanks and bayonets. To point out, as we do here, the totally hypocritical and two-sided nature of the Russian charge is not in the slightest degree to whitewash or support the role of Britain in the Mediterranean.
For apparently everyone understood that the verbiage about democracy which Vishinsky and Bevin hurled at each other at the UNO meeting was not to be taken seriously. What was the REAL issue? The correspondent of the New York Times, James Reston, wrote on February 4:
“It is generally admitted here that this is no common dispute over the mysteries of Balkan politics or a clash of personalities. It is seen instead as a clash of empires, a new phase in the old Anglo-Russian struggle for influence in the Mediterranean and the Near and Middle East. And it is seen as the beginning of a showdown before the Paris Peace Conference redrafts the map of the Mediterranean.”
This, as you can see, is delightfully frank. And accurate, too. Greece occupies an immensely important strategic position in the Eastern Mediterranean: it lies on the path to the Near East and to that “jewel” of the British Empire, India. If Britain were to lose control of that pathway of empire; if she were to face an unfriendly Greek government, one which leaned to Russia; if she were to have the Near Eastern Arab-Jewish struggle explode in her face – then the Empire would indeed be in complete jeopardy. Which is why, even under the aegis of the “socialist” Foreign Minister, Ernest Bevin (who boasts of his working class origin, even if he can’t boast of any working class policies), Britain still clings desperately and clutchingly to its wobbly control of the Near East. And if she were to lose Greece ...
But the Stalin regime realizes all this as well as anyone else. What Britain wants to cling to, the Stalin dictatorship wants to snatch away: it has big eyes and long fingers. Greece is, for it, merely a stepping stone. Russia has demanded bases from Turkey, has indicated a desire for bases in the Dodecanese Islands and has demanded “UNO trusteeships” for the Italian colonies of Tripolitania and Eritrea. Stalinist imperialism thereby clashes with British imperialism in the latter’s “heartland” – and that’s why Ernest Bevin shouts so thunderously at the UNO.
 
And They Talk Peace!
There is the reality, the unadorned and simple fact. What about the UNO, then? In its first session, it is already shown for what it is: a talk- shop, a maneuvering ground in which the major imperialist powers – Britain, Russia and America – were indignant about the imperialist plunder of EACH OTHER, but in which not the slightest, not the tiniest, genuine step for peace can be taken. It is the power relationships that prevail – inside the UNO as well as outside. Whoever has the strength wins – and no speeches change it. The giant imperialisms of America, Russia and Britain predominate because they have the guns; and the other nations play follow the leader.
How could it be otherwise in an imperialist world where powers fight over the spoils of the last war and uneasily prepare for the next? The UNO has no power and no meaning aside from the strength of its dominating members, and their irreconcilable conflicts dominate the proceedings. The liberals may publish weekly sheets full of crocodile tears, but socialists who understand what is going on expect nothing else.
In the meantime, there’s even a certain refreshing aspect to the spectacle of the big powers telling the truth about each other. It reminds one of the delightful cartoon of the great socialist artist, Art Young, in which he has two capitalist politicians of opposing parties standing on soap-boxes and pointing to each other while saying “He’s no good!" Of course! Russia exposes Britain in Greece. Britain exposes Russia in Iran. Russia exposes British imperialism in the Dutch East Indies. And, turnabout, Britain inquires skeptically about Russian intentions in Tripolitania.
Occasionally, while you’re reading the newspaper reports of these shopkeeper squabbles at the UNO, you suddenly remember: Good Lord, these miserable creatures are arguing about countries in which millions of people live, people who also want democracy and the right to decide their own destiny. But their voice is not heard at the UNO. Only the other week, the Russians announced that the United States and Britain had agreed to cede to them the Kuriles Islands and the southern half of Sakhalin. Now, people live there. What do they think and what do they want? Nobody asks them. Do the Greeks want British troops? Do the Javanese want Dutch and British troops? Do the Iranians want American, British and Russian troops?
The bargaining continues in the UNO and at the secret “peace” conference. Just think: a few diplomats sitting in secret deciding the fate of millions, cutting up maps – and dividing the wealth of the world among them. The giant of capitalist imperialism, the United States, sits at the head of the table; its junior partner, Britain, sits next to it; and across it sits the new imperialist tycoon, Stalinist imperialism. You take this; we take that.
And it is this repulsive spectacle which taffy-brained liberals tell us will bring peace to the world!
 



The most significant event in Europe last week was the referendum in which the people, by a substantial majority, rejected the constitution which had been offered to them by the Gouin government and supported vigorously by the Stalinist party and half-heartedly by the Socialists. The vote was, at latest count, 10,552,478 against and 9,323,709 for the proposed constitution. Though there is not yet enough information on which to attempt a thorough analysis of this event, a few preliminary remarks may be made.
It must be soberly recognized that the capitalist class of France has won an important victory, its most important victory since De Gaulle, with the aid of the Stalinists, derailed the Paris resistance from revolutionary into capitalist legal channels after the withdrawal of Hitler from Paris. We say this not primarily because of the formal issue involved – that is, the constitution itself – but because the referendum had obviously become a test of strength in which the parties, the Catholic MRP and the Radical Socialist Party of French capitalism, bent every effort to defeat a constitution which they labeled “communist.” De Gaulle, despite his “retirement,” gave support to the movement to defeat the constitution. It became clear that the referendum was a test; and the Right won.
Proof of this is furnished by the undisguised glee with which the results have been received in Washington. In the New York Times of May 7, 1946, James Reston writes about the new prospects of France getting a loan from America:
“While officials do not like to concede that French internal politics affect their consideration of the French loan, it may safely be reported that the conservative vote has certainly not hampered France’s chance of getting the aid desired for the modernization of French industry.”
And a report in the Chicago Sun for the same date by Alexander Kendrick lists as one of the possible domestic French results the “possible scrapping of the government’s nationalization program by the Assembly.” The United Press further reports that “French stocks and bonds spurted up noticeably Monday and black market francs soared in value.” This much is clear: the parties of the Right, that is, of big business, made a test of the referendum; and they won. Why?
 
Why the Right Parties Won
The major reason for the victory of the Right can be found, we believe, in the record of failure and ineptitude of the Socialist-Communist-MRP coalition government. For months now this government and that of de Gaulle before it – in both of which the “parties of the Left,” the Socialists and Stalinists, played decisive roles – have been unable to solve the most simple and elementary problems of the French people. They have failed to smash the parasitic black market. They have applied their previously announced program of limited nationalization of industry in a timorous and hesitant fashion; so much so that the French capitalist class has had the opportunity to make a partial recovery and regain some of its old selfconfidence (as witness the rumors of “plots” by de Gaulle to establish a Bonapartist government).
The masses, formerly so full of a renewed revolutionary energy as a result of the successful partisan struggle against the Nazis, have sunk into relative apathy once more; they have had talk, promises, but little action. The government in which the Socialists and Stalinists predominate, has failed them.
Yet a breakdown of the referendum vote indicates that in the heavily industrialized cities there was a majority in favor of the new constitution. That is, the workers by and large seem to have continued to support the Socialist-Stalinist leadership during the referendum though – and here is a crucial point – without sufficient enthusiasm to roll up a sufficient majority to overcome the conservative vote of the rural areas.
It was apparently the middle class which was excited and stirred by the parties of the Right to defeat the constitution. In the elections of the Constituent Assembly in October, only 60 per cent of the eligible electorate voted; in this referendum the very high percentage of 85 per cent voted. Since most of the increase in votes took place in rural areas, it would seem that the middle class turned out in full force to vote against the Socialist-Stalinist constitution. But during the past period, large sections of the middle class had given their support to the “parties of the Left.” Why this present shift?
It is possible to suggest several reasons for this shift in middle class sentiment, which have an intimate connection with the causes of decline in working class enthusiasm. Parts of the urban middle class and the peasantry had for the first time in French history given their support last October to the Stalinists and Socialists out of a sense of desperation, a desire for serious and drastic action to clear up the terrible economic and social mess in which France found herself. But no such action had been taken. As always, the working class can win the middle class to its support only by decisive and bold measures; a policy of hesitancy will drive the middle class back to the Right.
Another important reason for the middle class shift was the fear – in many ways quite legitimate – which they had and which was exploited by the MRP and the leading French capitalist politician, Edouard Herriot, that the continued growth of the Stalinists represented a threat of totalitarian dictatorship in France.
 
Referendum a Test of Class Strength
Formally, the issue was: Shall the new French legislature be a single house without the cumbersome “checks and balances” of an indirectly elected Senate and a powerful executive and judiciary which the Right wanted? But the formal matter of a unicameral legislature – which we Socialists have “always considered desirable – was soon obscured by the test of strength between classes and the fear of totalitarian domination. For instance, during the debate on the proposed constitution, Herriot was able to pose as the defender of a free press against the “Left,” which shamefully urged press restrictions. The ineradicable totalitarian brand which is stamped on Stalinism was skillfully utilized by the politicians of the Right to corral votes against the constitution.
And, finally, an additional reason for this result is that it was a vote motivated by considerations of international politics. The sharpened split between Stalinist Russia on the one hand and Anglo- American imperialism on the other resulted in a reflecting internal cleavage in France; and there can be no doubt that the referendum result is a victory for the latter bloc as against Russia and its puppet French Communist Party. The tragedy of the situation is that the legitimate desire of the French people not to fall under the domination of Stalinism forced them in this case to cast a vote which has given sustenance to the Anglo-American bloc and the parties of French capitalism. The criminal policies of the “parties of French Left” are directly responsible for this result.
Though we have not yet received the relevant issues of the paper of the French Trotskyists, we have been informed that they, our French comrades, urged the workers to vote “Yes” in the referendum. Without necessarily indorsing all the provisions of the constitution, they felt that the test of strength between classes which this referendum represented far transcended the formal constitutional issues.
Where this new development leaves the French workers and what are the new tasks they now face as a result of the referendum, we shall discuss in a future article.
 



A number of odds and ends have accumulated in this corner over a period of weeks and this week’s column will be devoted to clearing up a few of them. (As soon as we expand to eight pages there will be room for fuller coverage of international news.)
*

More on Stalinist Concentration Camps in Eastern Germany
Some weeks ago this column reported that the Stalinist military occupation in Eastern Germany had reopened Nazi concentration camps and placed in them various anti-Stalinist radicals and Social-Democrats who opposed the “fusion” of their party with the Stalinists. This latest indication of the fact that wherever Stalinism becomes dominant it does its best to destroy independent organizations of the working class can now be further corroborated by reports from Europe. The Manchester Guardian, from which we quoted the report that Hermann Brill, a Socialist leader, had been sent to a concentration camp, now reports in its March 28 issue that Dr. Brill has been released. He was released, however, ONLY after resigning as chairman of the Thuringian section of the Social-Democratic Party, that is, only after giving up the political struggle against the fusion with the Stalinists.
The London Tribune, a left laborite weekly, reports in its April 5 issue of “increasing arrests of opponents of fusion” on charges of “insulting the Red Army.” Writes the Tribune:
“By mid-February, eighty-three Social-Democrats, including thirty party officials, were held on such charges in the well known concentration camp, Sachsenhausen, near Oranienburg. One of the latest arrests is Werner Ruediger, one of the two chairmen of the Greater Berlin area organization of the party ... There are now detailed reports available from all the provinces in the Russian zone showing how unwilling district and local leaders were induced to agree to immediate local fusion by similar methods. Against those opponents of fusion who are beyond the reach of the Russians a campaign of personal slander has started: Dahrendorf, the Berlin leader who was celebrated for his underground activities before the present conflict arose, is now attacked in his former paper as an employee of the Flick armament combine, while Soviet-controlled papers in the provinces – not in Berlin, where they could be answered – have published an anonymous letter accusing Dr. Schumacker, the Social-Democrat leader in the Western zones, of having belonged, while in the Nazi concentration camp, to a committee helping the Nazis to decide which prisoners should be gassed as politically incurable.”
Perhaps the most revealing statement on the whole matter is quoted by Leon Dennen, who reports from Germany for the New York New Leader. Dennen quotes Otto Grotewohl, one of the Social-Democrats who favors fusion with the Stalinists: “Twelve years of concentration camps or underground existence is enough in one lifetime.”
This is the “liberation” which Stalinism has brought to Eastern Germany.
*

The Apparent “Disagreements” Among the European Stalinist Parties
Rigid and inflexible though the allegiance of the various Stalinist parties is to the dictates of their Kremlin masters, they are apparently allowed a certain flexibility on some important boundary problems which are now agitating Europe. For instance, the French Stalinists support the demand raised by their government that the Ruhr be separated from Germany; the German Stalinists, in the name of national unification, urge that the Ruhr be retained within the boundary of Germany. On the future of the Ruhr depends the future organization of European economy, for the Ruhr, despite its partial destruction by bombing, remains the industrial heart of the continent. So long as Germany retains it, she is in a position to rebuild its power and become once again a threat to France. Hence, the obvious desire of French nationalism to deprive Germany of the Ruhr – not to mention its hope to get its own fingers into that juicy industrial pie. Both Stalinist parties in Germany and France are aping the super-nationalistic jingoes in their own countries; they are completely foreign to the simplest conception of socialist internationalism.
A similar situation exists with regard to Trieste. The Stalinist-dominated Tito government of Yugoslavia insists that Trieste be ceded to it and the Russian government supports the demand. But that puts the Italian Stalinists in an impossible position, for they know that they would become the most unpopular party in Italy if they ran counter to Italian nationalist feeling by urging that Trieste be abandoned to Yugoslavia. So the Italian Stalinists equivocated, stammered and hesitated. Their embarrassment was heightened when the French Stalinist party through a speech by its leader, Jacques Duclos, on April 20, said that Trieste should go to Yugoslavia for “geographical and economic reasons.” He also said that “we (notice Duclos’ identification with French imperialism – I.H.) have the unimpeachable right to ask for adequate reparations.”
The Italian Stalinists thereupon issued an official statement two days later in which they said that they were “unanimous in hoping that a solution of the Trieste question will be found which will be different from that urged by the French Communists.” They further opposed the idea of Italy paying reparations to France.
The question arises: Do these differences of position represent a serious internal divergence within European Stalinism – a divergence provoked perhaps by the development of tendencies within the Stalinist parties which become more closely identified with “their” national capitalist class than with their Russian masters? Probably not. The theory that the Stalinist parties or significant sections of them would try to break loose from Russian domination and gravitate towards “their” native capitalist class was advanced by Trotsky before the war, and was shown to be incorrect by the experiences of the war. No matter how unpopular their position was during the Hitler-Stalin pact, the Stalinist parties remained loyal to the Russian bureaucracy first and foremost, even though that meant persecution by the governments of the countries in which they functioned. There seems no reason to assume that this is not just as true today; witness, if proof be needed, the recent “turn” in Stalinist policy.
How then explain the different lines taken by the European Stalinist parties? For one thing, at present it doesn’t make any decisive difference. The future of Trieste will, for the moment – one may imagine the Stalin bureaucracy calculating – be decided by what the Big Powers want and not by what the Italian Stalinists say. Therefore, in order that they may retain their mass support, let the Italian Stalinists “oppose,” however weakly, the ceding of Trieste to Yugoslavia. Much the same reasoning probably permits the Stalinists to continue with different lines in Germany and France on the Ruhr problem. It is more important for Stalin to be able to manipulate mass parties in Europe, which are his strongest means of applying pressure on his erstwhile allies, than to consider the formal consistency of their programs. And so the Stalinist parties in Germany, France and Italy are permitted by their master to indulge in seemingly contradictory ultra-nationalist propaganda, but all with the common purpose of helping that master.
 



Since the end of the war, the international Stalinist movement has adopted a more aggressive “left” political line, to the point where certain superficial observers have seen a return to the “policy of world revolution.” Nothing of the kind is true.
It would be a serious error to identify the current “left turn” with the notorious Stalinist Third Period in the early thirties, when it was really pursuing an ultra-left policy. At that time, before Hitler came to power, though the Stalinist parties were thoroughly dominated by the Russian bureaucracy, the full weight of degeneration inside Russia had not yet been felt and the Stalinist parties still functioned more or less as revolutionary working class movements. They made scandalous errors, they were already bureaucratized, but they still had a certain connection with the Marxist tradition and were still somewhat responsive to the needs and pressures of the workers.
 
The Motivation of Stalinist Policy
If one sees in the first Moscow Trial the final culmination of a process of degeneration inside Russia; or if one chooses the failure of German Stalinism to resist Hitler’s rise to power as the point in time where Stalinism as a parasitic bureaucracy can be seen to have been transformed into a new ruling class; or if one chooses any other time – this much is clear: Stalinism can be understood only by accepting the proposition that it functions today essentially as a vassal of the Russian collectivist bureaucracy and all of its basic policies are determined by the needs of that bureaucracy. The various Stalinist parties may have interests and aspirations of their own, but thus far these have been subordinated to the requirements of Russian foreign policy.
In view of this characterization of Stalinism the terms “left” and “right” as traditionally used in the Marxist movement are really inapplicable to Stalinism. When, for instance, one says that the Norman Thomas Socialist Party has recently moved to the right, there is a specific meaning which that description suggests to people acquainted with politics. But the terms “left” and “right” are in that sense not very useful when considering a totalitarian movement like Stalinism which is a new and unique historical phenomenon, and to which the descriptive terms of the traditional working class movement apply only in a most limited and analogical sense. When one says that the needs of Russian foreign policy makes the Argentine Stalinists first with dictator Peron, or that the needs of Russian foreign policy make the American Stalinists criticize Truman; then we are talking about something that is much more clear than if those policies are described as “left” or “right.”
During the war the American Stalinists were bitterly opposed to any strikes, because they feared that strikes in war industries might hinder Stalin’s military campaigns. And no considerations for the needs of the American workers could force them to change their policy.
Now that the war is over, Stalin has allowed his parties to become more belligerent, to talk more “radical” politics, to revert to the language of socialism. There are two main reasons for this shift:

The major international conflict is no longer the imperialist war, but rather a struggle among the victors of that war on how to divide the spoils. Serious quarrels have arisen among the Big Three. These quarrels are simply about one proposition: who is to get what? and how much? Resultantly, Stalin utilizes his puppet-parties in the Allied countries to apply pressure on his erstwhile war allies in order to gain a larger share of the war booty. That is the basic reason for the “left” turn of Stalinism, and it can be said that if some agreement on the division of the war spoils satisfactory to Stalin were worked out and the present strain between Russia and the Anglo-American bloc eased, then the Stalinist parties would become much more docile and would cease talking so “revolutionary.”
 
The other and secondary reason for the “left” turn is that the Stalinist parties are aware of the moods of the masses of workers which is, especially in many countries, extremely restive; they know that a certain amount of “leftish” demagogy is essential if they are to retain their followers. As it is, this need fits in very nicely with the first reason we have given for their turn is that the Stalinist parties are aware of the mood of a conflict between their loyalty to the Russian bureaucracy and their political requirements in the capitalist countries will not become very great until the present diplomatic crisis sharpens to the point where war seems really imminent.
 

The “Left Issue” in Practice
But even this so-called “left” turn is still severely limited. In several European countries, such as France, Austria and Italy, they either are now or have recently participated together with capitalist parties in coalition cabinets which function within the framework of capitalism. They have participated in the same French government which brutally suppressed the Indo-Chinese nationalist revolt and have never said a word of criticism against “their” government on this matter. In America, they continue to play around with capitalist politicians: they supported O’Dwyer in New York City and are now fiddling with the idea of a third party to be formed together with the “liberal” section of the capitalist politicians.
In Argentina they have tacitly supported dictator Peron, merely because he, for his own reactionary reasons, was hostile to America. In Brazil they have flitted back and forth between the dictatorial Vargas political machine and its reactionary militarist opponents.
They have continued their wretched chauvinism in Europe by which they violated the ABC principles of socialist internationalism and even simple democratic rights. In Italy the Stalinists demand that Trieste be returned to that country; in Yugoslavia they demand that Trieste be annexed to Tito’s terrorist regime. On a basic question of European politics, the problem of the disposition of the Ruhr, their sections have pursued contradictory policies. The French Stalinists urge that the Ruhr be separated from Germany; the German Stalinists urge that it be retained within the German borders. Each thereby appeals to the narrowly nationalist sentiments of the most backward sections of the European populations.
For a hair-raising example of Stalinist policy in this connection, we refer our readers to the March 30 issue of La Victoire, a New York French language paper, in which Genevieve Tabouis interviews Karl Ulbricht, German Stalinist leader. Tabouis asks Ulbricht if the German Stalinists do not have to take indirect responsibility for the brutal uprooting of 8 million Germans from that territory which Poland is to annex from Germany, since this annexation is to be made at the instigation of the. Russians. And Ulbricht answers with a reply worthy of a true Prussian nationalist or a rabid Nazi:
“Certainly not! The country really responsible for this is Poland, THE ETERNAL ENEMY.” (Our emphasis – Ed.)
It is this wretchedly chauvinist poison which German Stalinism feeds.
In a sense, then, international Stalinism is in a period of transition: it may move to either a more reckless and aggressive role if relations among the Big Three become worse, or if some reconciliation satisfactory to Stalin is patched up, it may return to its old wartime docile self. But in either case, its policies will not be based on working class needs; in either case it will not hesitate to utilize legitimate working class aspirations or reactionary chauvinist prejudices to further the program of the Stalinist bureaucracy. That is the fundamental fact to be remembered in connection with its so-called “left” turn.
 



Well, it looks as if we made that 5,000 sub quota. Not that anyone didn’t expect us to make it, but still it’s good that those subs are in the paper’s office and that we have over 5,000 people who are now new regular readers.
And in just about 6 weeks, this 4-page paper will be doubled in size. That means that there’ll be at least three times as much work involved in getting it out, and that it will cost nearly three times as much to publish as does the 4-pager. But it means something even more. It means that we will have four full additional pages to get across our ideas. You know, in a four pager there’s a certain amount of necessary routine that has to be printed: ads for meetings, notices of branch headquarters, editorial boxes, etc. But when we add 4 more pages, we can devote almost all of that extra space to meaty and interesting articles which will enable the paper to have a fuller coverage of what is going on in the world and will also enable us to provide explanatory background material about world events. The extra pages are, so to speak, so much gravy for the paper. The 8-pagers we’ve put out so far testify to that fact. As one friend put it:
“When it’s 8 pages, you really have to sit-down and give some time to reading the paper, because there’s so much in it.”
One of the pet ideas is to devote a lot more space to letters and comments from readers. If it were necessary, in an 8-page paper we might give a full page each week to printing comments, letters and contributions from readers. In fact, it would be a good idea if in certain cities and towns, especially where there are no branches of the Workers Party, regular readers of Labor Action got together once in a while to discuss the paper and its contents.
But all this means that we have to be sure to get that 8-pager started – and what is more important, to keep it going once it is started. Of course, that means a constant flow of subscriptions. The paper doesn’t pay for itself of course; no labor paper, which doesn’t have the financial buttress of capitalist advertising, can pay for itself. But a steady stream of subscriptions and contributions would certainly help. Suppose you, a regular reader and friend of Labor Action, were to say to yourself:
“This paper means enough to me, its ideas are important enough to me to do just a little work, make a little effort to keep it going. I’m going to set myself the goal of getting one new subscription each week from my friends or shopmates.”
If a sizable group of our regular readers did that, the future of the 8-pager would be assured. It would mean steady revenue and it would mean a growing group of new readers.
There’s nothing at all unreasonable about that, and nothing especially hard about it. At this end, we’re preparing all kinds of elaborate plans for the 8-page Labor Action. The two sample issues we’ve put out are only a mild forecast of what the regular 8-pager will be like. Now it’s up to you at your end. Just one sub a week from each friend of the paper: that’s the road to a stable 8-pager. And send your contribution to the $15,000 fund drive for an 8-Page Paper.
 






The articles that appear below are DISCUSSION ARTICLES published as part of the pre-convention discussion in the Workers Party. Because our space is limited, it will be impossible to devote more than two columns per issue to this material. Contributions will therefore have to be brief, not exceeding 750 words. Pre-convention discussion articles are also appearing in The New International and in the Workers Party Bulletin. Copies of the latter may be obtained by sending 25 cents to the Workers Party, 114 West 14th Street, New York 11, N.Y. Readers will understand that these articles represent neither the views of the party nor of Labor Action, but are written with a view toward establishing policy at the coming convention of the WP.



*
One of the major differences of opinion facing the coming convention is the problem of how to characterize the international Stalinist movement. This traditional position of the Trotskyist movement was that, just as Russia was a “degenerated workers state,” so the Stalinist parties were degenerated and even counter-revolutionary workers parties, but workers parties nonetheless. The Workers Party, having rejected the false theory that Russia was a workers state and having characterized it rather as a new social formation, bureaucratic collectivism, now faces the need of giving a new characterization to the international agency of the Stalinist state, the Communist parties. Correspondingly, the International Resolution of the Majority of the National Committee proposes that the coming convention of our party characterize the Stalinist parties as being non-working class in character, and totalitarian agents of a totalitarian bureaucratic collectivist state in Russia. Comrade Johnson, who believes that there is fascism in Russia, persists, however, in continuing to characterize the Stalinist parties as working class.
In my opinion, the position of the Majority is correct for the following reasons:

The various Stalinist parties do not in any way represent the interests of the working class or any section of the working class. The traditional, classical Social-Democracy has represented the labor aristocracy, the highly skilled sections of the workers and the labor bureaucracy – all parts of the working class or working class movement. The Stalinist parties on the contrary represent the Russian dictatorship. Now whether one applies the sociological characterization of bureaucratic collectivism or of fascism to Russia, the basic fact is that all of us in the Workers Party reject the idea that Russia is a workers state. Correspondingly, we must reject the illusion that a party so completely and thoroughly under the domination of this state, functioning as its agent, can be a working class party. Exactly how comrade Johnson proposes to reconcile his characterization of Russia as a fascist state with his idea that the agent-parties of this state are working class parties, is a bit of a mystery.
 
The Stalinist party, unlike every party that can in any way be characterized as working class, is the agent first and foremost of a counter-revolutionary bureaucracy in Russia. It is not in any fundamental way amenable to the pressure of “its” working class. If it is to the interest of Russia to prevent strikes in America, the American Stalinists will oppose strikes no matter how much they are in the interests of the workers and no matter how much the workers want them. Even the Social-Democracy at its worst has been amenable in various degrees to the pressure of the working class.
 
The Stalinist parties are thoroughly and completely totalitarian in their internal structure. No matter how bureaucratized, no working class party can be checked in the same way – and here again, not even the Social- Democracy at its worst. Comrade Johnson offers a rather bizarre objection to this point by writing in his resolution that the Stalinist parties are not totalitarian because “membership in the Stalinist party is voluntary. The party holds no power of life and death over its membership. It cannot prevent secession and the formation of other parties.” But Johnson’s logic leads to the conclusion that a party is totalitarian only when it has state power for that is the only time it can fulfill the requirements which he lists as essential to the definition of a totalitarian party. In that case Hitlers’ Nazi party, which before it seized power also didn’t have “the power of life and death over its membership” was NOT a totalitarian party and became one only after its accession to power. That seems to me a patently absurd point of view.
 
Stalinism has as its purpose the destruction of democracy, proletarian and bourgeois democracy. It aspires to create a state of affairs similar to that of its model and inspirer in Russia; and it has succeeded in doing so in certain eastern European countries. Here again we see where it is totalitarian in structure, purpose, ideology and method.

Comrade Johnson offers only one reason for calling the Stalinist parties working class: “their program and practical activity appeal to the working class on the basis of the class struggle against the capitalist class for the socialist society.” But the fact that the Stalinist demagogically utilize the socialist tradition for their own reactionary ends does not make them a working class party. Consider the following: The Nazi movement has as its basic purpose the buttressing of finance capitalism, Big Business. Yet, both in its “program and practical activity,” it appealed to the middle class. It had a mass base in the middle class, as Stalinism has in the working class. Nonetheless, Nazism remained essentially in the historic interest of, and essentially to be characterized as, a movement of Big Business. Similarly, with Stalinism in relation to the working class.
We must recognize a new fact in history when it thrusts itself in our faces. Stalinism is a new, unique historical phenomenon. It is an international totalitarian movement, the completely subservient agent of the Russian bureaucratic ruling class; its method, purpose, structure, ideology and historical character are – despite its mass base in the working class – not working class in character.
 



Last week Labor Action published an editorial entitled Why Is The Militant Silent? This editorial inquired why The Militant and its sponsor, the Socialist Workers Party, had remained silent for several months while the SWP’s sister parties in Europe and a group of American trade union leaders, intellectuals and radicals, supported by the Workers Party and Labor Action, independently initiated campaigns to request the court at Nuremberg to interrogate the defendants and check their records to see if any evidence could be produced in connection with the infamous charges made against Leon Trotsky at the Moscow Trials.
The very same week that we published this editorial, The Militant appeared with a belated statement issued by the SWP’s National Committee on this matter. This statement was the FIRST public recognition which the SWP or its Militant has given to this matter. For many MONTHS it failed to say a word about this burning issue despite the fact that its sister party in England had issued a call to the Attlee government urging it “through its representatives at Nuremberg, to bring out the relevant issues in the Moscow Trials, to call upon the Russian representative to produce the ‘evidence’ relating to the connection between Leon Trotsky arid his son with the Nazis, as a vital part of the present Nuremberg Trial.” (Reported in Labor Action, February 4, 1946)
Later when over 100 trade unionists, intellectuals and radicals issued a similar demand (reported in Labor Action, April 1, 1946) The Militant again had nothing to say, despite the fact that most newspapers and almost every radical paper either printed a report about or comment on the appeal.
 
Why They Were Silent
The SWP tries to explain why it has been (a) silent on this matter and (b) in seeming disagreement with the position which the European Fourth Internationalists and the Workers Party of this country have taken. It informs the readers of The Militant of the various appeals and statements (weeks after their appearance!) but it fails to inform them that when leaders of the SWP were requested to add their names to the appeal, they did NOT respond. Thus by their refusal to add their names to this statement, the SWP in effect indicated disapproval of its issuance. Now then, let the SWP tell its members and friends, honestly and openly: were they right or wrong in refusing to sign the appeal? And further: if the SWP leaders believe they were right in refusing to support this appeal, which the Workers Party through its national secretary, Max Shachtman, did sign, let them explain precisely why they so believe.
The SWP is also under obligation to explain, to its members and to the revolutionary public why it refused to agree to the request of the Workers Party to cooperate in a joint campaign on this issue; why it continually procrastinated on this matter and informed the Workers Party that it would take it “under advisement.”
The statement of the SWP National Committee says that:
“The SWP, on its part, did not participate in any of this activity. (A masterpiece of understatement, in view of the facts listed above – I.H.) Our hesitation was not prompted in the least by lack of interest in the question ... In our opinion the Nuremberg Trials offered not only great propagandistic opportunities to the defenders of the memory of the martyred heroes of the Russian Revolution; they were also fraught with great dangers. The Nuremberg court of imperialist and Stalinist judges operates outside of all control. These judges are just as capable of perpetrating another frame-up as were the judges in the Moscow Trials if it serves their purposes ...”
That is the reason the SWP “hesitated” to support the appeal to the Nuremberg court. Let us see if it was a valid reason. We of the Workers Party are ready to admit that there was a danger that the Stalinists might try to utilize the Nuremberg Trials to smear Trotsky; but that danger existed independently of whether or not we would call for an investigation; it was a danger that would come to fruition on the basis of two possibilities: (1) that the Stalinist prosecutors could cook up a new frame-up and (2) that the British and American imperialists would agree to it. We supported the appeal to the court partly because we were aware of that danger and because we felt that the matter made it necessary for the Trotskyist movement to be bold and aggressive on this issue. Furthermore, we remembered how effectively our movement and the many people outside of our movement who were interested in seeing justice done, had succeeded in exposing the Moscow Trials themselves.
 
Correcting a Mistake
The question arises: who was right and who was wrong? .We ask this, not out of any petty vindictive spirit, for everyone, including ourselves, makes mistakes. We ask it rather because it is important as a means of judging the METHODS of the SWP, as contrasted to the WP, of discussing its mistakes. The WP has followed a fairly consistent policy of admitting such mistakes openly and frankly; the SWP statement is evasive and shamefaced. But the very fact that it has felt it necessary to publish this statement informing its readers for the first time of the issuance of such appeals to the Nuremberg courts, of the point of view of the European Fourth Internationalists, which contradicts that of the SWP, and of its reasons for “hesitating” to do or say anything about this matter – this fact indicates that it is uneasy about its position and feels called upon to make a partial shift of line.
Thus the SWP statement continues:
“It has become quite apparent by now, however, that the sharpening conflicts between the imperialists and the Stalinists have thus far prevented them from coming to an agreement to perpetrate a supplementary frame-up against the Old Bolsheviks.”
Two questions arise immediately in connection with this remarkable sentence:

How explain the SWP’s belated recognition of such an obvious fact? The Militant, in fact, has been continually skirting the realms of fantasy by its talk about an imminent war against the “Soviet Union”; it has emphasized and overemphasized the immediate depth of the conflict between Russia and the Anglo-American bloc. Since it was aware of this conflict, why then did it have to wait until now, months after the appeal to Nuremberg was issued, in order to draw the conclusion contained in the sentence we have quoted?
 
And, perhaps even more important, having made the admission, in ever so subtle and tacit a manner, that it was wrong in the matter, what does the SWP propose to do now? Will it endorse the appeal issued by the more than 100 signatories to the Nuremberg court? Will its leaders add their signatures? What will it say to the offer of the Workers Party that a joint campaign be conducted on this issue?

 






On the night before election, in the heart of East Harlem – that polyglot slum where poverty-stricken Puerto Rican and Italian families crowd into tiny apartments – there was a large mass-meeting. The man who shrieked over the loudspeaker was small, swarthy, his face pinched and sharp; he spoke in a torrent of words and shuttled from Italian to Spanish to English. Invariably he referred to his political opponents as “dose bums”; in the foreign languages he used less genteel expressions. He had a phenomenal ability to sustain his high-pitched harangue with which he pummelled his audience, occasionally breaking into hysterical falsetto. But there was no denying his effectiveness; his audience responded. The speaker was Vito Marcantonio, Congressman from New York’s 18th district, accomplice of Stalinism and therefore experienced political chameleon; former buddy of fascists; ruthless political boss and ally of Tammany Hall; and skilled, dangerous though limited political demagogue.



*
What makes Vito tick? Why has this cheap political trickster gained such a foothold in New York’s East Harlem – so powerful that despite a heavily-financed Republican campaign, on top of electoral gerrymandering which put a German and anti-Marcantonio area into his district, he was still able to win the recent election?
Marcantonio’s career is unique in American politics. Personally he is not very much; his mind is shallow and his personality lacks that boyish charm generally considered indispensable for the American politician. Yet he is the head of the New York County American Labor Party, has a strong influence in Tammany Hall and has built a powerful local political machine.
Marcantonio began, interestingly enough, as a protege of that falsetto windbag, F.H. La Guardia. When La Guardia was beginning to build his political fences in New York in preparation for defeating Tammany, he needed a slick lieutenant capable of corralling the foreign-language vote in East Harlem and of building a tight organization there on which La Guardia could count for support. Vito was the man. He did the job, but he did more; he began to build himself a personal machine. And like all political demagogues he was not too concerned about the political ideas he peddled.
In the early thirties Marcantonio flirted with the fascists. He was a frequent speaker before the Leonardo da Vinci art school, a front organization sponsored by Mussolini’s consul; he spoke at Columbus Day rallies of Italian fascist outfits; and on one occasion, March, 1936, he denounced the opponents of Mussolini’s invasion of Ethiopia at the LaGuardia Political Club as “agents of the racketeering League of Nations.” At this meeting, reported the Italian daily, Il Progresso of March 9, 1936, Marcantonio’s entrance was greeted appropriately enough by the playing of Giovinezza, the fascist hymn. This was the man who was soon to become the darling of the Stalinists.
Marcantonio was clever enough to see, however, that if he continued to flirt with the fascists, he could gain the support only of that minority of New York’s Italian population which actively supported Mussolini. A political future required other approaches. He dropped the fascists and began fronting for the Stalinists. In retrospect, we can see how clever that was. For a man like Marcantonio there was little room in the conventional capitalist political outfits like Tammany Hall where seniority plays such an important role and where he would have patiently had to climb the ladder of wardheeling assignments. But for the Stalinists, Marcantonio was just right. He had so little interest in or respect for ideas that he was ready to parrot almost anything he was told. He was a talented demagogue capable of rousing the masses in his area, though quite ineffective in other sections. And he was building his machine.
 
Nature of Area
To understand Marcantonio’s machine, one must know something about the neighborhood in which he functions. It is one of the worst slum areas in Manhattan. Its population is largely Puerto Rican and Italian – the immigrant groups which have been least “Americanized” in the city. The Puerto Ricans came from a country which, as a result of the benevolence of U.S. imperialism, is a vast slum with the bitterly oppressed masses kept deliberately illiterate. Upon arrival in New York, they failed to find an economic niche for themselves, one reason for which was the constricting social, economic and education background with which they are cursed. They are therefore today a tightly- knit group, their children often speaking more Spanish than English; they are neither adapted to American ways nor have they succeeded in retaining an integral native culture.
As a result, they are particularly prey to superstition, fanatical religion and political demagogy – the latter usually exploiting their legitimate desires for Puerto Rican independence. Most of them work at the lowest paid menial tasks, the women slaving in the poorly paying and non-union artificial flower and dress sweatshops which dot the area. Only a minority of the men who work as seamen have achieved the status of skilled workers. But since their union is the National Maritime Union, which is controlled by the Stalinists, that too helps Marcantonio.
The Italian group in East Harlem is somewhat better off than the Puerto Ricans, though here too one finds the conflict between a tenacious but doomed alien culture and a poorly assimilated American culture. The first generation children of immigrants are therefore at home in neither. Among the Italians there is also a strong nationalist tie to the homeland and on which Marcantonio capitalizes.
East Harlem is quite separated from the rest of the city. There are few movie theaters; one can walk several blocks before being able to buy a newspaper. The neighborhood is inbred. Fraternal clubs and innumerable “cellar clubs” meet in dingy stores which are the center of political and social activity. All the parasitic vices of the slums flourish here among these people ground down by social conditions they cannot control or understand.
 
Marcantonio’s Appeal
It is on this base that Marcantonio builds. He is, it is true, the accomplice of Stalinism; but it is not primarily that which makes him the local hero. Vito is, first, the local boy who made good in big-time politics and that makes the folks feel proud. He is one of them; not an Irishman or a Jew or a Yankee.
Secondly, Vito panders to their political prejudices. When he speaks in Italian or Spanish, he is much less cautious than in English; then he makes the most blatantly chauvinistic appeals; knowing well how to tap the emotional nationalism of unassimilated and poor immigrants.
Thirdly, he appeals to them not only on a nationalistic but also on a religious basis. When the saints’ days come around – and there are many of them – East Harlem is lit up with colored bulbs strung across the streets; there are religious parades in the streets and Vito is right up in front, piously parading barefoot, singing hymns and carrying a taper.
Fourthly, Vito appeals to their rightly bitter sense of poverty. For his appeal is not merely nationalist; it is a kind of demagogic radical nationalism. That this radicalism is merely the latest Stalinist shift in line, vulgarized by Vito’s coarse intellect – well ... Vito figures, as Hitler once said, that nothing is too stupid for mass appeal. And so he screams and shouts at his audiences, consciously and cynically manipulating their emotions rather than discussing with them. If political agitation is, as Lenin once said, “a dialogue with the masses” – or rather if that is what it should be – then Marcantonio has, like other totalitarian demagogues of our time, given it another meaning: a directive to and a performance for the masses.
Fifthly and finally, Vito “plays ball” with the local clubs; he gets a job for one of the boys; he drops a little patronage among his drugstore cowboy agents. There is his organizational strength: the cellar clubs and fraternal organizations. While the Stalinists supply the political line and some experienced political workers, it is the local area which supplies the base of support. For the Stalinists as such are not very strong here; they have influence mainly on top of Marcantonio’s machine. And so we find this strange alliance between an unscrupulous political demagogue with the Stalinists, resting on local political patronage and not occasionally above the use of a little hoodlumism to smash dissidents.
 
Vito as Stalinist
Marcantonio has quite faithfully followed the Stalinist lead in national politics. When they were shouting that the Yanks Are Not Coming, Vito went along. After Stalin was forced into the war on the side of the Allies, the local Stalinists switched lines and became arden patriots. Marcantonio was a little slow on the pick-up, continuing the old line for a few months; but soon he was straightened out and became an ardent flag-waver.
This is the background of Marcantonio’s victory in the recent election. His opponent was a former army colonel, a stuffed shirt whose appeal was frankly snobbish. If seems to this writer quite unlikely, short of some cataclysmic event like a war with Russia, for Marcantonio to be ousted by a traditional capitalist party machine. Their blank conservatism has nothing attractive to counterpose to Marcantonio. Only a genuine, honest, patient revolutionary party able to surmount the barriers of language and tradition can break this political demagogue.
In the meantime, Vito is king of East Harlem – flanked by drugstore cowboys and hoodlums, in alliance with Stalinism, buttressed by chauvinistic backwardness. This cynical demagogue rides the wave: the product of a merger between a corrupt local machine and the international corruption of totalitarian Stalinism.
 



One of the most significant, though little noticed, developments in Europe was the announcement a fortnight ago that the Austrian Parliament had adopted a resolution requesting the occupation authorities of the Big Three – Russia, the U.S. and Britain – to withdraw their troops from Austria and leave that country to its own fate. The resolution was adopted with the support of all parties, even the small Stalinist deputation being forced to go along with the motion though it was obviously directed in part against Russia.
What is significant here is not primarily the action of the Austrian parliament; that, after all, is largely a diplomatic gesture to be filed and forgotten. That neither Russia nor the Anglo-American bloc will now simply get up and leave may be taken for granted. But what is significant is that this parliament composed largely of the timid Social Democracy, its tongue well worn from licking the Anglo-American boot, and the reactionary Catholic party, should even have considered – let alone passed – such a motion. There must have been tremendous pressure from the Austrian masses below – revealed not in such dramatic gestures as demonstrations, but rather through the subterranean and atomic processes of mass expression which sooner or later reach the top politicians – to drive the Austrian political leaders openly to request the occupying “liberators” to get out. The masses of Austria must be thoroughly fed up with the occupation by now.
And not without reason! There is no country in Europe which has been so mutilated, its economy and national independence so violated, as has Austria. The Russians grabbed everything they could lay their hands on. At the beginning of the occupation, they looted directly from the people of Vienna. Later they organized their looting into a political-economic method, paying special attention to the crucial oil fields of Zisterdorff. They abducted, without even any attempt at secrecy, the few individuals who had enough courage to speak against their tactics. In,previous columns, we have reported the arrest and sentence to Siberian prison camps of Social Democratic editors who protested, ever so mildly, against the Russian occupation tactics.
Nor has the Anglo-American occupation been essentially better. It has been so inept, so full of bungling maladroits – the outstanding one being the butcher of Anzio and Cassino, General Mark Clark – that the economy of Austria has completely fallen apart. During the past year there have been times when the people of Vienna, while always on the brink of starvation, have sunk to a food standard as low as 800 calories a day, a level insufficient to sustain a normal human being.
Is it any wonder then that the people of Austria must be so completely disgusted with the occupation of their “liberators”? The motion adopted by the Austrian parliament is conclusive testimony of the degree of this disgust.
In this situation, we believe that the revolutionary socialists of Austria have a splendid opportunity to gain a foothold of support among the Austrian masses. Their aspirations toward national independence, which concretely means driving out the occupation, are extremely healthy symptoms. A revolutionary socialist party alert to the situation could appeal to the masses by saying along the lines of the position on the national question held by the Workers Party, something like the following:
You, the people of Austria are disgusted with the occupation of the Big Three. You wish to rid yourselves of this iniquitous burden. And we agree: you have every right to feel that way about it, every right to wish to drive these leech-like armies out of the land. So powerful are your sentiments that even parliament has heeded them by passing a resolution.
But – and this is essential – no resolution of parliament, no polite gesture can drive the occupation troops out of Austria. Only struggle can achieve that aim. Only the struggle of the Austrian masses themselves, through your mass organizations which means predominantly the trade unions, can reconquer the independence of the country. You cannot depend for leadership in this struggle on the Stalinists who are the agents of one of the occupying powers; the Stalinists, regardless of what they may occasionally say, are actually the cronies of our oppressors. You cannot depend on the Austrian capitalist class, or their subservient agents, the Social-Democracy, to lead in this struggle; for they are tied to Anglo-American imperialist oppresssors.
Only the masses themselves, through their own organizations and their mass militant activity, can drive these leeches out. We revolutionary socialists, whatever our present differences of political opinion with you, will fight side by side with you in this struggle.
In the present situation, to drive out the occupation oppressors is to conduct the class struggle in its most important arena, to find a means of establishing contact between the national-democratic aspirations of the masses and the as-yet isolated revolutionary vanguard. For that purpose, we believe the point of view of the Workers Party on the national question a powerful weapon.
 



France remains the crucible of European politics: all significant tendencies are centered there with classic clarity. The referendum of October 13 on the Constitution proposed by the Assembly, the present political stalemate and the coming elections on November 10 all point to the continued state of class tension which marks European politics.
The new Constitution, presented to the electorate after it had rejected a previous one several months ago, was a “compromise” by the three parties of the coalition government: Socialists, Stalinists and MRP (Conservative Catholics). It did not propose as much concentration of power in the National Assembly – which had previously been the main excuse for opposition by the de Gaullists – and was this time supported by the MRP, which had opposed, and had been the decisive factor in defeating the first draft.
 
De Gaulle’s Role
In the second, more recent constitutional referendum, the three big parties supported the draft constitution, and the only major political voice raised in opposition was that of de Gaulle. Le Grand Charlie has been playing a cagey game, trying to cluster round himself the extreme conservative and fascistic forces in France in order to prepare for his reassumption of French political leadership. He saw in the constitutional referendum an opportunity to organize a conservative opposition against all parties, centered around his would-be Bonapartist personality.
It must be conceded that even though the Constitution was passed by a vote of approximately nine million for and eight million against, de Gaulle has won a political victory of some consequence. For this political martinet has succeeded – without a formal political party at his disposal – in rallying only one million votes less than the three major political parties of France. (Though it is possible that many of the “No” votes were not intended as votes in support of de Gaulle, yet the immediate effect of those votes is to increase de Gaulle’s strength.)
When one further considers that there were seven million abstentions, the defeat of the three party coalition becomes clearer. The seven million abstentions are the index of a growing apathy in French political life; they are the voice of people who, disgusted with what seems to them the meaningless rigmarole of political chicanery, vote “with their feet.” However, we must also note that some 300,000 votes, according to our information, were cast blank. We do not know how many of these were cast on the request of the PCI, French Trotskyist organization, but they certainly represent a protest against the Constitution AND de Gaulle.
And of one thing we may be certain: apathy, indifference, political disillusionment will help the reactionary de Gaullist forces more than anything else. The would-be Bonapartist will find his road to power easier if the masses turn away from politics.
 
Political Skirmishing
The indications are that most of the French workers still supported the two parties which have so tragically betrayed and misled them in the past years – the Socialists and Stalinists; for in the proletarian suburbs of Paris, the vote was two to one in favor of the constitution.
With an election to the National Assembly only a few weeks off, there has been some hectic political skirmishing as a result of the referendum. The MRP, which had gone along with the Socialists and Stalinists, has suddenly discovered that it must make a bloc – or try to – with de Gaulle. The estimate of Edgar Ansel Mowrer, political writer for the New York Post, is unfortunately correct when he writes that “de Gaulle emerges as the strongest single force in France. Though beaten by a coalition of the three large parties, he is obviously still the most popular figure in the entire country.” He has succeeded in deflecting a considerable section of the MRP’s supporters, who feel that his refusal to work with the Stalinists represents a more determined version of their rightwing point of view. And the following he has attracted has enhanced de Gaulle in the eyes, of the French capitalists and Anglo-American imperialists, both of whom see in him a more reliable and resolute – if more temperamental – ally than the watery Bidault.
The MRP is now trying to adapt itself by its announcement that it will henceforth refuse to participate in any coalition government with the French Communist Party and that it looks forward to an exclusively MRP government or at least a coalition directed against the Stalinists. By this maneuver the MRP hopes to form a temporary bloc with de Gaulle in order to consolidate the conservative votes for the November 10 election.
At the same time it has appealed to the Socialist Party for a bloc against the Stalinists. The muddled and faction-riddled SP is thus faced with another of its periodic quandaries. If it joins with the MRP in an anti-Stalinist bloc it will alienate those sections of the supporters who have been taken in by talk of a “united proletarian front” with the Stalinists. If it cooperates with the Stalinists against the MRP it will lose many of the middle-class votes it has gained in the past, which were intended as a “bulwark against communism.” Whichever way the French SP turns it is in difficulty, which is why it will probably try the impossible by not turning anywhere.
In the meantime, the struggle sharpens. Misery, insufficient food, economic disorganization, political confusion remain in France. The forces of the right are beginning to coalesce. As an unsigned dispatch to the New York Times of October 16 puts it: “... de Gaulle’s opposition to the Constitution encouraged a variety of fascist elements who prefer a conservative dictatorship to a republican government ...” And that “... unless the anti-Communist forces can form a coalition capable of governing the country without the Communists, who have been in every post-war cabinet, the resistance to the Communists may resort to force. This is also de Gaulle’s conviction.”
While the reactionary elements gather under de Gaulle’s banner, political apathy and confusion grow in the ranks of the lower middle class and the working class. For the government in which the Socialists and Stalinists dominated solved none of their problems – and these parties offer nothing but more of the same. Hence the large numbers who turn away in disgust from politics.
The situation is highly dangerous. The French working class has given abundant evidence in the last few years of its ability to struggle and sacrifice, of its incipient militancy which could so readily be brought to a peak if a bold revolutionary leadership made sizable contact with it. Right now the French workers face a new threat to their security and liberty in the de Gaullist reaction. The two “parties of the left” are socially impotent, unable and unwilling to move toward genuine revolutionary socialist policy.
Under these circumstances, the eyes of revolutionists the world over turn to the French Trotskyists, who are making a supreme effort to place their candidates on the ballot for the November 10 election, despite the difficulties which the new Constitution imposes on small parties. In the last election to the Assembly, they polled some 45,000 votes though only able to place candidates in about one-fifth of the districts. An increased vote for the French Trotskyists will indicate that the most advanced political elements within the working class movement of France continue to struggle and grow.
 



Before an audience of over 700 people, who packed New York’s Hotel Diplomat, Max Shachtman, national chairman of the Workers Party, debated Liston Oak, managing editor of the New Leader, on the subject: Does Stalinism Flow from Bolshevism? last Friday night, November 8. Oak took the affirmative and Shachtman the negative.
This debate took place on the 29th anniversary of the Russian Revolution – the first in history in which the workers established their own government – and if was entirely fitting that Shachtman, as a spokesman for the American revolutionary socialists in and around the Workers Party, should make an eloquent and effective defense of this revolution in this debate. For the principles of the great October Revolution remain the principles on which the Workers Party stands.
Liston Oak, who spoke as a Social Democrat, began his speech with an admission that there were great differences between Leninism and Stalinism, but asserted that Lenin and Trotsky had used similar, “dictatorial” methods as has Stalinism, and that the Stalinist regime was the “logical outgrowth” of the “one-party dictatorship established by the Bolsheviks.”
Oak saw Bolshevism as a kind of terroristic conspiracy on the part of a tiny, disciplined minority group, ruthless in its fanaticism and readiness to resort to violence, and unscrupulous in the means it used to reach its ends. Though Stalin is “cruder” than Lenin, he said, they are both in the Bolshevik tradition, Stalin continuing the amoral methods of Lenin. Stalinism is the result, in Oak’s view, of the unwillingness of the Bolshevik leaders to work with or unite with any of the other socialist groups in Russia. Having established a minority dictatorship, Oak continued, the Bolsheviks could only resort to terror and thereby pave the way for Stalin.
To buttress his case, Oak quoted from Social-Democratics like Kautsky and Plekanov, who were opposed to the Bolshevik revolution; from Marxists like Luxemburg who supported the Bolshevik revolution even though disagreeing with certain of Lenin’s tactics; and from Trotsky’s early writings at the turn of the century in which he polemized against Lenin. Oak attacked Lenin’s conception of the party as leading to a conspiratorial clique of “professional revolutionists” who seek to manipulate the masses as if generals of an army. The Social-Democratic or Menshevik conception of a party, on the other hand, is, he said, a loosely-knit democratic organization.
Oak supported the pre-Lenin policy of the Bolsheviks which called for a coalition government with the bourgeois parties. (What was amusing about this, though Oak didn’t seem to notice it, was that it was Stalin – whom Oak now professes to hate so heartily – who favored this policy which Lenin denounced upon arriving in Russia.)
Oak then denounced the Bolsheviks for illegalizing the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries, though he did not mention why this was done. He denounced, further, the dissolution by the Bolsheviks of the Constituted Assembly which had been elected several months before the Bolshevik Revolution and represented the pre-revolutionary sentiments of the masses when they were still hesitant about supporting the Bolsheviks.
Turning to our day, Oak rejected the conception of revolution, which he believed would inevitably fall under Stalinist control, and came out in favor of gradual reforms since he considers that capitalism still has certain progressive functions to fulfill.
 
Shachtman Analyzes Bolshevism Historically
Max Shachtman opened his presentation by emphasizing the historical background against which the debate was being held: “Capitalism is bankrupt. To support it is equivalent to the suicide of society ... What is Bolshevism? Bolshevism is the planned and organized attempt to mobilize the working class to take over state power in its own interests in order to use its political supremacy for the purpose of establishing a classless society.”
“If,” continued Shachtman, “it can be proved that Stalinism is the natural and inevitable product of Bolshevism, then you will have proved that the working class cannot take and hold socialist power and that any attempt to do so can lead only to its degradation under totalitarian dictatorship. I say this because Bolshevism is the only road to working class power and socialism.”
Shachtman then proceeded to an historical examination of Bolshevism. The truth about it has been obscured first by the propaganda barrage by the bourgeoisie which would identify it with dictatorship, he pointed out, and secondly by the Stalinists ... who would also identify it with dictatorship. He traced the origin of the Bolshevik movement in Russia, its struggle to overthrow the Czarist autocracy, its demand for democratic rights for the Russian masses. He differentiated Bolshevism, which placed its faith in the working class and peasantry, from the Mensheviks, who wanted a coalition with the liberal capitalists. And he further pointed out that the actual experiences of the Russian revolution confirmed the Bolshevik point of view, and showed it to be in harmony with the most profoundly democratic aspirations of the masses – for that was why the masses turned to Lenin.
The Bolshevik Party, attacked by its enemies as dictatorial, was in reality a highly disciplined organization for it was serious in its objective to destroy Czarism and capitalism; but at the same time it was the most democratic organization in bistory, for in no other party was there such freedom and fullness of discussion, such intellectual loyalty toward scrupulous regard for the rights of minorities. Only the Stalinist debasement has misled people to identify Bolshevism with internal party dictatorship.
“You will not find one party in modern times,” stressed Shachtman, “in which there was such free discussion, such rich and fruitful interchange of ideas.... The whole internal history of Bolshevism is a history of free discussion and debate, not conducted in a dark comer, but openly, in the press of the party itself.”
Shachtman laid particular stress on this last phrase.
“You need only read the works of Lenin,” continued Shachtman, “to see reflected there the vigorous, rich and fertile intellectual life, the favorable atmosphere for the development of revolutionary thought, that always prevailed in the Bolshevik party. Read these works and see if so much as a seed of Stalinism can be found in them!”
Shachtman then pointed out that on three essential touchstones of democratic and socialist standards the Bolshevik party was unsurpassed: its attitude toward national minorities; its attitude toward imperialist wars; and its attitude toward revolutions. He noted how the Bolsheviks granted freedom to Finland as soon as they acquired power and then made a devastating contrast with the behavior of the English Social-Democrat, Arthur Henderson “who sat in the British Cabinet as Privy Councillor when the British bombed and shelled Dublin in the Easter uprising of 1916 and murdered the Irish socialist martyr James Connolly!”
Shachtman, by this time going full guns, launched into a contrast between the war records of the Bolsheviks – who denounced World War I as imperialist and spread no illusions ‘about it among the masses – and the war record of the Social-Democrats, each section of which supported its own imperialist rulers. “There is your road to socialism,” he turned to Oak, “Ad astra per Hohenzollcrn and Churchill! To the stars through Hohenzollern and Churchill!”
Shachtman contrasted the attitudes of the Mensheviks and Bolsheviks toward the Russian Revolution itself: how the former wanted to limit it to a democratic capitalist state unable to solve any basic problems, while the latter pushed through to state power. He challenged Oak to tell the audience what the Mensheviks and SRs did during the civil war, how they worked with international capitalism against the young workers state.
Shachtman proceeded to show how Bolshevism and Stalinism were mortal enemies and complete opposites; how Stalin had launched a campaign of extermination against the old Bolsheviks; how, in fact, many of Oak’s Menshevik heroes had become belated supporters of Stalin; and how Oak himself had during the war supported an alliance with Stalinist totalitarianism.
“We say,” concluded Shachtman, “Stalinism grew out of Bolshevism only because the social democracy destroyed the hopes of the isolated Russian Revolution by trying to keep capitalism alive in Europe. The central lesson in the rise of Stalinism is not the abandonment of Bolshevism but the abandonment of reformism and insistence on the struggle for international socialism.”
In his first rebuttal, Liston Oak stressed a few main points:

He argued that if the Bolsheviks had formed a coalition with the “other socialist parties” they would not “have had to resort to minority violence.”
 
He quoted from documents of early opposition groups in the Bolshevik Party in the early 1920’s which stressed the danger of bureaucratism in Russia.
 
Any party, he asserted, which seizes political power and identifies itself with a class, “as did the Bolsheviks,” finds it necessary to suppress all opposition. “Totalitarian organization leads to totalitarian society.”
 
He cited the Kronstadt rebellion against, and its suppression by, the Bolshevik government “as evidence of the undemocratic nature of Bolshevism.”
 
He denied that the Social Democrats were responsible for the failure of the European revolution after the First World War, asserting rather that it was the Bolsheviks who split the working class movement and thereby helped perpetuate capitalism.
 
He asserted that capitalism still had a future in certain places, one of which is “the backward countries which need capital investments.”
 

Rebuttal Lashes Menshevik Activity
In turn, Shachtman drove home the following main points in his rebuttal:

The Bolsheviks were not responsible for splitting the socialist movement; it was split by the Social Democrats who supported their imperialist war machines and put such revolutionary socialists as Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg in jail. It was this division which split the socialist movement – this division between support of and opposition to imperialist war.
 
The reasons no coalition was formed with the “other socialist parties” when the Bolsheviks assumed power are: a) the masses of workers abandoned the ineffectual Mensheviks and came to the Bolsheviks; b) the masses of followers of the Social Revolutionary Party followed its left wing which did participate in the Bolshevik government; and c) the Mensheviks and SRs were opposed to the workers taking power and when the civil war., came they supported the foreign intervention against the workers state.
 
The Constituent Assembly was dissolved by the Bolsheviks because it no longer represented the sentiments of the masses, having been elected before the revolutionary wave which rose to its crest in the October revolution. It gave way to the more representative Soviet of Workers Deputies which supported the Bolshevik government, even though convened by Mensheviks.
 
There was only one party after a while in Russia, not because the Bolsheviks so desired it, but because every other party took up arms against the workers state. Shachtman cited detailed evidence of how the Social Democratic government in Georgia concluded an agreement with Germany on June 13, 1918 and a few months later with Britain to use their troops against the Bolsheviks.
 
He ridiculed Oak’s argument that capitalism still had some future and inquired whether his theory that it could help “backward countries” was what led to the British Labor Party government’s scandalous behavior in Greece and Palestine.
 
He summed up by stressing the democratic and revolutionary character of Bolshevism, its loyalty to the idea, of working class liberation and its lessons for our time.

In his final rebuttal Oak rephrased his point of view in more general terms, constructing an abstract argument about totalitarian means and ends. The hall in which the debate was held was decorated with signs advertising Labor Action forums. Some $50 worth of Workers Party literature was sold.
 



Studs Lonigan
by James T. Farrell
Modern Library Giant. $1.25
Studs Lonigan is one of the most terrifying novels written in America. It is the culmination of that series of bitter commentaries on American life which began at the turn of the century when Jack London, Frank Norris and Upton Sinclair, influenced by the powerful naturalist tradition of Europe, turned their attention to the social inequities which made a sham of all the talk about “the American dream.” This realist tradition in American literature was continued by Sinclair Lewis, Theodore Dreiser and Sherwood Anderson – each in their different ways – until Farrell, in the early thirties, wrote his lengthy study of the life of a young man born in the environment of the “shanty Irish” in Chicago and eventually crushed by it. With Farrell’s detailed, remorseless and powerful Studs Lonigan, the literary tradition in which he functioned seems to have come to fruition in America; it has not been as vital since.
Studs is a young boy when the novel opens – a rather frail and quite average chap brought up in a South Side Chicago family where superstition and ignorance prevail. The family is caught in the vice of conformity: its every move, its every habit, its every outlook, is determined for it by what is “right,” by what is socially accepted in its lower middle-class environment. Studs, who feels in himself vague sensations of dissatisfaction – feelings he is never to be able to concretize, finds this family environment stifling and escapes from it to the Chicago streets. There he is hardened and molded by the influence of the street gangs, the poolroom ethics, the side-of-the-mouth morality. Studs is not really interested in many of the things he does with his street friends: he has no particular desire to taunt and beat up Jewish lads; he has no particular desire to go to whorehouses; he has no particular desire to listen to lascivious stories.
 
A Life of Desperation
But he feels above all else the compulsion to be “one of the boys” – above all else, to know himself accepted somewhere in this strange and alien world; and so he goes along with the gang, gradually becoming coarsened to the point where he accepts it with hardly a murmur. In the meantime, the depression comes: Studs’ family is hit hard; he finds great difficulty in getting a job; his pathetic romance with a pale little creature (whose great virtue in his eyes is that she, perhaps alone in the whole world, accepts him as a human being of worth) is wrecked by poverty and the fear of an unwanted baby; and finally, Studs – by now worn, his health undermined by excessive drinking and debauchery – contracts pneumonia after a futile job hunt and dies.
And there, Farrell tells us, is the terminus of the American dream, there the end of the life of a little man who also wanted to taste some joy and security before going to the grave. This is life in America in the late Twenties and the early Thirties: a life of desperation and helplessness, of chaos and dissolution before the assault of forces that are unidentifiable to Studs and therefore full of terror for him.
One of the reasons for the essential success of this novel is that it was written by a man who came within a shade of falling into the pits in which Studs could find no light. Most first novels are usually autobiographical in a direct sense: a painful account of the painful assent to maturity of the very sensitive young man. Farrell was later to write in this vein and, I think, with much less success. But Studs Lonigan was written with the advantage of its creator being able to establish a certain distance from it, of being able to say: “There, but for the grace of what-you-will, go I.” And it is because of that distance that he is able to write with complete objectivity and an essential though subterranean compassion; he is able to allow the characters to develop according to the internal logic of their own personalities rather than as pitied objects of manipulation. After a while one forgets Farrell altogether: the novel has a compulsion, a direction, a movement and an inexorability of its own.
 
Won’t Forget It
Many of the passages are rather barren and dreary. Many of the individual sections seem repetitious. But the reader should understand that the perceptivity of the novel derives from its totality, unlike other novels, where individual passages, paragraphs and phrases bear more perceptivity than the work as a whole.
For, whatever one’s ultimate judgment of the value of Farrell’s method or the significance of the philosophical assumptions on which his book is based, no one can deny its unity and integration – and that is why most readers acknowledge that its impact after reading is somehow greater than had previously seemed possible. For it has a force and strikes an imprint on the memory which make it an ineradicable experience.
 



Social-Democracy versus Communism
byKarl Kautsky
with an introduction by Sidney Hook
The Rand School Press, 142 pages, $2.00
Here is the swan song of Social-Democracy, sung by its most
powerful voice, Karl Kautsky. Written in the 1930’s, these essays
comprise the last grandiose attempt to present Social-Democracy as a
political theory consistent with the Marxian system. And surely
Social-Democracy could have found no more competent spokesman!
Kautsky writes with the broad historical sweep and assurance which is
given only to the most competent of theoreticians and historians; his
logic is keen, his argument close. Yet, once tribute has been paid to
Kautsky’s competence, one must pass to the content of his work. And
how sad that is! Not all of Kautsky’s skill and authority can give
sheen to the tarnished goods that are found each week in The New
Leader: the same formal preachment of “democracy” to which no
content other than constant support of capitalist institutions is
ever given; the same hypocrisy with regard to political means:
Quaker-like indignation at the idea that the defense of socialism may
require extra-parliamentary means coupled with vicariously
bloodthirsty support of imperialist war;, the same uncanny ability to
embroider the most paltry political practices with the most stirring
humanitarian rhetoric. It would be absurd to attempt a review here of
the historic quarrel between Marxism and Kautsky’s revision of it;
a few points only, of special pertinence, should be made:
1) It is remarkable how an idea can gain currency, despite its
invalidity and inaccuracy, if it is repeated often enough. Kautsky
tries, with much erudition, to discover the roots of the Bolshevik
ideology in the theories of the extremist leader of the French
Revolution, Babeuf, and later the 19th century putschist, Blanqui.
The theories of Babeuf – he notes correctly enough – were
developed at a time when the working class was still incipient in
formation and when the extreme left in the chain of French
revolutions found itself in the tragic and anomalous position of
trying to anticipate history. Lenin, continues Kautsky, developed a
similar theory with regard to the also backward Russian proletariat;
he made the same error as Babeuf and Blanqui, he tried to substitute
the action of a small conspiratorial group for the movement of a
social class.
But it needs only to be pointed out, in refutation, that Lenin’s
theory was an internationalist one, based on an assessment of the
Russian working class in relation to the world proletariat. He took
the historical “gamble” – and who dares call himself a
revolutionist or a Marxist if unwilling to take such “gambles”? –
of seizing upon an extraordinarily favorable conjunction to lead the
Russian workers to power in the hope that the workers of the advanced
West would soon come to the rescue. That they did not is another
matter-a matter, incidentally, for which Kautsky carried a heavy
share of responsibility. The point is that even if, by some
historical freak the little groups of Babeuf or Blanqui had been able
to seize power in France, they could not have counted on the aid from
elsewhere for which Lenin was later to hope. For 19th century France
had the most advanced revolutionary masses of its time, not the most
backward population of Europe, as did 20th century Russia. Rather
than relying on small conspiratorial groups, Lenin was able to gain
the support of masses of workers, unlike Babeuf and Blanqui, who
neither desired to nor were able to appeal to masses.
Historical analogy is a powerful weapon, but it is two-edged.
2) Why did the Social-Democracy fail? Why, if it, unlike the
“Bolshevik conspirators,” represented the true union of socialism
and democracy, did it not succeed in wresting power from capitalism
and forestalling the contemporary nightmare? Here is Kautsky’s answer:
“Everything of a truly progressive nature which the
Bolsheviks sought at that time to realize was also part of the
program of the other Socialist Parties and would have been
carried out by them, for the people had empowered them to do so.”
(My emphasis – I.H.)
Has there ever been a historical apology at once so tragic and
comic? Before the Bolsheviks took power, there was a Menshevik-SR
government in Russia, that is, one composed of Kautsky’s friends.
What prevented it from beginning to put into effect “everything of
a truly progressive nature which the Bolsheviks sought”? And what
prevented the German Social-Democrats? If “everything of a truly
progressive nature which the Bolsheviks sought” had really
been carried out by the Mensheviks, then Lenin would have been
politically disarmed; if ...
 
Sees State Capitalism in 1919
3) Kautsky was one of the first in the labor movement to
characterize Russia as a society of state capitalism. Let it be
noted, however, before there is even a handclap of misplaced applause
for this seeming prescience, that Kautsky applied this label
indiscriminately to the varied and rich development of
post-revolutionary Russia, all the way from 1919 to the period of
Stalin’s consolidation of power in the middle thirties. Such a
lumping of infinitely different social phenomena under one generic
heading is only a means of escaping the historian’s responsibility
rather than facing it. One cannot take seriously any sociological
category which is supposed to encompass within its discreet fold both
Lenin’s revolutionary and Stalin’s counter-revolutionary Russia.
Kautsky’s use of the label, state capitalism, as a means of
describing the new, unique phenomenon of a totally statified economy
in which no workers control exists, is merely another instance of the
common fallacy of believing that an unfamiliar phenomenon is made
less so if it is given a familiar label. But if calling Stalinist
Russia state capitalism attenuates the shock of novelty in the heart
of the observer, it does not in the slightest penetrate into the
reality of this new social formation.
* * *
It may be asked how a man of Kautsky’s stature, who in the early
part of the century was one of the two or three greatest Marxists,
could have degenerated to the point where, in the thirties, he pinned
his hope for the future of humanity on ... the League of Nations?
Answers to such questions, when confined to individual cases, must
skirt the unsteady grounds of personal psychology. In Kautsky’s
case, it has been suggested, that his life of comfort as a
theoretician of the powerful Social-Democracy – a life of secluded
scholarship (for which, let us wryly admit, almost every
revolutionary theoretician yearns) – gradually acclimated him to an
acceptance of the status quo. Revolutions may be hatched in
libraries; they are not led there. But whatever the explanation for
Kautsky’s personal development, it cannot be gainsaid that there is
an element of genuine tragedy in the decline of this once titanic Marxist.
Tragedy, however, is hardly the appropriate word for the author of
the introduction to this book, Sidney Hook, who was also once a
Marxist – and a talented one at that. Hook, who has come a long way
since he wrote Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx,
contributes an introduction of unrestrained praise for Kautsky to
which he merely appends a critical phrase in polite sotto voce.
Hook writes:
“... although Kautsky is perfectly justified in
defending the Social-Democratic attempt to preserve the democratic
heritage of the Weimar Republic, he minimizes the consequences of its
attempt to preserve the capitalistic economic structure of the
the Republic as well.”
Notice that deliciously delicate phrase: “minimizes the consequences.”
For Sidney Hook is hardly the person to become raucous about a
mere detail such as the preservation of the “capitalistic economic structure.”
 



The first opportunity for the people of Berlin to express their political views since the assumption of power by Hitler, has resulted in a decisive victory for the Social Democratic Party and a resounding defeat for the Stalinist and conservative Catholic parties. The Social Democrats received 948,851 votes or just under 49 per cent; the Stalinist dominated “Socialist Unity Party” received 383,249, or less than 20 per cent; the conservative Christian Democratic Union received 432,016 votes; and the extreme right-wing Liberal Democratic Party was fourth with 181,875.
Recall the conditions of this election – the favored position of the Stalinist “Socialist Unity Party” (SED); the fact that it had four to five times as much newsprint allotment as the other parties; that the Social Democrats were banned in the section of Germany occupied by the Russians; that no party had the financial and administrative aid such as the Russians gave to the SED – and you will realize that the mere 20 per cent vote which the SED received is the most devastating and conclusive repudiation of Stalinist Russia yet made in any of the occupied areas of eastern Europe. And when it is further recalled that this repudiation has been administered not by backward peasants of a Balkan country, but by the workers of Berlin who, before the advent of Hitler, were overwhelmingly enrolled in the ranks of either the Social Democratic or Communist Party – then it becomes clear that the workers of Berlin have given a sign that they still retain at least some of their old class consciousness.
 
The Meaning of the Vote
What does this vote mean in the present situation? First and foremost that the workers of Berlin – despite years of Hitlerite repression and propaganda – continue to think within the working class and socialist tradition. They have had a sad experience with the Stalinists. The Russian armies came into Berlin as conquerors; they lorded it over the people of' Berlin in the same despotic manner in which they dominated the Balkans; they raped, they stole, they brutalized; they suppressed and terrorized those parties which would not be their servile agents. But they made one serious mistake – they failed to realize that the workers of Berlin had a great tradition, a tradition of independence and pride.
And so the first time that the population of Berlin had the opportunity to express itself it repudiated by an overwhelming majority the Stalinist puppet party, the SED, which had been created by a fake merger of Stalinists and a few scattered Social Democrats. Just as the workers of Berlin never accepted the totalitarianism of Hitler, so they do not accept the totalitarianism of Stalin. And this fact can only cause rejoicing among revolutionary socialists.
The workers of Berlin did not fall into the trap of voting for the old conservative church parties as a result of their disillusionment with the Stalinists. Half of the vote went to the Social Democrats – and since about 30 per cent went to the conservative parties, it is reasonable to suppose that the bourgeois elements of Berlin did not vote for the Social Democrats, but rather that the Social Democratic vote was largely working class.
 
Some Hope for the Future
Of course the Social Democracy itself is a bankrupt, inept and hopeless movement. In a sense it is an indication of the political disintegration of Europe that today in 1946 revolutionary socialists find comfort in the fact that the workers of Berlin are voting for the Social Democrats, while 20 years ago we were bending every effort to break the workers away from the reformist Social Democracy. But facts are stubborn – and the fact is that in the present specific situation the vote of the German workers should be hailed.
This does not of course mean that we in the slightest abate our criticisms of the Social Democracy. Quite the contrary. Only the day after their victory, which came as a complete surprise to them, the German Social Democrats admitted that they were at a loss for what to do with their newly acquired power. Traditionally they have played the role of subservient agent of their native capitalist class. And that is the role they will continue to play in relation to Anglo-American imperialism.
The Social Democracy remains a working class movement, reformist and inept, unable to solve the basic problems of society because of its unwillingness to abolish capitalism – but still a working class movement in which there is a measure of internal democracy and a degree of sensitivity to working class pressure. That the electorate of Berlin, therefore, chose to support this party, with all its shortcomings, as against the Stalinist and capitalist parties is an encouraging political symptom. Encouraging that is, for the opportunities it offers to whatever revolutionary regroupings may today be taking place in Germany.
 



An agreement has been reached between the Dutch empire and the Indonesians – called a “masterpiece of compromise” by Robert Trumbull, New York Times correspondent, in a November 13 dispatch – which grants Indonesia the right to an “independent republic” within the framework of the Dutch empire. The major islands, Java, Sumatra and Madura, will compose the Indonesian Republic, while the other islands are to be united with this republic within two years in a United States of Indonesia. Holland and the Indonesian Republic are to be united under a joint body headed by the Dutch queen.
Does this then mean that the Indonesians have successfully achieved their national independence, for which they have fought with such bitterness during the past period? We believe that, despite the formal rigmarole and the undoubted concessions granted by the Dutch – granted because of their own weakness and their fear that a stiff policy would result in even greater rebelliousness – the Indonesian people have not yet achieved their national independence.
 
“A Rocky Road Ahead”
What has happened in Indonesia is similar to recent political tendencies in India and the Philippines, however different the roads they travel. The restive populations of these colonial lands have forced indecisive nationalist leaders into struggles, which, though not fully consummated, have gained for them a certain measure of political independence without in any essential way lessening the economic exploitation of the imperialist powers which made their rule so oppressive.
Thus Robert Trumbull writes in the above-mentioned dispatch to the N.Y. Times that “Foreign business interests with heavy investments in Indonesia are particularly interested in the agreement guaranteeing that foreign enterprises will not be taxed more heavily than Indonesian industries ... the econonic position of the Dutch in these islands will be little impaired by the new political status ...” That last sentence is the key; for so long as the economic domination of the Dutch continues in Indonesia – as does that of the U.S. in the Philippines or Britain in India – no genuine liberation has been achieved.
That this deal with the Dutch will not be readily accepted by the Indonesians is indicated in the remarkable dispatch of Trumbull who, as so many other Times’ correspondents, reveals more than he thinks he does. Trumbull writes that “It remains for President Soekarno of the Indonesian Republic to sell this new point of view to the fervent nationalists. This Mr. Soekarno promised the commission he would do ‘with the full power of my personality’ ...” The egotistical phrase about his personality reveals that Soekarno is cut out of the same cloth as the Nehrus and Quezons: vain, self-centered, strutting petty-bourgeois peacocks who see in themselves the center of history. But, more important, why should Soekarno have to “sell” this new deal with the Dutch – unless because it does not really give the Indonesians the independence they desire?
Trumbull writes further that “Neutral observers foresee a long period of tension and mutual distrust fomented by numerous extremists on both sides. The Republican government of President Soekarno and Premier Sjahrir, which accepted this compromise with the Dutch, has a rocky road ahead.” Naturally; since the intransigent nationalists want to drive the Dutch “into the sea” – that is, out of their country – and those of their spokesmen who are fighting hardest for complete independence, like Tan Malakka and several hundred of his followers, have been imprisoned by the Soekarno government. But the struggle for complete Indonesian independence, which means first and foremost the reconquest of the wealth of the islands at present in the hands of Dutch and British imperialists, will continue. Yes, indeed, the government of Soekarno faces a rocky road ...
For the people of Indonesia have sacrificed too much, have spilled too much of their blood in the last two years of their independence struggle to be satisfied with this deal. They will understand that the deal provides them with many conquests, but not the complete national independence which is their aim and was within their grasp.
 
The Ceaseless Struggle for Freedom
When the war in the Pacific ended, the people of Indonesia through their self-created organizations and armies seized control of large sections of their country. They imprisoned many of the Japanese leaders and put large parts of the Japanese army in internment camps. The British, however, upon their arrival restored many of the privileges of the Japanese army – to the extent of using Japanese troops to quell the mass Indonesian movement. The Christian Science Monitor was then moved to write that “The situation is unparalleled in history and the spectacle of the defeated Japanese army still being held responsible for the maintenance of law and order is not easily understood and is causing doubt in the minds of the Asiatics as to the future position of the white race in the islands.” In polite language that meant that the Indonesians didn’t want British or Dutch rule any more than Japanese.
For months the British conducted a full-scale war against the inadequately armed but brave nationalists and in their campaign of reconquest they were considerably aided by the timorous and compromising leaders of the Indonesian Republic. The British said they were conducting their vendetta in behalf of their “Dutch cousins,” but they themselves had plenty at stake in Indonesia. British capital, through its domination of the Royal Dutch Shell Corporation, controls over forty per cent of the rich oil production of the islands, an investment estimated to come to twenty-six million pounds sterling. That this imperialist suppression was conducted by a Labor Party government only made it all the more shameful. And that the Nationalist Peoples Army of Indonesia had announced as one of its aims the nationalization of foreign-owned property, confirmed the British in their desire to help their “Dutch cousins.”
Once the nationalist forces had been scattered and many of their leaders imprisoned, the British brought the hated Dutch back to Indonesia and, with a fanfare of democratic trumpets, announced their own withdrawal. Like the master hypocrites they are, the British even urged the Dutch to negotiate with the Indonesians!
The present agreement is the result. And what a vivid contrast it makes with the words of Soekarno who said a year ago that “We do not recognize any Dutch return to power and we will not deal with them.” Today Soekarno has agreed to rule under Her Majesty, Queen Wilhelmina, and will exert the “full power of my personality” to sell this deal to the Indonesians.
But the Indonesian masses, aware that even the advantages of this deal were won by their struggle and not by Soekarno’s negotiations, will want to fight through to the end with, the aim of having their country as their own to do with as they will – without Dutch, British, U.S. or Japanese imperialism or any Indonesian Quislings of that imperialism.
 



Due to lack of space, we have been unable to report a number of significant international events of the past several weeks. This week’s column is therefore devoted to a roundup of such neglected items; Every few weeks such a roundup will be printed.
*

Concentration Camps for Socialists
A report in the New York Times from Germany brings the news that certain leaders and members of the German Social-Democratic Party (designated in the article as “left Socialists”) have been seized by the Russian Army occupation authorities and thrown into some of Hitler’s concentration camps.
Buchenwald, Hitler’s hell-hole, has been reopened by the Stalinists and a whole group of Social-Democrats who opposed the pressure campaign to force their party into “unity” with the Stalinists have been once again thrown into the very camps where they suffered under Hitler. The cycle from Hitlerism to Stalinism is not accidental in this case; both of them – whatever their sociological differences – suppress every manifestation of independent working class activity in the most brutal manner.
*

Deadlock in Belgium After Close Election
The elections held in Belgium several weeks ago have resulted in a serious parliamentary impasse. Out of 202 seats in parliament, 110 have been won by the “left” parties, that is, the Social-Democrats, Stalinists, etc. This slender majority makes it impossible for any stable government to be formed. The powerful Catholic Party of the Right gained 19 seats; the Social-Democrats gained 4; and the Stalinists gained 14. The “center” Liberal Party lost 15 seats. In other words, there has taken place a polarization of political sentiment towards both left and right. The Catholic Party has tried to form a “Big Two” coalition with the Social-Democrats, but the latter have in turn refused to participate in a government without the Stalinists. Thus, the government formed without Catholic participation by Spaak, the Social-Democratic leader, fell in its first parliamentary test of confidence.
The situation is complicated by the issue of the monarchy. The monarch, Leopold, has such a tainted record as a collaborator with the Nazis that not even the Catholics propose to restore him personally. They hold out, rather, for a regency. The Stalinists and Social-Democrats, while formally against the monarchy, have not taken the logical step which should follow from an anti-monarchical stand: refusal to participate in cabinet maneuvers with the bourgeois parties.
It is precisely this ineffectuality and timidity on the part of the “left” parties which paralyzes the struggle in Belgium to overthrow the monarchy. The Belgian Trotskyists, who polled 1,100 votes in the one local region where they were allowed on the ballot, have been conducting an aggressive struggle to remove the decadent monarchical institution from Belgian life.
*

New Nationalist Tendency in Germany
The first fruits of the Allied policy of dividing, repressing and virtually starving the German people – while permitting many of the secondary Nazi leaders to maintain their posts – is appearing: a new nationalist movement has arisen in the American-controlled section. This quasi-Fascist movement has been partially discouraged by the occupation authorities, but its very appearance is of great significance. One of its main rallying points has been objection to the proposed separation of the Ruhr from the rest of Germany, which at present means virtual de-industrialization of the country. Especially popular has been the call for unification of all sections of Germany. It should be noted that even the Stalinists, in order to curry to this sentiment, have been forced to come out for a united Germany.
This is the concrete result of the policy of imperialist dismemberment which the Allies and Russia have pursued. Just as after the first world war the imperialist policies of the victors stimulated various nationalist and chauvinist groups, so similar reactionary groups have been brought forth by the present Allied policy.
 



We are living – let us frankly admit – in the aftermath of great defeats suffered by the labor and socialist movements internationally. All the decadent tendencies of a rotten society accumulate speed as they hurl humanity backward. The Second World War is hardly over when there appears the threat of a third. Fascism, though militarily destroyed in parts of Europe, flourishes elsewhere; the root-conditions which nourish it, persist. Europe is a shambles, a wrecked and tortured continent; its economy shattered and without possibility of healthy reconstruction on any basis short of socialist revolution; its people unnerved and devitalized by years of hunger and agony. The totalitarian colossus of Stalinism flourishes amidst this social putrefaction; its very sustenance is in the decay of a capitalist society over-ripe for a socialist revolution which has not yet succeeded.
The European working class, despite the magnificent urges and movements towards revitalization which have taken place in France, Italy and England, remains in many countries atomized, disrupted, disoriented. How are the workers in countries like Austria and Hungary to gain a sense of social solidarity when the very factories upon which their sustenance and status depend are taken away by the Russians? How are the workers of Germany to gain a sense of unified resurgence when their country is split into ribbons by occupying armies which create chaos and confusion? The totalitarian poisons of Fascism and Stalinism have left their mark: even many of the workers who believe themselves committed to militant struggle for the socialist program have had their conceptions of it debased and poisoned by their experiences with these two totalitarian movements. And in this situation the revolutionary movement – that is the parties of the Fourth International and adjacent groups – remain small, isolated, persecuted by all the powers.
That is the setting for our time. It is not pretty. It gives no occasion for shrill optimism or shallow bombast. We must face the problem of how to react to these events: Is the perspective of Socialism still valid? Has, it been proven by history to be a mere utopian chimera? Is the possibility of social action itself a realistic one?
 
On the New “Failure of Nerve”
One set of answers has already been given, both in America and elsewhere, by people who, although they are intellectuals and therefore often believe themselves to be functioning in pure and detached areas of the mind, still reflect the social pressures about them and serve as symptoms of the crisis of our times. In themselves, these people might be of slight significance; but they cannot be viewed independently, for they are the weathervanes of the social storm.
Lamentations fill the air; cries of agony and repentance; pessimism is elevated from a mood to a philosophy – the intellectuals, stunned by the events of this world, would turn to another. Where formerly many of them believed in the possibility of social action to achieve a new society, of cooperation with the working class to build socialism, today they turn away from society. Increasingly large numbers abandon the idea of social action for the myth of individual salvation. Rather than change society, they exhort people to purify their souls. Some turn to outright mysticism, to the trinity; others – more sophisticated – develop philosophical versions of the same retreat. Suffering, we are told by them, is the inevitable and unavoidable lot of man: the fundamental human condition. No attempts to change society can alleviate that condition so long as the individual has not previously cleansed himself. The most extreme and socially irresponsible forms of individualism – in which some mythical and non-existent Individual is throned as Deity – are rampant. We are witnessing the “failure of nerve,” the rout of the “men of thought’ and the “spokesmen of our time” before the facts of life. And when these people mention the atom bomb, with its horrible potentialities, their rout becomes sheer hysteria.
(The absurd is brought to its final limit in France where a group of people – after issuing the inevitable Revue – have announced themselves as “Dolorists,’ people who believe in sadness as normal and desirable, who revel in the rejection of any possible social change.)
 
Society Must Be Changed First
Though we revolutionary Socialists do not in any way minimize the seriousness of the present situation, we categorically and contemptuously reject all such tendencies of thought as have been here described. We believe that the basic problem of our time resides in society, not in the soul. We believe that humanity can develop a healthy society of plenty and peace, and not that “sadness is our birthright.” The pitiful creatures who wallow in their tears have merely magnified their own helplessness into a permanent generalization. But as socialists we continue to affirm the possibility and necessity for men to work together to build a new and decent society, and that means primarily the class which has most to gain from and can alone construct socialism: the working class.
Is it merely wishful thinking that allows us to persist in our belief? Is it merely because we want it so?
Of course, part of the answer is: yes, one of the reasons why we believe in the continued validity and relevance of the socialist
program is the fact that we desire it, the fact that it alone can solve the problems of our day. History is not some automatic process in which men are merely puppets; history is the activity of men functioning within the limits of their situation. And today that situation cries for a socialist solution. That the ranks of the socialist vanguard throughout the world have remained firm despite the most incredible persecution (see the report from Greece in this issue of Labor Action) is one of the reasons why we remain so firmly attached to the socialist ideal.
 
Capitalism Can Solve No Problem
But more: society is at an impasse. The breath of capitalism becomes shorter, more strained and choked. Capitalism is at a loss to reconstruct the world, it cannot achieve the most simple reorganization of production and distribution in Europe. In America, the crying paradox of its existence becomes more evident each day: the gigantic productive facilities which it unleashed for war are not and, by the very nature of the system, cannot be utilized for peacetime production. Starvation; poverty in the midst of plenty; uprooting of millions of people; renewed totalitarianism; diplomatic hypocrisy; destruction of and failure to use productive facilities; preparations for new war; imperialist exploitation; filthy jockeying for division of the spoils of war – this catalogue of the aspects of capitalist society can be continued indefinitely. The society is sick, moribund, overripe for change. It is beyond redemption, beyond reform. No realistic desirable alternative exists except a thorough socialist reconstruction. And that is the program to which the working class, for all its present confusion in Europe and political immaturity in America, will have to turn if It is not to sink completely into a new era of barbarism.
But it is not merely the impossibility of the old system which leads us to believe in the desirability and possibility of a new one. The revolutionary lever of modern history, the working class, continues to struggle. With what truly awesome and magnificent courage have some sections of the European workers risen anew to fulfill their historic tasks: the French workers immediately after the retreat of the Germans; the Polish workers in the short-lived Warsaw Commune which was stifled by Stalin; the workers of northern Italy who turned to revolutionary action and seizure of factories as soon as the war was over.
True, they have again been deflected from their tasks; the same problem remains in Europe: to give revolutionary leadership to these strivings, to break the hold of the Stalinists and Social-Democrats. But the thrivings themselves remain. Struggle is an inescapable condition of existence for the working class under capitalism; it will continue until there is a triumphant ending.
 
The Revolt of the Colonial Peoples
Just as the working class has begun to stir inside the imperialist countries, so have the major powers of capitalism been attacked even more resolutely by a wave of colonial revolutions and near-revolutions by peoples determined to achieve national freedom. In Indonesia, in Indo-China, in India, national revolutions which strike at the very heart of imperialist power have taken place, are continuing and will take place.
And in America itself – that colossus of imperialism – the working class has been militant, has struggled with a ferocity and resoluteness that has given encouragement to the workers everywhere. The wave of strikes which culminated in the GM strike and its advanced program, indicates the freshness, the readiness to struggle of the American workers.
The most elementary needs and demands of the people are unrealizable under capitalism.

Do you want economic plenty, the utilization of the means of production for peaceful needs? Then you must fight for socialism.
 
Do you want the right of national independence for the colonial world? Then you must fight for socialism.
 
Do you want the right for democratic self-determination of the peoples of Europe? Then you must fight for socialism.
 
Do you want the perpetuation and flowering of the democratic rights which the workers have won through years of struggle? Then you must fight for socialism.
 
Do you want a future without atomic bombs, without poison gas, without terror bombing? Then you must fight for socialism.

There is no other road. Either chaos and destruction – or socialist reconstruction. The socialist perspective is more valid, more essential than ever because it alone meets the problems of our times; it alone proposes a program that is realizable in the situation of declining capitalism and which is a comprehensive solution to all of our social problems, as well as a concretization of the greatest ideals of which humanity is capable.
In part at least, the realization of this program depends upon the people who believe in it and fight for it. What we do will help determine the future. And that is why on this May Day in 1946 we unfurl again the banner of socialist revolution; we stand with arms interlocked with our comrades throughout the world; we march towards the future.
 



The record of the British Labor Party government in domestic affairs has not received as much attention as its record in foreign policy, if only because the latter has been such a flagrant continuation of Churchillian imperialism. But a number of highly interesting questions arise with regard to the Attlee government’s domestic policies; and one of them, the problem of nationalization of industry, we shall briefly examine here.
The Labor Party government has promised to nationalize several basic industries, such as coal and transport; it has already “nationalized” the Bank of England, in a way we shall describe later. Nationalization, as outlined by the leaders of the LP government, means that the government takes over and runs the given industry while reimbursing the capitalists, often at a rate higher even than the face value of what has been taken over.
Does this, then, mean that socialism – willy-nilly, partially, hesitantly – is being built in England? Does it mean that the LP reformist government is, contrary to the predictions and expectations of the Marxists, capable of bringing socialism to England, and through strictly parliamentary means at that? We believe the answer to these questions is No and we shall briefly show why.
First let us note the limitations of these measures? In a speech in Canada, Herbert Morrison, a member of the Attlee cabinet, bluntly stated that the bulk of British heavy industry would not be nationalized during the rule of the Labor Party government. He made it clear that only those industries on the verge of bankruptcy, those unable to shift for themselves (that is, make a profit for their owners) would be even considered for nationalization.
 
“Fair Compensation” for the Capitalists
The second limitation: the LP government promises “fair compensation” to the capitalists in all cases of nationalization. As the British Trotskyist magazine, Workers International News, writes about this matter:
“What this ‘fair compensation’ means can already be clearly seen from the example of the recently published bill for the nationalization of the Bank of England. The shareholders of the Bank of England hold an amount of stock with a nominal value of 14,553,000 pounds. On this stock they have for the past 22 years been receiving an annual dividend of 12 per cent. These shareholders will receive as compensation from the Labor Government bonds to the value of 58,212,000 pounds, i.e.; four times the NOMINAL value of Bank of England stock. These government bonds will bear an annual interest of 3 per cent – in other words, the Bank of England stockholders will go on receiving the same incomes as they have done in the past. No wonder that the news of the government’s proposals have brought about a rise in the selling price of Bank of England stock.”
The third and most important limitation is in the complete lack of any proposal for workers’ control of those industries to be nationalized. Presumably they will be run on the same basis as the Bank of England: the same directing personnel retained, the same methods, the same policies. The state is to own these industries; but if the workers themselves do not control both the state and its executive agencies in the nationalized industries, they will benefit precious little.
This is a far cry from genuine socialism, isn’t it? Most industries are to remain in the hands of private capitalists. Those that are nationalized are only the industries which private capitalism has brought to the verge of bankruptcy and which do not promise to be very profitable in the future. And the LP government merely helps those capitalists along by “compensating” them, so that they retain their wealth, their ability to invest in other industries and to exploit labor. Thus far, only the Bank of England has been “nationalized.” But it was already a semi-governmental institution; now that it is nationalized, and its stockholders properly “compensated,” its directing personnel remains the same and its function as a financial servant of British capitalism continues. And the joint stock banks, the great insurance companies and the Stock Exchange continue under the ownership and control of private capitalists.
These are the limitations of the nationalization program. It has nothing in common with socialism. But, aside from its limitations, what is its significance?
 
The Dilemma of the British Empire
British capitalism, we should remember, is in a terrible fix. It has come out of the war on the verge of bankruptcy, its resources depleted and its prospects for recovery slight. On the one side, it is pressed by Russia’s threat to its near eastern empire. On the other side, and even more fundamentally, the United States is driving it out of market after market.
The British cannot compete with the superior productive efficiency and capacity of the United States. To cite one example: America with 600,000 miners produces 500,000,000 tons of coal each year; Britain has 700,000 miners who produce only 200,000,000 tons of coal. From 1939 to 1943, the output of coal in Britain fell 16 per cent. This situation, which makes Britain unable to compete with United States imperialism on the world market, is due to the fact that England was the first major power to become industrialized on a large scale. This head start made it possible to build the Empire; but it is now the cause for the decline of the Empire, since the late comers like Germany and the United States were able to utilize the most modern developments in technology and thereby bypass Britain.
This economic inferiority with regard to the United States is to be further aggravated as a result of the forthcoming loan from the U.S. to Britain. The price which Britain will pay for the loan will be the surrender of the only two defenses she has yet found against American imperialism: the sterling bloc and the Empire preference system. Thus British capitalism moves from contradiction to contradiction. It must modernize its obsolete plants and mines. The only way it can get the necessary capital to do that is to borrow from the U.S., but to do that it has to weaken further its economic position and help strengthen the very rival to compete against whom it desires to modernize its industry.
 
Nationalization – Capitalism’s Patchwork
Which way out? There are three main possibilities. First: overthrow capitalism and strike out on the socialist road. But that the reformist LP government will not and, by its very nature, cannot do. Secondly: establish a fascist dictatorship which would squeeze wages and thereby make things easier for the British capitalist class. That at the moment is impossible, for the British workers are too strong and there is no substantial fascist movement in England. Thirdly, patch up the capitalist system a little more. And that, willy-nilly, is what the LP government is doing.
That is the true significance of the nationalization program. When one sector of the capitalist economy becomes obsolete, incapable of yielding profit, and without prospect of a profitable recovery under private auspices, then the capitalist state as a whole takes over that part of the private economy, all the while conveniently “compensating” the former owners. The capitalists deprived of their former holdings are enabled to invest in new and more profitable ventures. The state bears the expense of running and renovating the obsolete industries – and that means that eventually the workers pay for it through higher taxes and lower wages.
That it is, ironically enough, a Labor Party government which directs and initiates this program does not in the slightest degree invalidate the idea that this program has as its OBJECTIVE result the continuation and buttressing of capitalism. One cannot sit on two stools at once for an indefinite period. The reformist Labor Party government having rejected the perspective of socialist revolution, has no alternative but to try to patch up, to bolster here and there the crumbling capitalist economy of England. The British program of nationalization, then, has nothing in common with socialism; on the contrary, it has as its purpose the perpetuation of capitalism.
 



The intellectual section of the Stalinist movement has been wracked by a “literary discussion” in recent weeks. This discussion was initiated by an article by Albert Maltz in the New Masses in which Maltz made a very hesitant, timorous plea for a certain amount of discretion in condemning writers who had strayed from the “party line”; or rather for discretion in condemning writers merely on political grounds.
He gave as an example the indiscriminate condemnation of James T. Farrell in which the Stalinist movement indulges, a condemnation motivated exclusively by the fact that Farrell is sympathetic to revolutionary Marxism and therefore opposes Stalinism. Maltz, of course, has no sympathy for Farrell’s politics; but he wistfully hinted that Farrell’s politics were insufficient reason in themselves for which to condemn his novels on artistic grounds.
 
“Browderism” in Art
For this seemingly platitudinous statement – which all sensible people, let alone those professing to be Marxists, take for granted; that is, that art is not to be judged on the basis of party loyalty – Maltz drew upon his head a shower of abuse and condemnation which ended in his being labeled with the newest and most terrifying heresy: Browderism. The issues involved in this internecine dispute among the Stalinist intellectuals – or more accurately, in this hatchet campaign by them against Maltz – are of considerable importance. Labor Action has simply lacked the space to comment on them in detail, though we have followed the matter with a detailed discussion by James T. Farrell in the April New International, which we recommend to every interested reader.
A new development has arisen, however, which we cannot pass in silence: our scruples about space are overcome by this excellent opportunity to demonstrate the true intellectual level of Stalinism.
Albert Maltz has confessed! He has seen the errors of his ways! In the April 9 New Masses he prints as craven, as belly-crawling, as positively sickening a recantation as it has been our displeasure to read. (If Maltz were in the docket, you’d swear his piece was part of the Moscow trials.) And remember: in line of duty, we’ve read a good many Stalinist recantations, in which the offender humbly confessed to having betrayed everything from Socialism to Dialectical Materialism (the betrayal of which is of course the cardinal crime of all!).
 
Totalitarianization in Art
Listen to Maltz: “I severed the organic connection between art and ideology ...” (Horrors! Can there be anything worse than that crime?) And “... a word of comment on Farrell. I agree now that my characterization of him was decidedly lax, and that it was the inadvertent, but inevitable, result of the line of thinking in my article that separated art from ideology and politics.” (Ha! Betrayer that Maltz is! Giving aid and comfort to Farrell, than whom none is held in lower repute ... by the Stalinists!) “It seems clear to me ... that I have been discussing and illustrating revisionism, and that my article, as pointed out by others, was a specific example of revisionist thinking in the cultural field.” (It is clear that if Maltz has condemned himself to the lower depths, it is only because he hopes to sneak back into purgatory. He further flagellated himself with the onus of “Browderism” which makes it impossible, he informs us, to “really love the people.” (Oh woe, oh woe: Browder, the source of impotence which makes it impossible to love the people! But Foster, there’s a really virile chap, from whom writers can gain the ability to really “love the people.”)
But what really gets under Maltz’s all-too, delicate skin is this: his article was praised by the New Leader, the Social-Democratic weekly. And so, with the praise of the New Leader hanging like a millstone around his neck, Maltz confesses. “Good art,” he writes, “has always and will always come from the writers who love people, who ally themselves with the fate of the people, with the struggle of the people for social advancement.” And does it not follow as B follows A – to put it in the language of the Beloved Stalin – that those who do not “ally themselves with the people” (that is, are opposed to totalitarian Stalinism) must necessarily be bad writers?
 
Art in Relation to Society
Of course, this point of view happens to ignore history a little, but that has never fazed the Stalinists. It ignores the fact that there have been great writers who were not allies of “the struggle of the people for social advancement” – to mention only a few of the titans: Balzac, Dostoevsky, Coleridge, Wordsworth, etc., etc. (You can fill in your, own examples at will.) Art is not a mechanical replica of politics; it is an autonomous cultural activity which, while related to and drawing deep inspiration from social currents, can by no means be equated to them. This is not to say that the socialist movement does not desire and need the support of writers and artists; on the contrary. But it is to say that no political movement has the right to dictate what a writer shall write, how an artist shall paint, how a critic shall judge.
What a contrast between this point of view, which is, simply put, that of revolutionary socialists, and the point of view of Stalinism. Does a pathetic little soul like Maltz dare suggest that art is not the handmaiden of the Stalinist line? He is publicly whipped, denounced, humiliated. He is berated by that expert dialectician, Howard Fast. Stalinism cannot tolerate intellectual independence or critical thought. It either drives thinking writers from its midst ... or they confess and crawl back into their intellectual stockades.
Such is the sad case of Albert Maltz, once again goose-stepping in behalf of Stalinism. Of him, it will perhaps be said: he once tried to think – ever so slightly, to be sure – but the results were so terrifying, so unlike the slogans of others which he had habitually parrotted, that he returned to the intellectual position which he had always occupied: horizontal prostration before the intellectual dictatorship of Stalinism.
And to all the other little writers and artists who had sold their souls to Stalinism, it was a warning too: if you dare to think for yourself, you too will meet the fate of Maltz and will have to confess.
That is the way Stalinism works.
 



The pall of powder smoke has hardly risen from the battlefields; the corpses of the Second World War – in their millions a gruesome monument to the inhumanity of capitalist civilisation – are not yet wedded to the earth to which they were so prematurely sent; and hunger – universal hunger, the universal accompaniment of war – grips and chokes the children of Europe as surely as if it were a deliberate murderer.
And yet this very world, wracked and torn and tortured by the aftermaths of the Second World War, learns in horror and in fright of the talk in diplomatic circles about a Third World War. Still in the terror of the Second World War, the war of let planes and buzz bombs, we feel the anticipatory terror of the Third World War, the war of the atoms.
The thieves of war are falling out!
The world is split into two opposing camps: American and British imperialisms with their satellite powers; and Russian imperialism with its dragooned satellites and Stalinist party agents.
Gone and forgotten are the noble words – they were never MORE than mere words! – which sent millions of boys to rotting graves; gone and forgotten is “democracy”; gone and forgotten is “peace”; gone and forgotten is that promise of the Atlantic Charter: self-determination for peoples.
Every land succumbs to the military and financial paws of the two great imperialist power blocs. Who can think of the promise in the Atlantic Charter of self-determination for peoples without laughter?
Self-determination for India? Britain will not permit it.
Self-determination for Iran? Russia and Britain and America will not permit it. Russia demands that it be allowed to rob oil from northern Iran if the American and British imperialists can do so from southern Iran. (And Stalin says, with the cynicism which he has learned by long observation of the way Allied imperialism treats its subjects, that he will discuss terms of payment TEN YEARS AFTER his exploitation of of the oil fields has begun.)
 
Preparations Begun
Will there be war tomorrow? Probably not. The powers are not yet ready. It takes time to prepare for a war, especially the war of the future. It takes time to recover from the effects of the one just ended. The talk in capitals and in the press is largely to intimidate opposing nations, to get populations at home jittery and inflame them with new nationalist prejudices.
But the preparations have begun. Just as the Second World War was the continuation of the first, so will the third be the continuation of the second – if the masses of people permit it to take place. All the squabbling now is merely the quarrel over the spoils of the Second World War!
The factories of Manchuria: shall these be seized outright by the Russian troops or shall American capital utilize them through a pliant Chinese government?
The oil fields of Iran: shall they pour their products into Russian barrels or continue to enrich American and British millionaires?
The granaries of Europe, the strategic outposts of the Mediterranean, the islands of the Pacific: which of the two mighty imperialist blocs shall rule and exploit them?
And as this indecent struggle continues over the spoils of a war which has left the world in tatters and in tears, Europe starves. The British announce that their part of occupied Europe will have to “get along” on 750 calories a day, exactly one-third of the minimum necessary for a satisfactory diet.
At the moment, the British seem to be at odds with the Russians. But the British no longer play a basically independent role. American imperialism is behind London, giving it support and allowing it to say aggressive things about Russia which it is not quite ready itself to say AS YET. Attlee carries the ball a little while for Washington; but if is Washington’s ball. Whoever wins, British imperialism is on the skids; it is doomed to be America’s poor cousin.
London and Washington will screech about democracy. Moscow will reply with its slogans. Both lie. They are quarrelling over the booty of the war: oil, natural resources, machinery, capital goods, land, strategic bases. That is the substance; the talk is camouflage.
No, there will not be war tomorrow or the day after or the month after. But the stockpiles are being replenished. The reserves of weapons – new and terrible ones – are being increased. The fundamental truth of our time is seen once again:
There can be no peace, no security, no freedom under capitalism or Stalinist imperialism. Each war bears in itself the imperialist seeds of another war. The quest for power, for plunder, for prestige; the struggle for economic domination; the search for markets for products and capital investment; the search for sources of raw materials and plunder continues. It is inexorable in our society. So long as capitalism and totalitarian Stalinism continue to exist, war .is inevitable. It may not come tomorrow, but come it will.
And that is the basic meaning of the present war scare, of the exchange of notes, of troop preparations. Each side is jockeying for position, jabbing in the war of nerves. If talk of war today is largely bluff, the continuation in power of those who indulge in that talk makes war inevitable.
Look about you – you who fought, you who sacrificed, you who worked – and see the outlines of the future. See a new, infinitely more horrible war slowly taking shape. For we are living in the shadow of the atomic bomb. It will destroy us, surely and quickly, unless we remove the despots and displace the decayed economic systems which use it against us.
Continue capitalism and we face the certain prospect of new war, mass destruction: the graveyard of civilization.
Build socialism and we face a new threshold for humanity: the control of atomic energy to give us undreamed-of wonders to enrich and case our life.
 



Recent reports from Germany indicate that, at least in the zone controlled by Russian troops, there may soon be a fusion between the Stalinist and the Social-Democratic Parties. This fusion should be understood primarily as part of the tendency towards totalitarian dictatorship wherever Stalin’s armies take control.
What is the nature of these two parties in eastern Germany? The role of the Stalinists is well known: they are the unquestioning and unscrupulous servants of the Russian regime; they twist their “lines” and politics, regardless of effect on the workers, to serve the interests of the Russian ruling group.
 
“Liberation” by Pauperization
Their task in eastern Germany was therefore especially difficult. For here was a situation in which the advancing Russian armies were behaving, according to the most favorable reports, in a manner little short of barbaric. Looting, raping, political terrorism – these characteristics expected of conquering imperialist armies were also the characteristics of Stalin’s troops.
But it wasn’t only a question of the behavior of the troops. The political and economic policy of the Russians was one which could bring only total misery to the German workers; it was a policy which could be summed up in one word: looting. Whole factories were dismantled and shipped to Russia. The workers in Eastern Germany were in many cases deprived of the social basis of their existence: the factories in which they had worked were simply no longer there. In other words, the policy which the British-American bombings had begun – that is, the destruction of Germany’s industrial plant – was deliberately continued by the Russians; and the result could only be misery and pauperization for the German workers.
Yet here were the German Stalinists trying to hail this as the work of the “liberating Red Army.” The German workers soon learned exactly what ironic significance that word “liberation” had (a significance which others, in America, have still to learn). The Stalinist party in eastern Germany has resultantly had some difficulty in “selling” the Russians to the local workers.
And this is where the idea of a fusion with the Social-Democrats comes in. Traditionally social-democracy is a working class party whose leaders serve as the agents of its “own” capitalist class; that is the role which it plays today in France and England, for instance. It is committed to the maintenance of the status quo, that is, capitalism, regardless of what reforms it may simultaneously suggest. But to serve in this role, social democracy requires a certain minimum of political freedom; it flourishes during those periods of capitalist democracy when capitalism is attempting to placate the workers with dribs and drabs rather than suppress them completely by fascist terrorism. So soon as capitalism turns to the perspective of the “closed fist,” the perspective of fascism, it has no more use for social-democracy.
When capitalist democracy – that distinctly limited kind of democracy – began to rise again in France and Belgium after the rout of Hitler, the Social-Democrats were its main agents. One of their main purposes was to “calm down” the workers, to deflect them from the idea that the workers, must seize power themselves. But suppose there isn’t the traditional capitalist democracy; suppose, instead, there is a Stalinist domination. How little democracy that brings everybody knows. Here, too, the social-democrats are willing to bend; their backs have infinite flexibility.
Yet, bend as they will, lick boots as they will, try to . make their peace with the Stalinist armies in eastern Germany as, they will – the Social Democrats still cannot serve as quite the unquestioning servants of the Stalin regime that the Stalinist parties do. Social Democratic organizations, though bureaucratized enough, still do not have the incredible totalitarian, ja-voting character of Stalinist parties, Reformist rascals though they may be, the social-democratic leaders are comparatively more responsive to the pressure of dissatisfied workers than are the Stalinists. For the Stalinists have as their sole and exclusive function the furthering of the interests of the Kremlin; no amount of workers’ pressure can make any Stalinist party take a fundamental or important course which the Kremlin bureaucracy does not wish it to take.
Is it therefore far-fetched to surmise that in eastern Germany some of the workers fretting under the Stalinist dictatorship may have turned to the local organizations of the Social Democratic Party in order to find there some expression for their grievances? We think that is what may very likely have happened, and that it is to remove this “nuisance,” that the Russian military rulers are forcing the Social Democrats to agree to fusion.
To Anglo-American imperialism in western Germany, the fusion is a distressing prospect. It means that their main agent and native political, counterweight to the Russians has been lost to them in eastern Germany. And they are determined not to let it happen in western Germany. Their attitude is: You, Stalin, keep YOUR agents; but for goodness sakes, let us hang on to OURS too!
Thus, a New York Times dispatch of February 6 reports:
“There is a tendency in London to take the line that the best way to counter this Communist maneuver is to shape Allied policy in the west so that it supports the Social Democrats and does not play into the hands of the Communists.”
 
Stalinism versus Revolutionary Socialism
An extremely important conclusion must be drawn from these events. Wherever Stalin’s army entrenches itself, there sooner or later develops a totalitarian regime. No independent working class activity is tolerated by the Russian overlords; not even the hesitant, partial, atomized activity which might result from a Social Democratic party.
Between revolutionary socialism and Stalinism there can be no peace. The one represents freedom; the other brutal dictatorship. The one means independent initiative and expression on the part of the workers; the other total suppression and militarization. The advance of Stalin’s army brings not liberation, but suppression.
 


The Task of Building the American Bolshevik Party, by J.R. Johnson (C.L.R. James).

The purpose of this article is to begin an examination of the errors in Comrade Johnson’s resolution; it will merely note a few in brief, with the hope that other comrades will develop the points in detail. The issues involved are important enough to warrant such further discussion.
 
I – The Objective situation in America Today
The preliminary weakness in Johnson’s resolution is his failure to adequately or correctly describe the objective situation in America today. Unlike the resolution of the National Committee, he makes no effort to describe the position of American imperialism in relation to the rest of the world, nor of its probable internal developments during the next period of years. The NC resolution, after analyzing the basic situation (the impossibility of imperialist stabilization, the continued antagonisms between the two major powers in the world today, the tremendous expansion of American productive forces with its resultantly sharpened crisis) proceeds in Paragraph 25 to a specific prediction about the period ahead. It predicts a “temporary economic boom” as the most likely variant. And this for a variety of reasons: the accumulation of capital reserves, the hunger for consumer goods, etc., etc. – all of which are made possible by the favored position of American imperialism in the world today. That is the basic fact. American imperialism, unlike any other in the world, can forestall for a time (and for a time only!) the deep crisis which has already attacked and will attack in the coming few years even more murderously every other country. American imperialism in a privileged position can thereby temporarily “ease” its internal problems; it may even temporarily throw a few crumbs to the workers, somewhat analogously to the way British imperialism threw a few crumbs to its workers when it was at the height of its exploitive period. Do not misunderstand! This does nit mean that American imperialism is exempt from the basic crisis; we pose no theory of “exceptionalism.” But it is in a sense the rest of the world, the very desperation of Europe and Asis which gives American imperialism its momentary and partial threatening spell.
Now we make this analysis because it is of first importance for our behaviour and attitudes in the coming few years. (And that is the main purpose of a resolution; to guide us for the coming few years.) There will be “sharp class battles” in the next period; these will be part of a “period ... of great preparation for the future.” But unless there occurs a series of cataclysmic events on a world scale such as none of us (not even comrade Johnson!) is in a position to foresee, it is very unlikely that the social crisis in America will within the next two or three years, so sharpen and the political level of the American workers so heighten that a direct struggle for power will take place.
Here is one estimate. Johnson poses no real alternative. He engages in ecstatic flights of rhetoric – but he couches them loosely enough to avoid being pinned down. At the membership meeting in New York, he pooh-poohed any discussion about “booms” or economic predictions; he would not allow himself to be drawn into discussion of such matters when he was busy creating Soviets in the sky. But we insist that he must discuss these questions. He must tell the party what he expects to happen in America – not in general descriptions of the crisis of capitalism to which no one can take much objection but which are not analyses of the immediate period. He must tell us: what developments does he expect in the American economy during the next two years or so? What effect will the relationship of America to Europe and Asia have upon those internal developments? What effect, in short, does America’s dominant position in the world economy have upon domestic economic developments and then upon the position of the working class? These questions must be answered concretely; not in rhetorical flights about the coming revolution. Without such an analysis Johnson’s position is merely a subjectivist wish-thought.
 
II – The Position of the American Workers Today
It is on this question that Johnson makes his most errors. There are a variety of formulations, all of them and sloppy in his resolution. Let’s compare them:
On Page 14 of the bulletin in which his resolution appears, he writes: “No revolutionary can deny the possibility that two years from today the American proletariat could cover the nation with Soviets (or their equivalent)...” Now this is either grievously wrong; or grievously irresponsible journalism. One does not write (or at least one shouldn’t!) resolutions based on mathematical possibilities. Of course it is possible that there will be Soviets in America two years hence; it is even possible that there will be Soviets two weeks hence. If that is all Johnson means, then he is merely indulging in misleading speculation. But the purpose of a resolution is to analyze the past and present and as much as possible to predict the future, or at least possible variants of the future. Now the real question is; How much likelihood is there that the American workers will have reached the stage of creating Soviets within two years? Not very much, is there? If you are talking about likelihoods, real living probabilities upon which to base our behaviour, then Johnson’s estimation is wrong. If you’re just fooling around, then his estimation is irresponsible. And if you’re trying to suggest likelihoods without committing yourself too irrevocably, then you use loose formulations such as “No revolutionist can deny the possibility ...”
On the same page we read: “awareness of the contradictions of American capitalism have been to a large degree the property of Marxists alone. Today they are increasingly the property of great masses of the people.” If Johnson is using language in a responsible way, then he doesn’t know what he is talking about. The usual trend of Johnsonism is to, say that the “instinctive movements of the workers” (of which more later) are forcing them into revolutionary action. But here Johnson speaks of “awareness” which means – in English at least – consciousness. Does anyone with the faintest acquaintance with the thoughts and attitudes of the American workers believe that they are in any way aware of the contradictions of capitalism? Would that it were so in real life – and not merely in Johnson’s mind!
The same kind of vague and irresponsible “revolutionism” is found on Page 18 in which Johnson speaks of the “revolutionary pressure of the American proletariat.” What does “revolutionary pressure” mean? Does it mean pressure to overthrow society, to change the system? That’s all it can mean, again, unless English be abused even more than is our wont. And so on Page 26 we learn that “The American proletariat ... will welcome the most drastic revolutionary changes in American society, carried out at the expense of private property.” If Johnson is serious, he means that the American workers are not merely receptive to Socialist ideas, not merely that they vaguely desire some kind of change (or more accurately, amelioration) but that they will welcome the Socialist Revolution. Is there one serious and mature comrade working in a factory who will testify that the workers today, will welcome a Socialist revolution? They are militant; of course! They fight hard; of course! They sometimes violate aspects of private property “rights”; of course! But do they, in any considerable number, yet think of themselves as a revolutionary class whose mission it is to achieve the Socialist revolution? Alas, no! The fact may be unpleasant; but the price of not facing it will be even more unpleasant.
If we accept Johnson’s estimate, and we are serious about it, then a whole new perspective is on the order of the day: the seizure of power; or at the very least preparations for its seizure, not eventually but within a short in time. Workers, who, in Johnson’s words, “will welcome the most drastic changes in American society, carried out at the expense of private property” AND who are not, as a whole, prey to the illusions of either Social Democracy or Stalinism, are surely on the threshold of power. No other conclusion is possible. Is that the fact in America today?
(In passing: just how seriously Johnson is – I use the word “serious” not as a subjective personal description but as an objective political category – is indicated when we read in the very resolution containing the above statements that “this is not a matter of an actual revolutionary situation but a matter of years of preparation.” But if the workers will “welcome the most drastic changes in American society” and if Soviets are a real possibility within two years; and if these workers, to repeat, are fresh and undefeated and untainted, by either Social-Democracy or Stalinism then why is it a matter of “years of preparation?” How may years incidentally? I ask this last question not because I want Johnson to answer or believe him or anyone else capable of answering the question, but because it will clarify the area of disagreement. If it is really a matter of years of preparation, then where is his disagreement with the NC which would undoubtedly subscribe to that formulation? In a word, are we entering a revolutionary or even pre-revolutionary period? Johnson must answer these questions specifically and without equivocation. Is Johnson talking about the next two or three years – for which we are preparing resolutions – or is he indulging in grand historical sweeps which by their very breadth do not offer guidance for the coming period and if confused with the specific perspectives for that period are positively dangerous?)
What is the real situation with regard to the American workers? The truth is that the basic contradiction between their behaviour and consciousness remains: the contradiction between their fresh and increasingly bold economic struggle and their comparative political backwardness. As the NC resolution states, “The masses continue to follow bourgeois reformism.” This is a matter of neither wish nor analysis; it is a simple fact. America is the only country of any consequence in the world today where the masses still retain their essential faith in the workability of the capitalist system, though they desire reforms and amelioration. America is the only country in the world of any consequence where the workers do not function in the political arena as a separate class, not matter how misled; but where instead the overwhelming bulk of the workers still retain their essential faith in the capitalist parties, in no other country do the workers think in terms of “good men”; in no other country is the doctrine of “reward your friends and punish your enemies” (of which even the CIO-PAC is a variety;) so universal. The American workers have recently made significant advances, (e.g. the General Motors strike) but they still function within the limits described above. We may not like this; we try to change it; but we shall meet with grief if we deny it. Johnson doesn’t analyze this; he doesn’t even deny it; he does worse, he ignores it. He substitutes what he considers – and rightly – the “logical consequences” of the present strike action of the workers for their present state of consciousness. But the two are not the same and it is not, in fact, until the very peak of a revolution that they even touch each other.
 
III – The Role of the Transitional Demands
Though the transitional demands were originally formulated on a world scale, the scope and manner of their application in America has always been and remains vastly different from that in Europe. The reason is obvious: the main task in America is to break the workers away from bourgeois politics, to prod them into functioning as an independent and separate class. That I repeat, is the main task; and were it achieved even partially, would represent a tremendous victory for the socialist movement. Now the transitional program as applied to America has always had as its main purpose precisely, this need. We asked ourselves the question; What slogans and perspectives can we raise before the American workers which will enable us to move this class so militant and aggressive in the economic struggle and so backward and tied to the bourgeoisie in the political arena – what slogans can we raise that will move this class into action so that this chasm will be bridged? And that’s where the transitional demands came in. That is why in America – and in America alone – the central point of the transitional program is the demand for a labor party. If not to bridge that gap between economic militancy and political primitiveness, then what purpose is there in raising the labor party slogan?
Now then if we accept Johnson’s analysis, then the gap no longer exists or it is at the very least much narrower than we believe. In that case, we can ask, why raise the preset transitional demands at all? Now if the masses are on the threshold of a direct struggle for power, if they will welcome a drastic change in society and in property relations, then why raise slogans whose major purpose is to make them aware of the need for such a change and to begin to move them into action for it? In that case the need is to raise a whole new set of slogans, slogans of a pre-revolutionary nature, directed towards a rapid struggle for power. In that case, why raise the slogan of a labor party? If the workers are ready for socialism, if they welcome it, why the devil bother about a mere labor party? It is in order to overcome this contradiction that Johnson is forced to utter his mumbo-jumbo about giving the labor party slogan a “revolutionary content.” What that means he does not explain, because he cannot explain it in terms of his analysis.
Let me anticipate a Johnsonite rebuttal: “It isn’t a matter of an immediate revolutionary struggle but of propagandistic preparation for that.” But how does one prepare propagandistically? By raising slogans – in addition to general education and propaganda about the desirability of socialism – which correspond to the needs and consciousness of the day; slogans which make possible a real connection between what exists today and what we want to exist tomorrow, rather than slogans based merely on our wishes. Therein is the whole purpose of the Transitional program, which Johnson does not understand at all.
 
IV – The Slogan of Factory Committees
The new cure-all proposed by Johnson is the slogan of factory committees. He does not attempt to give this slogan any concrete significance or orientation. Are these factory committees to be embryo or miniature Soviets? Are they to replace the trade unions, or to displace some of their functions? Again I ask these questions not in search of blueprints, but in search of direction. And here is why:
As Johnson quotes Trotsky, the latter proposed the slogan of factory committees. But Trotsky proposed it under conditions in which the trade unions had exhausted their function, conditions in which the workers were turning from the unions because they could not satisfy their needs. Thus, for instance, during the war, the slogan of factory committees had a certain limited but important application. In may cases, where the union leadership was particularly strongly tied to the war machine and unwilling to fight for shop demands, factory committees (concretely the assumption of de facto leadership by the shop stewards) sprang up spontaneously; that is, the workers turned from the unions to their own improvised and provisional organs of action. Under such conditions it was legitimate and useful to urge the slogan of factory committees; it met with a real need of the workers. But today that situation no longer exists. The unions are fighting – inadequately, poorly, hesitantly no doubt – but they are fighting. And the slogan of factory committees is therefore largely, in general, an abstraction. It is not the king-pin of our demands, as Johnson would have it, because it does not correspond to any real situation.
 
V – “Instictualism” and the Role of the Party
The basic error underlying Johnson’s approach to every political question is his constant underestimation of the role of the party in our epoch. He constantly speaks of the “self-activity” of the working class as if that were some magical panacea. But let us try once again and however briefly to restate what should by now be commonplace in our movement:
The working class is capable of great and heroic actions even on the basis of the limited consciousness which capitalism develops in it. It is capable on that basis of struggles of great ferocity and vigor. But such struggles must remain limited, sporadic and essentially unfulfilled. The working class cannot conquer power by “self-activity” or “self-mobilization” it can conquer power only under the leadership of a consciously revolutionary and democratic socialist party. And a great deal of that revolutionary and democratic socialist consciousness must be implanted into and seep into the minds and hearts of the masses. We must not succumb to any aristocratic theory, as Johnson does in part, in which the consciousness of the vanguard is mated with the “instincts” of the mass – unless we desire the abortion of bureaucratism! The socialist revolution is different from all its predecessors, it gains its very uniqueness and world-liberating character in that it demands and requires a high degree of social and political consciousness from the masses. Of course, one doesn’t expect each worker to become a theoretician ... and – just a minute! – one does too. What is it that the socialist movement does to the worker? In a sense, it makes an intellectual out of him; that is to say, it teaches him to think in theoretical terms, to generalize his experience. And this is a mighty, an unheard of advance in consciousness. Did the Bolshevik revolution, do that? To a tremendous extent! And to the degree that objective conditions made that increase in consciousness impossible, to that degree was the basis of the future degeneration laid.
But all this means next to nothing to Johnson. He is constantly seeing self-mobilizations and self-activity; to him it is of little consequence apparently that in America the revolutionary movement and the masses do not yet have any substantial contact whatever. He instead speaks of instincts, of the objective consequences of instinctual action. But that is the task of the revolutionary party: to get the workers to understand the objective consequences of their behaviour and needs. And it is our failure thus far to achieve this in America which is our main problem.
The tendencies to revolt are, in a sense, “organic” (as Johnson puts it) in the position of the masses under capitalism, but that is not the same as a conscious drive to seize power. And without the revolutionary party, the latter will never be consummated and the former will always be frustrated. The ideas of socialism, of socialist revolution, of Marxism do not spring from “organic tendencies in the psychology of workers” living under capitalist production relations. They are implanted – yes, “from the outside” – by the socialists, by our party. This is why it is insufficient to base our perspective merely on the objective situation of the workers today (which Johnson completely misunderstands, as I have tried to show), we must take into account the relationship between the working class as a whole and the revolutionary vanguard. And that, in America today, should give us cause to pause ... and think ... before speaking as does Johnson.
“Instincts” are not enough. The working class can make many moves based on an incomplete or false consciousness; but it cannot seize power on that basis. And if one is serious about that perspective and doesn’t merely talk of it, then we must recognize the virtual lack of contact between the mass and the party and not indulge in revolutionary phrase-mongering.
 
VI – The WP and the SWP
The rest of his document should be rejected as wrong, this section must be characterized as rotten. I refer especially to the sentence which, after referring to the “inestimable advantage” of the SWP over us, proceeds to say: “Not only in relation to Europe but in relation to the United States the SWP propaganda is in the full Trotskyist tradition ...” Since this comes immediately after a section in which the WP line is characterized as Menshevik but “within the limits of the Fourth International” (whatever Menshevism within the limits of the Fourth international may mean!) we are justified in assuming that it refers to the superiority of the SWP line over ours. I therefore wish to ask comrade Johnson:
When the SWP hailed the advancing Stalinist army as “the liberating Red army”, when the SWP national secretary called upon the workers of Warsaw to subordinate their struggles to the oncoming Stalinist army – was that the SWP’s “inestimable advantage” over us, their means of espousing the “full Trotskyist tradition”?
When the SWP press discovered, that the workers in Russia “owned” the factories and the land and that that was the cause of their determined resistance – was that the SWP’s “inestimable advantage?”
When the SWP the week after the war responded by printing a learned dissertation on criminal syndical laws while we of the “Menshevik” WP responded by printing a bold declaration against the imperialist war – was that the SWP’s “inestimable advantage?”
When the SWP played ostrich in the trade unions and finagled with bureaucrats while our comrades boldly and with some success pursued a class struggle line in the unions – was that their “inestimable advantage” over us?
When the SWP national secretary spoke of “telescoping” the struggle for socialism with defense of country – was that then their “inestimable advantage?”
Your formulation’s on this question are not merely wrong, comrade Johnson; they are simply an insult to the party for which we have worked, these past six years, for the distinctive tradition within the Trotskyist movement we have so laboriously constructed.
One word of warning to some of the newer comrades: The issue in dispute is not who is “more revolutionary” or who is “more optimistic” about the possibility of revolution. The main task of our party is to recognize the facts and to proceed from them to try to make its program accepted by the working class. When we say that the workers are at the moment politically backward, that they are still tied to the bourgeois parties, that doesn’t mean that we have “no faith” in the workers, or that we do not expect them to move in revolutionary directions. Quite the contrary. Our whole approach, the approach of the NC resolution, is predicted on that perspective. But we are too well acquainted with the history of our movement; to allow ourselves to substitute wish for fact, to delude our selves with fantasies of our own manufacture. The recent militancy of the American workers gives us enough cause for confidence in their future, provided we of the revolutionary movement learn to make contact with them and persuade them of our views. But, we must not fool, ourselves into believing that we have already done so. Johnson’s resolution is a product of fantasy churned with half-digested quotations; ours a sober and concrete estimation of the situation we face and the tasks it imposes on us. The party must choose decisively.
 



What will be the character of the Stalinist regime in Russia, now that the war is over? This question, which has interested the world for many reasons, may now be partly answered on the basis of Stalin’s “election speech” and his Order of the Day to the Red Army,” Leaving aside the rhetorical pap, what Stalin said was this:
Contrary to the expectations of the weak-brained Stalin sympathizers in other countries, there will be no relaxation in the Russian totalitarian regime. Those who fooled themselves with the idea that once the war was over and the danger of Nazi invasion removed there would be a gradual “democratization” of the Stalin regime, must now face the reality. The elections just held followed the same “Vote Ja” pattern as previous Stalin elections: no toleration of opposition; the unanimity which comes only with terror and a paralyzing spy system; in short, a farcical mockery of democratic processes. And this pattern will continue.
Stalin said that the war machine, which had been built up by driving millions to the verge of hunger and by depriving the masses of consumer goods, would be continued. In fact, it “is obliged not only to keep up with progress in the art of war but to advance it.” The militarism which had pervaded every arena of Russian life will also be perpetuated: “Firm discipline and strict military order” are the needs that Stalin emphasizes.
 
One Imperialist versus Another
Not a word from Stalin about democratization of internal life – something, by the way, which only the most naive ever expected from him! He does have a word in his speech about “raising the standard of living,” but it is completely subordinated to the perspective of constructing a gigantic military machine.
Why this perspective of continued and increased militarization? The orthodox Stalinist explanation is that Russia fears the capitalist powers, but that is an explanation we cannot accept. At the moment Russia stands in no particular danger of attack from the capitalist powers. The conflicts that exist between them are not based on ideological issues; the Western powers know that Russia is not, and has not been for a long time, the source of working class revolution. On the contrary, Anglo- American capitalism remembers how efficiently the Stalin bureaucracy has helped them to stifle and destroy working class revolutions in various countries. The basic source of conflict between Russia, on the one hand, and America and Britain, on the other, is imperialist ON BOTH SIDES!
The British are fighting desperately to maintain their empire; and at the moment Russia is making what are for the British “ominous” moves to muscle into the Near East, “the lifeline of Empire.” The United States, whose imperialist domination inclines toward financial control rather than territorial rule (though the latter is by no means unusual) is also interested in getting Russia out of the places into which she is at present moving.
But the Russian imperialist expansion becomes increasingly compulsive in its nature: the low level and poor organization of Russian economy are among the factors which prod the Stalin, bureaucracy into further imperialist adventures. At the moment, Russian troops are propping up puppet regimes in a number of Balkan countries; Russian troops persist in Manchuria long enough, at least, to filch every movable piece of capital goods; Russian puppets grab a piece of Northern Iran rich in oil; and Russian imperialism even reaches out to grab a piece of Africa, Tripolitania.
(In passing, we wish to ask those people who deny the imperialist character of the Stalin regime: Just what is the nature of its African ambitions? Are they also “merely an attempt to protect its borders by supporting friendly countries”?)
The Russian economy has been thrown back considerably by the war; whole industries have been destroyed. But it is not these factors which are basic. What is basic is that Russia is not a working class state but rather a bureaucratic collectivist dictatorship in which there is no motive for genuine working class effort for productive efficiency and expansion (other than the fear of the NKVD, the secret police). Russia is a country in which the paralyzing grip of bureaucracy, of dictatorship, makes impossible that working class initiative which a socialist regime would stimulate. Terror and efficiency don’t go well together – not, at least, for very long. Bureaucracy and democratic workers’ initiative don’t go well together – not, at least, for very long.
The economic exploitation within Russia is not based – as is, for instance, capitalist exploitation in America – on a highly developed and technologically advanced and efficient economy. On the contrary, the exploitation is, so to speak, extensive rather than intensive. A very striking example of this is seen in the “Russian use of the oil wells it has grabbed in Hungary and Austria. The Stalinist press gleefully announces that “under the guidance of the Beloved Leader” (who is, of course, also an expert on drilling wells ...) new records in oil acquisition have been set in Hungary and Austria. But these records, somewhat similarly to Stakhanovism, the Stalinist equivalent of the speed-up, are set by means of incredibly wasteful exploitation of natural resources, of working the wells so ruthlessly today that their value will be lost tomorrow. This is the economic method of the Stalinist bureaucracy: extensive, wasteful, primitive exploitation.
And it is a method which forces intermittent attempts at EXTERNAL expansion. The Stalinist armies have looted half of Europe and half of China, too. They have sent back to Russia – without the slightest regard for the, peoples of the occupied countries, even those who were “allies” – entire industries. This is not the classical kind of capitalist imperialism in which the capitalist country tries to sink its surplus capital into the backward country. It is rather a kind of “primitive accumulation” by bureaucratic collectivism spurred on by its internal economic backwardness and its greed for acquisition. To achieve this end Stalin needs tremendous military forces; nobody will submit to his plunder willingly. Result: his call for increased war production, his emphasis on “firm discipline,” his statement that consumer goods production will remain subordinate to war production.
This is not the picture of a state moving toward socialism; it is not the picture of a workers’ state. It is rather the picture of a totalitarian dictatorship, driven to more and more reckless adventures by its internal contradictions. The bureaucracy doesn’t give a damn about the internal standard of living, other than having it high enough for the Russian workers to continue as efficient slaves. Concretely, that probably means a certain increase in the standard of living, for the near-starvation level of the war years cannot be maintained indefinitely. But too sharp an increase is not entirely to the interest of the Stalin bureaucracy. For an increase of considerable proportions in the standard of living means an increase in leisure and culture among the masses; that means a “chance to breathe and think”; and THAT is a danger to the bureaucracy. Terror, bureaucracy, low living standards, primitive economy, imperialist expansion – all of these characteristics of the Stalin regime are intimately related. They are its trademarks. They will continue to be so in the post-war period.
 



Without attempting a complete analysis, I want to devote this column to some preliminary notes on the present war scene.
(1) Will There Be a War Soon? Or, Rather, How Soon Will There Be a War?
Any expectation that the Second World War would in some way put an end to imperialist conflict can now be put to rest. Any expectation that the very horror of the atomic bomb would force the imperialist powers to desist from war can also be put to rest. The forces driving imperialist countries into war surmount individual desires and individual fears.
On every side, the victors of the war are quarreling over who is to control the vital resources and strategic areas of the world. American imperialism, which has one of its main economic stakes in China, comes into sharp conflict with Russia in Manchuria, where the Stalinists have walked off with half of the industrial plant. In the Near East, the British – with the Americans panting, on their back – are struggling against Russian encroachments on their imperialist holdings, which means primarily oil. It is difficult to remember a situation in which the nature of imperialist conflict, the unabashed race to grab and despoil has been as open and cynical, By comparison, the struggle around the Versailles Treaty was a friendly discussion.
There will probably not be a war in the immediate future. The powers are not ready for it yet. War preparations take time. The peoples of all countries are emotionally tired, physically exhausted, politically skeptical. And it will take time to prepare new stockpiles of war material, to “reconvert” to atomic war.
But war is on the agenda – if imperialism is allowed to continue. The new imperialist conflict issues from the ranks of the “united victors” of the second world war.
(2) What Is Russia After? How Far Will She Go?
The basic Russian strategy seems to be to take advantage of the common knowledge that America and Britain are not prepared for immediate war and therefore to indulge in imperialist raids. London and Washington will send notes of protest, but the bureaucrats of the Kremlin are not much impressed by diplomatic rhetoric. It seems highly likely that Stalin will not go so far as to force the Allies to prepare for immediate war. For all of the factors which make immediate war unappetizing for Britain and America operate as well with regard to Russia; she too has suffered economically from the war.
So the Russians proceed to make a raid here and a sortie there; grab the factories in Manchuria; march into Northern Iran and present the British with an accomplished fact; grab an oil field in Hungary; denude Poland of its factories. But we do not believe that at present they are likely to cross that line which the Allies are now drawing; the line which says “You can’t go further than this without war.”
(3) Does Internal Crisis Provoke Russia’s Moves?
There is less information about the internal situation in Russia than about any other country in the world. Nonetheless, from the little that does creep past the censors and from a general analysis of the nature of Stalinism, we believe that Russia is in no way exempt from the general rule that in every class society external crisis is inevitably bound up with and in part stems from internal crisis. The imperialism of Russia is motivated by social forces basically different from those of highly developed capitalist countries. The latter seeks outlets for capital investments, but the Russians seek places in which to replenish their badly battered industrial plant, places where they can raid directly and on the primitive basis of simple looting. It should be remembered that there has been not the slightest loosening of the internal totalitarian regime in Russia; that, on the contrary, Stalin’s recent speech insisted on continued militarization.
This policy means a continued scarcity of consumers goods, which the people in Russia had been told would be increasingly available after the. war. And that the masses are dissatisfied with this is evidenced by the continued and remarkable propaganda in the Russian press warning its soldiers not to be overly impressed with the “riches” they have seen in Bulgaria, Poland, Austria and such countries. That gives you a real picture of the standard of living under Stalinism; that the soldiers are impressed by the conditions they see in the most primitive and hunger-stricken countries of Eastern Europe. Stalinist Russia has not even been able to give its people the living standards of ... Bulgaria, or Poland!
Another interesting indication of internal crisis – this should not be magnified to mean immediate serious internal struggle in Russia – is an article in the March 8 Pravda which compares the present situation to 1920, a period of famine, internal revolt, disorganization and practical breakdown of industry and agriculture.
And so the bureaucracy engages in imperialist raids, each of them calculated to ease the internal strain, to replace its worn out and misused industries; but none of them solving its basic problems.
(4) What Are America and Britain Going to Do Now? Will There Be a Military Alliance?
Churchill’s call for a military alliance between America and Britain has been cold-shouldered by Washington and not commented on officially by London. That should not divert us from the fact that America and Britain are operating in joint imperialist action. Neither of them can meet the threat of Russian imperialist competition without the aid of the other. There may be no official military alliance; Churchill’s speech was probably a mere trial balloon to test public reaction to the idea; but in practice there is already a virtual military alliance. (Cnurchill’s role is worth noting. This Tory and Mussolini admirer is unofficial ambassador of the British Labor government. Churchill is free to go off on any individual tears, and the government is not obliged to take responsibility for its ambassador, ex officio. A convenient arrangement!)
America, of course, is in the dominant position! As the only creditor nation in the world, it is in a position to dominate its partners. This is true, even though at the moment Britain seems more aggressively in opposition to Russia. British imperial interests are more directly threatened in the Near East than are American interests. But regardless of relatively minor differences between them, American and British imperialisms are being welded into a military bloc. That America, in the process, is also horning in on its partner – well, that’s imperialism.
(5) What Position Should Workers Take Toward These Developments?
To say that war will probably not break out immediately is not to deny the gravity of the situation. The world has begun to tread the road to war once more – this time, toward atomic war.
The pace of disintegration, and degeneration of the imperialist world increases. The Second World War has hardly ended and the clear outlines of the Third can already be seen. Could there be any more persuasive and convincing argument for our insistence that the workers should not support ANY imperialist power in its war moves, and that socialism is today essential for the very PRESERVATION of humanity?
 



The Congress of the French Socialist Party recently concluded, was dominated by a so-called left majority which favored closer cooperation with the Communist Party, though it did not come out for organic unification. Nonetheless, the pressure of the Stalinists in behalf of such unification, both through their own party and through the elements they influence inside the French Socialist Party, remains powerful.
Nor is the issue confined to France. In Eastern Germany, the Russians have forced some elements of the Social Democrats, and bribed others, into uniting in one party with the Stalinists, the so-called “Socialist Unity Party” which the Stalinist control from top to bottom. In England the Labor Party rejected the Stalinist proposal for affiliation; in Italy the issue remains a vital one; in Poland “unity” under the pressure of Russian bayonets has been forced through; and in other countries the Stalinists are conducting similar campaigns.
What attitude should revolutionary Socialists have toward these developments? Should they favor such “unity?”
This problem cannot be considered on the basis of previously formed abstractions: to talk now about unification of working class parties in general is meaningless and deceptive.
The Social Democracy in Europe has traditionally based itself on the labor aristocracy, that is, the trade union officialdom and the more skilled sections of the working class. It has functioned within the framework of capitalism, and has done its best to thwart any revolutionary movement which would proceed beyond this framework. Despite this role of the Social Democrats it is still necessary to distinguish between it and the role of the Stalinists.
The Social Democracy usually functioned as a collaborator with sections of its “own” capitalist class; but it still remains part of the working class movement. In its classical form, it represents a certain level of consciousness in the development of the European working class. But it bases itself nonetheless on working class strata within its “own” country; to some limited degree it represents their interests and is amenable to their pressures. Its very existence requires the perpetuation of democracy; it is a party inextricably linked with the continuation of bourgeois democracy.
 
Stalinists and Their Role in Politics
The Stalinist parties are quite different. They function essentially and preponderantly as agents and police spies of the Russian Stalinist bureaucracy. Wherever there is a conflict between the interests of the working class of a given country and the interests of the Kremlin oligarchy, the Stalinist parties line up on the side of the Kremlin. No amount of working class pressure can deflect them from such a course. During the war, the American Stalinists were opposed to strikes because they were so directed by the Russian bureaucracy. No amount of pressure from the ranks of the trade unions in which they functioned could in any important respect force the Stalinists to modify that line.
The Stalinists parties, as agents of a counter-revolutionary bureaucracy in Russia, are a totalitarian movement opposed to the slightest degree of working class democracy. It is true that Stalinism addresses itself to the working class; and has succeeded in securing in many countries mass support from the workers. But the fact that a party has support among workers does not necessarily make it a working class party.
Stalinism is a unique and unprecedented historical phenomenon: the completely subservient and counter-revolutionary foreign agent of the Russian bureaucracy which arose over the ruins of the Russian revolution. It seeks mass support among the working class, but not in purpose, character, ideology or internal regime does it serve the working class. It is not a working class movement.
If the Stalinists succeeded in forcing a fusion with the Social Democratic parties, the results would be catastrophic for the workers and for the socialist movement. Were there a powerful mass revolutionary movement in Europe, the picture would undoubtedly be changed. Given the small and isolated sections of the Fourth International and a few parallel groups in Europe, given the absence of a mass revolutionary movement in Europe today, unification of the Social Democracy and Stalinists could only have the concrete effect of putting the European labor movement under the virtual domination of Stalinism. Such unification would remove the Social Democracy as the present partial and ineffective, but still existent buffer against complete domination of the labor unions by Stalinism. The occasional protection, which, for whatever reasons, the Social Democracy now gives to revolutionary movement from the terrorist onslaughts of Stalinist onslaught, would no longer be available.
For these and similar reasons we believe revolutionary socialists should not give any support to the movement for the fusion of Stalinism and Social Democracy, despite the fact that it is conducted under the spurious slogan of “working class unity.” In the specific circumstances of present European politics, such fusion can only result in strengthening one of the worst enemies of the working class – the Stalinist counter-revolution.
 



A political book is an act. If, like Trotsky’s The New Course [1], it appears at a critical juncture of an historical struggle, it must primarily be understood by an attempted placement of oneself in the context in which it was written. In this sense, understanding is a process that moves backwards in time. But it is not the only possible sense in which such a book can be approached. Understanding can also be a projection out of the specific historical context; it can be a movement forwards in time, away from the context of the book’s creation and towards whatever relevance it has for new situations different from the original context.
I begin in this way because I wish in this article to use both methods and because the two methods will yield slightly variant results. What follows may subject me to the charges of “looking at the situation out of context” and “second guessing,” both of which charges I partially acknowledge in advance and the legitimacy of which will be discussed towards the end of this article.

The New Course is one of Trotsky’s most remarkable works. Unlike many of his other books, it is not immersed in history; it does not concern itself with the alternation of epochs, their opposition and synthesis. Nor is it primarily a polemic on Marxist strategy though it does contain some of the first formulations – how brilliant they seem in retrospect! how remarkable is Trotsky’s gift to sum up in a phrase an entire political conception! – of the strategical conceptions on the Russian economy which he was later fully to develop in his Draft Program (Third International After Lenin).
The New Course is unique among Trotsky’s works in that it represents a kind of pause in his thinking, when he stops at a moment of crisis to take stock. It is, and appropriately so, more static than dynamic in its approach. It is as if he were saying: Let us desist from the specific events of the incipient struggle -and see what generalizations we can draw. Which is why Trotsky does something in The New Course that is quite rare in his writings: he offers, with the appropriate reservations and the relativistic emphases, certain general observations on the conduct of a revolutionary party and revolutionists in the post-revolutionary behavior.
 
A Polemic Against Bureaucratism
Trotsky therefore discusses in The New Course such problems as the internal functioning of a revolutionary party, the relationship between the older leaders and the often rebellious youth, the moot role of tradition in a revolutionary movement and the role of the functionary in the party. Now these problems are discussed in their specific context first of all: Trotsky is most concerned with demonstrating the growth of bureaucratism in the apparatus, its contempt for criticism, its snide attitude towards the youth, its demagogic deification of tradition into a gag on fresh and creative thought. Trotsky is writing a polemic – an opening, veiled, mild but still powerful blow against the bureaucracy. But he is doing something else as well. First out of motives of caution (the fight is in its opening stages) and second because the problems he discusses cannot be restricted to a specific context, Trotsky necessarily indulges in certain generalizations on problems of democracy and organization.
Trotsky has some profoundly important things to say. He tells us that a healthy revolutionary leadership is constantly being renewed; its personnel, far from being static or “hereditary,” is constantly refurbished by additions from the most critical and serious of the youth. Tradition, he tells us, is a controlling guide and not a stifling inhibition; no argument is settled by appeals to tradition, for though we may learn from the experiences of our revolutionary predecessors we must recognize the existence in each situation of unique elements to which fresh answers must always be furnished. Bureaucratism is an ever-present danger in a party, especially when it is forced to function in such a difficult historical milieu as was the Bolshevik Party in the post-war years. Bureaucratism inheres in all organizations (as we today understand organization) for organization is concomitant with struggle, status, hierarchy and social differentiation and with these present bureaucratism cannot be absent. We do not draw the self-defeating conclusion of abandoning organization, but rather of constantly being on guard against bureaucratism. Trotsky indicates a high degree of sensitivity to the cross-currents of social pressures which wrack every party, to the realistic pressures which give it its ever-present dual character of liberator and confiner. I shall not here continue to list these admirable aspects of Trotsky’s work; everyone should read them for himself.
I want now to proceed to a consideration of what seem to me some of the weaknesses in Trotsky’s book.

Trotsky’s polemic proceeds too much within the framework of discussion – and thereby, action – laid down by the bureaucracy itself. His book is full of assurances and reassurances that the struggle which he is about to begin, or rather which has already been provoked by unavoidable historical circumstances, will not assume the character of a party “crumbling into factions”; Trotsky speaks of the possibility of “the leadership ... finding this line corresponding to the real situation ...” What then was Trotsky’s fundamental understanding of the nature of the differences in 1923?
 
The Question of Factions
Though the dispute over the theory of “socialism in one country” docs not yet appear in this book – because it has not yet been developed as a political rationalization by the bureaucracy – all of the deep social conflicts which were later to prod the bureaucracy into developing the theory of “socialism in one country,” are implied and described. The rise of bureaucratism in a backward country whose revolution has not received succor from the west, the economic problems of the relation between industry and agriculture summed up in the graphic figure of the “Smytchka” (scissors) – these are the fundamental social problems of which the dispute over “socialism in one country” was a mere ideological reflection. But if Trotsky understood the depth of the crisis, as the book suggests, then he was wrong in fearing a party which would “crumble” into factions (why does the existence of factions necessarily imply crumbling?); in fact, objectively he was playing into the hands of the bureaucracy by moderating the struggle: calm was to its advantage.
It may of course be objected – and with considerable relevance – that Trotsky began his struggle in conditions of great difficulty, when the population was wearied from years of hunger and struggle, when all of the objective factors were highly unfavorable. That is true, and cannot be ignored.
(In that case, however, how explain the apparent optimism which fills Trotsky’s book, his assurance that “the present critical period ... will teach a good deal to the majority of the apparatus workers and will get them to abandon most of their errors.” Can that be considered merely as exhortation?)
But it would seem, in retrospect, that precisely these objectively unfavorable factors would have dictated a more vigorous, a more open struggle rather than one which for many months before and several years after 1923 was largely confined to the top strata of the apparatus. By open struggle I mean exactly the opposite of what certain people have meant when they asked why Trotsky didn’t utilize his popularity in the Red Army to initiate a coup d’etat; for an open struggle would have involved at least the attempt to bring the issues to the masses before the degenerative process had gone further, rather than the effects of a coup d’etat which would have been self-defeating whether victorious or not. These considerations, which are of course not novel, are given added weight by the internal evidence from The New Course.
A specific instance of how Trotsky kept his polemic more or less within the framework convenient to the bureaucracy is seen in his discussion on the role of democracy in the young soviet state. By 1923 there was only one legal party in Russia. For this regrettable state of affairs, the Bolsheviks were least of all responsible. The Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks had openly gone over to the camp of reaction and counterrevolution. In the famine year of 1919, when Petrograd was threatened on two sides by White armies, the Left SRs and the Mensheviks had called a general strike in the factories which the revolutionists had left in order to fight in the Red Army. Such parties had no moral right to legality in the soviet state.
But to accept the necessity of the Bolsheviks’ suppression of these parties is not to deny that the very act of suppression was dangerous, that it created a vacuum which should have been full, that it tended to establish certain attitudes and incipient conceptions which smoothed the way, though they did not cause, the bureaucratic degeneration.
 
The 1920 Opposition Groups
Thus in the early twenties there was only the Martov group in vocal opposition; exactly how it ended up is not quite clear, though it seems indisputable that the Bolshevik government took at least mild police measures against it. More important, there arose opposition groups within the Bolshevik Party itself, the two main ones being the Workers Opposition Group led by Kollontai and Shlyapnikov and the Workers Group led by Myasnikov. The former group was outlawed within the Bolshevik Party at its 10th Congress and the latter at the 11h Congress; subsequently many of its members joined the Left Opposition of Trotsky. Little is known of these groups – their history has been lost in the maze of subsequent struggles – but it appears that their democratic opposition to the growing bureaucratism led them to advocate anarcho-syndicalist economic measures.
Trotsky has not satisfactorily explained his negative attitude towards these groups: their invalid economic conceptions were entirely secondary to their healthy and correct attitude towards the problem of democracy, which was the main problem. Nor has he explained, in The New Course or elsewhere, why he acquiesced in the suppression of these groups within the Bolshevik Party, which merely strengthened the bureaucratic regime and made more difficult his own subsequent opposition. On the contrary, The New Course contains a number of references to the groups which seem without justification. Thus Trotsky writes that the Workers Opposition Group was “the most dangerous” opposition, and that the 10th Party Congress took action “satisfying what was just and healthy in the criticisms of the Workers Opposition.” How valid these statements of Trotsky were can be judged by his own subsequent experiences.
On the contrary, there are formulations in The New Course which indicate that Trotsky’s thinking – vigorous and valid though it was in opposition to bureaucratism – had itself also been infected by the milieu in which he functioned. Thus the remarkable but indefensible sentence: “We are the only party in the country and, in the period of the dictatorship, it could not be otherwise.” Thus, also his left-handed endorsement in The New Course of the 10th Party Congress decision outlawing factions. In fairness, it should be remarked that Trotsky writes that this decision outlawing factions within the Bolshevik Party was supplementary and that it was not intended as a police decree; that, in fact, a certain amount of both free discussion and factional activity did continue after the decision was made. But the point which is involved and is central here is this:
In launching a struggle in behalf of a democratization of the degenerating soviet regime, Trotsky confined himself to the boundaries laid out by the bureaucracy. His struggle would have been more effective and meaningful had he launched an open demand for the unconditional right of all loyal factions to exist openly and without intimidation within the Bolshevik Party, as well as for the right of legal existence of any party which remained loyal to the soviet regime regardless of its differences of policy with the Bolshevik Party. But Trotsky – so The New Course indicates – was himself subject to the narrow conception that in the concrete situation only one party was possible (a conception Bukharin was soon to render profound by stating that only one party was possible in any workers state) and that a split [2] in the Bolshevik Party would have been a major tragedy. Quite possibly, had the leading militants been acclimated to the idea that there could exist more than one loyal soviet party at one time – in fact, more than one loyal Bolshevik Party at one time – an early split might have been no tragedy at all. But by so thoroughly accepting the idea which the bureaucracy craftily spread – that a split in the party would be a tragedy leaving the door open for capitalist restoration and that therefore opposition groups should “restrain” themselves (or be restrained ...) – Trotsky made much more difficult his own struggle. The conception of the proletarian dictatorship as a kind of erziehungsdiktatur with the Bolshevik Party as the stern schoolmaster had begun to be common in the ranks of the communists; and only a radical, total break with that conception could have rallied a more effective opposition.
 
Economic Planning and Democracy
Instead Trotsky made the error of seeing the economic issues as predominant. It goes without saying that they were integrally and inseparably linked with the problem of democracy, that ultimately they were two sides of the same problem. But as issues for struggle they were entirely secondary to the one burning problem of democracy; proper economic planning may have been impossible without workers democracy, but a successful struggle for workers democracy was the best way to make possible proper economic planning. Had Trotsky been able to see this he would have: (a) been less ambiguous about his attitude towards the general problem of democracy in a workers state, as I have indicated above, and would have not been intimidated by the demagogic cries of “split” which came from the bureaucracy; and (b) he would not have made the false analysis that he did make of a number of other opposition groups that arose in Russia. For instance the fact that Bukharin’s Right Opposition had an economic program which was incorrect and even dangerous was as nothing to the fact that it found itself in opposition to Stalin. Much the same was true, I think, for the pre-1923 opposition groups. What strikes one in examining the 1920-1932 period of Russian history is the existence of successive oppositions, all of them, whatever their other differences, dedicated to a restoration of at least some soviet democracy. Even if their total strength had been put together at any given time, they still could probably not have triumphed. But a much stronger struggle could have been conducted and Trotsky was the one man who might have welded them all into one bloc.
Trotsky’s difficulty on this matter flowed – it is now clear – from his acceptance of the idea that the main danger in Russia was capitalist restoration. Now it is true, that unlike today when there is very slight possibility of it, capitalist restoration was a real danger in the early twenties. But Trotsky failed to see – and this failure was to mar all of his subsequent analyses of Stalinism, brilliant as they were – the possibility of the development of an indigenous bureaucracy based on nationalized economy which would strike as powerful blows against any restorationist tendency as against revolutionary groups. Trotsky was in the grip of a more or less mechanical conception of progress as measured primarily by economic productivity, a conception which served well enough during the historical past when world economic productivity was still insufficient to satisfy man’s basic needs, but which was by now irrelevant in an historical epoch when productivity had reached a new peak and the social problem became no longer one of how to develop the productive forces but rather within which social relationships to utilize them. It was this conception of the theory of progress, adequate enough for the past but requiring sup plementation for the present, which led Trotsky to view Stalinism as merely a bureaucracy within a degenerated workers state. In 1923 Stalinism was just that: a bureaucracy of a degenerated workers state; but Trotsky’s conception of progress and his unwillingness to accept the possibility of a new kind of society arising in Russia, what we have called bureaucratic collectivism, were at the root of his subsequent difficulties on the Russian question. And in The New Course we can see the incipient manifestations of those shortcomings which were to develop into a false political line on Russia’s role in the second world war.
 
Early Speculation on Degeneration
There is one fascinating sentence in The New Course in which Trotsky answers the question of what are the political paths by which counter-revolution might triumph. He answers: “either the direct overthrow of the workers’ party, or its progressive degeneration, or finally, the conjunction of a partial degeneration, splits, and counter-revolutionary upheavals.” But he does not, alas, explain what he meant by “progressive degeneration.” Later he was to deny that this degeneration
could be called anything but a workers state so long as nationalized property was maintained, but there is at least the possibility in this pregnant sentence of another interpretation – of the kind which the Workers Party has made. So long, then, as Trotsky saw capitalist restoration as the main danger or danger equal to that of degenerative bureaucratism, he was necessarily restrained in the struggle which he conducted and his analysis was necessarily disoriented at times.

Nonetheless, whatever weight the reader may give to the above remarks, I wish to emphasize that they are made within the framework of the general Bolshevik conception; that I accept the essentials of the Trotskyist explanation of the degeneration of the Russian revolution and also the essentials of Trotsky’s explanation for the constriction of democracy in the early twenties. It is hoped that these remarks will not be viewed as an attempt to gain the cover of piety. We must by now understand that the acceptance of Bolshevism and Trotsky’s politics does not mean an acceptance of each of their acts or statements; that, on the contrary, loyal criticism is the most useful and fructifying kind of agreement.

The Question of “Second Guessing”
One matter remains to complete this discussion: what about “second guessing” and “taking events out of their context?” I have said at the beginning that it is necessary to understand both in and “out of” context. We can now see the relevance of that remark.
In a certain sense, all historical criticism is second guessing. We examine Trotsky’s behavior in 1923 or what he wrote in 1923. We conclude that some of his behavior and some of his writings were incorrect. What does that mean? It can mean several things. It can mean that insofar as we can project ourselves into the situation of 1923 we believe that our opinions would have led to a more correct course of action. In that sense, we try – never successfully, for the effort is self-contradictory – to move backwards in time and imagine ourselves in a situation of the past.
Even in that limited sense, I believe what I have written is valid for the following reasons: 1) There were Bolsheviks [3] even then who had this – what I consider – superior political conception; in that sense, the previous criticisms are not merely second guessing. 2) We are writing here about one of the titans of modern history, Leon Trotsky, a man of consummate and universal genius from whom we expect and have a right to expect insight superior to that of most people. It does not seem absurd to ask why Trotsky didn’t see what took ordinary mortals twenty additional years to see. The canons of criticism can be infinitely more severe in relation to a man of Trotsky’s stature than towards some one else.
But let us grant that we are largely second guessing, let us grant that our opinions are retrospective judgment. The question is: what is wrong with second guessing, what is wrong with retrospective judgment? To some extent all historical criticism is second guessing and retrospective judgment. Certain kinds of second guessing are useless and absurd, for they pertain exclusively to the past; they are as dead as the events they describe. But historical criticism – which we have crudely equated here to second guessing and retrospective judgment-may have more relevance to the future than to the past. Thus if we criticize The New Course in order to learn certain lessons for the future, in order to once more reassert the forever necessary statement of the indissolubility of socialism and democracy, then we are engaging in a useful activity. The criticism is then in a sense more important for today and tomorrow.
If retrospective judgment is used for this purpose, it is a very important form of self-criticism. It does not in any way detract from the brilliance of our teachers of the past, it does not detract from the luster of their achievements or their writings. For we build not merely on that which we accept from the past but also on that which we reject. And that too is a tribute.
 
Footnotes
1. The New Course by Leon Trotsky. With The Struggle for the New Course by Max Shachtman, The New International Publishing: Company. 265 pp. Cloth $2.00. Paper $1.60.
2. Lenin was ready to face splits on much less basic issues. Do we not all feel Lenin would have behaved differently from Trotsky?
3. See the discussions of the internal differences in the Left opposition contained in Ciliga’s The Russian Enigma.
 



Two interesting reports appeared last week on the spread of Stalinist terror in the Balkan countries. One was written by Bogdan Raditsa, former head of the foreign press department in the Yugoslavian government of Tito, and appeared in The New Republic; the other appeared in Collier’s and was written by Reuben Markham who has for many years been Balkan correspondent for the Christian Science Monitor and is known as a responsible journalist.
The two articles do not tell us anything especially new about Stalinist rule in the Balkans, but they do provide considerable information which confirms again the reports that the Russian occupation forces have spread terror and disorganization wherever they have gone.
Raditsa’s article offers a picture of how Yugoslavia is actually ruled by OZNA, the secret police of the Stalinist rulers. While the new Yugoslavian constitution, like its Russian model, offers wide theoretical guarantees of freedom, the actuality is much different. Raditsa writes:
“There are, of course, paper guarantees of freedom of speech, assembly and religion. But in fact, the people are afraid to talk. No opposition press exists. In the pre-election period an opposition paper, Democratija, published by Milan Grol, was temporarily permitted to appear, but when it became popular it was suppressed. The same happened to Novostj, published by Dragoljub Jovanovich, and to Glas Naroda, published by Marija Radio ... In the first issue she published two poems by Vladimir Nazor, now president of Croatia, to expose his opportunism. One lead been written during the war and was dedicated to the fascist collaborator, Ante Pavelic. The other was dedicated to Tito. For her rashness, a bomb was exploded in the paper’s bookshop.”
The Stalinist oligarchy has established a system of local Vijece (Peoples Councils) the function of which is to dominate local life in behalf of the government. “Each council,” writes Raditsa, “has its ‘denunciation’ office, which issues a karakteristika, a secret report on every citizen within its territory. If anyone moves elsewhere, the report is sent on.” That is Stalinist “liberation” at work.
 
In Dictator Tito’s Jails
Raditsa, who was on the inside of the Tito government and knows the facts, charges that after Tito assumed power, “Zagreb’s jails held 70,000 prisoners ...” And just as the opponents of Stalinism are terrorized, regardless of which political point of view motivates their opposition, so those on top, the Stalinist functionaries and bureaucrats, live a life of comparative privilege. “They alone get enough to eat, and adequate clothing. They are well housed. Tito inhabits the King’s palace, Kardelj (another Stalinist leader – Ed.) the old Stoyadinovich villa. When I was entertained by state and party functionaries during my trips I always had plenty of food. On going back to my friends, I sometimes found they had been without food for days.” That is the picture of Tito’s Yugoslavia.
A similar picture of Stalinist terrorization in Rumania and Bulgaria is painted by Reuben Markham in his Collier’s articled In these countries the Stalinist rulers have made alliances with former fascists and reactionaries. In Rumania “The Foreign Minister, George Tatarescue, has committed practically every political crime that Communists the world over excoriate. In the past, he directed and subsidized pogroms against Jews, suppressed Peasant and Communist leaders, helped King Carol establish a dictatorship on a fascist model and conducted Rumania’s worst elections. He also concluded the first major agreement in the series of treaties delivering Rumania to Nazi Germany.” Today this man works hand in glove with the Stalinists.
 
Terror in Bulgaria
The same situation holds in Bulgaria. The Prime Minister of that country, Kimon Gueorguieff, despite his present alliance with the Stalinists, was a leader in the bloody suppression of workers on June 9, 1923, and again during 1934 when a military clique seized power in Bulgaria and suppressed all working class opposition.
Markham’s article is interesting not merely for its revelation of the mechanisms by means of which Stalinism maintains its terror in the Balkans, but also for the description of the policies which it has pursued. He describes the failure of the Stalinist policy of land distribution :
“The land was given out in a haphazard way. Groza (the Rumanian Stalinist leader – Editor) confiscated property and used it to attract followers. A peasant stood a poor chance of receiving anything unless he joined Groza’s Plowman’s Front, whose membership soon jumped from a few thousand to a million and a half. But the peasants received inadequate amounts, under five acres each, with no machinery, stock or credit.
“Also hundreds of thousands still remain without land, because there isn’t enough to go around. The larger farms that were once well cultivated are now broken up into little pieces which are poorly cultivated; production has fallen and the peasantry as a whole is poorer than ever. No basic problem has been solved, peasant poverty remains, dissatisfaction mounts and eventually the autocratic leaders must resort to some drastic reform measure.
“That has already begun in Bulgaria where the Communists in many villages are gathering the peasants’ fields into big ‘blocks’ ... The peasants, while theoretical owners are formed into work brigades, directed by brigade bosses.”
This is the pattern of Stalinist occupation in the Balkans – and the mockery and tragedy is that it even proceeds in the name of socialism to which it is completely antithetical.
 



Bread and Wine,
by Ignazio Silone
Penguin Books. 25 cents

< cl fst>Ignazio Silone, the author of this book, was at one time active in the underground Italian Communist movement. In the early thirties he wrote a splendid novel, Fontamara, which gave a vivid picture of the life of the peasants under Italian fascism and of their struggle against it. Shortly afterward Silone broke with the Stalinized Italian Communist Party, but remained a revolutionary. He continued to write stories, essays and novels, of which Bread and Wine is his most characteristic.
Bread and Wine is a novel immersed in the atmosphere of defeat. Its hero, Pietro Spina, is a professional revolutionist of legendary stature who returns to Italy to do underground work shortly before Mussolini’s invasion of Ethiopia. He comes as a convinced Marxist, but his experiences with the peasantry of his native area shake his convictions and stimulate him to develop new ideas.
Spina becomes convinced that propaganda is useless as a means to prepare the overthrow of the fascist dictatorship. People have been misled too long by words and slogans; they automatically distrust and disbelieve all phrases. It is useless, again, to point out the stupidities and lies of the official propaganda because nobody believes that either, least of all the government propagandists themselves. Under fascism, humanity has become so corrupted, so cynical and hopeless – Spina concludes – that it is useless to speak of programs or of parties. One cannot organize a revolutionary party in a town where no one is certain his neighbor will not betray him for so much as cracking a joke about the head of the state.
These are the conclusions Spina comes to as a result of his life among the peasants. They are concerned merely with existence, with the cycle of rural life; they view the evils of government as natural and unavoidable plagues comparable to drought or flood.
Spina visits the underground workers’ groups in Rome, but there too he finds no hope. These groups are isolated; their members go through the motions of conspiratorial work but they have lost their grasp on the essentials of life; they are victims of their helplessness.
What, then, is to be done? Spina concludes that it is necessary to show people once more how to live. One must show them that it is still possible to live decently and honestly; that friendship can be cultivated for its own sake.
Spina adopts as his guiding principle the ethical ideal of primitive Christianity, “a Christianity denuded of all religion and all church control.” The task is not to propagandize or organize parties, but to live as revolutionary saints. ‘‘No word,” writes Silone, “and no gesture can be more persuasive than the life and, if necessary, the death of a man who strives to be free, loyal, just, sincere, disinterested. A man who shows what a man can be.”
These ideas are, of course, not in agreement with those which revolutionary Marxists hold. Saintliness, a quality which the debased society in which we live makes impossible for most men, cannot be a substitute for the united action of those who suffer most under capitalism and are in the best position to eradicate it, that is, the workers.
But it would be wrong to think of this book only in terms of the ideas its author develops. He writes with a wonderful sense for the concrete, a feeling for the patterns of human life which become defined in the experiences of Spina in his search for a new way of life. Silone also has at his command a rich and gentle humor which illuminates and makes even more poignant the tragedy of life under fascism.
Bread and Wine is a masterful work of art: it is a warm picture of the life of the Italian peasantry; it is a moving account of the inner struggles of the doubting revolutionary returned from exile; it is dramatic in action and brilliant in its internal clash of ideas. As with all great novels, whatever their explicitly formulated ideas, it is a deep and penetrating depiction of man’s fate, his suffering and triumphs; and it is an affirmation of his ability to struggle against his enslavement and attain thereby the dignity and stature of the whole man.
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 



Even casual movie-goers have probably noticed the greater stress on violence, horror and sadism in the pictures recently produced by Hollywood. These “shockers” have been among the most financially successful of Hollywood’s recent productions. They can hardly be MERELY contrived by Hollywood planners as part of their continuous search for fresh material; and even if they are that, there must still be something about these movies which touches areas of response in the minds of the millions who view them.
Hollywood has always gloated in violence, always been fond of the strange, the grotesque and the horrible. It has always skillfully, though crudely, appealed to the subterranean areas of its audiences’ minds where fear of and fascination for terror are inextricably mixed. Thus, the success of such actors as Bela Lugosi and Boris Karloff. But these films usually made it abundantly clear that their locales were unusual, that they were concoctions of weird imaginations, and that they had no relationship to ordinary life as experienced by the people who paid their money to enter the dreamworld of the screen’s shadows.
Today that has all been changed. Instead of vague castles, mythical laboratories and Roman amphitheaters, movie terror is shown in most usual environments. Where in the past the Frankenstein monster made one shudder at first sight, today the villain is an unprepossessing young man, often slight in build, who engages in the most ruthless behavior in typical American small towns or cities. (For instance, the films Shadow of a Doubt and The Stranger.)
As one critic, Siegfried Kracauer, writes:
“Thus, the weird, veiled insecurity of life under the Nazis is transferred to the American scene. Sinister conspiracies incubate next door, within the world considered normal – any trusted neighbor may turn into a demon.” (Commentary, August issue)
The same critic notes the penchant for unrestrained and deliberate physical brutality in which this type of film indulges. He points to the film, Dark Corner, in which a private detective smashes the hand of a gunman to make him confess and is then himself assaulted by the gunman, who knocks the detective down and “steps with the full weight of his body on the hand of his unconscious victim.” An even better example is found in the series of pictures made from Raymond Chandler books and in those which star Dick Powell and Humphrey Bogart: for instance, the scene in one Powell picture in which he beats a man to death with his fists and the scene in a Bogart picture in which he contemptuously refuses aid to a group of drowning German aviators.
This tendency toward obsessive concern with physical brutality – in a world which seems to have lost all rational meaning, is not physical power the decisive arbiter? – is combined with the suggestion of a constant eerie feeling of uncertainty and insecurity. The films directed by Alfred Hitchcock are extremely effective instances.
As Kracauer writes in the previously mentioned article:
“Apprehension is accumulated; threatening allusions and dreadful possibilities evoke a world in which everybody is afraid of everybody else, and no one knows when or where the ultimate and inevitable horror will arrive. When it does arrive it arrives unexpectedly: erupting out of the dark from time to time in a piece of unspeakable brutality. That panic which in the anti-Nazi films was characterized as peculiar to the atmosphere of life under Hitler, now saturates the whole world.”
What is the explanation of this emphasis on horror, physical brutality, psychological destruction of personality, and pervasive feelings of insecurity?
An answer to this question involves many factors. For one thing, all of life under a decaying capitalist society is increasingly insecure, many pretenses of morality and order are being dropped in political life. This tendency toward open power domination, toward domination of masses by terror and pressure propaganda, is transformed on the screen into images of more personalized insecurity. What is especially noteworthy is that so much of the brutality and horror of these Hollywood pictures is without meaning or purpose beyond the mere accidental existence of some particularly evil individual – this very meaninglessness, incidentally, making it all the more terrifying. Hollywood refrains from associating terror with current social and political life, even to the degree that, such a foreign film as Open City does. Unable or unwilling to connect the feelings of terror which seem so strongly rooted in contemporary life with their social setting, Hollywood can therefore produce only grotesque portraits of horror, ultimately boring in their viciousness.
There is still another important reason for this series of films. During the war, most “war pictures” were, to the surprise of their producers, not especially popular. People felt that they had enough of the real thing; soldiers universally scorned the sugared versions of war which most of the “war pictures” presented. Yet all of the emotional antagonisms, the accumulations of aggression, the bundles of tension which war produces in men required some outlet for release. This, I think, the horror films are doing.
The films produced by Hollywood can serve as barometers of the moral and ideological climate of capitalist civilization. When that civilization is distinguished by an increasing sense of individual helplessness in a brutal, meaningless world; when mass murder and terror are everyday events; when psychological disintegration is the result of social decay – then the pictures made in Hollywood will reflect, in however distorted a form, that very situation.
 



POLAND, under the domination of the Stalinist army but with great masses of workers and peasants obviously in active revolt against the Russian-buttressed puppet government, is one of the key spots on the European political map. The current crisis is coming to a head over the insistent drive which the puppet government has been making to force Mikolajczyk, leader of the Peasant Party opposition, to agree to a “single slate” in the coming elections.
For all evidence points to the fact that the Stalinist rulers of Poland are seriously worried about the outcome of these elections. They suffered a rude shock from the result of the recent plebiscite which they announced as favorable to the government, but which, it is now commonly accepted, was manipulated by them to avoid showing the actual anti-government majority.
In the September 2 issue of Labor Action, our foreign correspondent, A. Rudzienski, who specializes in Polish affairs, gave a detailed analysis proving that the government actually falsified the results of the plebiscite in its favor. Now we learn the additional bit of news from the London Tribune that:
“The recent plebiscite on government policy took place under extraordinary conditions. A ‘No’ after the three questions had to be marked by a dash (minus), a ‘Yes’ by a cross (plus). As most electoral commissions contained no opposition representatives, it was child’s play to turn dashes into crosses.”
Child’s play is putting it mildly.
Yet the plebiscite gave the Stalinists a scare. Proof of that is in two facts. About a month ago, the so-called “Socialist” Premier, Osubka-Morawski, signed a series of three articles in the Polish press which some literate GPU agent undoubtedly wrote for him, urging once again that Mikolajczyk – whom the government had only yesterday denounced as a traitor! – come to an agreement with the government parties for a “joint slate” in the coming elections. In this way there would be no means by which the voters could express their opposition to the Stalinist government; the number of seats in the Parliament would be apportioned in advance and the election would be a mere formality.
 
Latest Stalinist Flirtations
Even more significant than the Stalinists’ renewed overtures to Mikolajczyk – the virulent attacks on him in the pro-government press have been muted to a few hoarse mutters – is the basis on which they appeal to him. Osubka-Morawski, and behind him the GPU man who guides his pen, is no longer threatening Mikolajczyk; he is plainly imploring him to be reasonable. He tells Mikolajczyk that an electoral victory gained by the opposition over the government would bring about Russian intervention of a kind which would reduce Poland to a virtual colony. It is a plea ... and a warning.
Another indication of the uneasy status of the Polish Stalinists is their recent flirtation with sections of the Catholic Church. The infamous Cardinal Hlond, fascist and anti-Semite, is frankly in opposition to the Stalinist government from the point of view of the old landowners, who would like a return to a Pilsudski-like dictatorship; but there is another tendency in the Catholic hierarchy which is flirting, however sedately, with the Stalinists. Cardinal Sapieha of Cracow has written in his weekly Tygodnik Poweszechny, that he would like to participate in the “constructive work” of the Stalinist government but that certain difficulties stand in the way. The Stalinists have greeted this declaration with careful interest; the weakness of their base among the Polish masses has become so obvious that they are looking in all directions for buttresses.
In the meantime, the economic crisis in the country becomes sharper. The London Tribune reports that:
“... free market food prices in the towns ... are four times higher than formerly. The sudden rise in the basic cost of living has produced a series of unofficial strikes in the textile and mining industries ... State factories have been compelled to buy food at market prices and sell it in their canteens at highly subsidized prices; industrial costs, which are high because production is still so slow, have since increased. Shortages and high prices of industrial goods in turn have increased the peasants’ tendency to hoard.”
 
Increasing Instability of Regime
Together with economic disorganization goes political instability. We have already mentioned several indications that the Stalinists are jittery about the forthcoming elections. There are still others. In early August the government initiated a drive to destroy the armed bands of the illegal opposition. The clashes have in some areas reached the proportions of a small-scale civil war, but the opposition has not been crushed.
Having failed thus far in the use of armed force, the government tried cajolery toward another section of the opposition. When, in early August, the Catholic “Labor Party” applied for permission to hold a party congress, the government consented if ... the Catholic group would agree in advance to participate in a single ticket electoral bloc. Rather than agree, the Catholic party refused to hold its congress.
These developments are the latest in a long series which indicate that the present Polish government would collapse in a week if Russian army bayonets were withdrawn. There is no space here to analyze in detail the political situation in Poland; that has been excellently done in the September issue of The New International. The facts reported in this column, however, give additional evidence to the assertion that a first-rate political crisis is brewing in Poland in which large sections of the masses are stirring to rid themselves of the tyrannical puppets whom the Stalinist army has placed over them.
 



The Fate of Writing in America
by James T. Farrell
New Directions, New York 1946: 25 cents
In this pamphlet, the novelist James T. Farrell has examined the
tendencies towards concentration and centralization in the publishing
business, the counter-tendencies which make for a relatively small
scale and free industry, and the position of the serious writer in
relation to these developments.
“The war boom,” he writes, “demonstrated positively
that mass production and distribution in books are both feasible and
highly profitable. These developments are irreversible. Their
structural consequences are revealed in the tendency towards
combinations and centralization. Inevitably every phase of book
business will become more concentrated than in the past. This
concentration will increase the difficulties of operation for small
and independent publishers, and it will probably have the effect of
requiring a higher initial investment from any newcomers into the field.”
This economic tendency, reflecting the general tendency of
capitalist economy, is traced by Farrell in certain recent
developments in the publishing field: the growth of gigantic reprint
houses which produce books cheaply and on such a mass scale as to
require a high degree of standardization and certainty of huge sales;
the combination of a number of smaller houses in to large concerns;
the increasing dependence of publishing on Hollywood in a hoped-for
sales of books. for movie production.
But simultaneously Farrell indicates where, in his opinion, the
tendency towards centralization and standardization has not yet
reached and probably will soon not reach the extreme to which it has
gone in Hollywood. The book medium. has a tradition, a heritage of
greatness as the major cultural conveyer of our civilization that is
totally foreign to the movies and which gives the publishing business
a certain kinship to cultural values. Limited though it may be by
commercial considerations, such a kinship is still largely foreign to
Hollywood. The capital investment required to publish a book is far
less than that required to produce a movie and the publisher need not
therefore concern himself so greatly with standardized tastes,
pressure groups and “public opinion” as does the movie producer.
And finally, the individual writer in his dealings with the
publishers can, no matter what his personal discomfort, strive to
maintain his integrity, to avoid the temptations of fat contracts
which come from writing popular trash.
It is on this last note that Farrell ends his pamphlet: a call to
his fellow writers to maintain their independence from commercial
subservience. He is aware that in order to live writers must deal
with commercial considerations; they cannot loftily disdain the
social conditions in which they function. But they must nevertheless
say “with scorn in their voices, that they will not be hacks.”
The writer, says Farrell, is “an active and not a passive agent in
this situation”, and it is his responsibility firmly to refrain
from the tawdry temptations which a decadent society may occasionally
offer him-when it doesn’t disdain him altogether.
In this brief notice, the issues raised by this pamphlet cannot be
discussed. But it should be said that Farrell’s article will be
found both interesting and provocative to anyone who is concerned
with the problem of culture in capitalist America.
 



The major problem agitating European diplomacy at the moment is that of boundary settlements. In the past 15 hectic years, the boundaries of several countries have been changed any number of times; other countries have, for periods of time, even ceased to exist as independent nations.
One of the most interesting sidelights of this general problem is the attitude which the various Stalinist parties of Europe have taken towards the boundary problem. This has been a very difficult matter for them. Basically and ultimately, their primary loyalty is to Stalinist Russia and it is in the interests of the Stalinist ruling class that they function. Yet, in a number of southern European countries they have been propelled into governmental responsibility and power by the bayonets of the Russian army; they therefore have imperialist interests of their own. Thus, for instance, the Stalinists of a country like Yugoslavia or Hungary are concerned not only – though still primarily – with the needs of Russian imperialism; they have, as dominant forces in their own native regimes, their own fish to fry.
 

Stalinist Boundary Conflicts
In the past few weeks, I have worked up a list, probably not complete, of instances in which Stalinist parties of different European countries have come into conflict with each other on problems of boundary settlement. Here are the most dramatic instances:

French Stalinists urge the separation of the Ruhr from Germany; the German Stalinists urge its retention within the framework of Germany.
 
Yugoslavia Stalinists under Tito’s leadership, want the strategic port of Trieste; the Italian Stalinists want Trieste to be part of Italy.
 
Hungarian Stalinists support frontier revision in Transylvania; Rumanian Stalinists insist that the borders of Transylvania be maintained.
 
Austrian Stalinists support the claim of the Austrian government to the South Tyrol; the Italian Stalinists oppose it.
 
Czech Stalinists want the Cieszen coalfields, located at the point where Poland and Czechoslovakia meet, to be part of their country; while the Polish Stalinists oppose that.
 
Hungarian and Czech Stalinists are in conflict on the problem of the expulsion of Hungarians from Slovakia initiated by the Czech government.

Thus far, these differences exist only among Stalinist puppet parties themselves. They are not especially difficult to explain. It seems reasonable to assume that Moscow is allowing its puppets a certain flexibility of motion ... so that they will continue to be efficient puppets. For instance, the issue of Trieste. The conflict over Trieste has reached the point where the next world war might well break out around that dispute, as this last one broke out around the issue of Danzig; that is, while such border disputes do not cause a war, they help ignite it. The rival imperialist governments of Yugoslavia and Italy are bitterly fighting for control of Trieste, and they have succeeded in inflaming among their peoples powerful nationalist sentiments on the question. If therefore, the Italian Stalinists were to agree to the cession of Trieste to Yugoslavia, their hold on the Italian working class would be greatly reduced – and thereby their value to Stalin would decrease. So that it is to Russia’s advantage to allow its puppet parties to take dissenting positions on boundary questions, in view of the fact that neither the Italian nor Yugoslav Stalinists will actually decide the fate of Trieste.
 

How Far Will They Go?
However, another incident has recently taken place which is of a more striking nature. Russian armies are deeply entrenched in Austrian territory. They control over a third of that unfortunate little country and they have sucked dry most of its economic resources. A dispute arose between the Russian occupying troops and the Austrian government over certain industries, including some formerly held by German Nazis, the ownership of which is now in dispute. The Russian occupation laid claim to these industries, and in a move to forestall their seizure by the Russians, the Austrian government decided to nationalize them. We shall not here discuss the significance of this nationalization – part of a general economic trend in Europe – except to say that the change was largely a formal legal one, since the industries in dispute had largely been held by the government already.
What is interesting is this: the Austrian Stalinists supported the motion to nationalize the industries in question. After this decision by the Austrian government, the Russian occupying authority objected to Austrian decision to nationalize on the grounds that it would deprive the Russians of what was “rightfully” theirs. When the Austrian government went along with its legal maneuver of nationalizing the disputed industries, it did so with the support of the Austrian Stalinists.
Apparently, then, for the first time a puppet Stalinist party has defied its master. But even here it would not do to jump to hasty conclusions. We simply do not have the necessary information: was there previous consultation between the Russians arid the Austrian Stalinists? was the stand of the Austrian Stalinists agreed upon in such consultation? is there indication of open disagreement?
We ask these questions because it is possible that, again for reasons of political convenience the Russians may have allowed their Austrian puppets to register formal dissent. But whatever the specific facts in the Austrian situation, this much is certain:
Such terms as “nationalist” or “internationalist” when applied to the Stalinist parties are largely meaningless. They are primarily agents of the Stalinist ruling class of Russia; as such they can pose, whichever way is convenient to them, as nationalists or internationalists. In addition, in a number of countries they have developed interests and ambitions of their own, and these interests and ambitions may at one point or another come into conflict with those of other Stalinist parties or even with Mother Russia herself. But that stage, if it is ever reached at all, is not yet here. In the meantime, the Stalinist parties continue their role above all and before anything else as agents of the Russian ruling class.
 



Human Nature: The Marxian View
by Vernon Venable
Alfred A. Knopf, New York 1945, $3.00
This book, written as a doctoral thesis, has as its purpose the
presentation of what Marx and Engels said about the problem of human
nature. It is a difficult task, for nowhere did Marx or Engels,
perhaps precisely because of their views, write any rounded
exposition on human nature. Mr. Venable has therefore patiently
collected paragraphs here and phrases there, read the texts with
evident care and attempted to present Marx’s beliefs on human nature.
The reorganization of familiar material in a somewhat
unconventional pattern presents certain difficulties and challenges.
One maybe familiar enough, for instance, with the classical Marxist
description of the rise of industrial capitalism viewed as
socio-economic history; but approach the same matter while attempting
to derive Marx’s conception of human nature and you realize how
very much the study of history depends on the purpose for and
viewpoint from which it is conducted. I mention this shift in
perspective because it seems a little difficult and at present not
especially necessary to reach any binding conclusion about the value
of this book: there is not enough relevant material with which to
compare it. And, in addition, Venable has written in typical
doctorate style, his work being full of heavy academic jargon which
is foreign to the spirit of the very subject he discusses, and full,
too, of the timorous hesitancy which is characteristic of the
American professor. Nonetheless, since it is virtually a pioneer
work, at least in English, the book requires the attention of all Marxists.
It is clearly easier to say what Marx did not believe human nature
to be, than what he did believe. Venable’s first section is
therefore the familiar retelling of the Marxian case against any a
priori theory of human nature, any static conception of immutable
essences applicable to all times and conditions regardless of social
level or economic organization. That human nature is flexible,
amenable to change under varying social conditions and – as far as
we can tell today – not predetermined or pre-limited by innate
categories which make a classless society impossible by definition;
all this is, or has been until very recently, quite commonly
accepted. The approach of modern anthropology and sociology has
buttressed this relativist emphasis. (Though it should be noted that
in the current trend away from scientific method and rational inquiry
to various forms of intuitionalism the withdrawal of the
intellectuals characterized as the “failure of nerve” there has
been a recrudescence of static and reactionary instinct theories of
human nature). But between Marxism and even the most
historically-minded of the pragmatists there remains an important
difference of approach even on this matter: Granted that human nature
is a flux and is variable, how is one to explain the forms and
directions of its change? Contemporary liberal American sociology and
anthropology flounder badly on this question; they lose themselves in
an unrelieved relativism in which the investigator merely points out
that differences in human behaviour exist in various societies, but
make no attempt to move beyond that necessary descriptive prelude.
This kind of barren relativism of the liberal school (e.g. Ruth
Benedict’s Patterns of Culture) can become as absolutistic
as the most insistently absolutist approach to human nature.
For the Marxist – and in pointing this out Venable does an
excellent job – man is by definition a social animal; he differs
from other animals in that he doesn’t merely use nature, but
masters it and to an extent controls it. Such activity is necessarily
social, even in the most primitive societies. And as Engels says in a
remarkable sentence: Not only does labour change man, not only is it
a necessary condition of human existence, but labour created man
himself. It is literally impossible to think of a human being outside
of some labor relationship, apart from some social context. But it is
not labor in the abstract with which we are concerned; it is rather
with various social relationships, productive patterns which
determine the forms and kinds of divisions of labor which impress
upon each generation or group of generations its distinctive character.
The method of historical materialism, then, insists that what man
is at any given time – how he lives, loves, dreams, thinks,
“projects,” and idealizes – is determined basically by the kind
of society in which he lives. But this is not where the problem ends;
it is where the problem begins.
 
Human Nature and the Historical Process
Venable, in the second half of his book, attempts to discover what
in the actual historical process determines the course of human
activity and results in the complex known as “human nature.” He
does not content himself with a mere general statement about the
crucial influence of environment factors, but proceeds to break down
these factors into four categories: 1) the general nature of labour
itself, which involves the application of the biological organism to
external surroundings; 2) the social relationships within which that
biological organism functions, that is the totality of class
relationships which, rising upon certain productive levels, result at
any given time in the society that encompasses and delimits
individuals; 3) the natural objects of labor such as raw materials,
“unworked nature”, etc.; and 4) the instruments of labor utilized
by factor 1) upon factor 3) within the framework of factor 2). Now
this scheme does not create hard and fast categories, or at least
shouldn’t; it is intended as a method of isolating various aspects
of the historical process in order to study them and subsequently
better to form an integrated conception.
There is no predetermined rule which informs us which of these
always unequally weighted factors (separable, be it noted, only for
purposes of inquiry: in actuality, they deal with a total process) is
most important at any given time. An undue emphasis, let us say, on
the instruments of labor may lead to a technological heresy in
historical approach; correspondingly with others. It is here that the
skill, intelligence and insight of the investigator enters; and it is
here that the need for specific research and historical material
cannot be replaced by mere reliance upon method itself.
The problem of human nature, then, is inseparable from – is, in
measure, the same as – the problem of the social relations which
prevail within a society. But, it may be asked, is there not a
general biological foundation, a continuity in type which exists
regardless of societal forms and which is independent of them? Are
there not universal urges and instincts which remain unchanged? The
question is not a meaningful one, in our opinion. For it is
impossible to conceive of a human being outside of conscious society;
and what we believe to be generic traits of humanity are merely the
summary observation of partially continuous characteristics
which – since societies are themselves in a continuum and not unrelated
replacements – cannot be isolated from social relationships. The
conception of a generic biological being with formed characteristics
outside of society may be useful as an analytical myth, in the sense
that Rousseau’s social contract theory was once so useful, but it
has no other basis: one cannot conceive of man without thinking of
him as part of some form of society, for it is that which gives him
his unique status as man. It is from this point of view that Marxists
must categorically reject as historical methods all approaches which
construct supra-historical categories, be they idealist imperatives
or libidinal drives. “The human essence”, wrote Marx, “is no
abstraction inherent in each separate individual; in its reality it
is the ensemble of all social relations.”
 
Scientific Basis of Marxist Idealism
One other interesting problem is raised by Venable which has a
special applicability to the present day. Did Marx and Engels, E0r
all their insistence on realistic description, have a utopian
conception of human nature? Didn’t Engels write, in his Condition
of the Working Class in England of the Londoners who “have been
forced to sacrifice the best qualities of their human nature”, of
“a hundred powers which slumbered within them”? Wasn’t the
conception of “alienation” which is so central to his system an
idealist wish-thought? If one views the matter from a mechanical
standpoint, one is forced to say that Marx and Engels did have an
idealist approach after all (Max Eastman once discovered this all by
himself!) for then one must deny the existence of potential qualities
which occasionally spring up in human behaviour. These qualities
arise not from some hidden source of good buried deep in the human
soul, but from the fact that even under capitalism certain forms of
activity permit cooperation and decency, as for instance class
solidarity among workers. Marxism is not merely descriptive; it is
frankly and unashamedly directive and normative in its approach. It
deals not only with what is, but with what can and should be – and
only pedants can therefore deny its claim to scientific stature.
But its normative aspects deal with possibilities that are real in
the context in which they are raised, which is why Marx rejected the
Utopian Socialists. It is meaningless to make the directive
statement, “Let us prevent the sun from shining,” because thus
far it is impossible for man to control the sun; but it is
correspondingly meaningful to say “Let us abolish unemployment by
constructing a socialist society.” Marxism is thereby scientific in
that it deals with real possibilities, and directional and partisan
in that it favors certain of those possibilities. Marxism is not
merely a political-economic method; it is a call to arms, a summation
of the greatest ideals of human history within the framework of a
relevant program rather than an irrelevant utopia; it is material
science and directive morality united.
In the above paragraphs, I have tried to suggest some of the
provocative problems raised by this book. The reader should be
warned, however, of its deficiencies as well: it is scholastic and
pedantic in its approach; it deals not with the tradition or method
of Marxism but only with the actual writings of Marx and Engels
themselves and therefore does not discuss the challenges to Marxism
offered by other theories; and above all, its scholasticism prevents
it from appreciating the role of revolution as the major and
triumphant historical factor which transforms human nature in the
most extraordinary way. The Great French, the American, and the
Russian Revolutions have been the climactic points of modern history;
and it is to them, rather than to anything else, that one must turn
in order to understand modern man.
Within these limits, however, Venable has written a useful work.
It should stimulate more original and bolder thinkers to a creative
and integrated work on Marxism and human nature. In the meantime, it
deserves the attention of every serious Marxist student.
 



For several weeks now public attention has been focused on the little town of Athens, Tennessee (population, 6,700) which is the seat of McMinn County. There, for the first time since the end of the war, veterans worked together as a political group, organizing the GI Non-Partisan League to drive out the local wing of the corrupt Democratic Party machine headed by Boss Crump. In their ranks were former Democrats and Republicans – McMinn County is a border area which oscillates between the two major parties – who campaigned on the issue of “clean government.”
They won. That is, they got a majority of the votes. The local machine, which had always worked on the maxim that it was more important to count votes than to get them, then proceeded to steal the ballot-boxes and organize its “own count” in the county courthouse. Since the GI Non-Partisan League knew what that meant, it called upon its friends to take up arms. They forced their way into the courthouse, after a big display of gunfire, and the Crump machine acknowledged that the GIs had won.
This incident is of considerable importance on the American political scene. Whether or not it is part of a trend or merely an isolated incident, several questions of interest are raised:
 
1) Were These Ex-GIs Merely Organizing to Get Political Jobs?
It seems most unlikely that their only or even major motive was a raid on the county treasury. No doubt that motive was present to some extent, as it always is, but surely if the leaders of the veterans were interested only in featherbedding themselves, they could have made deals with one or another of the political machines. Such conservative observers as Harold Hinton, the N.Y. Times correspondent who rushed to Tennessee, and Perry Jennings, Nashville editor, report that the issue of clean and honest local government was taken quite seriously by these former soldiers who, in their years of army misery, had spent many hours brooding about political conditions back home.
As soon as they were elected, the veterans announced they would abolish the former “fee system” of paying county officials – by which Crump’s men made as much as $25,000 a year! – and would impose a ceiling of $5,000 for county salaries. It is clear that there is a genuine element of democratic idealism in the action of these veterans.
 
2) What Is the Program and Perspective of the GI Non-Partisan League?
There is little information on this point; probably because there is little to be had. The N.Y. Times correspondent, Harold Hinton, writes that many of the veterans to whom he talked seemed to be nursing a vague sense of grievance accumulated over their years in the army. Yet, beyond a few words about kicking out the crooks, there was little that they could tell him about their plans.
What, to raise one crucial question, is their attitude toward Negroes? True, McMinn County has fewer Negroes than most Southern areas, but the question is still vital as an index of the political development of these veterans.
And, secondly, what is their attitude toward labor? Again, McMinn County is, because of its agricultural nature, devoid of trade unions but the question is also important as an index.
We do not mean to suggest that if these veterans don’t have exactly the opinions on these questions we should like them to have, that they should be condemned out of hand. But it is necessary to point out that there are only three courses open to them: they can fritter away their energies in local politics in which case they will sooner or later develop into a routine political machine different from the Crump machine in perhaps being less corrupt; they can look toward the labor movement, the CIO’s Operation Dixie drive, as a base and ally; they can become part of a veterans movement that is generally pro-labor and democratic in its orientation; or they can be deflected into some kind of reactionary nationalistic veterans outfit such as the native fascists are trying to organize.
 
3) What Is the Future of Veterans in American Politics?
The Athens incident raises the general question of the future political activity of America’s veterans. Before the war’s end, there was much talk about how veterans would come back to run the country. The veterans were then seen as a threat to the labor movement which they had been taught to hate in the army. Thus far these dire prophecies have not been realized. There has been more pro-union activity reported among veterans than anti-union activity. In many strikes veterans have marched in the front ranks of picket lines and have fought with heroism against police attempts to smash those lines.
But the full story has not yet been told. The danger of veterans being deflected into reactionary outfits remains. Until now that danger has been minimized because the temporary post-war boom has made it possible for a good many of them to get jobs (even if poor jobs). The test will come when conditions get a little worse, when a social crisis develops in the country’s economy and the veterans find themselves on the streets, jobless and dismayed.
It is then that narrow appeals will be made to them by the G.L.K. Smiths and the other fascist rabble. It is then that attempts will be made to organize veterans to “take over the country.” One thing is certain: any exclusively veterans movement, pretending to a political and social independence which it cannot really obtain, must sooner or later become reactionary. Particularly sensitive as some are to extreme patriotic appeals, and disoriented as they will be on finding themselves helpless in the post-war world, veterans will be prey to the appeals of reaction – unless the labor movement is in there pitching, and pitching fast and hard.
An opportunity has already been muffed. The CIO’s Operation Dixie and its Political Action Committee have had nothing to say to the GI Non-Partisan League of Tennessee. We think that the CIO has here shown a lack of imagination; we think it should have made a bold appeal to work together with these veterans, even if only for limited objectives and on a limited basis.
 



A new migration of hunted Jews, reminiscent of the exodus from Egypt many centuries ago, is taking place in Europe today. Thousands of Jews are fleeing westward – fleeing from the anti-Semitic terror which has swept Poland and fleeing too from the reign of Stalinism for which they seem to feel little affection.
It is one of the dramatic and tragic treks of history – the starved, poverty-stricken remnant of a destroyed people which has had its hopes of finding peace dashed to the ground by still another wave of anti-Semitism. And so they are leaving Poland, the Stalinist-dominated government of which seems unable to stamp out anti-Semitism. Of the estimated 160,000 Jews in Poland (all that remains of the 3,000,000 of pre-war days!) only about 50,000 are expected to remain there. The rest are fleeing for their lives; they see no hope in Stalinist-dominated Poland, nor in that section of Poland which Stalin has annexed directly.
The homeless, still-persecuted Jews (Hitler is gone; his ideas and precepts live!) form the core of the general problem of Displaced Persons in Europe. There are over 1,000,000 of them: 850,000 in Germany, 100,000 in Austria and 50,000 in Italy, according to UNRRA figures – which means that there are probably many more. These pathetic people are the flotsam and jetsam of a decayed, brutalized continent; they are citizens of countries which hardly exist any more or which have fallen under the domination of one or another imperialist victor; they are political refugees who can find no home in the lands of their birth; they are former inmates of the concentration camps who have travelled through so many political prisons that they have become homeless and without nationality.
And these weary souls, their hearts ripe with desperation, have nowhere to go; they depend for their daily piece of bread upon foreign charity. In Germany today there are 94,000 Jews of whom 74,000 are DPs and the rest “natives.” None of them want to remain there; they all wish to find a new home and most of them yearn for Palestine. In Italy there are thousands of Poles who refuse to return to Stalin-dominated Poland. There are Hungarians, Czechs, Germans, Austrians, Italians – stranded in miserable DP camps and always on the verge of starvation.
But the most desperate of all are the Jews. Their Underground Railway, a remarkably skillful and heroic organization, has succeeded in bringing many from the east to ports of embarkation in Italy from where they hoped to go to Palestine. Now they see that their brothers are being shunted from Haifa to the barren isle of Cyprus.
Is it any wonder that reports from Europe tell of moods of desperation in the DP camps, of waves of suicide? For here, in crystal form is still another result of the imperialist war: the most persecuted and murdered people of Europe, the former slave laborers, the political prisoners from the concentration camps and the Jews are today stranded on the Continent without hope or salvation. Here it is – the bright wonderful future which Churchill and Roosevelt promised, the fruit of imperialist war and capitalist society, the toll exacted by a society decadent to the point of barbarism.
Will the last pathetic remnant of European Jewry expire in the DP camps? Are the doors of the world to be closed to them in their last agony? No one who still, functions on the level of humanity, no one who still responds as a human being rather than a robot can fail to urge, with the Workers Party, that the doors of the United States, Palestine and whichever other country they wish to go to, be opened to the Jews of Europe.
 



Palestine is in the news these days, for the bitter three-sided conflict between the Jews, Arabs and Britain has broken out into a boil of violence and terror. In past issues, Labor Action has printed articles about the general political situation in Palestine, and it will continue to do so; in this article I wish to discuss only one aspect of that situation: the use of terror by the extreme nationalist wing of the Jewish community.
It is necessary to approach this matter with a certain balance, and above all with a perspective which flows from a firm socialist opposition to all imperialism. At the present moment, the world is filled with cries of anguish, righteous indignation and holy wrath because of the terrorist attack which the extreme nationalist group, Irgun Zvei Leumi, launched against the British headquarters – an attack which resulted in the death of over 50 people and the wounding of some 70 more.
How the air is rent with righteous and moral indignation! Prime Minister Attlee is “appalled” at this “terrible” act; President Truman, also noted for his social sensitivity, adds his two Missouri pennies with a statement “viewing with alarm.” ...
Opposed though we are to the use of individual terrorism, we socialists nonetheless do not accept as genuine the moral indignation of the heads of imperialist states. For consider: these are the men who acquiesced to the killing of millions of individuals in the imperialist war; these are the men who daily acquiesce to the continuation of imperialist domination over the entire world. Only yesterday, Attlee’s government was shooting down in cold blood thousands of people in Indonesia whose sole crime was their desire for liberation from Dutch rule. Where was Attlee’s moral indignation?
And where was Truman’s?
Attlee is, furthermore, head of a government which has instituted a black reign of terror in Palestine, a government which has deprived that country of the right of habeas corpus. Truman is head of a nation in which recently a Negro in South Carolina had his eyes gouged out by some racially-blinded barbarian.
 

Double Standard Imperialist Morality
These imperialist governments have an utterly shameless degree of hypocrisy. When a few imperialist satraps are knocked off by desperate anti-imperialist terrorists, they shed crocodile tears in every capital on the globe; when victims of imperialism are killed every day, not a peep of protest is heard. For they are the ones who do it!
If, then, the sight of the imperialists weeping over the Palestine terror is sickening, what then of the young Jewish terrorists themselves?
Terror is a phenomenon as old as national and imperialist oppression. It flourishes in situations of desperation. When an oppressed people sees no way out, no road open to liberation, then it turns, in a last desperate frenzy, to individual terror as a means of opposition. Or, more accurately, tiny sections of that oppressed people turn to terror; for by its very nature terror cannot be utilized by masses or it would quickly develop into mass revolt. Terror is the work of tiny minorities, usually desperate youth or students or intellectuals who feel that the masses are in a state of torpor or that mass resistance is impossible.
Terror cannot be and never has been a substitute for mass struggle. At best it creates a momentary diversion, a momentary twinge of fear in the rulers; but the oppressors whom it strikes down are always replaced by others. If the terrorists kill one British police commissioner, there will be another to take his place.
Terror leads up a blind alley. Sooner or later the terrorists are destroyed, for they lack the protection which a mass movement might afford them. The masses, though perhaps temporarily stirred by the heroism of the terrorists, soon lapse into apathy; for they have not been involved, they have not been brought into action.
 

The Heroism of the Jewish Terrorists
No one can help feeling a certain sense of admiration for these Jewish terrorists in Palestine. They are men of great heroism and daring; they risk their necks without flinching. The behavior in court during the recent trial of some who were detected by the British police was a model of revolutionary defiance and intransigence. And yet their policy is wrong, their politics reactionary, their heroism futile.
These terrorists of Irgun Zvei Leumi – a group much smaller than and not to be confused with the main body of Jewish resistance, the Hagana – have succumbed to the fatal error of making their struggle into an exclusively nationalist one. They are admittedly anti-Arab, ignoring the fact that the Arab masses suffer as much under British imperialist rule as do the Jewish masses, and that unity between the two would be the one sure way to drive the British out of Palestine. The terrorists are, many of them, even against organizations of Jewish workers into trade unions, for they oppose prosecution of the class struggle if it means conflict between Jewish workers and Jewish capitalists.
The result of this policy is obvious: their fanatical nationalism drives the Arab masses directly into the hands of both the reactionary Arab League and the British rulers. The Jewish terrorists, by their extreme nationalism, their refusal to cooperate with the Arab masses and their rejection of trade union unity between Jewish and Arab workers, sharpen the fatal split between Arab and Jewish masses in Palestine. And so long as that split exists, British rule in Palestine is secure.
Think, however, what a powerful anti-imperialist blow could be struck by the heroism, daring and devotion of the Jewish and Arab masses in a joint anti-imperialist bloc to drive out the foreign oppressor and substitute a democratic independent Palestine in which the rights of both majority and minority were respected. In that case, British rule would not be secure; it would be trembling for its future.
 



Just as in modern society there is an increasing tendency towards a productive specialization in which each man merely does one operation, apparently meaningless and without satisfaction in itself; so too in the intellectual world of capitalist society there has taken place the same kind of destructive specialization, the compartmentalization of human knowledge into pigeon holes.
Leon Trotsky was one of the few thinkers of our time who escaped this deadening division. His approach to life and thought was total: the approach of a committed revolutionist who summed up in his action, his passion and his thought a central outlook which allowed him to view contemporary society as a whole. Trotsky, for all his vast and often unsuspected knowledge, was not the most erudite man of his time; there were many fields in which other people knew more than he. But no thinker of this century, since the death of Lenin, was able to use a theoretical method – Marxism – in such a way that it served as a rigorous guide, a controlling instrument and yet did not become a rigid dogma. Trotsky’s outlook was from one perspective, the most fruitful of all historical perspectives: Marxism; and yet the whole world, all of its concerns and ideas, was within his purview.
 
Scope of His Work
For a man so thoroughly committed to the life of revolutionary action and all its attendant dangers, Trotsky’s writings reveal an extraordinary breadth of interest, scope of knowledge, and flexibility of approach. In his young manhood, he tells us in his fascinating autobiography, he worked – almost simultaneously – on his first projection of his greatest contribution to Marxism: the theory of permanent revolution, as outlined in his little known book. Our Revolution; on his as yet untranslated 1905, a history of that revolution in Russia; on a collection of literary essays on such figures as Ibsen and Shaw (which someone would do well to dig up, translate and publish); and, while in Siberia, on a study of Freemasonry, which was unfortunately lost. All this apart from the vast store of polemical and political articles which one expects from a practising revolutionist!
Trotsky’s primary interest was, of course, Marxism: the theory of socialist revolution. Trotsky’s work is consistently polemical, as is that of most Marxists, for Marxism is a theory of action above all else.
Yet Trotsky was able to produce a work which is at the very pinnacle of its type: his gigantic History of the Russian Revolution This book – the only Marxist rival to which in the field of history is Marx’s own 18th Brumaire – is not only one of the very greatest works of history ever written; it is a living challenge demonstrating the superiority of the Marxist method when used by skillful hands.
Much of Trotsky’s writing remains, unfortunately, untranslated. His studies of military problems written during the civil war period, in fact, most of his writings from the period of the Russian Revolution until his exile from Russia, are not available in English. But those that are available, and those we know of by hearsay, again attest to the range and power of Trotsky’s mind. Imagine, if you will, a revolutionary leader at the helm of a young workers’ state suffering from intervention, breakdown and starvation, who yet finds time – in between battles and political work – to write voluminously on military problems; to write a masterpiece, Literature and Revolution, discussing problems of literations which were passionately and (in such contrast to Stalin’s later intellectual tyranny) so freely discussed in Russia of the early twenties; to write an almost forgotten little book called Problems of Life in which he raised problems of revolutionary morality: religion, swearing, sex, home and family life.
Such a man was Trotsky – whose mind knew few limits, whose intellectual curiosity was insatiable and whose pen the sharpest of our time.
From the period of his struggle against Stalinism, Trotsky produced a steady stream of books and writings defending Marxism against its traducers: his New Course, a discussion of bureaucratism; his <Permanent Revolution, the classic statement of that theory; his Third International After Lenin, the basic document of Trotskyism in which he reiterated the internationalist character of socialism; his innumerable books and pamphlets on the internal Russian situation; and then the works on political problems faced by the working class throughout the world.
From the earlier Lessons of October, in which he discussed the reasons for the failure of the German and Hungarian revolutions in the early twenties, he turned his attention to every country in which the working class began to move.

Germany: those powerful, biting brochures urging upon the working class parties of Germany a united front before it was too late.
 
France: dissections of the Stalinist policy of popular frontism in his Whither France?
 
Spain: discussion in several pamphlets of the problems of socialist policy in a backward country.
 
China: detailed analysis of the Stalinist fiascos in the Far East in his Problems of the Chinese Revolution.

And then a return to the problems of Russia in his Revolution Betrayed. All the while, innumerable articles, documents and studies. Not even the limitations of exile, the necessity of starting from scratch in the rebuilding of the revolutionary movement against odds greater than ever before, could narrow Trotsky’s interests. Against those “new moralists” who were polemizing against Marxism, Trotsky retained his interest in literature to the end. writing in recent years studies of such authors as Celine, Malaquais and Silone. It has been reported that, though he did not write on the subject, he followed with keen interest the most recent developments in the field of psychology, such as Freudianism.
 
Method of Marxism
Just to list his works – and I have done little more than that here – is cause for awe and wonder. How could one man have done all this? I think the answer is that in few men of our time has there been such a unified conception of life: Trotsky was a revolutionist, a man who lived by his ideas, a man who would not, could not make one iota of peace with capitalist society. His passion and his intellect were fused into one: the triumphant Marxist who would not let terror or exile or hardship stand in the way of what he believed to be true. Therein too, I think, is the secret of his style: the majesty and power of his History; the biting sarcasm of his polemic against the theory of “social-fascism” in his Germany, What Next; the tender, moving quality of his tribute to his murdered son; the noble peroration with which he ended his Literature and Revolution.
Certain Philistines – only yesterday in awe of Hitler’s power – are today engaged in a revision of estimates; they see Stalin, who retained power, as the great man and Trotsky, murdered in lonely exile, as the failure. Such a revision says nothing about Trotsky or Stalin, though it says a great deal about the values of those who make it. It suffices however only to compare two monuments: Stalin’s monument of betrayed revolutions, bureaucratic tyranny, fawning toadying before power, Moscow Trials, pacts with Hitler; and Trotsky’s monument of revolutionary incorruptibility, great works of history, criticism and revolutionary strategy, implacable and serene indifference to hardship or defeat because of confidence in ideas and ideals.
Two monuments; two men; two movements; two choices.
 



The Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) has become so much a part of the consciousness of the people of this country that it comes almost as a shock to recall that the CIO is only ten years old – practically an infant as labor organizations go. And yet in those ten brief but exciting years, this mighty organization of industrial workers has become a factor of first importance in the United States; it has brought about tremendous changes in the conditions and attitudes of millions of workers; it has given American labor a consciousness of its strength unequalled since the 1830’s when the first important, if, halting, attempts were made in the young nation to organize a few workers into unions.
The CIO has just published a little booklet called The Truth About the CIO which details its tumultuous history for these past ten years. This booklet stimulates memories for us which our readers, no doubt, will find similar to their own.
 
Craft Unionism Proved Outdated
In 1935 the trade union movement in America, as contrasted with its present strength of about 15,000,000, had less than 5,000,000 members. Company unionism, today almost entirely wiped out, was rife in the big industries. The use of armed strike-breakers, company thugs, state militia to break strikes was a usual occurrence. The AFL, then the only nationwide federation, was hopelessly out-of-date; it could not touch the mass industries because its horse-and-buggy craft unionism would mean twenty ineffectual and competing craft unions where one industry-wide union was needed.
So great was the need for militant labor activity, so pressing the need for union strength, that by 1935 a conflict broke out in the AFL. A number of unions, such as the United Mine Workers, found that if they themselves were to continue to exist and expand, it was necessary that allied industries, such as steel, be strongly organized. But the AFL, by its inept and conservative craft methods, had made a dismal failure in steel; membership in the almost moribund AFL steel union had fallen from 100,000 to 10,000.
And then the CIO was formed by eight AFL unions, under the leadership of John L. Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers. A bitter struggle broke out inside the AFL: industrial versus craft unionism, twentieth century versus nineteenth century methods. The conflict took a personal and dramatic form when John L. and Joe Hutcheson, reactionary head of the carpenters’ union, came to blows at the historical 1935 AFL convention; but beneath that flareup, and much more fundamental than it, was the fact that an issue of grave importance was being decided: should the mass industries of America be unionized?
Think today how much has been done, what great progress has been made! Sometimes we socialists, in our criticisms of the CIO leadership – always made, of course, from the point of view of strengthening and improving the unions – tend to overlook the magnitude of these accomplishments and to forget how much blood was sacrificed and how much sweat was spent in organizing the CIO.
For big business didn’t take it lying down. Recognizing what a mortal enemy industrial unionism was to it, the gigantic U.S. Steel Corporation, for instance, knew that if its workers were organized it wouldn’t be able to repeat the scandal of doubling its net profits in 1924–29 without giving a single wage increase during those years! The giant corporations fought – but they couldn’t stop the advance of America’s workers.
The first great test came early in 1936 when the Akron rubber workers went on a six-week strike, during which they introduced the new and revolutionary technique of “sit-down.” They occupied the factories and would not be budged; they defied the property rights of the rubber barons, even though they might have given you a queer stare if you’d put it to them in just that phrase. And they won!
Then came the deluge: an incredible growth of mass unions. The CIO steel union, despite the million dollar propaganda campaign which the American Iron and Steel Institute initiated against unions, broke through the stronghold of American capitalism and organized the steel workers. They took over or wrecked company unions; they persisted despite the bosses’ strong-arm tactics and labor spies.
And then the auto workers! Here were America’s most militant, aggressive workers moving into action as never before. The UAW, later to become the largest union in the world, moved at break-neck speed, struck General Motors in a sit-down strike and in 1937 forced GM to sign on the dotted line.
 
What the CIO Has Achieved
Today the CIO, with its six million members, is at the apex of its strength. Let us take a glance at what industrial organization has meant to America’s workers:

It has resulted in a feeling of confidence and strength which is the most hopeful sign for those who look to labor as the force which can be stimulated to take bold action and, by creating its own government, solve the problems which the workers of this country face. Where formerly company spies and police reigned in undisputed terror, as in Ford, today union stewards speak for their brother workers and struggle in. their behalf. True, boss domination continues, and with it insecurity for the Workers; that will always be the case so long as capitalist society exists.
 
In many CIO unions there has developed a degree of democracy which has few equals. Of course, the CIO has its share of pie-cards and bureaucrats, but what union today can equal the democracy of the United Automobile Workers? Even in those unions in which the Stalinists have wormed into control, such as the Electrical Workers (UE), the desire for democracy among the ranks is so keen that the Stalinist leaders are often forced to allow a certain amount of freedom to oppositions. Not that the CIO is perfect on this question of inter-union democracy; not by a long shot. But you need only compare the internal functioning of, say, an AFL building trades local with that of a UAW local and you see the great progress that has been made.
 
The CIO has, by and large, kept racial and religious prejudices out of its ranks; it has rejected the Jim Crow policy which so disgraces some AFL unions. For the CIO found that when it went out to organize the mass industries, in which many Negroes worked, a policy of refusing to treat the Negro workers as brothers simply meant suicide. Who doesn’t remember the famous Ford strike when the company tried to use Negro workers as strike-breakers by telling them that the white workers hated them, and when the white workers appealed successfully to their Negro brothers to join ranks and thereby won the strike? Today there are hundreds of thousands of Negro workers in the CIO; they have won a new sense of dignity in their acceptance as equals in the army of labor – and thereby the white workers by their side have also won a new sense of tolerance and brotherhood.
 
The CIO has brought to its members many material advantages. Thus the average hourly wages of auto workers went up from 74 cents in 1935 to $1.40 in 1946; those of steel workers from 65 cents in 1935 to $1.30 in 1946. Hours have been shortened, conditions improved, speed-ups resisted. Of course, many of these increases in wages have been eaten up by the rising cost of living; but ask yourself: would wages have gone up to the same degree to meet the rising cost of living if there hadn’t been union organization?
 
The CIO has shown, through its Political Action Committees, the political strength of labor, even if only potentially.

We mention this point last because it brings up the major weakness of the CIO at the moment: its lack of political independence. Though it has organized an independent political arm, the PAC, its politics are not yet independent. The CIO still flits around, fiddling with so-called “liberal” capitalist politicians. Its leaders still resist the idea of an independent Labor Party. And that is why so often what the workers win on the picket line, they lose in Washington.
The CIO has a great past – a history made possible by the sacrifices, struggles and devotion of thousands of its active militants, the stewards, the men who do the small union tasks, who keep things going; who, when the time comes, walk the picket lines be it cold or hot; who run into debt to keep the struggle going; who fight off the cops or the scabs when the picket lines are attacked.
It is they, the many unnamed heroes of the CIO’s struggles, who have built their unions to present-day strength. They have reason to be proud. And it is to them that we look for the future: to maintain the ’36 tradition of militant union struggle as opposed to playing ball with the bosses; to maintain the tradition of union democracy; to push through to success Operation Dixie; to drive the Stalinist leeches from control of the few unions on which they have festered; and, above all, to move decisively toward building a political arm as strong in labor’s behalf as is its economic arm: the political arm of an independent Labor Party.
 



THE human imagination has obvious limitations. It is a platitude that the sight of a child with a cut finger moves us more than a report that millions of people are hungry in some distant nation. Our sensitivities are calloused by the age in which we live: suffering, death, horror and cruelty have become such commonplace things, that we take them for granted as if familiar parts of a landscape. And we deliberately harden ourselves to our world; it is almost necessary to do so if we are to survive the mad society in which we live.
As I would read through an issue of Labor Action after it had been put “to bed” at the printshop, I would wonder to myself: here is an article written about hunger in India, which says that 20,000,000 people face starvation in that country. Does it, can it really convey the emotional impact which it should?
Can these abstract, general words really describe what has happened to this world?
* * *








Take a glance at the drawing accompanying this article. It is done by a boy of 13 who was in one of Hitler’s concentration camps and who survived death by a miracle. His parents were shot. He himself was led one day with 150 children to be shot. The bullets hit him on the left arm. He fell down, and with the blood of his arm he colored his face and remained the only survivor among the 149 dead children. He then escaped in the darkness.
The drawing which this child made represents the execution.
Perhaps in this remarkable drawing we can understand the fate of society under capitalism; perhaps if we try to imagine what horror this child went through as we look at this drawing we learn something about capitalist society which no words can suggest.
I myself was moved by a small detail even more than by the little figures falling under the fire of the SS guards. Notice the row of prisoners’ huts drawn on the side with numbers on each of them. That this child should have been so impregnated with the regimented orderliness of a totalitarian society – the meaning of his meticulous numbering of the huts – seemed to me the final, ultimate condemnation of the world which already had brought so much suffering to him. For capitalism means not only starvation and war and insecurity; it is the debasement of a man to the point where he is a mere robot-slave.
And then the robot-slave numbers the huts of his concentration camp ...
* * *
Europe is a continent in ruins. The story of its desolation as a result of the war has been told often enough. What is important is this:
Whole generations are growing up who know nothing but death and destruction. (We are reminded of the child in London who, when lights were turned on after the war, thought of them as unusual and yearned for the blackout which to him represented normality.) There is no longer a “normal” way of life under capitalism in Europe. Europe witnesses whole shifts of population; mass starvation; destruction of peoples, and disorganization of personalities.
It is a continent of nightmares. And what characterizes it most strongly is the constant use of terror as a means of social action.
Terror has become the normal way of running a society. Terror means not only physical violence and oppression. Of that we can see the most blatant examples in Eastern Europe where the Stalinist imperialism shifts people as if they were mere puppets. Just last week the Russian ruling militarists decided in Austria to exile all those of German origin: 54,000 helpless people were forced to make their way back to Germany, from one land of starvation to another. Under present conditions in Europe such a movement means endless misery and deprivation for these people.
The rulers of Europe shift peoples as if they were sand on a beach which one molds with one’s toes. Trieste: what shall happen to it? Does anyone think of consulting the people who live there? Does anyone think of holding a free plebiscite? Of course not. The future of Trieste is decided in secret conference among the big powers in Paris. This too is a form of terror.
In the modern highly organized, bureaucratically run capitalist state, the worker, the member of the lower middle class, feels himself a helpless individual whose fate is decided by powers stronger than himself. Does he dare to oppose the powers that rule? Does he dare to think for himself? Does he dare to dissent from the chorus of yeas? Then he has the entire state apparatus against him.
The capitalist decline which has struck Europe and Asia so dramatically, and which is making itself felt in this country, too, results in a destruction of all the traditional relationships and values which to some little extent once made life bearable. During the war, whole countries were uprooted and whole peoples shifted. Families were broken up; human beings degraded in concentration and work camps. Nor was it Hitler only who did these things. As the most terrible manifestation of capitalist society, Hitlerism was the most barbaric government in Western Europe; but let it be remembered that on the other side stood the British Empire and the French Empire which were soon to suppress colonial revolts in the Far East and the totalitarian Stalinist regime which had exiled millions to forced labor camps and which was as tight a dictatorship as any country in the world.
The decline of capitalist society in Europe manifested itself in every country and in every way. Perhaps the most dramatic manifestation was, socially speaking, its effect on children. I recall reading a few months ago the brief letter a little girl wrote from a Nazi concentration camp: “Now I must say goodbye. Tomorrow mother goes into the gas chamber, and I will be thrown into the well.” That was all she wrote, so matter of fact in its story, so devoid of any emotion for her death had become a normal, everyday event.
* * *
Capitalism in decline, capitalism hanging on simply because there is no force powerful enough to push it in its grave, exacts this toll. Starvation is the most dramatic manifestation of it, but by no means the only one. Yet, when you try to imagine people in Austria living week in and week out on a diet of 800 calories – and when you try to imagine the gradual decline of their bodies, their constant state of weakness from constant hunger, the destruction of morale and energy which must result from all this – you can understand how starvation is at the bottom of the whole business. People who are starving cannot live independently, with courage and strength for very long. Their bodies force them to do things against which their minds rebel.
Together with starvation comes the rest: the degradation of individuals and groups; the callous disregard by the ruling powers for any desires of people themselves; the disruption of normal family life; the indoctrination of children into the ways of destruction and war.
Some individuals, including former socialists, have seen in this situation reasons for the belief that all that is possible in Europe today is for scattered individuals to live nobly, to try to salvage for themselves alone a decent way of life. We reject this conception. Precisely because capitalism tends so much to break the bonds between them, to make them feel helpless before the massive powers of the modern police state – precisely because of this do the workers and people of Europe need more than ever organization on a collective plane: trade unions and revolutionary parties. The individual is helpless in the police state. That is true. But to retire to a life of private nobility is neither possible nor helpful. Where the capitalist decline tends to scatter and disorganize people, there especially do the workers need more than ever the sense of solidarity and the possibility of effective action which can come from a genuine revolutionary party.
Socialism has become a condition for survival; it is a reality in the here and the now, for we have already crossed the threshold of the barbarism produced by capitalist decline.
If men would live as human beings, drawing from the earth and the machines that which can give them plenty and security – they must fight for socialism.
If men would gain a sense of dignity and purpose, a feeling that their lives are more than tribulation and suffering, they must fight for socialism.
That is the path out of the desert.
 



Austria – said Karl Renner, her former President – is like “a little boat on which four elephants” are bearing down with all their weight and trampling on its flimsy bottom. The “four elephants” are of course Britain, Russia, the United States and France.
Since the occupation of Austria by the imperialist victors of the war, it has suffered enormously. Starvation has struck Austria blows of appalling proportion: its population lives today on a diet of 1,000 to 1,200 calories a day – which means that its people are simply wasting away.
The reasons for this tragic situation are several. Austria is not really an economic unit. It is, even in “normal” times, incapable of independent economic survival. Its economy must necessarily be meshed with those of Germany, Italy or a Danubian bloc. The reasons for its existence as a separate country are political, not economic. That is the situation in “normal” times.
But all of these difficulties are increased a thousand times by the present situation. Imagine a tiny, poverty-stricken country such as Austria – already wracked by the Nazi occupation – forced today to support four occupying armies. The largest of these armies, the Russian, has by its regime of terror, rapine, and theft simply grabbed whatever it desired. The occupying forces of the western capitalist powers have been concerned, not particularly with fleecing Austria, but rather with trying to maintain Austria within the orbit of their influence and preventing it from falling under the control of Russia. The conflict between Russian imperialism and Anglo-American imperialism in Austria has been extremely sharp.
The formality of joint occupation has been a mere pretense, and the Russians, by virtue of their vastly superior military forces have reached about two-thirds of the country.
 

Stalinist Seizure of Oil Fields
They have deliberately seized every important industrial concentration which survived the war. Especially ferocious has been their hunger for oil. The Stalinist army seized the Zisterdorf oil fields, which had formerly been operated by an English-Dutch combine and has exploited them at an unprecedentedly rapid but wasteful rate.
The Soviet military commander, Kourassov, issued on June 27 an order decreeing that all formerly held German property in the Russian zone would be expropriated by the Russians.
In order to forestall this and similar Russian grabs, the Austrian government – in which the conservative Catholic Peoples Party dominates – took a bold step. It decreed the “nationalization” of a number of Austrian industries, many of them in the Russian zone. This plan was supported by the Social-Democrats and also by the small Austrian Stalinist Party.
As soon as the plan for nationalization was announced it met with many-sided opposition. As the New York Times correspondent, Albion Ross, wrote on August 8, 1946: “So far the criticism of the Austrian nationalization measures is coming exclusively from the Russians, the Austrian Communist Party’s press, large foreign oil interests with investments here and a French banking group with large investments in one of the banks to be nationalized.” He further writes that “the Socony-Vacuum Oil Company estimates that its holdings are worth something like $100,000,000.” No wonder Ross reports that “the situation is a little embarrassing for the American government.”
The motives for the opposition to nationalization held by the French bankers and Socony Oil are not difficult to guess. They see in such a measure an end to their imperialist exploitation of the resources of Austria; and furthermore they are skeptical about the ability of the helpless Austrian government to reimburse them.
But the attitude of the Russians is even more interesting. Though they have in many instances nationalized the industries of the countries they occupied, they did so only where the government functioned as a Russian-dominated puppet. In Austria where the government attempts to exert some independence, the Russians object to nationalization since they realize that such nationalization would deprive them of the opportunity to dominate and profit from Austrian industry.
In this situation, the position of the comic-opera Austrian Stalinists is ludicrous. At the beginning they supported the nationalisation move; now, however, as indicated in Ross’ dispatch, they have begun to criticize the very same measure. Apparently, after a good verbal lashing from the local commissar (and perhaps the removal of some Browderites who wormed their way into the leadership of the Austrian CP ...) the Austrian Stalinists saw the light, and came but against nationalization. How this will sit with the people of Austria is not difficult to imagine; this spectacle of a party pretending to speak in the name of socialism, which opposes the expropriation of private industry so that a foreign totalitarian government may squeeze it dry!
 

The Meaning of Nationalization
Some paragraphs back, the word nationalization was put in quotation marks. The major party of Austria, the Peoples Party, is a party committed to capitalism. Yet it decreed a nationalization measure. This is not difficult to understand: it did so as a desperate attempt at survival, an attempt to prevent Russia’s grab of Austrian industry. We can imagine the Austrian capitalists, such as have survived the war, thinking to themselves that it is better to have their government nationalize industry if that is the only way to prevent it from falling into Russia’s hands. But even this nationalization decree is only partial: the Peoples Party announces that it will establish a system “called neither Capitalism Nor State Ownership.” (Dispatch of Albion Ross, N.Y. Times, August 9, 1946) Those industries nationalized will be formed into “cooperatives” of some sort, thereby providing a possibility for the resurgence of private capital.
The basic struggle in Austria does not involve Austrian capital, which has in any case been largely an agent of western capital. The basic struggle is between Russian imperialism and its Anglo-American rivals. In this struggle no holds are barred; the Austrian Stalinists oppose nationalization, the Austrian capitalist politicians propose it. Both of them serve as agents of foreign imperialists. And in the midst is the suffering, tortured, starving Austrian people – living under the blessings of the victorious “anti-Fascist coalition” which brought to them a diet of 1,200 calories a day.
 



Hardly a day passes but some new statement is issued by frantic scientists, urging humanity to realize the danger which the atomic bomb represents to its. future. These scientists, who gave their highly specialized talents to create a bomb which could kill 100,000 people, are now terrified at its possibilities. It disturbs their days and nights: the echoes of the wailing victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki agitate their consciences.
Especially since the publication of John Hersey’s report on Hiroshima – an appalling picture of the abyss to which capitalist civilization has brought humanity – have the voices of the scientists been raised in uneasy, troubled quavers. They glumly warn us that there is no defense against the bomb; they urge some sort of “international control” to prevent atomic warfare.
Of their solution – “international control” – it is a waste of time to write. The notion that the atomic bomb, which represents a danger when in the hands of one imperialist power, can become less of a danger if jointly controlled by all the imperialist powers, is. merely ... quaint. It is as if one believed a convention of thieves more honorable than each of its participants.
But the belated recognition by America’s scientists of the nature of the weapon they developed at the command of American capitalism, offers us the opportunity to discuss another and more interesting question. Just what is the responsibility of the scientist in the present social dilemma?
 
Scientists – Myth, Reality
The scientist has always been an especially respected and revered figure in the American mythology. A whole series of stereotypes have been developed and exploited by books, the movies and the radio: the man in white sacrificing to discover the cause of yellow fever; the kindly country doctor rearing generations and giving of his energy and life to help others; the neglected, persistent researcher delving into hidden mysteries to find some new technique to ease man’s life or cure his ills.
Such stereotypes can be discovered in as diverse cultural manifestations as Dr. Kildare, the miraculous physician; in Sinclair Lewis’ novel, Arrowsmith, one of whose main characters, Dr. Gottlieb, represents disinterested medical devotion at its best; in Sidney Howard’s play Yellow Jack, which exalted the doctors who discovered a cure for yellow fever; and in the national elevation of Thomas Edison to the rank of folkhero.
Now, such stereotypes are not undeserved – or at least have not been.
Despite the fact that many scientists sold themselves to corporations, many doctors became bedside racketeers and many researchers worked more often for war than for peace, there has still been a higher devotion to humanity among scientists than among most other groups.
The cultural stereotype which gave heroic dimension to the scientist, always saw him as one somewhat divorced from common concerns, as one who narrowed his breadth of vision so that it could be more intense. Hence, the frequent myths about the “absent-minded professor” (to which even as uncritical a film as that based on Louis Pasteur’s life had to pander); and hence, too, the common mistrust in America of professors and scientists who would enter politics – a field traditionally reserved for business men and the more petty variety of thieves.
 
What Should Science Do?
The scientist was supposed to stick to his own field and not be concerned with social problems; and most of them conformed to this pattern. Exceptions were rare, such as the great Charles Steinmetz, who was an active Socialist in his day. The role of the scientist was simply that of one who made possible by his discoveries great advances for mankind. Whether mankind properly utilized’ these discoveries was ITS business.
But nobody in his right mind blamed the Wright brothers for the fact that the airplane they discovered was later turned into a terrible weapon for destruction. The airplane was there, to be utilized for good or evil in accordance with man’s skill at social organization. Likewise, with the innumerable other discoveries in physics, chemistry, biology and optics which were neutral in quality: that is, they could be utilized for construction or destruction. And there was no doubt in anyone’s mind that the bulk of the scientists hoped they would be used to make man’s life better.
The attitude of Marxists was rather similar, ’they hailed scientific discoveries as indices of human progress, despite the possibility that such discoveries might later be misused – and we believe they were right, too. for without such discoveries a society of plenty and leisure such as socialists want would be impossible from the very start.
Yet in the case of the atomic bomb there is a different situation. The scientists who worked on the atomic bomb knew perfectly well – at least those key figures who understood what the project was about; the others were mere tools – that they were engaged on an assignment that could only bring horror and destruction to humanity. If today they shudder when reading Hersey’s report on Hiroshima, just a little bit of imagination two years ago, especially after the New Mexico experiment, should have enabled them to foresee exactly what would happen.
They were NOT engaged in a project which was socially “neutral,” and the value of which would be determined by the use to which it was later put. They were not engaged in an abstract attempt to split the atom which might be a great boon, as well as a great danger, to humanity. In the specific situation, they were working on the most terrible weapon of destruction which humanity has ever known; the key scientists knew this; they went ahead anyhow. There was no doubt at all about the immediate use to which their work would be put.
And that is why their wails of despair and concern today are so significant. Having sold their skills and their skulls to an imperialist war machine, having fathered the ghastly murder at. Hiroshima, their present conscience pricks of belated responsibility is understood by us.
It is said, that, some scientists: – their names are not at hand – more keenly aware of their responsibilities to humanity as a whole, refused to work on the atomic bomb project. These men, whoever they were, displayed a sense of courage and responsibility that is admirable. They were not going to prostitute their skill in order to produce a Hiroshima; and they, we are certain, sleep better at night.
 
Science and Humanity
The time is past when the scientists could divorce himself from common social concerns; when he could discover, and then allow man to use his discoveries as best he could. For today the scientist must realize that his work has direct and obvious social implications; his manipulations with electrons and protons may tomorrow result in the literal destruction of entire cities.
The scientist can no longer exist as the specialized folk-hero; if he attempts to do so, he will find himself merely a tool of reaction, a cog in a war machine. Today, if the scientist is to continue true to the ideals of his tradition, if he is to find a bond of social kinship with the rest of humanity, he must become a whole man, aware of the meaning and responsible for the work he does. He must be ready to refuse to prostitute it because he is not an isolated specialist but a responsible member of society.
The scientists who live up to this standard will discover – we believe – that their liberation, as well as that of all humanity, depends on the triumph of socialism. Otherwise they will merely plunge humanity further into the Gehenna of a world where Hiroshima is merely the prelude of more terrible things to come.
 



The cultural purge in Russia continues. The fierce dictatorial repressions based on fantastically ridiculous critical judgments have this time struck Dmitri Shostakovich, until now hailed by the Stalinists as a great composer. In the journal Culture and Life, published by the Agitation and Propaganda Committee of Stalin’s party (obviously the proper committee to evaluate music ...) one I. Nestiev accuses Shostakovich’s Ninth and latest symphony of lacking “warm ideological conviction.”
The Stalinist critic – who was probably intended for a job as a GPU guard in a Russian forced labor camp but became a music critic instead – writes that Shostakovich’s Ninth shows that the composer “has not overcome in himself the ironical skeptic.” It suffers further, the GPU Music Guard writes – as if ironical skepticism weren’t a serious enough fault! – from “the cynical and evil grotesque, the tone of merciless joking and ridicule ... the cold irony of stylization.”
The reader, even if not a musical specialist, will readily see that from the grievous error of ironical skepticism to the unforgivable crime of the cold irony of stylization – well, all that is left for a composer faced with such irrefutable charges is to plead for mercy.
Consider further that Shostakovich has been warned before. In 1936 the GPU Music Guards informed him that his ballet, Limpid Stream, was (as Pravda put it) “unwholesome and cheap.” What is more, Stalin couldn’t whistle its main tunes, and there is clearly no point in permitting music which Stalin can’t whistle. On that occasion, Dmitri showed the proper contrition – he confessed, so to speak – and wrote a few booming symphonies which Stalin could whistle. And all the little Stalinists could whistle them, too, from the Kremlin right down to 13th Street and the Freiheit Choir. Now, however, what will they whistle?
It’s pretty tough to be a Stalinist these days: you don’t even know what to whistle.
But – let us not forget Shostakovich. Will he adapt himself again? In the past he has shown a remarkable flexibility. When the Stalinists entered their ultra-left “third period” in the early 1930’s, he wrote the May Day and October Symphonies, the very names of which suggest their themes of struggle. After the Popular Front, both symphonies were withdrawn: themes of struggle smacked of Trotskyism! And when Stalin shook hands with von Ribbentrop and Molotov discovered that fascism was a matter of taste, Shostakovich who knew on which side of the party line his bread was buttered, composed his Fifth Symphony which – such a delicate touch! – contained large chunks of Strauss and Mahler, both “Germanic” composers.
So you see Dmitri has known how to adapt himself before. Yet the charges have never before been so serious. After all, ironical skepticism in a symphony is nothing to pass off so lightly.
 



The Withering Away of the State
by Solomon Bloom
A pamphlet, reprinted from the Journal of the History of Ideas, Winter, 1946
In this essay, Professor Bloom, who has acquired something of a
reputation as a critic of Marxism, attempts to demonstrate what he
considers the varying conceptions on the theory of the state held by
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. His thesis is that Engels made
greater concessions to the “anarchist conception of the state”
than did Marx; and that Marx, on the contrary, really was “closer
to the liberal tradition than to formal anarchism.” Bloom reaches
these conclusions by means of an examination of one of the crucial
conceptions in the Marxian system: the “withering away” of the
state during the epoch of communism and its replacement by a
classless “administration of things.”
Bloom begins by describing the traditional version of the Marxian
conception. He quotes Marx:
“The abolition of the state has meaning only for
Communists, as the necessary result of the abolition of classes with
which the necessity of the organized force of one class for the
suppression of other classes falls away of itself.”
According to the commonly accepted Marxian schema, capitalism is
overthrown by the working class, which replaces it by a
revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat which, in turn, serves
as the transition to a classless communist society. Once this
classless society is approached, the state – by definition
having as its purpose class exploitation and hence by now without
function – commences to “wither away.”
This idea received its classical formulation in a letter which
Engels wrote to August Bebel:
“As soon as there is no longer a class of society to be
held in subjection; as soon as, along with class domination and the
struggle for individual existence based on the former anarchy of
production, the collisions and excesses arising from them have also
been removed, there is nothing more to repress which would make a
special repressive force, a state, necessary.”
What this new “administration of things” is, as opposed to a
class state, writes Bloom, is “nowhere in Marx or in Engels ...
discussed directly and comprehensively. We may get some answers,
however, from Engels’ accounts of the emergence of the state, for
he gave at least two accounts. One was that after society had become
split into classes their conflicts became so severe that they
endangered the existence of society itself. In order to save it by
allaying the conflict, a public power became necessary: this power
was the first state ...”
The other explanation was that the state existed before the
division of society into classes. As Engels wrote in Anti-Dühring:
”The state, which primitive communities had at first
developed only for the purpose of safeguarding their common
interests ... and providing protection against external enemies.”
(My emphasis – I.H.)
Bloom then proceeds to examine the much more crucial question of
Marx’s conception of the future “withering away of the
state.” He quotes from Marx’s major work on this subject, The
Critique of the Gotha Program:
“The question then arises: what changes will the state
organization undergo in a communist society? In other words, what
social functions still remain there which are analogous to the
present functions of the state?
“Between the capitalist and the communist society lies
the period of revolutionary transformation of the one into the other.
To this there corresponds also a political transition period, whose
state can be nothing else than the revolutionary dictatorship
of the proletariat.”
“The (Gotha) Program deals neither with the latter nor
with the future state organization of the communist society.”
It is on this latter phrase (“the future state organization of
the communist society”) that Bloom bases most of his contention
that Marx believed that even under communism the state would continue
to exist. Accordingly, he continues, Marx used the term “state”
in two different ways: “In class society, the state is the tool of
the ruling class .... in the absence of classes, the state is
properly the responsible agent of society.”
Bloom’s conclusion js that “the weight of the evidence is
rather against an anarchist interpretation of the doctrine of Marx”
since Marx “insisted on the need of centralization and authority
and indeed implied the possibility of a state organization” under communism.
* * *
To this reviewer, Bloom’s essay seems an ingenious but
unsuccessful attempt to construct, by the method of quotation, the
thesis that Marx’s theory of the state does not have the ultimate
libertarian perspective usually attributed to it.
The aid which such a construction would give to the current
anti-Marxian offensive is not difficult to see. A brief refutation
involves the following points:
1) The argument from Engels’ statements about primitive society
seems irrelevant to the question of the future “withering
away of the state.” Its use involves an unwarranted identification
of “primitive communism” with the future communism based on a
high productive level. For if a state did exist in a classless
“primitive communism,” it had as its purpose the mere mutual
protection of the tribe against enemy groups and functioned on a
social level lower than that of even simple slavery. What relevance
such hypothetical “states” in the hypothetical society known as
“primitive” communism have to the problem of the existence or
non-existence of the state in a highly advanced communist society is
not clear to this reviewer.
2) The crux of the question, however, is the by-now famous
quotation from the Gotha Critique. Bloom is not the first to
have offered this quotation as being contradictory to everything else
that Marx and Engels wrote. In a footnote, Bloom writes that Lenin
too was perplexed for a time by this quotation and that he, Bloom,
finds Lenin’s analysis of this matter unconvincing. Bloom does not,
unfortunately, offer any reasons for finding Lenin’s analysis of
this matter unconvincing, but this reviewer believes that Lenin’s
remarks on the matter are, when considered within the framework of
the entire Marxian system, thoroughly satisfactory. Lenin attempts to
make clear what Marx meant when writing about the “future state
organization of communist society” by quoting from a further
section of The Critique in which Marx distinguished between
two stages of communist society (which Lenin was subsequently
to characterize as socialism and communism.) In the first stage,
writes Marx:
“What we have to deal with here is a communist society,
not as it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary,
as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus, in every
respect, economically, morally and intellectually, still stamped with
the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges ...
these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist
society.”
And Marx continues:
“In a higher phase of communist society ... the narrow
horizon of bourgeois right (can) be fully left behind and society
(can) inscribe on its banners: from each according to his abilities,
to each according to his needs.”
Since, says Lenin in his fascinating notebook on The Critique,
“semi-bourgeois rights would still exist” in the first stage of
communism, so too “the semi-bourgeois state” has still not fully
disappeared. And in State and Revolution, Lenin repeats the
same idea in slightly different language: “Consequently, not only
bourgeois right but even the bourgeois state for a certain time
remains under communism, without the bourgeoisie.” In other words,
Marx’s reference to the “future state organization of the
communist society” upon which Bloom rests his entire, case is
merely a reference to the process of the “withering away” of the
state which begins, according to the Marxian conception,
approximately when the dictatorship of the proletariat slides into
the “first phase of communism.”
3) Now all this may seem rather casuistic and Talmudic. But it is
necessary to refute attempts, such as those of Bloom, to give Marx an
authoritarian emphasis which does not really apply. Once that is
done, we can proceed to the interesting question: just what would the
actual development of this “withering away of the state” entail?
Did Lenin foresee a situation in which the state had already withered
away by the time the dictatorship of the proletariat slides into
socialism (or, as he calls it, “the first phase of communism”) or
a situation in which the “withering away of the state” begins
with socialism? In the latter case, Marx’s phrase about “the
state organization” of communist society is perfectly
comprehensible.
The basic trouble with an approach such as that of Bloom is that
it views the whole matter most mechanically, as if it were a mere
question of constructing conceptualized categories which had Chinese
walls between them. I doubt very much if the future workers’ state
will proclaim, say, on January 1, that “as of today” it is no
longer a workers’ state but rather the “first phase of communist
society.” The categories of distinction set up by Marx and
developed by Lenin are categories whose purposes are largely useful
in terms of goals and processes of development toward which to
strive; and aids to future historians who will be able to check back
on the actual development of a free society to compare it with the
Marxian forecast.
Bloom’s attempt to blow up an entire theoretical structure by
pitting quotation against quotation may earn him a pat on the head in
the artery-hardened circles of American bourgeois sociology, but
cannot be taken very seriously by Marxists.
 



THE long and tedious Nuremberg trials are over. That in a few days such vermin as Goering and von Ribbentrop will no longer contaminate this earth, somehow makes all of us feel that there is just a little less ugliness in this world. These Nazi leaders have a record of mass murder, of inhumanity and brutality which is the ultimate index of the depths to which capitalist civilization has sunk.
No, they will not be missed: these butchers and murderers, who danced on the graves of Europe’s workers and who gave to the world the names of Maidoneck and Buchenwald.
That Goering and the others condemned to death do not deserve to live is so obvious as to require no further discussion. But what about those whom the Nuremberg Tribunal freed? Schacht, von Papen and Fritsche. What are we to make of their acquittal – and who are these men absolved of the crimes with which they were charged?
We have no intention of getting wound up in the legal rigmarole with which delighted lawyers are discussing the Nuremberg trials. This much we know: Hjalmar Schacht, Franz von Papen and Hans Fritsche worked hand in glove with Adolph Hitler and the Nazi Party. These men who have been freed, have a record of complete and unquestioning support of Nazism.

SCHACHT – A member of Nazi Party since 1932. Hitler’s Minister of Economics until 1937 and President of Hitler’s Reichsbank until 1939. Signed, despite his present denial of anti-Semitism, laws excluding Jews from German economic life. The financial brains behind Hitler’s whole rearmament program.
 
VON PAPEN – Hitler’s Vice Premier; then his agent to the Vatican and then his Ambassador to Turkey. The British Prosecutor Maj. J.H. Barrington said Papen was surpassed only by Hitler himself in helping strengthen the Nazi grip on Germany.
 
FRITZSCHE – Deputy Propaganda Minister under Goebbels; broadcasting chief and head of DNB, Nazi news agency. Especially noted for fierce anti-Semitism; American prosecutor Capt. Drexel Sprecher said that even Jew-baiter Julius Streicher could hardly outdo Fritsche in anti-Semitism.
 

The Political Key to the Trials
Once we discover why these scoundrels have been freed, we have the key to the political meaning of the trial. The case of Fritzche seems something of a quirk and is not of first importance, but the freeing of Schacht and Von Papen is not a quirk. Schacht and Von Papen were the spokesmen for that major section of German capitalism which played ball with Hitler; they were the intermediaries from Big Business who negotiated with Hitler.
Now it is precisely to the remnants of these very same elements – German Big Business – that Anglo-American imperialism is at present appealing for support in its attempt to dominate Germany and lessen Russian influence in Germany. By freeing Schacht and von Papen, Anglo-American imperialism is extending a hand of partial friendship to all of Schacht’s and von Papen’s friends. What this means concretely is told in a New York Herald Tribune dispatch, dated October 1, which reads:
“SCHACHT VERDICT LIKELY TO SPARE MANY BANKERS – Hundreds of German industrialists and Germany’s leading bankers probably will be spared international trial as a result of the acquittal of Hjalmar Schacht, Nazi financial wizard ...”
The freeing of Schacht and von Papen is a logical step in the policy outlined in Secretary of State Byrnes’ recent Stuttgart speech: Anglo-American imperialism is to attempt to rebuild a somewhat strengthened German capital as a base of support against its Russian imperialist rival.
It is therefore understandable why the Russians opposed freeing Schacht and von Papen. They don’t need them as agents; they have their own agents, the Stalinist parties, ready and willing. In the struggle in Germany between Russian imperialism and Anglo-American imperialism, both lean on two main agencies: the former on their Stalinist puppet parties and the latter oh the remnants of the German capitalist class. Under the circumstances, it is clear why the Russians could afford to be so intransigent ... toward the very Nazis with whom they had not so long ago signed a “non-aggression pact.”
 
Attitude to the General Staff
That the freeing of Schacht and von Papen was an indication of Anglo-American imperialism’s policy of making overtures to German capitalism, can be seen in the refusal of the Military Tribunal’s statement to name the German Army General Staff as a “criminal organization” responsible for the war in the same sense as the Nazis. Instead, the Tribunal labeled its behavior as “a disgrace to the honorable profession of arms.” Two points stand out in connection with this partial whitewash of the General Staff:

Just as it wishes to utilize the remnants, of German capitalism, so Anglo-American imperialism is considering the eventuality when it may need the German General Staff. Hence, its condemnation of INDIVIDUAL GENERALS only as criminal, and its failure to condemn the staff as a whole; though it is common knowledge that the General Staff worked hand in glove with Hitler in preparing for and in the conduct of at least the early stages of the war.
 
The idea of trying generals – even German generals – for their behavior during war has not appealed to the American military. When the Nuremberg indictments were drawn up, the Army and Navy Journal, unofficial organ of the U.S. services, said that the indictment of a general staff for its behavior in a war would deter “gentlemen from entering the military profession.”

Similarly, Anne O’Hare McCormick writes in the New York Times of October 1 that “professional soldiers are afraid that indicting military high commands establishes a dangerous precedent ...”
Which explains the dual judgment of the Nuremberg court: it absolved the General Staff of criminality to be able to use it in the future, and then labeled it a “disgrace to the honorable profession of arms” in order to suggest that the German General Staff was unique and that its indictment is not a precedent for other military staffs. But the German Staff was not unique in its murderous brutality – no more so than the French General Staff which suppressed the Indo-Chinese, nor the British which killed Indians and Jews, nor the U.S. General Staff which in its history invaded Central American republics, suppressed independence fighters in the Philippines and helped break strikes.
 
Why the Trials Were Held
Against this background we can understand, the purpose of the trials. Originally the victors in the war wanted to get rid of the top Nazi leaders because so long as they were alive they could serve as a rallying center for a Nazi resurgence. This is not to say that the victors cared too much about eliminating fascism or totalitarianism; it was merely that they wanted to cut off the TOP Nazi leadership even while they were absorbing large sections of its secondary leadership into the AMG-controlled local governments in Germany.
But more important, they wanted to perpetuate as long as they could the frayed myth that the war was a crusade for democracy – a myth that seems more preposterous each passing post-war day as we see the imperialist struggle for a division of the spoils. And a trial of the leading Nazis seemed a dramatic device with which to bolster this myth. As the trial proceeded, and as Anglo-American imperialism settled down for a fierce struggle with its Russian rival, it conceived of the idea of using the trial as a means of partially vindicating Schacht and von Papen, and thereby the classes they represented, in order to prepare for the struggle with the Russians.
The trials, in brief, were intended as a device of imperialist politics. As such they were only partially successful, for many gaping holes were left visible to the public eye – not the least of which, incidentally, was the haste with which a Nazi witness was shut up when he began talking about secret clauses in the Hitler-Stalin pact.
The great tragedy of the trials is that the real victims of Nazism were not the judges. It should have been the German working class, sitting on a socialist tribunal with representatives of the other workers of Europe, who would dispose of Goering. For then Schacht and von Papen would not have been whitewashed – and, infinitely more important, the social putrescence of capitalism which gave rise to Goering and which may yet give rise to other Goerings, would not be allowed to continue.
 



The 6th Annual Convention of the American Youth Congress ended this weekend with the question of its Stalinist control unchanged.
As in all previous Conventions of the AYC, the Young Communist League established decisive control by two methods: 1) electing large numbers of packed delegations from their paper “front” organizations who follow the “party line” on all crucial questions, and 2) by having their stooges in genuine youth organizations elected as delegates. In this manner, the Stalinists succeeded in giving the Congress a certain coloring of genuine youth representation, despite the numerous groups, such as Young Judea, which have withdrawn from the AYC.
 
Tunney Farce
This pose as the genuine spokesmen of American youth was made considerably easier by red-baiting attacks of Gene Tunney and his youth stooge, Murray Plavner, which were eagerly seized upon by the press. Many of the non-Stalinist delegates at this Congress were brought under Stalinist influence because they correctly resented the red-baiting of Tunney’s boys. And the Stalinists cleverly utilized this fact by inviting Tunney to speak and then mocking his refusal.
They thus succeeded in partially obscuring the ‘fact’ that they had steadily, since the organization of the AYC, acted in the most undemocratic manner towards delegates who opposed them from a progressive, anti-war point of view.
The decisive control established by the Stalinists can be clearly seen in the actions which the Congress took on the war question. The Convention held a year ago had taken the then Stalinist attitude on war: support of the capitalist democracies and endorsement of President Roosevelt’s “defense plans.” This, of course, was before the Hitler-Stalin pact. At this convention, the delegates swung sharply to the present Stalinist position: opposition to Roosevelt and the Allies, as a result of the Hitler-Stalin pact.
In view of the fact that whatever genuine anti-war spokesmen were at the convention were unable to gain the floor in order to expose the hypocrisy of the Stalinists, many non-Stalinist delegates voted for their resolutions because they believed them to be motivated by real anti-war sentiment.
Further evidence of Stalinist control was seen in the defeat of a resolution which directly labeled the Soviet Union a dictatorship.
 
No Change in Line
Considerable excitement was created when Mac Weiss, leader of the Young Communist League, made a speech urging, an American-Soviet alliance to defeat Hitlerism. This was interpreted as a possible “change in line” by the Stalinists on the part of many delegates. Actually however, it was merely a clever statement of the present line of the Stalinists. They have always been in favor of an American-Soviet alliance and they were now merely stating it in such a manner as to try to show that they were not really pro-Hitler as charged.
The fervid anti-Hitler sentiment of the American people which was mirrored at the convention forced Weiss to toss in a few attacks to try to whitewash the present essentially pro-Hitler position of the Stalinists. On the issue of conscription the Congress took a wishy-washy position. It voted against military conscription, but prefaced the resolution by declaring itself ready to fight “for the defense of American democracy.” In view of the fact that any war America may conduct will be described as a war for democracy, the resolution is open to numerous pro-war interpretations.
There was only a small pro-Allied and pro-Roosevelt bloc at the Congress. This was led by Joe Lash, former Secretary of the American Student Union and formerly a Stalinist stooge in the student movement. Lash has shifted to the role of unofficial spokesman for the war administration of Washington inside the youth movement.
Despite the reactionary use to which it was put by the Stalinists, there was considerable genuine anti-war sentiment among the unaffiliated delegates. The organization as a whole, however, remains firmly in the hands of the Young Communist League which will attempt to use it as a front for its reactionary position.
 



The Defenders
by Franz Hoellering
Little, Brown and Company
Franz Hoellering, a young refugee writer, has set himself the extremely ambitious task, in his novel, The Defenders, of depicting a cross-section of Viennese society immediately before and during the suppression of the Austrian proletariat in February 1934. The task is tremendous: not merely to show the effect of the actual struggle on different sections of society, but also to attempt a description of the social decay leading to the conflict; not merely to show one class of Vienna in the transition which led to the February revolt, but to attempt a description of the interweaving political and personal cross-currents which result in the revolt.
It is clear that only a master could succeed in this attempt and Hoellering is not a master – at least not yet. Most of the novels that have dealt successfully with themes of proletarian struggle have produced excitation and suspense by concentrating intensely on a specific event and the sharpened reactions of the participants in that event (Man’s Fate); or they have been, in one or two cases, thoughtful discussions of the problems facing the proletariat, posed in terms of certain specific human problems (Bread and Wine). But Hoellering has neither the intensity of Malraux nor the depth of Silone.
Resultantly, the novel winds itself into a serious contradiction which destroys it as a total effect and produces a series of disjointed parts. Such a situation is, of course, not unusual with a young writer.
Hoellering’s description of the Viennese intelligentsia – the most futile of all intelligentsias – rotting in their cafes and awaiting their doom, does not arouse interest in the reader; at best it arouses a mixture of detached pity and nausea. Here Hoellering can only produce stilted types who never come to life and about whom Hoellering can write only copy-book banalities. When he describes professors, actors, critics and passé noblemen, one gains the inescapable impression of receiving second-hand goods.
But not only is it that Hoellering appears to be incapable of bringing these people to life, it is impossible in a book of 500 pages to adequately develop all the situations and characters which he suggests. The result is that an entire section of the book is shadowy and irritatingly inadequate. It lacks the panoramic scope necessary to achieve Hoellering’s intention and it is too disjointed and diffused to bring the drama which is present in the last section of the book – the description of the actual revolt – to its greatest possible intensity.
When Hoellering turns, however, to the proletariat, to the Social-Democratic movement, to the intellectuals attached to the movement, he gains confidence and assurance. Here he is at home. And in those chapters in which he writes of the Viennese proletariat the novel is vivid and extraordinarily moving.. His capacities are as yet limited to an ability to write only of this one section of society, but that he does splendidly.
The capitulation of the German Social-Democracy and the Stalinists to Hitler without a struggle had an extremely depressing effect on the Austrian workers, ut it was still possible to fight and win – provided the Viennese workers were rallied under a militant banner of audacious struggle. Such a struggle might have had unforetold results in the rest of Europe where there were still mighty organizations of the working class and might well have been the turning point to beat down the fascists. But the Austrian Social-Democracy restrained the workers after each provocation of the reactionary clerical government until the point was reached where large sections of the workers became demoralized and disgusted. Then the Heimwehr government – negotiating all the while with the Social-Democratic leaders – provoked the workers into an uneven struggle and smashed them.
All this is vividly shown in Hoellering’s book. His picture of Hippmann, the two-faced SDP leader, is a biting portrait of the reformist leadership. Hippmann restrains the workers, cajoles them with pretty speeches about Socialist culture and humanitarianism. But a considerable section of the younger workers are restive and resentful; the hero of the novel is a young worker who resigns from the SDP because of disgust with its constant retreats. It is around this section of the most militant of the Viennese workers that the most vital section of the novel revolves.
Here the book grows to profound proportions. The picayune romances, the empty petty-bourgeois dimwits, the banalities and journalese ineptitudes that fill the other sections are absent. Here Hoellering writes with passion and warmth, with fire and understanding.
As a result, we meet a group of workers who are alive and important. The young worker-intellectual Merk who, after having left the SDP in disgust with its reformist position, gives up his life in the revolt; the older, experienced worker Kraus, who expresses the thoughts of the disciplined proletariat of Vienna when he enters the struggle with the realization of defeat but with the words “We are fighting on out of a sense of honor and to set an example for those who will come after us” on his lips; the heroic Mother Merk, an old woman, out of the party, who gains dignity and purpose in life when she is entrusted with the secret hiding places of the arms caches and who, in her determination to continue the struggle, even after the defeat and the death of her only son, expresses the indomitable will of the proletariat to liberation; and, above all, the extraordinary figure of Franze, a drummer in the symphony orchestra, who gives tragic stature to his ridiculous personality by his devotion to the proletarian struggle through his last act: dragging his dying body to a comrade’s house in order to inform them of a police spy whom he has uncovered – these are a gallery of unforgettable characters.
If Hoellering had pared his book down only to the sections in which the revolt of the workers is described, it would have been a far better novel than it is. But even with all its technical imperfections, it is an extraordinarily moving account of one of the most heroic of all proletarian struggles; and as such it deserves to be read by all to whom the working class revolution is more than a mere reminiscence of past youthfulness.
 



I have just returned from the now famous “sedition” trial being held in Minneapolis, in which 23 members of the Socialist Workers Party and Local 544-CIO have been accused of advocating the forcible overthrow of the U.S. Government and preparing to do so. In my dispatches to LABOR ACTION, which covered the main section of the trial – namely, the prosecution witnesses and the beginning of the defense case – I have attempted to show the completely reactionary character and the patently absurd and false nature of the prosecution. Now, it is necessary to sum up some of the legal and political issues of the trial, which are of utmost importance to the entire working class movement.
*
1) THE CONSPIRACY – When the government finished its case, it immediately became apparent that it was involved in one great contradiction: Where and what was the alleged “conspiracy?” The government had produced innumerable enemies of Local 544 who swore that V.R. Dunne et al. had informed them that the SWP planned to overthrow the government (though all these witnesses admitted knowing nothing else about the SWP); it had introduced as evidence innumerable Marxist works which have been public property for years, in order to show that they too advocated violent overthrow. BUT IT DID NOT PRODUCE ANY CONSPIRACY. It did not produce that “meeting of hands,” as the legal phrase goes, which would show that a group of people deliberately and consciously came together in order to achieve the aims alleged by the prosecution.
In reality, the prosecution functioned on two theories of conspiracy. Theory One was that the SWP itself, its mere existence, was the conspiracy. But this is utterly fantastic. For, where is the element of secrecy, of plotting, alleged in the indictment and implicit in the definition of conspiracy? The SWP conducted its activities publicly, available for all, who wished to see them. If it is held that a conspiracy is merely an organization publicly advocating a set of Marxist ideas, then it is clear that civil liberties are dead – if that theory be upheld by the courts.
Government theory No. Two was that the conspiracy was a secret group, mainly within the SWP, functioning through it and utilizing it, but not completely congruous with it.
If the government rests on this, theory, then it must (a) present evidence of the existence of a secret, organized group composed of a definite number of individuals, a group with a definite organization and composition, and b) it must admit it has no case against Goldman, Cannon and the other New York SWP leaders who have not been implicated by any witnesses, and who cannot therefore be, bound by this “secret conspiracy” in Minneapolis, of which government testimony has shown they had neither knowledge nor connections.
These seemingly abstract legal points are of the utmost importance both to this specific trial and to the civil rights of the working class generally. They must be carefully considered.
2) THE JUDGE – What capitalist justice means in practice could once again be Seen when Judge Joyce gave his decision denying the dismissal motion of the defense (except for the five defendants who were freed).
He compared the defendants to Hitler, who, he said, had also begun with a group as small as the present SWP. (That the SWP is a mortal enemy of fascism didn’t disturb him.) He defined “conspiracy” in such a vague and general way as to set another dangerous legal precedent which can be used against the labor movement.
According to him, there need not have been any common agreement among the defendants, any specific plan for overt action, or any possibility of realization of alleged aims, in order to prove the existence of this so-called conspiracy. What then, remains? Nothing but a common belief in socialism, which the defendants share, and for which they are being tried.
The Judge utilized the old threadbare argument that the defendants had no right to the protection of the Constitution since they intended to destroy it, and merely were using “constitutional rights” as a pretext. It requires a moment’s reflection to realize the entire reactionary implication of this statement. The defendants are held liable to the punishment the government wants to mete out to them because of alleged violation of this Constitution – they can go to jail for that; but they are not entitled to its protection. IN OTHER WORDS, PEOPLE WHO DON’T BELIEVE IN CAPITALISM ARE NOT ENTITLED TO CIVIL RIGHTS!
3) THE SMITH ACT – Another instance of the fantastically prejudiced character of the court rulings deals with the Smith Act. This act, which makes illegal the advocacy of violent overthrow of the government, was passed in June 1940. Yet the Judge admitted evidence in connection with the Smith Act of events and quotations that took place before its passage on the grounds that it would show their “state of mind.” Just consider how monstrous this is! The “state of mind” of people in relation to a law that was not yet passed, or even considered, can be used as evidence to prove they violated the law!
4) THE POLITICS INVOLVED – With obviously pre-determined purpose, the entire case of the government is pointed, especially at V.R. Dunne. The reason is clear. Dunne is the outstanding leader of 544-CIO; the purpose of the government is to “get” 544-CIO because it refused to submit to the jingo will of the Administration. In the maze of the daily testimony, it is very easy to lose sight of the main objectives of the trial. From a superficial examination of this daily testimony, it might appear that the political position of the SWP is the ONLY cause for the prosecution. The anti-war position of the SWP is a definite factor. But the GENERAL political line of the SWP is largely a pretext for the frame-up. The destruction of 544-CIO and the suppression of anti-war sentiment are still the major objectives of the prosecution.
 



It is nauseating to observe how the American liberals have suddenly taken Stalin back to their bosoms, once he joined up on the “right side” of the war. The vilest aspect of this retrospective adoration is the way in which even, the Moscow : trials are now justified by such men as Harry Hopkins, former Ambassador Davies and Journalist Ralph Ingersoll.
Walter Duranty, an old hand at this sort of thing, has developed the theory to its utmost in his latest book, The Kremlin and the People. The theory itself is by now pretty much old stuff. It goes as follows: The defendants in the Moscow trials were fifth columnists. Stalin, who foresees everything, foresaw the war with Hitler and got the fifth columnists out of the way. That is why the Red Army continues to be able to resist Hitler. Duranty, as might be expected, adds his own unique touches. He indulges in speculations about the Russian soul; Dostoievsky is once more dragged in to explain the trials; the example of Alcibidias from Greek history is given to “explain” Trotsky; and, not to be accused of failing to give the English a break, he also drags in the example of the Earl of Essex during the reign of Queen Elizabeth!
Here is the sort of stuff Duranty palms off to explain the trials:
“I say Russians are always Russians (Who can deny that? – I.H.) and every Russian is the same Russian, kind, cruel, hospitable, envious, suspicions, affectionate, generous, will shoot you as soon as look, and if he happens to miss might kiss yon the next minute on both cheeks.”
You see, of course, how this helps explain the trials.
 
The Doers and the Talkers
As Duranty tells it, Stalin represented those Bolsheviks who had fought in Russia before the revolution, while Trotsky led those who had been in exile “talking in cafes.” (The fact that Trotsky was in exile because he had escaped from Siberian prison – what is this to bother a self-admitted “philosopher” like Duranty?).
The Oppositionists were not really bothered by Stalin, Duranty tells us, until Kiroff was shot- – which stirred Stalin to the heart and started the trials and purges. Interesting if true. It happens that Oppositionists were shot (Blumkin) and exiled before the murder of Kiroff. And to think that the trials were held because Stalin loved Kiroff – is the man serious?
Duranty, with all his attempts to explain by references to Alcibidias and how Yagoa looked Ulrich in the eye and how the Russians are like children only they are like grown-ups, does not once attempt to consider the testimony of the trials from the point of view of objective plausibility and coherence. If he did that, he would have to admit that the testimony does not jibe with the facts.
 
Some Startling Admissions
As it is, he makes some. startling admissions. He admits that from 60 to 70 per cent of the leaders of every field of Soviet life were purged. He tells a story of the Bukharin-Yagoda trial that is quite startling and revealing in the light it throws on the trials.
Yagoda, he says, had denied accusations put to him by Prosecutor Vyshinsky. Then Ulrich chastized him. Yagoda burst out with an exclamation that was not printed in the official records:
“That goes for you too – you can drive me, hut not too far! I’ll say what I want to say ... but ... do not drive me too far!”
It is for little things like this, little slips, that the book is worth attention. Its basic: idea is merely an absurd version of the Stalinist whitewash of the Moscow trials.
 



The outbreak of the war has revealed many things in sharper and clearer perspective than could previously be seen. For one thing, it ha’s punctured completely all the radical pretenses which a considerable number of intellectuals attempted to enjoy. Not that these pretenses have been put forward very insistently; most of the intellectuals were long ago sucked into the fold of Rooseveltian capitalism, just as their forebears of the last generation were enticed by the Wilsonian New Order.
But the climactic statement of intellectual bankruptcy came after the war declaration was issued. The Nation and the New Republic, guiding lights of a section of an entire generation, devoted almost their entire editorial statements to the problem of the war.
If any additional proof be needed of the programmatic bankruptcy and intellectual poverty of the American liberals it is here provided, and brimming over the cup, too.
It is to be taken for granted that The Nation and the New Republic are openly for the war, that they give way to no one in patriotic and stirring phrases about the just and glorious character of the war. They long ago attached themselves to the chariot of American imperialism and nobody expected them to jump off.
What is, however, so noticeable at the present time is the complete lack of any political program, of any set of motivating ideas behind their present trumpet calls for the war. They write in the manner in which one expects the ordinary capitalist newspaper to write – not even that, since a paper like The Times constantly takes great pains to emphasize the programmatic issues of the war, as it sees them. The Nation and the New Republic write, rather, in the pseudo-scientific manner of that plague of American journalism – the self-constituted military expert. We therefore encounter the absurd spectacle of Miss Freda Kirchwey trying her best to write of the war in the accepted Hanson Baldwinish manner.
 
A Completely Uncritical Attitude
The liberals have so lost themselves in their uncritical attitude toward the imperialist war that they do not even attempt to distinguish their aims and purposes in the war from those of, say, the Herald Tribune. Rather does The Nation find itself swept over by the evanescent thrill of “national unity” – Miss Kirchwey is ready to trot out her best adjectives for the cause of saving democracy in Siam and Borneo.
She writes of the country at war:
“We feel a happy sense of union swelling in bur hearts; hatred and contempt for our enemy run warmly in our blood ... We are one – all of us ... We feel our strength and our virtue. We know ourselves to be honorable, peaceable, unaggressive, generous, conciliatory.”
It is this undiluted chauvinism, this two-penny jingoism which is the sole program of The Nation. Remember, it writes these words of American imperialism, the shining star of altruism in a world of gangsters.
Beyond this there is nothing. No program, no thought on the purpose of the war and, above all, no mention of that most embarrassing of topics: the character of the post-war world for which the war is allegedly being fought. The Nation confines itself exclusively to amateurish military pronunciamentos, which have the same value as those of any layman – zero.
The New Republic likewise concentrates on armchair strategy. Ah, it sighs, if only Bruce Bliven or George Soule could conduct this war instead of General MacArthur or Admiral Cunningham – from a point of safety, of course ...
 
On The Domestic Front
But the New Republic manages to tear itself away from its military preoccupations to write an editorial on the “Domestic Front.”
It advocates the struggle against inflation, but “it is up to labor not to accept a freezing of all wages, but to set its face against those wage increases which will necessarily increase prices (provided a decent minimum already exists).” (Our emphasis)
It advocates increased taxation, in order to lap up the recent increase in consumer buying power. “Unless we give up the extra money in savings or taxes we shall surely have inflation and a weakening of the war potential.”
It advocates opposition to anti-strike legislation, but warns labor of its “share of the responsibility.”
It advocates the preservation of civil liberties, but warns of their necessary limitations.
This program could – in fact, has – readily been proposed and accepted by ordinary, conservative bourgeois papers. It is far less radical than the program for labor proposed by Wendell Willkie.
The liberals have lost whatever function they once had. They have always been incapable of participating in the struggle for socialism. Now they no longer play the role of avant-garde within the framework of capitalist society. They do not even challenge, criticize, propose. Their voices are not distinct from, they are rather lost in, the pack of journalistic hyenas who screech their super-nationalistic choruses.
*
The Social-Democrats
The reaction of the Social-Democratic New Leader is also of some interest.
In its major article on the war, Ferdinand Lundberg writes in the New Leader of December 13, as follows:
“The world is not headed for a markedly better day, not in the next 1,000 years anyhow. None of these things are oil the agenda of history! Socialism, social security, the New Leisure, a land flowing with milk and honey. They will not be on the agenda of history even if the ‘Defensive Bloc’ (i.e., the Allies) wins the war and establishes a new and effective League of Nations. Within the realizable future there will not be two cars in every garage, a chicken in every pot, a model apartment for every family.”
Very interesting! What happens to the Four Freedoms, the Atlantic Charter, the Better World over which the war is supposed to be fought? What, in the opinion of this pro-Roosevelt author, is this war about? Where is the brave hew world for which millions are to die?
*
The Socialist Party
The Norman Thomas Socialist Party gave out a statement on the war which condemned the “wanton attack” of Japan while declaring that the war was a “culmination of a long struggle of European, American and Asiatic imperialisms for advantage of dominance in the Far East – an imperialist struggle which we opposed and continue to oppose.”
The statement came out in defense of civil liberties during wartime, but failed to specify the attitude of the SP toward the political character of the war.
*
The Militant, which was the organ of the Socialist Workers Party until two weeks ago, responded to the war by printing a lengthy analysis of the Espionage Act and the manner in which it had been used in the First World War.
 



WASHINGTON. – Despite every Stalinist attempt to stifle it. the voice of the revolutionary Socialist youth managed to make itself heard at the American Youth Congress “Town Meeting” held here last week end. During the discussion on the war question, Milton Miller, of the Young Peoples Socialist League, got the floor and presented the point of view of the working class opposition to both sides in the imperialist war.
Charging that Stalinists were actuated in their “opposition” to Roosevelt’s war plans solely by the interests of the Kremlin bureaucrats now allied with Hitler, Miller demanded that they answer this question: “If your proposal for a ‘Moscow-Chunking-Washington Axis’ becomes a reality, will you again. shift your allegiance lo Roosevelt, will you again jump on the war bandwagon?”
The speaker for the Young Communist League. John Gates, failed to answer this question, restricting himself instead to a eulogy of Stalin’s “peace-loving” character It way no cinch for Miller to get the floor. For two days, members of the Young Peoples Socialist League had vainly been attempting to get the floor. In all the previous sessions, the Stalinist floor leaders and chairmen had prevented the voice of left-wing opponents from being heard. The Stalinist floor leaders and chairmen were able to spot left-wing opponents by the undemocratic procedure: delegates who wanted to speak had lo hand up a slip of paper with the name and “specific topic” listed. The Stalinists who ran the convention were thus able to weed out “undesirable” speakers.
Despite the more than 3,000 delegates, the conference was a failure from the Stalinist point of view. Most of the delegates were either imported YCLers from New York or local Stalinists from Washington. To make up for the absence of genuine youth organizations, the Stalinists allowed any “youth” (and there were plenty who have grown old just attending these Stalinist youth conferences) who was willing to pay a dollar registration fee to attend. They were thus spared the necessity of finding organizations to “represent.”
Those few genuine youth organizations that were represented were mainly anti-Stalinist. The Stalinists were extremely anxious to placate these organizations even those which were actively pro-war and for aid to England – and as a result they became surprisingly “democratic” and “tolerant.” MacMichael, the chairman, made a plea for tolerance after a couple of sour incidents, and other Stalinist floor leaders did likewise.
This factor, plus the dread of a bad press, led the Stalinists to “relax” their vigilance against opponents. Sitting near the platform, I could see the constant pressure which a number of non-Stalinist delegates were putting on the Stalinists to allow dissident points of view to be expressed.
 
FDR’s Boy Friday
As a result, one of the most spotlighted characters at the convention was Joe Lash, once the chief Stalinist “front man” among the Youth, and now the unofficial youth spokesman of the Roosevelt Administration. Lash made no serious attempt to organize the 150 or 175 delegates who agreed with him in favoring support of the imperialist war, but he succeeded in focusing a lot of attention on himself.
The Stalinists tried to lump all opposition in one pro-imperialist basket. Thus, the Daily Workers, in reporting the AYC meeting, declares that support of the Lend-Lease Bill came from two sources: the Lash group and ... the YPSL. This, despite the fact that the first sentence from the mouth of the YPSL speaker was an attack on the Lend-Lease Bill.
The small but articulate bloc of delegates who supported the anti-imperialist war point of view of the YPSL kept hammering away all through the conference. A large number of the current issue of the Challenge of Youth, YPSL paper, which carried articles on both the Youth Congress and the Lash group, were sold to the delegates. The few unaffiliated delegates bought our papers almost without exception, although the Stalinists tried to cajole them into not reading it. Numerous discussions were held with non-Stalinist delegates and future contact with them was arranged.
 



SO POWERFUL is the democratic myth in this country and so comparatively attractive are the conditions of functioning in it, especially in relation to the fascist nations, that it is easy to understand why sections of the revolutionary movement may be subject to the influence of perpetual legalism and democratism. What is often understood only abstractly – that American capitalism is also subject to the laws of capitalist decline, one of whose results is the growth of totalitarianism or fascism – is often ignored in actual practice, in preparation for real-life perspectives.
The result of such a situation is, naturally enough, that once a sharp crisis comes, the revolutionary party receives a shock and requires a re-awakening, a political re-armament which prepares it for this new and unusual state of affairs – what the bourgeois press calls the “emergency.” It is precisely in such a state of affairs that the revolutionary movement of this country finds itself today. The nation moves toward a war economy, a war status (both in reality and formally) and a totalitarian or at least a semi-totalitarian regime. Quite inevitably the revolution parties must react quickly and sharply to the dangers of state persecution and suppression.
No more significant example of this can be given than the now famous “sedition” trial being held in Minneapolis in which 23 (originally 28; five have been freed) leaders of the Socialist Workers Party (Cannonites) and Local 544-CIO Teamsters Union are being accused of having conspired to overthrow the U.S. Government and having advocated its overthrow. This first, frontal attack of the government against a section of the Trotskyists – and a union in which they play an influential rôle – helped awaken the revolutionary movement to the intensity of the critical situation in which it finds itself. This, we believe, is true of all revolutionary groups in the country, not to mention their sympathizers, who are, of course, even more subject to bourgeois ideological pressures.
The realization that the prosecution of these Trotskyists in Minneapolis is a signal indication of the drive towards totalitarianization of our social life, and the extraordinarily sharp nature of this realization because the movement effected is also a Trotskyist tendency, is only enhanced when one is actually present at the trial. There is no teacher like experience. You may talk about the iniquities of capitalist injustice ad infinitum and ad nauseam, but when you actually come up against them in a political case of historic importance, as this one is, then your words take on a significance and a burning relevance they have never before had!
It is not our purpose to re-examine the details of the testimony and legal aspects of the trial here; that we have done at some length in dispatches to Labor Action, the weekly newspaper of the Workers Party. We should here like to note, however, a few of the highlights and conclusions of the trial.
 
One Hundred and Forty Years Apart
The U.S. Government is clearly treading on completely new and (for the labor movement) dangerous ground in this prosecution. This is the first peacetime sedition prosecution since the regime of John “Adams; the two laws which the defendants are alleged to have violated have never been applied to a case of this kind before. From a legal standpoint – and the working class has every need to pay the closest attention to the capitalist laws! – the case is without precedent. As a matter of fact, I.F. Stone in a report to The Nation, informs us that the Department of Justice itself is doubtful of the constitutionality of one of the laws on which the prosecution is based – the totalitarian Smith Act, which violates the First Amendment to the Constitution by outlawing expressions of opinion as to the advisability or “propriety” of overthrowing the U.S. Government. As far as the second count is concerned, even the prosecution has been forced to admit the absence of any overt act on the part of the defendants to conspire to overthrow the government, which the courts have ruled is necessary in order to constitute a violation of Article 6 of the Criminal Code.
Clearly then, there must be some pressing goal which the government feels necessary to reach in order to essay a prosecution on such flimsy grounds. It is not for the mere sport of it that the Roosevelt Administration has so desperately “gone after” the SWP and Local 544.
The answer is of course immediately found in the trade union situation existing among the Northwest truckdrivers. The conflict between the anti-war and militant leadership of Local 544-CIO and the AFL Teamsters (led by a Roosevelt favorite, Dan Tobin) is no mere local jurisdictional dispute. It eventually involves the future character of the entire truckmen’s union – a victory for the CIO forces in Minnesota would spell the beginning of a similar process nationally. The Roosevelt regime, however, which is extraordinarily sensitive to such matters, does not relish the idea of the crucial truck drivers’ union-or even its Northwest section – being led by anti-war militants. It has therefore interceded to crush this movement while it is still young, just as it ached to crush the “obnoxious” miners but could not do so because of their strength.
 
Part of War Preparations
It is not merely a political debt that FDR is paying off to a faithful servant such as Tobin is; it is one of the most significant moves to crush oppositionist sections of the trade union movement that Roosevelt has yet taken. And the tragedy of the situation is that so many unions have failed to recognize that!
But while the above is undoubtedly the major, immediate reason for the prosecution, there is still another – potentially more important. We cannot take seriously the pretentions of the SWP that the government is cracking down on it because of the threat which it represents to American capitalism and the war plans of the Roosevelt government. At present, the SWP amounts to little more than the proverbial hill of beans; if such a tiny political sect could at present really represent a serious threat to American capitalism, then we might actually prepare immediately to celebrate its demise.
But when the SWP says that the trial is intended to set a precedent for future persecution of dissident groups, especially those opposed to the war from a left point of view, then it is obviously correct. The Roosevelt regime which more sharply reacts to the affairs of the labor, and even of the radical, movement than the ordinary dull, conservative and plodding capitalist administration (if only because so many of its bright lads have “graduated” from them), has the ability of preparing for the future. Thus it kills several birds with one stone: it smashes a dissident trade union that can potentially be very “troublesome”; it sets legal precedents for future and perhaps even more important prosecutions; and perhaps it throws a bit of a scare and gives a bit of a warning (it thinks to itself) to other dissidents.
These, we believe, are the essential reasons for this fantastic trial, in which perjurer after perjurer is paraded up to the witness stand by the government in order to tell how V.R. Dunne or some other defendant told him – always, to be sure, in private conversations at indefinite occasions (which cannot be checked!) – that the SWP advocated violent overthrow of the government. It is for these reasons that the government indulges in such a weak case that it must rest its proof on the testimony of witnesses who are, without exception, known as the bitterest inter-union enemies of Local 544-CIO, all of them being AFL leaders and on the Tobin payroll. It is for these reasons that the government continues vigorously to press a case in which the only overt act it can produce to substantiate its case is the organization of a Union Defense Guard several years ago by 544. And it is again for these reasons that the government, for the first time in American history, introduces the 93 year old Communist Manifesto as evidence and contends that its circularization proves intent to overthrow the government!
 
Protectors of Civil Liberties!
How typical it is of the entire political evolution of the Roosevelt Administration and of its present status, that the special prosecutor sent from the Department of Justice, Henry Schweinhaut, was formerly in charge of a newly created section of the Department of Justice organized to protect ... civil liberties! Besides the obvious irony, there are also political implications.
There is no one so adept at destroying civil liberties as their former protector. (Not, of course, that Schweinhaut was ever too zealous in their protection!) From the head of a government bureau especially designed to impress labor and the liberals with the government’s interest in their civil rights, to the chief inquisitor of the first Roosevelt political lynching bee! And Schweinhaut, who of course is merely the representative of Attorney General Biddle, in turn the representative of Number 1, has proved himself very adept at the job.
With the aid of an extremely cooperative judge, legal precedents have been set at this trial, which, if sustained, represent a grave threat to labor’s civil rights. Witnesses are allowed to sit in court and listen to the testimony of previous witnesses, so that they can check their testimony and impress consistency into their perjury. The prosecution plays with two theories of conspiracy – neither of which attempt to prove its actual existence, but both assume it. One of them assumes the conspiracy to be a secret group within the SWP, in which case the government has failed to prove its secret existence nor the connection to it of a group of the defendants who lived 1,300 miles away from the alleged scene of the conspiracy; the second theory assumes the SWP itself to be the conspiracy, in which case the very right of existence of a revolutionary party is threatened. Evidence is introduced by the government, and admitted by the judge, on the ground that it “indicates the state of mind of the defendants,” in relation to one of the counts (the Smith Act of June, 1940) on events which took place before the passage of the act! Evidence considered by the government sufficient to convict the defendants of advocating the violent overthrow of the government is also presented as sufficient to prove an actual conspiracy to do so.
Perjury, flagrant contradictions, ex post facto rulings, confusion and deliberate contradiction of the very definition of the alleged crime of conspiracy, the use of commonly-known Marxist classics as evidence – the prosecution stops at nothing; everything goes.
In the midst of all this, the conduct of the defendants leaves little to be desired. They stood up firmly and defended their principles; they did not compromise any of their basic beliefs. If they will be convicted, it is clear that their only crime was an intransigent belief in their ideas.
The political lessons to be drawn from this trial in terms of the development of American politics are fairly obvious. We wish only to stress one of them here, which so many of the intellectual friends of the revolutionary movement constantly minimize. And that is the need for a stable, strong and steeled revolutionary party. It is only with such a party that the revolutionary and militant workers will be able to meet similar crises of an even more severe nature in the future. And it is only with such a party – which provides the necessary backbone and rallying center and ideological support – that the intellectual friends of the revolutionary workers will be able to maintain their balance and allegiances. The strengthening and building of that party remains the need of the hour.
 



AMONG THE innumerable bourgeois democratic magazines that are making their appearance these days, Free World (issued for the first time at the end of September) occupies a leading position. It has what even the most casual observer can notice in a moment – Class (in a sedate sort of way.) Its international honorary board and international editorial board read like a Who’s Who of Unemployed Bourgeois Ministers. The veritable cream of the intellectual stars of the democratic world – the former foreign ministers of former democratic republics, the former editors of former social-democratic newspapers, plus a liberal sprinkling of American foreign correspondents – grace the pages of Free World. Alvarez del Vayo, who betrayed the Spanish workers, rubs shoulders with Pierre Cot, who betrayed the French workers and helped no little in strangling the Spanish. The new school of hysterical war-thirsty females is represented by Dorothy Thompson and Freda Kirchwey. And there are the usual array of South American, Chinese and other second-rate politicians of second-rate powers. Nor is the American intelligentsia unrepresented: the arch-reactionary, Nicholas Murray Butler, is one of the beacon lights of Free World.
While most of the articles in the first number of Free World consist of panegyrics for moral values, democracy, human dignity, essential nobility, independent thinking and other fine things, there is one article of unusual interest, which if its type is to continue can become a great institution of world letters. This is the article called Round Table No. 1, consisting of a purported transcript of a conversation presumed to have been held between the following dignitaries: Quo Tai-chi, Foreign Minister of the Chinese Republic and an agent of that well known democrat, Chiang Kai-shek; Dr. Hugo Fernandez Artucio, professor of the University of Montevideo; Mrs. J. Borden Harriman, American Minister to Norway; Count Sforza, pre-Mussolini Foreign Minister of Italy; Pierre Cot, Minister of Air in the Leon Blum cabinet; and J. Alvarez del Vayo, Foreign Minister of the Negrin cabinet of Loyalist Spain. An imposing array, eh what?
 
My! What Scoundrels We Have Been!
These people have come together to reminisce about the immediate causes of the Second World War and the parts they played. They begin with a discussion of the appeasement policy which to them is the Original Sin from which all the other transgressions follow. Sforza, who is the cleverest of the lot, understands part of the cause of the appeasement policy – the desire of the Allied imperialists to draw Hitler into war against the Soviet Union – but he succumbs to the fantasy which they all hold: the theory that it was due to blindness on the part of the leaders of England and France. In reality, of course, appeasement was merely an integral part of imperialist policy, as war is today. It was part of the desperate game that the Allies were playing of (1) trying to buy Hitler off in order to avoid what they saw as the dreadful consequence of the war for world capitalism as a whole; and (2) continued stalling for time so that they could rebuild their military machines. The proof of this is that when Chamberlain came back to England after the Munich pact which he said was going to preserve the peace ... he also hastened to mention that in his opinion the first job of England was to arm to the teeth!
These bourgeois democrats, try to lull themselves (and others) with the illusion that the roots of this war are an ideological repugnance for fascism, rather than imperialist rivalry.
But the most damning testimony comes from the lips of Pierre Cot. He tells us in detail how the Peoples Front government betrayed the French workers, how the government had specific knowledge of the tie-up between the Cagoulards and the army general staff and refused to act upon it, how the government deliberately kowtowed to Britain on the issue of aid to Loyalist Spain. What a damning record of the impotence and futility of class collaboration; what a complete confirmation of everything Trotsky wrote anent Monsieur Cot’s Front Populaire.
But all that Cot can understand is that if he and the others would have fought for allowing Loyalist Spain to purchase arms is ... that it would have caused a cabinet crisis, which would have been “hardly propitious.” Those whom the gods would destroy ...
 
They Would Do It Over Again
The one other interesting aspect of the magazine is the streak of haunting inferiority complex and perplexity and doubt which runs through every article as to war aims. Being theoreticians of the capitalist class instead of mere propagandists for it, these people find it necessary to attempt to formulate some program. Thus, Eduard Benes begins with some awesome phrases about human dignity, etc. (see list of adjectives at the beginning of the article) and ends, somewhat bashfully, with his real program: the dismemberment of Germany. Another writer suggests that there be no statement of war aims since the war aims of the Allies are too noble, too idealistic (see list of adjectives at the beginning of the article) to bear concrete statement. Still another writer suggests that the ideology of ... Sun Yat-Senism become the basis of the new world if the Allies win.
And then there is Nicholas Murray Butler, who says that he wants a new world wherein the rich will be taught not to exploit the poor – too much – and the poor will be taught not to hate the rich!
We carefully refrain from further comment – there are times when it is better to stand in awesome silence than to attempt to say anything.

P.S. – We have forgotten to mention that Free World is graced by an extraordinarily bad poem by Archibald MacLeish. But, come to think of it, what is there so surprising about that? Could anyone imagine this sort of a magazine without an extraordinarily bad poem by Archibald MacLeish? – I.H.
 



On Monday, October 27, the trial of 28 working class militants, leaders of Local 544-CIO Teamsters and of the Socialist Workers Party, on charges of “seditious conspiracy,” will begin. This trial is unquestionably the most important in American labor history since the mass prosecutions of the IWW during the First World War and the sending of Eugene Debs to jail because he dared voice his socialist opposition to the war.
The American labor movement is confronted here with a trial which is of utmost importance to it. What is at stake are not merely the rights of the Socialist Workers Party or the rights of Local 544, the basic rights and freedoms of the militant labor movement and the rights of existence and free expression for minority radical parties are at stake.
The government has made clear that it considers this a test case. As Assistant U.S. Attorney-General Schweinhaut said: “We cracked down here FIRST. Mr. Biddle has said this is only a START. So you can expect other actions to follow shortly.” (St. Paul Dispatch of June 28, 1941)
As the trial, which is expected to last for at least two months, progresses, Labor Action hopes to bring its readers regular and detailed reports of the proceedings. In the meantime, we wish to indicate the causes for the prosecution of the 28 militants.
 
No. 544’s Record
Local 544 has been, for the past several years, one of the most militant and progressive unions in the country. In 1934, it won a series of bitter strikes in Minneapolis, which established it as the bargaining agency of the truck drivers in that city. The local had far greater influence than merely in its own trade and locality; it was instrumental in making Minneapolis a strong union center and aided numerous local unions and it helped organize the truck drivers of 11 bordering states, which brought over 200,000 drivers into the Teamsters International. The leader of this 11-state drive was Farrell Dobbs, official of Local 544, and a leader of the Socialist Workers Party.
For a considerable time, a state of “armed peace” existed between Local 544 and the Teamsters International, led by Dan Tobin, a Democratic Party war horse. Though Tobin was, of course, aware of the militant character of the local and the radical sympathies of some of its leaders (some were friendly to the policies of the Socialist Workers Party), he did not enter into any frontal attack against 544. It paid its per capita tax – and brought in a lot of additional members who paid their per capita. Tobin also recalled the previous occasion, in 1935, during which he had scrapped with No. 544, he had come off second best.
It took the war hysteria, which was growing in the spring of 1941, to give Tobin sufficient courage and cause to launch a new attack on the leadership of 544. In the May 1941 issue of his Teamsters Journal, Tobin published an editorial which accused some Minneapolis teamsters of being “known advocates of the Socialist Workers Party” (Tobin had known that for at least seven years!) and declared that anyone who did not resign from the SWP or anyone who opposed the war policies of President Roosevelt would be expelled from the ranks of the Teamsters International.
Tobin concretized these declarations with an order to No. 544 demanding that the local submit to a dictator-receiver to be appointed by Tobin, who would have complete powers to run the local, including the power to expel anyone.
 
544 Joins the CIO
Rather than submit to this outrageous demand to allow their union to be cut to pieces by one of Tobin’s stooges, Local 544 voted to disaffiliate from the AFL and join the CIO’s United Construction Workers’ organizing committee.
It is at this crucial point that the fight between Tobin and No. 544 begins to take on real national importance. For, as soon as 544 went CIO and a number of other teamster locals followed, Tobin made a desperate move to keep his power over the teamsters. He appealed directly and openly to President Roosevelt, who, it should be remembered, owed him a political debt for the election work which Tobin had done for the Democratic Party last November – declaring that the affiliation of No. 544 with the CIO was a “regrettable and dangerous condition,” that “those disturbers who believe in the policies of foreign, radical governments must in some way be prevented from pursuing THIS DANGEROUS COURSE.”
In other words, Tobin was asking FDR to crack down op Local 544 because ... they were militant unionists and opposed his war policies.
 
Roosevelt Cracks Down
And Roosevelt cracked down! He immediately issued a statement declaring that it was understandable why “Bundists, Stalinists and Trotskyists are opposed to them” (that is, Tobin & Co. – I.H.) and why such elements should seek to “destroy loyal trade unions which are supporting democracy.” He continued by saying that, in his opinion, this was no time “for labor unions, local or national, to begin raiding each other for the purpose of getting memberships.”
After this false and hypocritical statement (for what was involved was clearly not a matter of raiding for membership, but rather the right of a local union to choose its own leadership in a democratic way even if that leadership were radical!), the government moved fast. The Minneapolis SWP headquarters, as well as those of 544, were raided and a series of indictments issued against leaders of both organizations.
These indictments charged the SWP leaders with “sedition” and “intent to overthrow the government by force” and charged that the organization in 1938 of a Union Defense Guard was a concrete instance of this above purposes.
A few words need to be said about the basis for prosecution. The SWP itself is charged with no overt act which can in any way be construed as being of such a nature as would overthrow the U.S. Government. It has indicated its belief that America is fighting a reactionary war, that the workers should not support such a war and that it intends to convince the American workers of the desirability of socialism. The holding or expressing of these revolutionary socialist opinions is clearly in line with the right of free speech set down in the Bill of Rights. To deprive the SWP of this right would be a step toward constituting a dictatorship which would suppress minority radical points of view.
Likewise with the charge that Local 544 organized a Union Defense Guard to “overthrow the government.” This charge is patently false since the organization of the Guard was a public matter, known in all Minneapolis, and had as its purpose the defense of the union from attacks which the Silver Shirt fascist movement was threatening to make. As soon as this threat was dispelled, the Defense Guard was gradually disbanded, its last activity being to usher at a union picnic for children!
 
Resurrect Old Law
The indictments have been obtained on the basis of a law which was enacted during the Civil War in July 1861 and of the recently enacted “Omnibus Gag” Act, introduced by Poll-Tax and Labor-Hater Congressman Smith of Virginia. The first law has seldom been used since the Civil War and the constitutionality of the second is seriously questioned. Despite these flimsy, ludicrous grounds, the government is proceeding with the prosecutions.
The purpose should now be clear to every union militant. Roosevelt is out to pay Dan Tobin a political debt – by wiping out the militant leaders of 544 who threaten Tobin’s domination in that industry. If these prosecutions succeed, it is clear that no militant, fighting trade union leadership may not also be framed. What is at stake here is the right of a trade union to choose its own leaders, regardless of their politics. What is at stake here is the right of a revolutionary socialist party to express its anti-war opinions freely and in accordance with the rights which the Bill of Rights grants it. What is at stake is a deliberate, conscious attempt by the government to help a reactionary, pro-war section of the labor movement to destroy one of the most militant and progressive unions in the country.
 
Unions Defend 544
The labor movement has risen to the defense of the 28 militants. The national CIO, the United Automobile Workers Union, Labor’s Non-Partisan League and numerous other lesser labor organizations have come to the defense of 544. The American Civil Liberties Union has publicly protested the prosecution and is cooperating with the defence.
A united front committee, the Civil Rights Defense Committee, has been formed. The Workers Party has endorsed this committee, and its national secretary, Max Shachtman, is a member of it.
The eyes of every militant worker will be riveted on the Minneapolis trial for the next several weeks. Will we have a repetition of the infamous Palmer raids of the last war, when working class and trade union movements were ruthlessly suppressed, when the government sent hundreds of IWW and anti-war socialists to prison for merely expressing their opinions?
Will Roosevelt conduct his “war for democracy” as Wilson conducted the first one – by persecuting dissidents, by clapping fighting trade unionists into jail?
The American workers await the answer – they watch the trials in Minneapolis – but they are convinced that in the long run it will be they, the masses of the trade union movement, who will decide, and not the witch-hunters of the Roosevelt government.
(The Civil Rights Defense Committee has issued a pamphlet giving the facts on the Minnesota anti-labor case. The pamphlet contains an introduction by James T. Farrell, well known American novelist and chairman of the committee, as well as a thorough review of the case by George Novack. Copies may be obtained by writing to the Civil Rights Defense Committee, 160 Fifth Avenue, New York City.)
 



THE IMPORTANCE OF A MAN like Louis Fischer is sometimes underestimated. There is an inclination to pass him by as merely another journalist who has written the inevitable memoirs in the I Was There style. [1] Such an estimate in this case, however, would be completely erroneous.
For fifteen years Fischer has been writing as the journalistic high priest of the left intelligentsia, as a Stalinist and as the serious and authoritative spokesman of liberalism. He has garnered an international reputation, and the articles which we have read in The Nation have appeared in similar journals throughout the world: the Parisian L’Europe Nouvelle, the London New Statesman and Nation, the refugee Weltbuehne, the English Reynolds News, as well as other liberal journals. He has been in the unique position where, because of his ostentatious support of the popular program of the liberal intelligentsia and his until recently intimate connections with the Stalinist movement, he has been able to influence an extremely large section of intellectual opinion throughout the democratic world.
His book continues along the same lines. In no sense can it be considered in the same class as most foreign correspondent books. The anecdotes, the intimate interviews with leading statesmen, the personal details, the “impressions” are all present; but they are completely subordinate. Men and Politics is more in the nature of political history and a political document – not a personal autobiography. But it is an important book. It is the most complete and authoritative presentation of the point of view of the intrinsic non-Stalinist variety of Peoples Frontism, of social reformism, on the history of the last decade that has yet come to our attention. Fischer was, until the pact with Hitler, a servile hack of the Stalinists and did more than one literary “job” for them. Yet his writing in this book is so couched as to make you believe that his alliance with the Stalinists was, for him, a marriage of convenience; that the alliance could exist only so long as the Stalinists subordinated themselves to his essential program: bourgeois liberalism. In turn, he was ready to distort the Stalin-Trotsky fight, to maintain discreet silence about the Moscow trials, and about the deeds of the GPU in Spain (with which he was more than a little familiar). Only when Stalin abandoned his affair with bourgeois liberalism to engage in a brief flirtation with Hitler did Fischer discover the inherently repugnant moral nature of Stalinism and make his way back to pure and simple liberalism. Thus the knave writes.
Fischer is, thus, the representative and spokesman of an entire group. Bates, Sheean, Hicks and scores of others are part of it, but Fischer alone has succeeded in recording their history and development in a rounded, comprehensive and political Odyssey of the “Liberal Democrat.”
 
The Post-War Period and Fascism
Fischer traces the entire history of post-war Europe in terms of a moral struggle. The world made a mess of things during and after the First World War. The primary characteristic of post-war Europe was a mixture of greed and stupidity. Faced with the monster of Hitlerism, the democratic countries are paralyzed by their short-sighted failure to adopt a system of collective security which will end Hitlerism. Today, however, there are better and wiser men at the helm and provided Fischer can persuade Churchill and Roosevelt to adopt his program for reorganizing capitalism after the victory, the world may yet be saved. And Fischer, a sadder and wiser man, has learned that dictatorships in any form are bad: Bolshevism and Stalinism (for him they are the same!) are in essential respects different from fascism.
This simple approach to history does not ignore the class struggle; it merely chooses sides in that struggle. All of Fischer’s political calculations are based upon the assumption of the continued existence of capitalism. All of his writing on post-war Europe assumes the impossibility of a successful proletarian revolution. To function on the assumption that socialism is not a realistic perspective is not to ignore the class struggle; it is merely, in fact, a desire to choose politically within the framework of capitalism. Fischer might protest by citing his espousal of various progressive causes (Spain), his sympathy for the workers, etc., but his denial of the socialist revolution as a European or international perspective provides the decisive political coloration of the book.
With these few words on the general methodology and approach of the author, we can proceed directly to consider the four major topical divisions of the book.
 
Fischer and the Soviet Union
The question has often been raised about Fischer and his ilk, to what degree do they believe what they write? It is essentially an irrelevant question, but in Fischer’s case it has some interest. There is no particular reason to doubt that Fischer sincerely believes in collective security as the only way to stop Hitlerism, and there is as little doubt that Fischer did not, could not possibly have believed much of what he wrote about Russia. For Fischer was not a decrepit old nanny-goat, as were the Webbs, who “proved” the existence of freedom in Russia by citing its guarantee in the constitution. The articles which Fischer wrote on Russia (some of the less blatant ones are interwoven into the book) were just as much “jobs” for Stalinism as was the murder of Ignace Reiss by the GPU.
Fischer’s best chapter on Russia is his first, Lenin’s Russia. It is limited to the field in which he writes best: quick, pointed observations which are more than mere surface impressions but which are incapable of being integrated into a genuine theoretical understanding.
This is nowhere better seen than in his lengthy section on the Stalin-Trotsky fight. Fischer has made a hobby of attempting to construct a defense of the Stalinist theoretical and economic position during the Opposition fight, and he continues essentially along the same lines. Fischer is disposed, first of all, to minimize the objective social roots of the struggle and place great emphasis on what profound journalists call “the personal feud.” But let us wait with that and examine his theoretical explanation.
Fischer’s explanation follows the basic Stalinist lines. The Trotskyism, lacking faith in the peasantry and considering it an enemy of socialism, wanted a program of “super-industrialization.” The only way in which this could be achieved would be to squeeze the peasantry. But that would antagonize the peasantry, drive them into basic opposition to the regime and endanger its existence. Yes, says Fischer, Trotsky was brilliant enough in seeing the danger of capitalist regrowth toward the end of the NEP; he was, however, incapable of proposing a real solution.
It is this fantastic nonsense, sold by Fischer at least a dozen times to every liberal journal throughout the world, which is again peddled as a serious analysis. What is the truth?
 
The Problems of Russian Economy
The Russian economy, prostrated by the ordeal of the imperialist war, the revolution and the subsequent civil war with its military organization of economic life, was only gradually nursed back into a position whereby it could even equal the economic norms of pre-Czarist Russia. Lenin achieved this on the basis of abandoning the “systematic regimentation of consumption in a besieged fortress” which was “War Communism,” in favor of the New Economic Policy. War Communism was predicated on the belief that aid would come from the victorious German proletariat and thus permit a direct transition to socialist economy. The factories of Russia, however, could not do what it was hoped the factories of Germany would, and as a result it was necessary to find a new policy. This was the NEP, which permitted free trading, abolished forced requisitions and replaced them with a fixed grain tax.
This policy has the temporary effect of increasing the amount of land under cultivation, increasing the amount of agricultural production and giving a certain impetus to industry, to the point where it almost reached the pre-Czarist level. But by 1928 the NEP begins to fall down. The growth of new capitalist elements – the petty trader, the kulak – and the growth of the omniverous bureaucracy threaten the very existence of the economy. The kulak, not being satisfied by the weak industry, hoards his grain, since he can get nothing for it except paper rubles, which were becoming inflated.
The only way to genuinely stimulate the growth of agricultural commodity production is to embark on an ambitious but rationally planned system of industrialization. Only if Russian industry were capable of providing the machinery necessary for large scale agriculture could genuine collectives be established and the basis for undermining the kulaks created.
These are the general, internal economic features of the situation. The problem of industrialization is not one that can be posed only, as Fischer demagogically does, between city and countryside, between worker and peasant. The only way to close the gap, to narrow the scissors, is by an ambitious policy of industrialization which makes possible the gradual, voluntary but relatively rapid collectivization of agriculture and the squeezing out of the kulak at a similar pace. For then the technique necessary for collective farming, as well as the products desired by the kulak in exchange for his, would be available..
Ha-ha, chortles the wise Fischer, will this not also result in strengthening the kulak? But here is where the proletarian state comes in. It must place a heavy tax on the excess profits of the kulaks, as well as a forced loan of 150 million poods of grain. And with this we answer the other bright question propounded by Fischer. He asks: Who will pay for this industrialization program, and will a policy of “squeezing the peasants” not result in antagonizing them? (Twenty pages later we find him apologizing for some rather more significant squeezing: Stalin’s forced collectivizations, famines and peasant pogroms ... but no matter.) The answer to this question has already been indicated in relation to Trotsky’s proposed policy toward the kulaks. It needs but to be added that the Left Opposition proposed that the vast and swelling bureaucracy be sharply cut to provide additional funds for industrialization. But how can Fischer take this factor into account, since he does not even see the existence of a bureaucracy? He is too preoccupied in peddling the old tales that Trotsky wanted to “milk the peasantry” and liquidate the Kulak to understand that Trotsky’s program would have limited the kulaks (since it was economically impossible to abolish them), aided the poorer peasants and assaulted the bureaucracy.
 
He Falsifies the Rôle of Trotsky
But let us leave these matters alone for a moment. Fischer is guilty, in his account of the struggle, of even greater crimes of omission than commission. Not a word is to be found on the question of party democracy and soviet democracy, not one word. That is one reason why he cannot understand, even if he wished to, why Trotsky continued to oppose Stalin once the latter made his about-face to forced collectivization and super-industrialization. There is not a word about the validity or non-validity of the Stalinist theory of Socialism in One Country. That is why Fischer will later keep his discreet silence about the period in which the dependence of Soviet economy on world economy was proved by the effects of the world crisis on the Five Year Plan. Trotsky’s insistence that only with the proletarian revolution in western Europe could socialism be established in Russia, Fischer distorts in the most callous fashion. Trotsky, we are suddenly informed, “had no faith in united fronts” ... because he opposed the Anglo-Russian trade union bloc! The incorrectness of Trotsky’s position is shown by the fact that the revolutions in the West did not come, demonstrating “that the prospect of revolution in an advanced European country was not bright.” But that the rôle of the Social-Democracy and the Stalinists might have had something to do with this – not a word. The world is not ready for proletarian revolutions: in the advanced countries capitalism is too strong, in the backward countries the proletariat is too weak. Inescapable logic! And in the meantime it is better to support Stalin ... he is practical.
 
Fischer Learns from ... Duranty!
If Fischer owes a debt of gratitude to the Stalinist theoreticians for his explanation of the struggle, he owes an even greater debt to that well known expert on the Russian soul and its psychology, Walter Duranty. It is from Duranty that he has borrowed his “personality analysis” – those puerile and stupid bits of gossip. Trotsky “was an erratic and capricious individual”; he “either ignored individual psychology or else did not understand it”; he “preferred a field of activity for himself where he would be first.” Fischer also repeats the by now threadbare phrases (which are, incidentally, also repeated by people who never were Stalinist hacks and who should know better) about Trotsky’s organizational naiveté, his inability to build a faction. Stalin is not as smart; he cannot write (or read) as well as Trotsky; but he has “strength, will and faith.”
These are the writings not of an impressionable schoolboy but of a man who is regarded as an “authority” in the capitalist world and who has hobnobbed with the “great statesmen” of the age. It is slight wonder that Fischer chose Stalin as against Trotsky; it was a perfectly correct choice for him.
Having made this choice, there was nothing for Fischer to do except defend Stalin all along the line. That, of course, was what he actually did. Having since broken with Stalinism, he is at great pains to begin his criticism of Stalin early in the book in order to make it appear as if he were always critical. Fischer has not forgotten what he learned from the Stalin school of journalism: he is still quite adept at rewriting history, even if it be his own personal history.
Fischer conveniently neglects to discuss the famous forced collectivization, with its mass murders, mass famines, its resultant industrial breakdown because of the inability of industry to keep pace with the newly-collectivized agriculture, its destruction of workers’ standards, its final debacle in inflation, and then Stalin’s new right turn – Dizzy With Success – permitting gradual differentiation within the collective, as well as the substitution of the artel for the kolhoz. Fischer keeps quiet about the period of the Great Wretchedness. But he did not keep quiet then.
 
Fischer Is a Liar
At that time he was busy hailing the forced collectivization as the guarantee of socialism in Russia. He was writing such absurdities as: “It was largely because Trotsky did not foresee the possibility of collectivizing Soviet agriculture that he rejected Stalin’s thesis of socialism in one country.” He was hailing the birth of a classless society. And it all readied a grand climax in 1936 when the new Stalinist constitution was introduced. Let me quote a few of the things he wrote in The Nation at that time:
“It is difficult for him (Trotsky – I.H.) to believe that the bureaucracy will undermine itself, yet that is the very reason for the newly introduced secret ballot.”
“When a truth about the Soviet Union is told too early to unprepared minds, it is ‘propaganda’ ... Now for a few years it will be ‘propaganda’ is say that Russia is scrapping the dictatorship and establishing a real democracy.”
“Collectivization, industrialization and now the launching of democracy – with these remarkable achievements, Stalin’s place in history is secure.”
“The constitution guarantees paid employment, leisure and free education to all the inhabitants of the country. This describes an existing condition.”
“The date (of the adoption of the constitution – I.H.) will be a new era in civil liberties for Soviet citizens ... the Stalin dictatorship is the first to resign in favor of democracy.”
In his present book, Fischer proceeds blandly to inform us that the constitution did not guarantee any sort of liberty but was merely a facade for the increasing GPU terror. The serious reader has the right to inquire: Why and when did you change, Mr. Fischer? And why did you lie when the constitution was first published?
But Fischer feels no particular responsibility for what he wrote then. He merely proceeds to lie a bit more. Here are two sentences from the same page (349):
“I think, therefore, that originally Stalin really intended the Soviet constitution as a charter of greater freedom.”
“Yet just at the moment when the constitution ... came into being, the personal dictatorship showed its ugliest face.”
 
A Few More Questions to the Penman
This man is obviously caught in a trap between his previous lies and his retrospective attempts either to ignore or whitewash them. But we must not allow him. We must again ask:

Why, Louis Fischer, did you not say anything about the “ugliest face” of the dictatorship in 1936?
 
Why did you keep quiet about the first Moscow trial which you now call the “bloodiest purge in history”?
 
Why do you now have the temerity to write fifty pages minutely analyzing the Moscow frame-ups while you had not a word to say at the time?
 
Why do you now speak so glibly about your first-hand knowledge of the murder of Ignace Reiss, when you had not a word to say at the time?
 
Why do you now write such harrowing pages about the numerous Soviet citizens who you knew were abducted and murdered by the GPU without trial while you had not a word to say then, when it might have mattered?
 
You had faith, you say, in the great economic achievements of Russia. So faith was enough to keep you silent about juridical mass murders, about the greatest terror regime in history?

Only a person like you, Louis Fischer, king of the philistines and prince of liars, could establish such a record of filth and hypocrisy. But you established a unique record; nobody but you could have written: “The Stalin dictatorship is the first to resign in favor of democracy.”
 
A Discourse on Spain
Fischer’s theoretical contributions on the Spanish Civil are much less ambitious than his chapters on Russia. They are written in that sickly, hypocritical lyricism which characterizes most liberal apologists of Azana and Stalin.
The basic social problem in Spain, as seen by Fischer, was the existence of feudalism in large sectors of its economy. The civil war was provoked by the resistance of feudalism to the reforms which the republican government was instituting and the resultant line-up of opposing forces was: the feudal land-owning class against all “progressive sections” of the population. By “progressive sections” we are to understand the capitalist class (since capitalism is progressive in relation to feudalism) as well as the workers and peasants. It is by this silly little myth that Fischer would justify the political alliance of the Spanish reformist working class parties with the bourgeois parties of Azana and Martinez Barrio.
But Fischer, who is forced to recognize more than the official Stalinist hacks, must necessarily admit that considerable sections of his progressive Spanish capitalist class were in alliance with Franco’s “feudal” forces. This he explains on the basis of the short-sightedness of the Spanish bourgeoisie who should have sided with the forces of progressivism but who feared that a relaxation of the police power and a revolt aimed at the landlords might catapult against them. Revealing admission! It is already enough to condemn Peoples Frontism. But what Fischer fails – or does not wish – to see is that in a backward country, such as Spain, which functions in the contracting world market of declining capitalism, the reactionary character of agricultural relations are buttressed and maintained by capitalism, that it is often the banks or the industrialists allied with or dependent on the banks, which fear the destruction of the power of the landowner. The destruction of the semi-feudal relations of agriculture in a backward country entails the destruction of the finance capitalist who has part of his investment in the land. That is why it is necessary to destroy capitalism in order to even complete the bourgeois revolution in agriculture; that is why the proletariat alone today can satisfy the needs of the peasantry, which in the period of expanding, progressive capitalism could to some degree be satisfied by the bourgeoisie.
It is because of this basic theoretical ignorance that Fischer is unable to understand anything that took place in Spain. We do not wish to exaggerate – but Fischer understands nothing of fundamental theoretical questions. In other cases he deliberately lies.
 
The Class Issues
Let us take a few problems of the civil war at random. First, what might be called the internal political curve of the Loyalist camp. Up to a certain point in the war, roughly about the time of the Barcelona May Day, the power of the proletariat, while in capable of finding organized revolutionary expression, remains great and to some degree even increases. After May Day, we see the consolidation of the bourgeois democratic regime of Negrin and the destruction of the dual power of the proletariat. Fischer is completely blind to this development. For him, the problem is military, not social. The consolidation of the bourgeois government, the destruction of the peasant collectives, workers’ control of the factories, and the workers’ militia in Catalonia, the restoration of the land to the pro-Loyalist landowners, the persecution of the revolutionary proletarian organizations – all these are not indices of a rightward political swing but rather of an increase in the efficiency of the Loyalist camp. Proletarian initiative is equated with lack of a centralized military command; dual power is equated with sabotage of the military struggle against Franco.
Fischer is thus forced to whitewash the military betrayals of the bourgeoisie at Santander and Bilbao. He has not a word to say about the fact that it was the unarmed proletariat (even after Franco struck, Azana, Fischer’s darling, refused arms to the proletariat of Madrid) which saved Madrid and Barcelona from the fascist officers. He does not understand that the issue was not: Shall there be a centralized command? But rather: What shall be the political character of the regime which sponsors the centralized command: proletarian or bourgeois? And it was only because Fischer’s friends – Caballero, Negrin, Azana, Prieto, Hernandez and Stalin – decreed that Spain would not go beyond the bounds of liberal capitalism, that Franco won the war.
To buttress his untenable argument, Fischer is forced to repeat the Stalinist canards about Spain. The anarchists, we are told, were cowards at the front and did not take the fighting seriously. Then how does Fischer explain that the Sarragossa and Catalonian fronts, on which the anarchists fought, were the only ones where the Loyalists held firm throughout the war? How does he explain the fact that in the crucial early days it was only the anarchist column, commanded by Durrutti, that saved Madrid?
Another point needs briefly to be mentioned. Fischer waxes enthusiastic about the aid which Russia gave to Spain. There is considerable evidence in his book to indicate that at that time he was working in very close contact with the Soviet embassy under the control of Marcel Rosenberg, a GPU agent which whom Fischer was extremely intimate. Fischer, however, does not bother to inform us the price which Stalin exacted for his paltry material aid: the destruction of the Spanish revolution. He has not a word to say about the fact that had it not been for the intervention of the GPU, the possibility of a proletarian assumption of power would have still been great; and that could have transformed a defeat into a victory.
 
And Still He Lies
Instead, Fischer resorts to the crudest sort of falsifications. Negrin and the Stalinists, we are informed, desired nationalization of industry and collectivization of the land; they merely opposed hasty and anarchic expropriations! (How this man can lie!) The entire course of the Negrin regime was the destruction of collectives and workers’ control of industry. The very program of the Peoples Front opposed collectivization: “We do not accept the principle of the nationalization of the land and its free distribution to the peasants.” Could anything be plainer?
Fischer repeats the old slander that it was the desertion of a POUM regiment from the front and its march on Barcelona which provoked the Barcelona May Day. Nothing of the kind occurred, of course; the Barcelona May Days were merely the most dramatic instance of the destruction of proletarian dual power.
It is only after repeating this Stalinist version of the Spanish events that Fischer remembers ... he is no longer a Stalinist. He therefore decorates his chapters on Spain (which are merely a reprint of his pamphlet written in 1937–8 completely Stalinist document) with some anti-Stalinist trimmings and some interesting admissions. The latter are more important. Fischer tells us that he knew of the murder of a Trotskyite named Wolfe by the Stalinists. He was informed by a high Stalinist official (Who? Why does Fischer still shield him?) that the documents purporting to prove the POUM fascist were forgeries manufactured by the GPU.
Why did Fischer keep quiet about these things? Why did he not tell the truth then?
 
The Nature of the War
If only Chamberlain had not been a fool, if only Delbos had had courage, if only the British and French bourgeoisie had realized that it was in their interests to defend Spain and Czechoslovakia, if only Bonnet had been honest, if only there had been no appeasers, if only there had been some politicians who would have fought against the appeasers ...
If only ...
Fischer’s writings on Russia and Spain are venomous and dishonest, his chapters on the war and its background are simply pathetic. It was all due to the blindness and stupidity and lack of courage of a few men. Fascism, the decay of capitalism, the social conditions of the proletariat, the destruction of the revolution by Stalin – these are not even considered.
But the gossip of the slimy Bonnet, the sighs of the watery Delbos – these are important.
Why did the European democratic bourgeoisie follow the policy of appeasement? There are numerous, complex reasons and Fischer notices none of them. He sees only the most superficial manifestations of these reasons – the personal impotence and cowardice of the appeaser politicians. Let us list a few of the basic reasons.
The bourgeoisie feared war. It feared was because it was aware of the consequences. It was aware of the potential might of the proletariat, which might be set off by a large-scale war. It was aware that the result of the First World War had been the success of the proletarian revolution in one country and the near-success in several others. It did not relish the possible repetition of similar circumstances. Resultantly, it was prepared to make considerable concessions to Hitler in order to preserve the capitalist peace.
England and France did not want war because they had everything to lose and little to gain. The entire post-war history of Europe had been marked by a continuous struggle between France and England, the latter attempting to prevent France from gaining continental hegemony. That is one reason why England had watched the rise of Hitler with considerable sympathy. France, with the fall of Czechoslovakia, had already lost whatever domination it had over the continent.
France by herself was in no position to fight against Hitler. England continued to play off Hitler against France. France responded by tacitly supporting Mussolini’s Ethiopian venture in order to retaliate against England. But this was “bad,” say Fischer. No, it was neither bad nor good; it was simply the political expression of imperialist rivalries which exist even among the democracies.
A third reason for the appeasement policy was the perspective which considerable sections of the French and English bourgeoisie had of unleashing Hitler, the super-Wrangel, on the Soviet Union, there to satisfy his imperialist appetite. These sections would not have even been averse to participating in the kill themselves; that was one motive in the signing of the Munich pact. The politicians of France and England did not guide their policies by the catchwords of democracy because they realized that that was not the issue.
Still another reason for appeasement was the need of the democracies to gain time in order to re-arm. They knew, if no one else did, their military weakness in comparison to Hitler. When Chamberlain came back from Munich he said that he had brought “peace for our time”; but he urged the tripling of all military expenditures in Parliament. The appeasement policy was extremely complex and subtle; it was based on a desire actually to appease Hitler and a desire to hold him off until satisfactory conditions could be found to oppose him. It could undoubtedly be argued that the French and English bourgeoisie made a grave error, from their class point of view, in not fighting Hitler at the time he invaded Czechoslovakia. But this error, and the conservatism and ineptitude and cowardice which to some degree prompted Chamberlain and Daladier to make it, are by no means basic to an analysis of appeasement. Only if the class issues involved, the inter-imperialist rivalries, their developments and mutations, and the internal social conditions are kept in mind, can an adequate analysis of the appeasement policy be made. If it is elevated to a supra-class and supra-historical abstraction – a sort of bogeyman of history – it serves only to confuse and not to explain.
 
An Instructor in Morality!
Fischer is today in the unenviable situation of being unable to live down his foul past or to substitute a more attractive present. He is an hysterical supporter of the imperialist war and he peddles the left social-patriotic platform of Laski and Williams to justify his position. But throughout his final programmatic chapter there is a constant strain of defeatism and despair. He is forced, at the end, to admit the decline of the entire social system and he has slight faith in the patchwork program he proposes. Like the others of his creed and generation, he is lost, finished. And not many tears need be shed on his behalf.
* * *

Louis Fischer was aware of the murder of Ignace Reiss by the GPU. He kept quiet.
 
Louis Fischer was aware of the frame-up of the Old Bolsheviks by Stalin. He kept quiet.
 
Louis Fischer was aware of the frame-up of the POUM by the GPU. He kept quiet.
 
All this while he was the defender and glorifier of Stalin.

It is clear, therefore, is it not, that with such a record and background, Louis Fischer may shortly be expected to write an annihilating critique of the amorality of ... Bolshevism.

Footnote
1. Men and Politics, by Louis Fischer; 672 pages. Duell, Sloan and Pearce. $3.50.
 



NEW YORK – The 9th national convention of the Young Communist League will open here this week-end with a mass meeting in Madison Square Garden. This convention will mark a climax to the drive to transform the Y.C.L. into an open jingo organization.
According to the preamble to the new Y.C.L. constitution proposed by its National Committee, the Y.C.L formally abandons any pretense to revolutionary ideas and becomes an organization which has, among others, the following purposes:
“Educate youth for citizenship in our democracy”; “Oppose all subversive efforts to attack, undermine or destroy our democracy from within or without”; and “promote clean living and develop healthy minds in healthy bodies and to protect the American home and family.”
Despite the accompanying bashful mention of socialism, these points – especially the one on “subversive efforts” which means to be against all idea of revolution – show that the Y.C.L. is trying its desperate best to prove itself to be a respectable organization desiring to live at peace with the capitalist world and capitalist youth organizations.
 
Pro-War Rally
The convention will have as its main function the whipping up of a war spirit among the delegates, especially those who are not hardened bureaucrats. In view of the war crisis, the Y.C.L. leadership wants to make sure that the organization will serve as an integral part of the war machine and the convention is the place, the youthful Browders figure, to whip up an appropriate war spirit.
Another function of the Y.C.L. convention will be to make certain changes in its declaration of principles in order to bring it up to date with its present political line. Such embarrassingly reminiscent points as “We condemn American intervention in the internal affairs of the Latin-American countries and the Philippines, and we support the Puerto Rican people in their fight for independence” will be eliminated. For it is obvious that the Stalinist movement, youth or adult, can no longer have any connection with movements for the liberation of oppressed colonial peoples, even if that connection is in an obscure document.
 
Jim-Crow Stalinists
A further indication of the rightward swing which this convention will mark may be seen from a recent article in the April pre-convention number of the Young Communist Review, which admits that Y.C.L. recruiting and education is on such a reactionary basis that in Chicago many branches exist on a Jim-Crow basis, dividing white and Negro youth into different groups!
Another step the convention will take will be the dissolution of student branches. These have in the past been centers of dissidence from the party line.
 



NEW YORK – The Young Communist League ended its Ninth National Convention last week by writing into its constitution a provision for the automatic expulsion of any Y.C.L.’er who advocates the overthrow of the American government by “force or violence.” This act typified the spirit in which the convention was held: utter capitulation to boss-rule and frantic toadying to capitalist youth organizations, no matter how reactionary they may be. All this was done in the name of “supporting democracy.”
Concretely, however, they demonstrated their conception of democracy by touring their goon squads around Madison Square Garden on the night the convention opened with a mass meeting, with orders to pick off members of the Y.P.S.L. (4th International) who were distributing a printed appeal to the Y.C.L.’ers urging them to break with Stalinism and to join the revolutionary movement. In most cases the sight of determined Yipsels ready to prevent provocation prevented them from doing their dirty work, but in one instance they pounced on a Yipsel and slashed him on the forehead so severely that hospital treatment was necessary.
On the last day of their convention, May 15, a group of at least 35 Y.C.L.’ers rushed 6 Yipsels who were distributing resignation statements of two former Y.C.L. members, Ruth Powell and Lillian Brown, and beat them so severely that one Yipsel was left dazed on the sidewalk for several minutes, unable to move. The statement being distributed declared that the signers, formerly active members of the Y.C.L. did not want to accept “Earl Browder’s invitation to collective suicide in the next imperialist; war” and urged the Y.C.L. members to “join with us in the only real anti-war force – the revolutionary movement of the Fourth International.”
 
No Discussion
The convention itself was marked by the usual Stalinist unanimity. Every speech, report, resolution and nomination was “enthusiastically received” and accepted. There was very little discussion from the rank and file delegates and that little was in the organizational sessions, not during the political sessions.
The political sessions were run in the form of reports from the C.P. and Y.C.L. leaders which laid down the line with out any discussion or any opportunity for other viewpoints to be expressed.
The major speech, by Earl Browder, came out for a third term for Roosevelt. The political significance of this has already been analyzed in the Socialist Appeal He also made a “collective suicide” appeal to youth to be ready to die in the coming imperialist war. This section of his speech set the tone for the major note of the convention: pumping the rank and file delegates full of propaganda for supporting capitalist wars.
 
Patriotic Americans
The main youth report, delivered by Carl Ross, Y.C.L. National Secretary, again played on the jingo note. Ross declared that “We (the Y.C.L.) are patriotic Americans guided by a desire to defend our country.” He also raised the slogan of giving youth “the right to work.” But his inability to go beyond mere platitudes about “old age for leisure and youth for work” stands in sharp contrast with the specific 3-point program for unemployed youth proposed by the Y.P.S.L.
By the third day of the convention, it was felt by the leadership of the Y.C.L. that the convention was definitely lagging in spirit. The delegates had been given lengthy reports on “democracy” by the C.P. leadership and swing exhibitions by Y.C.L. delegations and they were getting bored with both. In order, therefore, to liven up the convention the Y.C.L. leaders suddenly presented William Z. Foster as a surprise speaker. The fact that Foster represents, in the eyes of the Y.C.L., the old spirit of militancy and revolutionary politics and the additional fact that Foster gave a “leftist” speech, actually declaring that socialism was the goal of the Stalinist movement, led to the delegates giving Foster a tremendous ovation, much more enthusiastic than that given to any other speaker at the convention.
This ovation for Foster’s “radical” speech showed quite clearly that, despite the fact that they would later with mechanical unanimity pass the by-law against overthrow of the American government the rank and file delegates still retain vague hopes for socialism, even if they don’t yet realize that the Y.C.L. is the last place in the world to help achieve it.
 



Dear Comrade Editor:
I want to express my appreciation of Bill Morgan’s column describing the California Y.P.S.L. camp. It was the sort of article which renews one’s faith in the ability of our movement to fight against all odds until victory will be achieved. Bill caught the spirit which filled the California camp and other Y.P.S.L. Camps – the spirit of fight and study and enthusiasm and sacrifice.
(May I suggest that you change the manner of printing his articles? They would be much more attractive if you give them special feature headlines based on the material in each article, instead of burying each piece under the dull and unsuggestive column-head On the Line?)
I also want to officially invite the Appeal to send up a reporter to the New York Y.P.S.L. camp which is opening this week, especially to the training school which we will have on the week of August 25 and which will end in a grand jamboree. If you think California Y.P.S.L.’s run a good camp, you ain’t seen nothing till you come to the New York camp.



 


Fraternally,
Irving Howe



 

