


Our hero shoots another federal man, the federal men kill another brace of innocent bystanders, the mad search goes on – with the result that the newspapers gratefully coin a few more hundred thousands of dollars through their extras and special editions with which they have flooded the streets during the past few months: the Dillinger Period.
Now it is opportune for us to take a look at Dillinger, to examine and interpret this one-man crime wave from the Bolshevik point of view.
The bourgeoisie can condemn him, and do, a hundred times a day in their press. And for a very good reason. Mr. Dillinger frightens them; furthermore, they live in mortal terror lest he be apt to steal from them that money which they have in turn squeezed from the hides of the workers. The frantic appeals on the editorial page, urging the whole nation to rise up wrathfully and destroy Mr. Dillinger, are really amusing. He is labeled as Public Enemy Number One, the greatest menace society has known. Help us capture this fiend, you workers, for he may kidnap you or hold you up!
What tripe this is! The workers know full well who the real public enemies are. Compared with a Mellon, a Ford, Rockefeller, Hearst, the lone Dillinger ranks scarcely above the pick-pockets in our modern calendar of saints and sinners. But Dillinger has, up ’til now at least, been working the boulevards and the Gold Coasts rather than the avenues and the slums. The dainty occupants are bawling out their moral indignation. Yes, Dillinger is expropriating the expropriators. But is not this exactly what we hope to do? Let us look a bit further into the matter.
 
A High Class Bandit
As far as can be ascertained, Dillinger is no run-of-the-mill gangster. That is, Dillinger is not on the same level as the Capones and Maddens, obvious agents of the capitalist class, working hand in glove with the detective agencies, the A.F. of L. unions, the larger industrialists, newspapers, judges, chiefs of police, bankers, states attorneys, etc. No, we can assume that Dillinger preys directly on the capitalists, that he has never directly exploited the workers by the breaking of a strike, the bombing of a dry cleaning establishment, the railroading of a militant labor leader, or by performing any one of too myriad little tasks by which the ordinary gangsters serve their masters. Dillinger is an enemy of the bourgeoisie.
Should we not, then, take him to our bosoms: “The enemy of our enemy is our friend.” This, as a matter of fact, is the actual view that is held by an astounding number of workers and members of the petty bourgeoisie. Everywhere, one hears the weirdest opinions of Dillinger. He is called a Robin Hood, a friend of the oppressed.
And nothing could be further from the truth, of course, than envisaging Dillinger as a saviour, a friend of the workers. True, he expropriates the expropriators. But to whose purpose? The working class, or Mr. Dililnger’s own selfish purposes, and those of his henchmen? Dillinger robs the possessing class, but only in order to become a member of that class himself. No worker is a whit better off because Dililnger has tapped the golden stream to the extent of one million.
 
Flower of Capitalism
To understand the rural community from which Dillinger comes, plus the get-rich-quick philosophy which impregnated America until 1929, is to begin to understand Dillinger; a somewhat unique flower of capitalism, one that could attain growth only in the deadly competition which is everywhere rife in the United States.
In any case, the Dillingers of this age should have no significance for the workers. It is very like the press to devote tens of millions of words to Dillinger, and ignore events involving tens of thousands of people, events such as the various strikes now occurring which are of immeasurably more importance to humanity than are the exploits of a paranoic bandit.
Let the parasites fight off their parasites – it does not lift the heel from our necks.
 




In Buffalo, New York, a young unemployed worker is shot dead for taking a loaf of bread. In Chicago, three Negro workers are killed for participating in a protest demonstration against eviction. In New York City scores of men have been beaten and jailed for demanding adequate relief. All over America in 1933 – in Los Angeles, Detroit, Minneapolis, Philadelphia – tens of thousands of unemployed workers have been given jail sentences for stealing food, clothing, money.
As the depression deepens it is evident that the crime wave grows in intensity. Even a cursory examination of the latest criminal statistics will disclose the fact that the vast majority of crimes are petty crimes against property. The reason for this is not hard to find; the fountain head for the overwhelming majority of all crime is poverty and want. It is not the well-to-do, the big bourgeoisie, who suffer from want of food and clothing; it is the workers and the lower stratum of the petty bourgeoisie – the declassed, the dispossessed.
Petty crime, then, has a class basis. It arises from the worker’s fight for life. It is on a different class basis than is gangsterism, for instance, which arises from bourgeois greed (in Chicago, for just one example, where has been traced the connecting links binding together the gangsters, Capone, Madden, O’Donnell, Durkin, etc.; the Pinkerton and Burns Detective Agency; the A.F. of L. trades unions, Tim Murphy and other leaders; the International Harvester Company, the Chicago Tribune and other manufacturers and newspapers; the judges, chiefs of police, aldermen, bankers such as Melvin Traylor, Insull; city corporation counsels such as Ettleson, state’s attorneys, etc.)
 
Prison Statistics
A surveyal of penal justice in the United States, and the penal code as it is functioning today, enables one to draw some interesting conclusions. Let us look at the following statistics, which indicate how crime increases in direct proportion as the proletariat becomes increasingly impoverished. Here is the prison census for seven years, the figures being taken from the U.S. Bureau of the Census covering State and Federal Prisons and Reformatories:



1926


 


  91,669




1927


  97,991




1928


109,346




1929


116,390




1930


120,496




1931


129,050




1932


137,516




1933


not yet available



Isn’t it obvious that our American school of criminology, with its cruel sentences, its fantastic jails and jailors, its unrealistic outlook, has not been able to lessen crime. On the contrary, America has arrived at a morass of vice which increases yearly with frightening speed. The stark truth is, of course, that nothing can ever be done to combat crime so long as capitalism reigns; for as capitalism cannot guarantee that no one will starve, it can not reach the basis of crime. The swampy soil of crime is the economic poverty of the masses which leads to their intellectual and moral poverty. Abolish want and starvation and you strike directly at the roots of 90% of the crimes that are committed daily. Abolish poverty by socializing wealth so that none of us need go hungry or unclothed – then will you see crime disappear as does fog under the noonday sun.
In 1932 and 1933 the following Part 1 offences were known to the police of this country:



 


Non-negligent
Man-slaughter


Negligent
Man-slaughter


Rape




1932


3,230


2,015


2,806




1933


3,514


2,285


2,922






 


Robbery


Burglary


Larceny


Auto theft




1932


51,067


179,572


331,327


171,103




1933


50,719


187,583


374,662


158,508



In 1932 there were, then, 741,120 known Part 1 crimes, of which 722,069, or 98.8% were crimes against property.
In 1933, despite vast increases in federal and state relief, there were 780,193 crimes, of which 771,472, or 98.9%, were crimes against property (robbery, burglary, larceny, auto theft).
 
The Economic Factor in Crime
Figures for previous years are not even available, or have been suppressed, such is the quixotic manner in which our government treats its criminal problem. But enough is indicated for us to see that the overwhelming majority of crimes are crimes against property. And crimes against property are, for the greater part, committed because the offenders are poor and, not being able to find employment are forced to seek elsewhere for the means to feed and clothe themselves, to keep a roof over their heads.
Yes, the economic factor is the all-important one in these crimes And do you doubt that this same factor counts powerfully in the cases of non-negligent and negligent manslaughter, in rape; and in the execution of minor offences, such as boot-legging, dope-peddling, etc.?
THE CAUSE OF CRIME IS POVERTY! Let us turn for a moment to foreign shores. Here is a report by Mr. Negley Farson on crime in Great Britain:
“Increase in crime coincides exactly with the industrial depression in Great Britain. Per million population, we find that burglaries were 3,000 in 1913, 3,500 in 1928, 8,000 in 1931 – the rise of 4,500 or 150% during the last two years proves out Sir Herbert Samuel’s (the British Home Minister) contention that crime increases in exact ratio with the industrial depression. The industrial depression has not increased crimes of passion, although robbery with violence is daily more prevalent. Roughly, the crime sheet for Great Britain for 1930 works out as follows:



Crimes of violence against persons


 


  2,000




Sexual crimes


  3,400




Crimes against property with violence


25,000




Larcenies


86,000



In 1930 in Great Britain, then, 116,400 crimes were committed, ol which 95.6% were crimes against property. Great Britain’s total indictable offences increased roughly by 12,000, or just under 10%. Facing such an increase, British courts have been imposing longer as well as more sentences to penal servitude.”
One more set of criminal statistics, those taken over several years in New York City:



Year


 


Burglary,
Larceny,
Robbery


 


Total
police
force


 


Total
police dept.
expenditure




1900


  5,588


  7,426


$11,494,393




1927


11,491


16,973


   45,018,725




1929


13,611


17,780


   48,705,918




1931


15,054


19,333


   63,910,282




More Criminals – Bigger Jails
In New York City crimes against property have definitely increased during the depression. The living standard of the worker has been pushed lower and lower. And yet all New York City can or will do is to increase its police force, pour more millions into its rotten gangster-infested police department, instruct its courts and judges to hand out more and sterner sentences, build bigger jails.
All Great Britain can think of to combat crime is to “impose longer and more plentiful sentences to penal servitude.”
To move to strike at the causes of crime, to relieve the destitution of the masses which leads to the commission of crime – ah, no. Treason! God forbid! Why this might lead to an acknowledgment that all was not well with the system; this would be a betrayal of all those petty theories worked out by our “scientific” sociologists and criminologists.
(Second Article Next Week)
 




Minneapolis. – Today there are 1,522 C.C.C. camps in this country with over 300,000 recruits. By summer many more such camps will be established. I have just returned from a visit to several such camps in Minnesota, and would like to tell the Militant readers what I observed.
Most of the boys at work in Minnesota forests have been imported from Kansas. The government makes a fixed policy of sending the young workers far from home: in this way the potential rebels and deserters will think twice before they run away, with a long trek back to the farm staring them in the face.
For working 8 hours a day, five days a week, these boys receive thirty dollars monthly – twenty-five of which is sent home to their parents. In this way many Kansas families are removed from local relief. This peculiarly ingenious plan has a double merit, then, in Rooseveltian eyes. By making one member of the family support his parents and brothers and sisters in the style to which they have become accustomed, it preserves the domestic self-respect. Likewise, the C.C.C. worker himself receives a tidy bit of pocket money. For working 40 hours weekly, he receives the munificent sum of $1.25 – or slightly over 3 cents an hour.
One of the camps at which I stayed for several days (in the Chippewa National Forest) was located near an Indian reservation. After every meal, a throng of dirty, ragged Indian boys and men would throng themselves at the kitchen door, carrying large cans and buckets. They were waiting to receive the scraps from the meal. All that could not be garnered by the camp cooks for subsequent meals was given to the Indians – soup, bones, crusts, vegetables – all were thrown in the greasy pails making the most filthy, garbage-like ollapodrida – to be eagerly taken home and eaten by the Chippewa braves and squaws and tubercular papooses. Thus does Uncle Sam provide for his First Families.
A word about the forestry work. These Kansas boys are not used to the bitter weather of northern Minnesota winters. One day it was 27 degrees below zero. Eighty boys decided that this was too cold and revolted. After breakfast they returned to barracks instead of climbing on the trucks which were to convey them to the woods. Ten minutes later the officer in charge strode in and paused in the center of the room.
“Any man not reporting for work this morning, will be fined $20,” he announced. “Just follow me back to the office and I’ll take your names.”
The boys thought of their families back home, destitute, starving. The putsch was over almost as soon as begun.
At noon a handful of boys came back to camp with frost-bitten ears and cheeks. After bandaging the injured parts, the camp medico observed, “The bandages will be a warning to the rest of the men. Now they will take more care to protect themselves.” What a soothing philosophy!
While at the camps I had the opportunity to talk to many of the boys. I should like to report that many were militant, class-conscious workers; but such is not the truth. The boys, almost without exception, come direct from farm homes. None has ever worked in a factory, has ever stood face to face with his exploiters across a picket line. I found no evidence to indicate that any boy had the least understanding of the economic forces at work in the world which were condemning him to an empty futureless life. They, and their fathers, had slaved on the farm, had been losing ground every year in this struggle for existence. Then came the New Deal, with its shabby offer of six months of camp life; and, poor as the work was, these boys jumped at the chance to escape from the wretched gray existence on the farm.
I was particularly interested in the attitude of the recruits towards war. Would they go to war if America should become embroiled with a foreign nation? Yes, almost to a man, they would. “There’s nothing doing back home,” they say. “Might as well fight as rot on the land.” Should an emergency arise, and the Government throw rifles at these 300,000 young men, 99% of the rifles would be caught and drilling could immediately start. At present, the army staff makes a great show of the lack of military discipline prevailing in the C.C.C. camps. No saluting, no drilling, no court-martial, etc. But let war appear on the horizon: how the picture would change overnight. The department of war must be well aware of the fact that, if occasion arises, they have a third of a million young men in first-class condition available for fighting forces at a moment’s notice.
The C.C.C. workers have become accustomed to having the government take care of them. Poor as the pay is, they are living better now than were they back home. In the evenings in camp they have attended classes in American history, in military tactics, etc. Subtly they have been filled with the insidious nationalistic ideology. Here the greatest danger lies.
 




CHICAGO, June 13 – As a flash of lightning illuminates a violent landscape, so the recent revelation of the Illinois labor scandal reveals one powerful reason why labor in the United States has no independent political power.
A few days ago the St. Louis Post-Dispatch – a Democratic paper which has been carrying on a feud with the Chicago Tribune, chief support of the former Green Republican administration in Illinois – uncovered the fact that a number of AFL and railroad union officials in Illinois were on the payroll of the Green machine to the extent of $124,793.
Since the Green machine in Illinois was succeeded by a Democratic machine last November, several interesting revelations about Green’s administration have come to light. A few weeks ago, the same St. Louis paper revealed that 51 editors, publishers and columnists in Illinois were paid a total of nearly $500,000 from the state treasury during Green’s tenure in office.
Most of the top union officials involved, it was revealed, were secretly receiving pay from the state Republican machine – one of the most reactionary wings of the national Republican Party – without the knowledge of their own executive boards or union memberships. Most of the union payrollers were listed as “investigators” for the state labor department or the attorney general’s office.
The scandal is all the more sickening when one recalls that, 30 years ago, after the First World War, the union movement in this state was one of the most progressive, politically, in the entire AFL. The Chicago Federation of Labor was then in the forefront of the movement to build a new national labor party.
 
He Had a Little List
The list of labor traitors reaches right up to the top of the Illinois Federation of Labor, and reads like a Who’s Who of Illinois labor leadership. Here are some of the Judases:

John H. Walker, former president of the Illinois State Federation of Labor, drew $200 a month from September 1, 1945 to December 31, 1948 – $8,000 in all – as a Labor Department “field investigator.”
 
Carl Soderstrom, attorney and son of Reuben Soderstrom, president of the State Federation of Labor, was paid $7,561 as a labor conciliator between January 1947 and January 1949. Soderstrom has refused to discuss his state job.
 
Earl J. McMahon of Chicago, secretary-treasurer of the state federation and secretary of the Chicago Building Trades Council, collected $4,575 from 1944 to 1946 from the Green-Chicago Tribune machine. McMahon was first carried on the state payroll as a “clerk in the office of the superintendent of public instruction,” later as a Labor Department investigator.

Asked if his state job had any connection with the support he gave to Governor Green’s third-term candidacy, McMahon said, “I should say not. I supported a lot of Democrats too.”

Asked if he supported the idea of labor’s building its own political party, independent of and opposed to the two old parties, McMahon said, “Gracious, no.”
 

Ends on Boss’s Payroll

Louis Rodier, president of the Springfield Building and Construction Trades Council, skipped out of town when the secret was revealed that he had taken $11,000 from the Republican Green machine, at $250 a month. He was down as an “investigator for the attorney general.”

“None of us knew Rodier was on the state payroll and members didn’t like it when they found it out,” said Earl Welch, council secretary. “There hasn’t been an election of officers around here for quite a while.”
 
One of the labor traitors has wound up in a cushy job with an employer, after having worked for Green at $360 a month in 1948. While on the Green payroll, this union official was “settling” strikes in southern Illinois, supposedly in the interests of the workers involved. He is Joseph Hodges, president of the Peoria Building and Construction Trades Council. Hodges liked working for the enemies of labor so much that he wound up as business manager of a road contracting firm.
 
John Brenton of East St. Louis, business agent and secretary of the Tri-County Carpenters District Council, said that his executive board actually approved his taking $300 a month from the Green machine. The Carpenters Union is headed nationally by William Hutcheson, one of the few labor leaders who has been openly identified with the Republican Party.
 
Another official of the Carpenters Union who served the Green-Chicago Tribune interests rather than those of the working class is Jack Ellis of Kewanee, business agent of Local 154. When uncovered as a Green pigeon, Ellis blustered that “I did it more or less as a patriotic duty since I had three boys in the service and the work was mostly with veterans.” Ellis was listed as an investigator for the Department of Labor. Green must have liked his service because Ellis was raised from $150 a month to $213.
 
A number of Dan Tobin’s Teamsters Union officials were pie for the Green bribery. Guy Anthony, business agent of a Teamsters Union local, drew $200 a month as “investigator for the attorney general.” An assistant in the attorney general’s office recalls that “Long was in and out a good deal and did a lot of investigating.” Long continued to hold his union job while on the state payroll. He left town when his perfidy was uncovered.
 
Herbert C. Wagner of the DeKalb County Teamsters Union took $6,140 of Green’s payoff money from 1944 to 1948. He “couldn’t be reached for comment.”
 
David O. Sark, president of the Chicago Municipal Teamsters Union, was “field investigator” in the state Labor Department at $200 a month. He “couldn’t be reached for comment.”
 
The late Leonard A. Murphy of Rockford, secretary of the General Drivers Union Local 325, took $11,198 from 1942 to 1948.
 

“Naturally” for Green

While Thomas Roe was pretending to represent the interests of the Order of Railway Conductors as legislative chief of Springfield, he was slipped $11,518 from the Green machine – as “investigator” for the highway division at $204 a month. Roe is refusing to answer telephoned questions as to his queer concept of loyalty to organized labor.
 
Thomas F. O’Connor, business agent of the Peoria Bartenders Union, was on the Green payroll for $8,374. He had the odd assignment of keeping Green’s Labor Department informed about the TP&W rail strike, a strike in which several pickets were murdered by company gunmen near Peoria. Asked if he was in favor of Green for governor, O’Connor said, “Naturally.”
 
John Bateman of Murphysboro, business agent of Plumbers & Steamfitters Union Local 160, received $150 a month from the labor-hating Green machine. “I was a sort of investigator and conciliator for the Labor Department,” said Bateman. “I was told they would call on me but they never did.”
 
Lester Mason, business agent of the Springfield Bricklayers Union, was really in the dough, drawing $400 a month as “mason foreman” on Secretary of State Rowe’s payroll. “I really worked every day, making repairs on tile, brick and stone at The State House,” insisted Mason.
 

They’re Against Labor Party
Each one of these union officials who, it is now revealed, has secretly been dipping into the Republican Party pork-barrel, is conspicuously identified with the “business” type of craft unionism. All are conservative, indifferent to lack of democracy within the union movement, and viciously opposed to the movement for an independent labor party.
The revelations have shaken the Illinois union movement. While they obviously uncover one of the central motives of American labor leaders in opposing a labor party, they also have dark implications for many other union officials in the United States.
If – many union members are today asking themselves – a number of union officials in Illinois have for years secretly accepted money from a political machine controlled by our enemies, how about other union leaders? Are they also being bribed by the Republicans or Democrats? Is this why they oppose militant democratic unionism and always spout off so hotly whenever the labor-party question comes up on the floor?
 





“The Industrial and commercial bourgeoisie,” flatly asserted Professor Joseph A. Schumpeter in 1942, in the very midst of the bloodiest imperialist war to date, “is fundamentally pacifist and inclined to insist on the application of the moral precepts of private life to international relations.”
The professor cited no evidence to support his fascinating assertion, one of many wonderful things found in his anti-Marxist work, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.
If you believe the professor, then of course you need not concern yourselves with the possibility of a third world war. But if you are one of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, or one of the victims of that predatory class, then you will be hip-deep in concern with the new blood bath which the “private enterprise system” is preparing for the world.
Just recently in Chicago a few hundred of the “industrial bourgeoisie” concluded a 10-day study course on economic mobilization planning, the second in a series of such courses conducted throughout the nation by the Armed Forces Industrial College. The course was not “planning for war.” Professor Schumpeter would have liked the term used for the course. It was “planning for the prevention of war.”
 

Third World War Will Bring Ten-Cent Dollar
Some of the ideas expressed during the seminar are of general interest.
Perhaps of greatest interest was the talk presented by Commander Greenhalgh on the inflationary prospects of a future war. A third war, he said, could lift the public debt from its present $252 billion to $600 billion. Interest charges would be “staggering,” declared Greenhalgh. Debt service on the present national debt now costs $5½ billion a year. On a $600 billion national debt it would rise to $12 or $15 billion.
Greenhalgh doesn’t believe the government would consider repudiating the public debt. Instead, he believes, prices might be allowed to rise, with the dollar further devalued as a means of lightening the debt burden. He predicted a “nine- or ten-cent dollar” in terms of 1939 purchasing power, as the aftermath of another world war. “The dollar of today, worth less than 60 cents in pre-war purchasing power, might very well become a nine- or ten-cent dollar of a post-World-War III period,” he said.
 

Is There an Adding-Machine in the House?
Lecturers described the increasing costs of war. Whereas the annual expense of maintaining a soldier today is $3,300 (against $1,350 in 1940), prices of raw materials and manufactured goods would be up 50 per cent from World War II, in the event of another war, it was declared.
Assuming 12 million men under arms, and purchase of the same amount of munitions as in 1944, a new war would cost $143 billion a year. If It lasted as long as the United States was in the recent war, it would cost $540 billion. The U.S. bill for the last war was $381 billion, of which $153 billion was squeezed out in taxes and $228 billion was borrowed.
Commander Greenhalgh said the prevailing opinion in top military circles was that a war with Russia would continue longer than the fracas with the Axis powers.
Among the subjects discussed by the peace-loving industrial and commercial bourgeoisie in the present study course were joint strategic planning, geopolitics, joint mobilization, and the relation of economic factors to political and military problems.
*

Economic Notes
Profits through 1950 are assured the peace-loving aircraft manufacturers, according to official sources which show current backlogs of prime military aircraft and engine contractors to total $2,626,303,594, a sum which is less than half the total to be spent on aircraft and equipment by the air force and navy. Forecast for 1949 is that the industry will show an operating profit of about $200 million ...
Tito recently signed a large contract with the Continental Supply Company, a subsidiary of the Youngstown Sheet & Tube Company. The contract calls for the company to supply several million dollars’ worth of oil-drilling equipment and tubes to the Yugoslavian ministry of mines. American technicians will go to Yugoslavia to supervise installation and operation of the equipment ...
The Chevrolet division of General Motors Corporation has purchased a war-built manufacturing plant in Saginaw, Mich., which it now occupies. Chevrolet paid $1,300,000 to the War Assets Administration for the property. It was built at a cost of more than twice that figure, $2,800,000.




Ten Giants of Steel: Net Profit After Taxes




 


 


1939


 


1946


 


1947


 


1948




U.S. Steel


$41,119,934


$88,683,530


$127,098,148


$129,627,845




Bethlehem


24,638,384


41,731,931


51,088,375


90,347,560




Republic


10,671,343


16,033,468


31,018,409


46,438,382




J. & L


3,188,944


10,854,084


19,225,184


31,222,451




National


12,581,636


20,461,651


26,838,788


40,121,506




Youngstown


5,004,484


14,254,905


26,299,923


35,711,732




Armco


4,011,909


18,552,491


25,002,210


32,030,712




Inland


10,931,016


15,556,897


29,888,558


38,606,89




Sharon


255,497


2.857,856


6,722,019


9,234,983




Wheeling


5,560,753


5,372,910


10,445,161


15,050,044



 




Seven months have passed since the Democratic Party, with the support of the AFL, CIO and Railroad Brotherhoods, won a landslide victory in the national election, and put Harry S. Truman back in the White House.
What cries of triumph issued from the lips of union leaders the day after November 2! And how sorry is the cold reality!
We are here going to pass through this experience again, in memory, through the eyes of one union and of one labor leader. But it is a case study. It might just as well be YOUR union and YOUR union president, in all probability.
Raise the curtain on 1948!
In July 1948 the Democratic Party held its national convention in Philadelphia. Words never cost a politician anything, and the Democrats adopted a high-sounding platform, which was accepted at face value by A.F. Whitney, president of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen. The leading story in the July 17, 1948 issue of the Trainman News, front page, is headed:
“Liberalism Is Backbone of Dem Platform”
 
Blames Republicans
“In one of the convention’s major addresses,” it is modestly reported, “the BRT chieftain blasted the record of the Republican-controlled 80th Congress and called for an all-out drive by labor and liberals to return a progressive administration backed by a progressive Congress in the November elections.
“The Republican Congress ... stultified themselves by the enactment of the Taft-Hartley Slave Labor Law, which runs counter to the fundamental principles of our democratic system. ... It is a Republican law. [A majority of Democratic Congressmen voted in favor of the Taft-Hartley measure. – J.R.] The Republicans who engineered this law through Congress never fought a fair fight. . . . Labor demands the repeal of every law that Interferes with the rights of labor and the people.”
The leading front-page story in the September 11 issue read:
“BRT LEGISLATIVE MEN INDORSE TRUMAN AND BARKLEY TICKET”
“UNANIMOUS VOTE GIVEN DURING SPECIAL SESSION IN CLEVELAND”
“Labors mounting support for the Democratic Truman-Barkley ticket was bolstered further this week as the Brotherhoods state legislative representatives handed it an enthusiastic indorsement ... The vigorous liberal Democratic platform and the pro-labor record of the 16 years of Democratic stewardship were cited by the legislative men as the basis for their support of the Truman-Barkley team.”
The October 16 issue carried a front-page editorial supporting Paul A. Douglas, the Democratic candidate for Senator in Illinois, and Stevenson, the Democratic candidate for Illinois governor.
“A Democratic victory is in prospect in Illinois and the Brotherhood is proud to give its backing to men like Douglas and Stevenson who are ‘undominated’ except by a lofty aim to serve all the people and protect the little people,” declared the editorial.
(Since faking office, Douglas has supported a Jim Crow housing measure and recently told a UAW committee that he opposed outright repeal of the Taft-Hartley Law.)
 
Backs Democrats
In the front-page story for October 23, President Whitney declared:
“In this election we cannot overlook the fact that the Democratic Party during the past 16 years has been the one which has had the people’s interest at heart ... We would be unmitigated ingrates were we not to support the party that has done the most for labor and the people generally. We are not, however, merely following a political label. We are backing a group that, on the record, has been back of us.”
(Two years earlier, in the railroad strike of 1946, President Truman used the injunction weapon to break the strike of the trainmen and the engineers. At that time Whitney publicly declared he would spend “millions” from the union treasury to defeat Truman.)
A front-page editorial in the same issue is entitled Progress Versus Republicanism and reads in part:
“The Democrats have promised repeal of the Taft-Hartley act, to raise minimum wages, expand public power facilities, provide national health legislation, extend social security, promote adequate housing and proper development of the country’s natural resources. They have spelled out in specific bills the benefits they intend to bring the people. Their record of the past 15 years is one that recommends their return to power. Certainly it is one which the worker can point to and say that it was written in his behalf.”
Pages 4 and 5 of the October 23 issue list the congressional candidates endorsed by the Brotherhood. “Election of these men on November 2. will insure the future of our democratic way of life and promote the interests of all Americans,” said the Trainmen News.
(In the vote on repeal of the Taft-Hartley Law in 1949, dozens of the Congressmen endorsed by the Brotherhood voted AGAINST repealing or changing the law. No less than 11 even raffed on the Wood bill.)
On November 2 the Democratic Party won a landslide victory throughout the nation. Let the November 6 Trainmen News describe it:
“Labor’s Vote Does It!
“Workers Pull Dems Thru for Great Victory
“Union Chiefs See Triumph People’s Gain
“The landslide Democratic victory throughout the nation in Tuesday’s election was hailed by labor chieftains on all fronts as a smashing win for organized working men and women ...
 
Truman Victory Hailed
“AFL President William Green declared the election results were an overwhelming repudiation by the American people ‘of the miserable record of the 80th Congress. By their votes,’ Green said, ‘the American people have given the next administration and the 81st Congress a mandate for progressive action – action to wipe out the anti-labor program of the past Congress, action to halt rising prices, action to build millions of new homes at a cost within the reach of the average family, action to broaden and increase social security benefits, action to lift minimum wages ...’
“President Whitney ... hailed the election results with this statement which was widely quoted in the nation’s press:
” ‘The action of the people in electing Truman and Barkley and electing a substantial majority in the Senate and House is an outstanding victory for labor and the masses ...’”
The same issue also reported that the AFL had decided not to sponsor a new political party. It said that a number of papers had recently quoted AFL President Green as saying that the pending AFL convention would “definitely do something about starting a third major U.S. political party,” but added that, following Truman’s election, Green had reversed himself and announced that it “would be a mistake for the AFL to isolate itself by forming a new party.”
“LABOR READY FOR RIGHTFUL ROLE IN U.S.” read the leading story in the November 13, 1948 issue, continuing:
“As smoke from the great political battle of 1948 cleared, one dominant fact loomed above all other considerations – that U.S. labor had come of age politically and was ready to play its deserved role in shaping the economic and social policies upon which America’s destiny rests. That role will be typically American, with labor influencing government within the framework of the existing and traditional two- party system.
“Labor, more than any other group or segment of the population, carried the campaign issues to the people.... President Truman, who had the almost unanimous support of organized labor from the beginning of his campaign, was the first to acknowledge the vital role of the workers in his victory. ‘Labor did it,’ he told newsmen. The President’s statement was backed up by Senator McGrath, who as chairman of the Democratic national committee, had supervised the campaign, declared: ‘This is a victory for American labor.’”
The November 27 issue of the Trainmen News, page 3, carries a story headed: Dem Party Is Labor Vehicle, Tobin Asserts, and quotes Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin as declaring, at a press conference following his address to the AFL convention, that
“I don’t believe in a labor party, but I would like to see an alignment of a conservative party versus a liberal party.
“I feel the Democratic Party is now the liberal party and should serve as labor’s vehicle. Also, the best interests of our country will be served by the two-party system.
“If the President campaigned on any one issue, it certainly was that the Taft-Hartley act must be repealed. He will go to Congress with a mandate for repeal. THERE’S NO DOUBT IN MY MIND THAT THE ACT WILL BE REPEALED BY MARCH 1.” (My emphasis – J.R.)
 
Dem Doubletalk Begins
Two weeks later, the secretary of labor was already reneging on the administration’s pledge for outright repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act.
Whitney Hits Hints of T-H Compromise is the heading on the front-page story, December 11.
“President Whitney this week blasted newspaper propaganda out of Washington intimating that administration leaders are willing to accept something less than full repeal of the Taft-Hartley act and that a compromise might be in order.”
“In a telegram to Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin, the Brotherhood leader charged that the ‘reactionary press is attempting to create the impression that you are supervising a compromise on repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act.’
“Secretary Tobin was reminded of the Democratic platform which states: ‘We advocate repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act.’
“‘Any compromise of that specific proposal,’ President Whitney said, ‘will be a great disappointment to the people who gave the Democrats victory November 2. No effort should be made to compromise the Taft- Hartley law. The Democratic pledge should be explicitly carried out and the Wagner Act re-enacted.’”
The same story added that:
“... renewed assurances by Vice-President-elect Alben W. Barkley that the Democratic election pledges won’t be switched into a siding came during a speech at Los Angeles when the Kentuckian ... said that not one of the party planks adopted at the Philadelphia convention ‘was written merely for the purpose of getting votes; the convention which adopted that platform meant every word it said.’
“On the question of repeal versus amendment of the infamous Taft-Hartley Act, Senator Barkley said: ‘We are committed to repeal, and to me that doesn’t mean amendment.’”
The December 25 issue, page 3, carries a story: Dems Determined to Carry Out Promises, Sen Barkley Assures Town Hall Audience.
The story declares that “The Democratic Party will leave no stone unturned in carrying out its commitments to the American people.
“Definite assurance that the promises will be transformed into legislative realities was given by Vice-President-elect Barkley ... The Taft-Hartley law is definitely on the way out, Senator Barkley said. ‘The Democratic platform pledged itself to its repeal because we felt, and now feel, that the law was harsh and unnecessary and that it undertook and succeeded in withdrawing essential rights of labor organizations.
“It would bo unthinkable that the incoming administration would not recommend, and that the Congress would not pass an act repealing the Taft-Hartley law, and I look for that to be one of the first efforts of the new Congress to carry out its pledges to the people.’”
 
Nothing Happened
Solons’ Task: Interpreting Nov. Election reads the lead story in the January 1, 1949 issue.
“Have the congressmen caught the significance of the Nov. 2 balloting and will they take it to heart?” asks Whitney’s paper. “Labor expects that they will and bases its hopes on the fact that a MAJORITY OF THE LEGISLATORS WERE ELECTED ON THE LIBERAL PLATFORM OF THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY.” (My emphasis – J.R.)
Whitney himself had a signed article on the front page telling his members that:
“I am able now to tell of a much more hopeful future facing us. The Administration we backed has been returned. Our candidates for Congress were victorious.”
The issue further quoted Whitney as stating that:
“Labor’s first major objective is repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act and enactment of a labor law that will insure justice ... The old Wagner act should be re-enacted and Congress should start from there.”
So the new administration took office, including the labor-backed majority in the House and Senate. Weeks passed. Nothing happened. Scores of Congressmen elected with the fervent support of the Whitneys, the Greens, the Murrays, showed unmistakably that they had no intention of carrying out ANY of the Democratic platform pledges.
The union rank and file were becoming increasingly restless, critical of the Democrats and critical of the union leaders who had urged them to vote for Democratic politicians.
The Railroad Trainmen devoted less and less space to the Washington scene. Finally, no longer able to remain silent, Whitney’s paper began to cry that labor had been tricked.
 
Congress Scores Zero
Congress ‘Renegades’ Hit by Pres. Whitney is the title of a front-page story in the March 26 issue, which quotes Whitney as proposing that labor map plans to “retire” in 1950 congressional “renegades to the people’s cause,” who are blocking enactment of President Truman’s Fair Deal program.
“We’ll have to give the backward boys the same treatment that many former members of the 80th Congress received who flaunted the workers,” piped Whitney.
The Trainmen suddenly discovered, as reflected in another front-page story in the same issue, that Turncoat Dems Had Fingers in T-H Birth. (There had been not one word said during the campaign of the fact that a MAJORITY of Democratic Congressman had voted FOR the Taft-Hartley Act.)
Finally, in the April 9 issue, the leading front-page story summed up the sad reality of the second Truman administration, after all the grandiose boasts of the “labor statesmen” during and immediately after the 1948 election.
“CONGRESS LABOR SCORE AFTER 3 MONTHS IS ZERO.
“Not One Dem Plank Is Law Due to GOP and Dixiecrat Opposition.”
The above subheading is a lie, designed to cover up the fact that a number of Northern Democrats elected with labor backing had repudiated their pledges to support legislation demanded by the union movement.
“The first three months of the 81st Congress have been a painful disappointment to those who thought they won an election last Nov. 2,” whined Whitney’s paper.
“Not one major plank of the Democratic platform has become law and the coalition of Republicans and Dixiecrats which blocked rules reform in the Senate shows signs of staying alive to fight Taft-Hartley repeal and other liberal legislation.” The story quoted William Green as expressing the pious sentiment that “Congress is moving altogether too slowly ... but we are still hopeful and optimistic that ultimately we will get what we are asking for.”
“Asked whether the White House has brought enough pressure on Congress for the Fair Deal, Mr. Green said it has ‘done all it can.’”
Despite this patent demonstration that it is hopeless for the labor movement to gain expression for its hopes and needs through the capitalist-dominated Democratic Party, Whitney still supports the party that, for the umteenth time, has betrayed its labor supporters.
The April 16 issue of his sheet has a story on the recent convention of the Americans for Democratic Action, headed: Dem Party Is Liberals’ Best Bet, ADA Told.
In the same issue, Whitney changes his approach to the Democratic Congressmen who were turning their back on their campaign pledges.
“There are a number of new senators and representatives who desire to do the right thing and some appear to be confused because of the propaganda that is being spread by the Big Money interests to retain the Taft-Hartley law,” Whitney is quoted as stating. He “scored” liberals who were predicting that the 81st Congress would not repeal the anti-labor law.
The April 23 issue carried a new prediction by Labor Secretary Tobin, whose batting average in the predicting game was still exactly zero.
“Secretary Tobin Predicts Early Repeal of T-H
“The Truman labor bill will be law before long,” the story runs.
(Note the reference to the Truman labor bill. Both Truman and the labor leaders had long ago given up the fight for re-enactment of the Wagner act and were now backing a weasel-worded bill that would retain many of the worst features of the T-H law.)
“Expressing great confidence that the measure repealing the iniquitous Taft-Hartley law and bringing back the Wagner act with a few necessary amendments would be enacted, Labor Secretary Tobin said the administration bill would be approved ‘without substantial change.’
“And what is the basis for this confidence? Indication of the Truman measure’s success stems from a Labor Department canvass, Mr. Tobin declared ... The administration bill, Mr. Tobin declared, would clear the House by May 1 after several days of debate.”
May 1 passed and it was all too clear that the Democratic majority in control of the House and Senate was NOT going to pass even the administration’s watered-down labor bill.
 
Whitney Crawls
The April 30 issue blossoms out with a front-page editorial signed by Whitney, entitled: Congress WILL Do Its Job for Nation.
His threats and blusters had had no effect. Neither had his kind words about some new Congressmen having been “confused” by big-business propaganda.
Now Whitney was crawling.
“Most members of Congress are hard-working, honest, respectable gentlemen, who have a desire to be faithful to their trust,” he writes. “They wish to deal fairly with labor, with the farmer, with industry, and to vote for what they believe to be best for all people ...
“The Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen prides itself in knowing something about human nature, and its representatives will not participate in a campaign of high pressure or false propaganda in an attempt to deceive or mislead any member of Congress. The membership of the Brotherhood enjoys the respect and confidence of most members of Congress, and it proposes to retain this confidence and respect by treating the members of Congress with dignity and by furnishing such information as will be helpful to them in determining matters placed before them,” etc., etc.
Were there a labor party in the United States, organized by and based upon the union movement, labor-party representatives in Washington would not have to be threatened or whined to or fawned upon in order to induce them to carry out labor’s program.
Instead such labor-party Congressmen would be in the thick of the vanguard of the fight, giving the green light to labor’s program, arousing the people, organizing mass action all over the nation and especially in Washington itself, to see that labor’s program was enacted.
How many times must labor have to repeat its experience with the two old capitalist-dominated boss parties, before it learns that NOTHING can be gained through playing ball with them?
In the summer of 1948 there was widespread demand in labor’s ranks that it organize a new nationwide labor party, independent of the two old parties. Whitney & Co. managed to sidetrack that demand in favor of Truman and his crew of blatherskites. On November 3 a lot of liberals and labor leaders thought they had been devilishly clever.
Developments of the past seven months have shown that the really clever people, and the recipients of all of labor’s campaign sacrifices, were the Democratic politicians and big business, whose interests the Democrats have joined the Republicans in protecting.
Whitney & Co. are bankrupt. They have lost their right to hand down political directives to the ranks of organized labor. It is time to revive the movement for a national independent labor party.
* * *

Time to Learn a Lesson!
Next – A Labor Party! (written before the election) was correct when it warned that the tactic of the union leaders in tailing the old parties in the 1948 election would “only lead to new disappointments, to more cries of ‘betrayal’ as the politicians whom they now label ‘liberal’ and ‘friends of labor’ obey their real masters after elections. “Given the tactic being followed by Murray, Green, Hutcheson, Whitney & Co.,” we wrote, “it is inevitable that reaction will continue to grow after the 1948 elections.”
The reason, the pamphlet seeks to explain, is that capitalism is going downhill fast, and that big business in the United States cannot permanently afford the luxury of strong unions and union wage scales, union working rules, the luxury of civil liberties.
A review of the past seven months should be instructive to those unionists who still believe that the Democratic Party can be transformed into a “party of the people,” or that labor can defend and advance its political interests without building a new party of its own, a labor party.
The events of the past few months are recalled on this page as they have been reflected in one of the representative union papers of today, the Trainmen News, official weekly publication of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen. Almost exactly the same quotations may be found in the columns of the AFL and CIO press.
 





Why Truman Worries About Inflation
A great many people have been puzzled by the persistence with which President Truman, in the midst of growing unemployment and reported widespread price reductions, has continued to assert that inflation is a very real danger. Why does the White House continue to insist about the dangers of inflation?
It is a fact that no serious analysis of Truman’s position has appeared in the public press. The daily papers (most of which are organs of the Republican Party) meet the president’s repeated warnings with remarks about ‘regimentation.’ They add that the real danger lies in the opposite direction. Apparently, few reporters suspect that there is a possible connection between the end of the boom and renewed dangers of inflation.
The situation merits more serious comment than has yet been paid it. It is more than possible that Truman knows what he is talking about when he expresses concern over possible inflation.
Should the business decline continue, at some point the administration will have to interfere drastically to halt and reverse the trend. American capitalism, neither at home nor abroad, can afford another deep depression. Some White House advisers, it is reported, believe that the time has already come for the government to act. The majority hold that any broad concerted action now would be premature.
It appears now as though the Truman administration will have to intervene drastically in the economy in an effort to stave off a depression.
I believe that the president is thinking ahead to this situation when he continues to warn of the dangers of inflation.
The indicated way in which the administration will act is along the lines of preparations for the Third World War, for the tremendous task of wrenching American industry from a peacetime to a wartime basis. The system cannot give both peace and prosperity. But it can give war and perhaps a renewal of the hopped-up economy of the early ’40s.
Such vast government spending is implied in this program as to make very real indeed the threat of great inflation. For one thing, it would mean a return to deficit spending, to the period when the government cash outlay would again exceed the tax harvest.
Even now the burden of servicing the national debt of $251 billion exceeds the total cost of government prior to 1934. A switch to production for war would involve a tapering-off of the production of consumers goods. The brief decline in prices would halt and would again turn upwards. The currency printing presses in the Treasury Department would begin working overtime. Money would be cheapened. Inflationary forces would be at work everywhere.
This, in all probability, is what Truman and some of his advisers fear, and this is why the president continues to sound the warning.
 

Cost of Living Rises Again in March
Despite the reported drop in the prices of a number of commodities, it is remarkable that living costs in March actually went up, rising half a point above the February level.
Though prices of basic farm commodities have fallen, retail food prices went up a full one per cent in March. Prices of fruits and vegetables, as well as of rents, contributed to the overall rise in the cost-of-living index. Retail prices for moderate income families rose 3 per cent above February levels, and were 1.6 per cent above March 1948 levels, and 72 per cent above the level of August 1939, according to the Labor Department’s consumers’ price index.
This rise in living costs is being felt with unusual severity by millions of families which now have one or more breadwinners out of work.
Even where family wage-earners are still working, their wages have in some cases dropped suddenly because of the end of overtime work and work on night shifts, usually paid for at higher hourly rates. In the opinion of some economists, this drop in overtime pay and night differentials is having a more serious effect on the economy than the growth in unemployment.
 

Relief Cases Up Considerably
In 15 major U.S. cities, the number of public relief cases increased 9 per cent between January 1 and March 1, according to a survey by the American Public Welfare Association. This is considerable more than seasonal, and more than last year, when the increase in the same months was only 5.6 per cent. In Chicago, relief cases in February 1949 were 20 percent more than in the same month last year.
As the relief load grows, some cities are starting up the whole business that so many of us recall from the dreary 1930s. Dayton, Ohio, for instance, has reinstated its depression work relief program, and at the beginning of March had 412 men at work.
The Chicago Journal of Commerce recently demanded editorially that relief clients be put to work “on street ‘maintenance’ – meaning street-cleaning for the most part.”
American capitalism has never been able to assure employment for all those able to work, at jobs for which they are fitted and trained. So long as unemployment doesn’t go beyond a few million, however, it can still offer street-cleaning jobs to jobless tool-and-die workers, machinists, building tradesmen, etc.
And it can “spread the misery.”
Recently the president of a large company urged that every employer “assure those of his people who have been with him two years or more that they should have at least three days’ work a week, no matter what happened.”
A number of plants are said to have adopted this principle. Instead of laying off workers, they are reducing the work week. This is supposed to be a very handsome gesture on the part of the “free enterprise” system, and to signify to the workers that management is thinking of them every minute. From the viewpoint of management, this step is being taken in the belief it will stem fear, and prevent depression turning into a panic.
 




CHICAGO, Mar. 10 – In the two-month period from November 15, 1948, to January 15, 1949, unemployment in Illinois leaped sharply upward, from 101,000 to 175,000, Samuel C. Bernstein, Illinois commissioner of unemployment compensation, announced. Unemployment has continued to rise each week since, by an estimated 5,000 weekly.
Young war veterans and Negroes have been particularly hard hit. Of the 137,337 claimants for unemployment compensation in Illinois the week of February 5, there were 32,262 veterans of the recent war. Of those filing in December in the Chicago-Calumet area, 37 per cent were “non-white,” the governmental lingo for Negro. By March 1, according to one colored spokesman, more than 48,000 colored workers had registered for unemployment benefits at the office on South Parkway, heart of the Chicago black belt.
“For the first time in more than three years, machinists, engine lathe operators, tool and die makers, auto mechanics and other highly skilled workers were laid off in significant numbers and were not immediately able to locate new employment,” Frank Anunzio, state director of labor, announced.
 
Future Looks Dim
The growing boom in unemployment in Illinois is further complicated by the entry of an estimated 26,000 high school and college graduates into the labor market in February, these, not having been hitherto employed, are not counted in the jobless totals.
The Anunzio report for the Chicago area asserted that “reductions in consumer demand were principally responsible for the 20,000 decline (in jobs) in manufacturing plants. Hardest hit by the slight business recession were four light metal industries which experienced losses totalling 11,000 – electrical machinery, fabricated metal products, non-electrical machinery,” etc.
Government officials do not assert, as do some columnists, that the unemployment situation here is “seasonal.” “Unexpected employment declines were noted which went beyond the normal seasonal volume, resulting in sharper reductions than anticipated,” they said.
The total increase in unemployment in Illinois is about evenly divided between Chicago and downstate. State officials say that the drastic drop in jobs here “points to the fact that employers either have reached or are rapidly approaching peak employment and that future hiring will largely serve to replace diminishing turnover.”
‘Schedules of future employment requirements submitted by employers to the Illinois and Indiana, employment services reveal that only a fraction of the workers laid off during November 15–January 15 will be rehired before May 15,” Anunzio reports.
He said that a spot check of the employment situation indicated that many large employers were “holding off” on production and cutting down on hiring while waiting to see what would happen on the national and international scenes. Smaller employers, without the flexibility of big industry, were decreasing their employment because of a drop in orders, he said.
Parallel with the growth of unemployment has gone a drop in retail sales. A few days ago, both Sears, Roebuck and Montgomery Ward disclosed that national sales in February were substantially lower than in February 1948. It was the second consecutive month in which both big mail order houses reported sales decreases. Sears’ February sales were down 8.3 per cent from a year ago and Ward’s sales were down 9.7 per cent. Retail sales nationally are reported running $100,000,000 a month behind last year’s volume.
 
More Begging
But the unemployment situation in Chicago is only faintly reflected in these bureaucratic statistics. To the average person, the picture reveals itself in more intimate ways.
There has been a sharp increase in the number of beggars in the Chicago loop. For eight years now, begging has seldom been observed east of the river in the Loop. It has been confined to the “skid rows” of West Madison and State Street south of Van Buren. Now, every day, one is approached by beggars right in the Loop.
Employers and “liberals” with penetrating eyes can judge to a nicety that those begging are not hungry and are “just too lazy to work.” The fact is, most of them look and sound desperate and plenty hungry and disgusted, too.
The bosses are licking their lips over the present situation. According to Austin Kiplinger, writing in the March 9 Chicago Journal of Commerce, “employers everywhere are using the business slack as a time for pruning out some deadwood, incompetents and ‘floaters’ in their labor forces.”
Translated, this means, in a large number of cases, that the best union militants are being given the gate.
‘Employers are reporting that for the first time since before the war, they can be a little selective in their hiring,” said Kiplinger. “It is not a case of taking anybody who offers himself for a job. With 3,221,000 unemployed in February ... a small pool of labor exists.”
There is nothing calculated to make an employer feel so smug and serene as “a small pool of labor” at the employment office.
 



Professor Schumpeter, in his interesting but grotesque book, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, remarks that “any prolonged period of depression or of unsatisfactory recovery will verify any pessimistic forecast.”
Conversely, any prolonged period of prosperity will verify, or appear to verify, any optimistic forecast. What we have had in the United States for eight years is a period of prosperity such as this nation (or any other nation) has never in history experienced.
In such an economic climate it was easy for all sorts of capitalist and social-democratic economic theories to win acceptance among intellectuals and labor leaders, at the expense of Marxism. The Marxist analysis and criticism of capitalism tended to be shoved into the background, and “new” theories, which explained nothing but which looked kindly upon capitalism and its work, became the popularly accepted ones.
John Chamberlain and James Burnham, who, in the depth of the depression, were predicting the socialist revolution, became ardent opponents of socialism. Perhaps the next turn of the economic cycle will again work its charms upon such people and their “theories” will reflect the economic ill health of the country.
The next turn of the cycle? When will it come? Because economics is still not an exact science, it is not possible to predict accurately when the post-war economic boom in the United States will collapse. Marxists (and other economists) can predict that the boom will be succeeded by a depression. Under capitalism it could not be otherwise. But no one can put his finger on the calendar and say: “This is doomsday.”
It is, however, possible to enumerate the major factors responsible for the boom, to measure roughly the development of each factor, and to estimate its weight in contributing to the end of the boom and the beginning of the depression.
 
What Made the Boom?
These are the factors which have joined to build up in the United States since the end of the war the greatest economic boom the nation has ever known:

Tremendous peacetime military expenditures. Today Washington is spending on armaments alone almost twice what it spent for the total national budget before 1940.
 
Swollen and artificially sustained exports, brought about by the division and ruin of Europe and by U.S. gifts and loans to that unhappy continent.
 
Unprecedented capital-goods investments by U.S. industry in new plant and equipment.
 
The gradual building up in the United States of huge inventories of goods at all levels – in the factories; in the wholesale warehouses, in the retail stores, in the granaries, etc.
 
Increasing mass indebtedness as the people attempt to supplement their inadequate wages and salaries with heavier credit and installment buying. While on the one hand this braces up the mass demand for goods, on the other it prepares the way for the economic devastation to follow when unemployment begins to spread throughout the economic body and people have to renege on their debts.
 
Public works, now at a level higher than in any other peacetime year. Yes, higher than in the old WPA days.

These are the major factors that have created the boom, that carried employment above the 60,000,000 mark, that have boosted corporate profits each year to record-breaking levels.
 
The Depression Is Nearer
How much closer to the depression are we today than we were one year ago?
This question is in the minds of all. The sharp increase to 3,000,000 or more in the number of unemployed since the first of the year has jolted every adult’s memory back to the years from 1929 to 1940. Fear of the future, well-founded fear, is widespread. Is this it? Will the army of 3,000,000 grow to 13,000,000 – to 30,000,000 ? Or do the capitalist class and its government have resources which can temporarily stave off the catastrophe? Let us take a closer look at what has been happening.
PRICES: Wholesale prices today are 12.5 per cent above one year ago, at a post-war high of 166.8 per cent of the 1926 average. Retail prices (despite the widely advertised but small drops of recent months) are correspondingly higher than they were a year ago.
The mid-November 1948 index of the cost of living was 172.2 per cent of the 1935–39 base of 100.
This was 4.4 per cent above the November 1947 level, and 29.6 per cent above the living cost index in June 1946, when price controls were lifted. (President Truman still had a Democratic majority in control of both houses of Congress at that time.)
Living costs in November 1948 were 74.6 per cent above August 1939, when the Second World War began. Some food prices have begun to edge down, but food prices are still considerably higher than they were at the beginning of 1948. Rents, on the other hand, continue to climb, as do the prices of many durable consumer items and of freight rates.
Here is the Bureau of Labor Statistics index of wholesale prices, based on 1926 as 100:



Year


   


Farm
Products


   


Other
Commodities


   


All
Commodities




1939


  65


  80


  78




1944


120


  96


103




1946


150


108


120




1947


180


135


146




1948


185


146


163



PRODUCTION: The value of all goods produced and services rendered in 1948 in the United States was $253 billion, about $20 billion above 1947.
CONSUMER PURCHASING POWER: This is lower today than at any time since 1942, according to statistics of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers. Climbing prices have not only wiped out an actual gain in per-capita income after taxes, but have sent the purchasing power of that income reeling backward.
In 1939 the share of national income going to employees was 65.9 per cent. By 1946 it stood at 65.4 per cent. Then price controls and rationing were completely removed, a blow aimed straight at the living standards of the masses. In 1947, the share of national income received by employees dropped sharply to 62.9 per cent, and during the first half of 1948 declined further to 61.9 per cent.
PROFITS: The complement to this decline in the proportion of national income going to the employees is the growth in the share going to the owners of industry.
In 1939 corporate profits (before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustments) comprised 8 per cent of the total national income; by 1946 this had been raised to 9.4 per cent. Corporate profits then jumped to 12.2 per cent of the total national income in 1947 and to 12.3 per cent in the first half of 1948. Between 1946 and the first half of 1948, the distribution of our national income had been shifted, through reducing the relative share going to employees by 5.4 per cent and through boosting the corporate profits share of the national income by 31 per cent.
According to the Commerce Department, corporate profits in 1948 increased more than any other type of income.
As to volume, profits rose from an annual rate of $24.7 billion in the first quarter of 1948 to a rate of $30.9 billion in the second quarter, excluding $2.5 billion in paper profits on inventories. By the third quarter profits were at an annual rate of $35.6 billion. The profits of unincorporated business and the rental income of landlords rose from an annual rate of $46 billion to an annual rate of $51.9 billion between the first and second quarters of 1948, and continued to grow during the rest of the year.
Corporation profits after taxes also set a new alltime record. The rate reached $21.7 billion a year in the third quarter of 1948, or 20 per cent above a year ago, which in its time represented an all-time high. Profits in 1948 were more than double those in 1929, year of the crash.
 
Mass Indebtedness Rises
According to the Federal Reserve Board, “during the three years since V-J Day, the American public has gone into debt more than in any other period in history.” The board estimated that by the end of 1948, some 40,000,000 American families would owe more than $50 billion for home mortgages and consumer goods.
Mortgage debt jumped $10 billion in the three post-war years, to a present total above $32 billion, chiefly as the result of home buying at inflated prices, the Reserve Board said.
Credit given to retail buyers expanded over $9 billion since the war’s end, to a total of $15 billion. This figure, despite regulation “M” and the moans of Mr. Kaiser, is rising steeply and represents a great danger to capitalist stability. Consumer credit in June 1947 totaled $10.8 billion, which was 38 per cent above that of June 1946. From June 1947 to January 1949 the masses went into debt another $4.2 billion.
At the close of 1948 total private debt had reached an all-time high of $190 billion. The total of public and private debt neared $425 billion, compared with a total of $192 billion in 1929. If we were keeping books on an individual, this would be the statistical expression of bankruptcy, or very nearly so. The prosperity of the immediate past has mortgaged the future, and the overhead expenses and wars of capitalism are not at an end. At the same time, consumers are saving less and less. By 1947, almost three of every ten “spending units” spent more than they received, according to the Federal Reserve Board. This reflected the continued “heavy” use of liquid assets and credit to buy durable goods and other consumer goods and services. One spending unit (one family, approximately) in ten neither saved nor “dissaved” in 1947. Those who saved (the wealthy) tucked away about $25 billion in 1947, while the dissavers (the workers, by and large) spent about $11 billion above their incomes.
More than twenty-five out of every hundred consumer units with incomes of $3,000 or more in 1947 spent more than they made that year, against fewer than twenty of every hundred in 1946. “Top income units accounted for a larger part of net savings in 1947,” was the Reserve Board’s way of saying that the rich got richer, the poor got poorer.
This is an important point. Economists in early 1949 continued to refer to the vast amount of savings for the nation as a whole. Pointless statistics! The people who have the savings are the rich, who live comfortably and buy accordingly. But these people constitute a very tiny segment of the population. If they all spent with the most reckless extravagance, they could still not create that mass purchasing power which is necessary to sustain capitalism at a high level.
 
Real Earnings Dip
Not only has the workers’ relative share of the national income been whittled down, but their real earnings have been steadily declining. In terms of the 1939 purchasing power of the dollar and after provision for the meager tax relief granted in 1948, the average weekly take-home pay of a single worker (with no dependents) in manufacturing had dropped from $30.32 in 1944 to $26.86 in the first half of 1948. For a worker with three dependents the decline was from $34.89 to $30.24 during the same period. The percentage decline in real take-home pay for the above workers was 11.4 and 13.3, respectively.
Dividends were the highest in 1948 of any year since the war. Cash dividends publicly reported approximated $5.75 billion, compared with $5.17 billion in 1947. (Publicly declared dividends are estimated to represent 60 per cent of all dividends paid.)
High as these dividends appear to be, stockholders’ returns averaged less than one half the available earnings of corporations. The corporations sought to justify their retention of profits by asserting the investment market was unable to furnish them funds for expansion. It was said that investors were “reluctant” to subscribe for new stock issues.
Though there is a grain of truth in this interpretation, it would be more correct to say that investors were refraining from buying stock because the corporations were slighting dividends at the expense of diverting the profits to new plant or equipment, or simply of retaining the profits. Whereas in 1929 dividends accounted for 6.7 per cent of the national income, in 1933 they accounted for 5.2 per cent of the national income, and in the first half of 1948 for only 3.3 per cent.
Industry’s investment in plant and equipment in 1948 was $18.4 billion, almost exactly the extent of 1947 profits. The Chicago Journal of Commerce pointed out that this was “a comparatively new phenomenon. In the old days new plant and equipment were made possible largely by equity capital.”
With profits on such a lavish scale, big business is using them for the purpose of itself financing a tremendous expansion of physical plant.
“But isn’t that what capitalism is for?” asks the defender of capitalism. “Isn’t that the ‘creative destruction’ that Schumpeter and other social-democratic apologists hail?”
To be sure! All that should be pointed out is that

the expansion is being financed from the surplus value taken from the workers;
 
that by and large it is being financed by each business itself, creating still greater concentrations of capital in the hands of the few;
 
that it is an anarchistic planning (without allowing for the possibilities of consumptive forces in America or the world buying back what the enhanced new plant will be used to produce);
 
that it is contributing to inflationary forces by taking such huge amounts of building materials and steel; and
 
that in the coming depression this huge productive apparatus will result in a greater unemployment than would have been the case had the new plant been created according to a harmonious plan.
 

How It Looks to a Capitalist
Let us see how a capitalist looks at this expansion of industry’s physical plant. M.J. Lovell, director and counsel of the National Association of Shirt and Pajama Manufacturers, wrote an interesting letter to the New York Journal of Commerce on this point. He said that the American shirt industry had suffered from “two fundamental defects in the last 22 years which had prevented that industry from being one of the greatest in the country – its comparatively low wage scale, and the industry’s tremendous capacity to produce.”
Mr. Lovell assured his readers that “the first of these inherent weaknesses has been corrected and the industry now pays a wage comparing favorably with that of the best in the land.
“The second defect in the industry is one which has been considerably enhanced, namely, its capacity to produce,” he continued. “While the former capacity of the industry was about 16,000,000 dozen shirts per year, this has now been increased to 20,000,000 dozen shirts per year.”
Mr. Lovell lamented the fact that statistics showed that when the industry was producing at 75 per cent of capacity, it furnished enough shirts to meet the normal demands of consumption, but when the industry produced in excess of 75 per cent it was overproducing, with the result that inventories piled up and more goods were offered for sale than the consumption warranted, thus resulting in a lowering of price.
Now, according to him, the installation of additional machinery and the improved efficiency of the production methods has increased the capacity potential of the shirt industry by 25 per cent.
“Why shouldn’t the industry be able to produce at 100 per cent of capacity without over producing insofar as consumption in the country is concerned?” plaintively asks our philosopher of the shirt.
That indeed is the question, which Marx answered some time ago.
“The annual shirt consumption in the United States amounts to only three shirts per man per year,” declares Mr. Lovell. “If the male population could be induced to buy only one shirt per man per year more, it would take up the slack between production at less than capacity and full production, with the resultant savings in cost and therefore in price to the consumer.”
But, alas! capitalism does not provide the worker with the wherewithal to purchase “one shirt more,” nor does capitalism permit the capitalist to produce at capacity for very long.
Our daily papers during the January sales told the story of what has been happening to Mr. Lovell’s shirt industry – and to a lot of other industries. The news stories in the back financial section told what was beginning to happen to employment.
 
Inventories
Because workers have not received back in wages the value of what, they have produced, the masses have not been able to hold up their purchases to match their production. Consequently goods are piling up higher and higher in the factories, warehouses and stores. The government takes huge amounts of these surplus goods and gives them away abroad, but still the goods pile up.
In September 1947 business inventories totaled about $40 billion. By July 1948 they had risen more than 20 per cent, to $51.7 billion. Inventories of manufacturers stood at $30.1 billion in July; wholesale inventories at $8 billion, and retail inventories at $13.6 billion. From July to November, total inventories rose another $2.7 billion, to $54.4 billion.
These statistics are seriously disturbing. A Chicago Journal of Commerce report points out that “the essential difference between high inventories this year and last seems to be that this year the increase in holdings is due to buyers’ resistance, whereas last year the rise was due to enforced protective buying by business as a hedge against higher prices.”
“Buyers’ resistance” is the equivalent of “no money in the wallet.” People are not so much waiting for prices to come down as they are trying to make their pay checks stretch from one week to the next.
As progressively serious as the economic situation is becoming in the United States, it would already have reached catastrophic levels if it were not for the arms program and the Marshall Plan aid to Europe.
First let us look at the significant export-import statistics.
In the years 1936 to 1938, U.S. exports averaged $3 billion a year, and imports averaged $2.5 billion.
The Second World War ruined Europe. The ruination of Europe has contributed vastly to the post-war boom in the United States, but now even that prop to our economy is washing away.
In 1947 U.S. exports totaled $15.3 billion – more than five times pre-war – and imports totaled $5.7 billion. Such a gross unbalance could not be continued for long. By 1948, even with Marshall Plan dollars, exports did not total more than $12.6 billion, a decline of more than 15 per cent. The spreading wave of dollar shortages led to an epidemic of import and exchange restrictions in Europe and Latin America.
In August 1948, U.S. exports fell below the $1 billion mark for the first month in almost two years; reaching only $988,200,000; in September, they fell another $61,700,000, to $926,500,000.
Despite the billions that ECA is pouring into Europe, U.S. exports continue to drop steadily. While the principal emphasis of ECA legislation has been on the economic recovery of Europe:
“Congressmen were not unaware,” as the New York Journal of Commerce reporter delicately put it, “that the ECA program presented an opportunity to dispose of some American surpluses abroad. It is certain that some Congressmen and private groups look upon the program as a means to benefit American agriculture and industry rather than as a means to help Europe. Declining exports, if they continue the trend which started last March, may well place the emphasis on aiding America, rather than on recovery in Europe.”
While exports to Europe are decreasing, imports from Europe are rising. This points to increasing European production, and to the end of U.S. sales in Europe at some point in the not-too-distant future.
Let us look at one commodity, coal, in this connection.
In the Ruhr, 1948 monthly coal production exceeded 6,500,000 metric tons, 30 per cent above the 1945 level and 60 per cent of the pre-war level in 1937. In 1948, the weekly average coal production in Great Britain rose to 3,900,000 tons. The 1948 average monthly coal production in Poland was 6,000,000 tons, exceeding the 1937 figure by 500,000 tons. Coal exports from the U.S. fell from 24,000,000 net tons in the January-to-August period in 1947 to 13,000,000 tons in the same period of 1948. These statistics point to the ultimate elimination of the European coal market and the return to our customary outlets in Canada and South America.
The coal illustration shows why it will become more and more difficult for the United States to keep the Marshall Plan going at 1948 levels, even if big business sees this as one of the few ways in which it can keep the system is America going. Europe is getting back into production on more and more items. Tomorrow it will perhaps be automobiles and tractors that are no longer wanted, etc.
The ERP spent $5 billion in nine months of 1948. At home this program had the effect of contributing to shortages or tighter supplies of steel, automobiles, pipelines, bridges, etc. The Marshall Plan, for instance, took 1.5 per cent of U. S. steel produced in 1948.
Abroad, the ERP aid just about equaled the expenditures of the nations of Western Europe for armaments to try to keep their colonial slaves in a state of bondage and to prepare for the coming war against Russia.
While our exports are decreasing, our imports are increasing. In 1948, imports to the U.S. totaled approximately $7 billion, 25 per cent above 1947. As recovery continues in Europe and Asia, the plain implication is that these areas will not only need less from the U.S. but that other areas can begin to fill their wants outside the U.S.
 
Military Spending
The tremendous expenditures on armaments by Washington constitute perhaps the most important prop of the post-war boom, and one that can and (it appears) will be further increased.
The national budget of the government in 1939 was a piddling $8.7 billion, though unemployment was well over the 10,000,000 mark. Came the war, with its vast capacity for destruction: by 1947 the national budget was $42.5 billion. By 1950 it will probably be $45 billion, of which $15 billion is expected to comprise the military budget for the future war (the rest of the budget is devoted mainly to paying for past wars). Government expenditures on arms now amount to one third of the government’s total expenditures. Together with the foreign-aid program, these two items will consume an estimated ten per cent of the nation’s total production of $250 billion in 1950.
Ten per cent! It is instructive to think what would happen if disarmament should strike – ten per cent of the economy chopped off; six million workers let out at a single crack.
For the fiscal year 1949, a military budget of $13.8 billion was authorized, plus $0.8 billion for maintaining the Department of Defense, selective service and stockpiling. Many people expect the 1950 military budget to go as high as $20 billion.
The fact is that government spending for war and war preparations (the Marshall Plan and military aid to Western Europe) is sustaining the U.S. economy. Without it, the depression would in all likelihood already be here. With it, our government is not only failing to pay off the huge national debt but threatens to increase that debt still further and, of course, to increase taxes to carry the debt.
The interest on the national debt alone is today far more than the total national budget was in the 1920s.
In 1948, three years after the end of the war, individuals were being taxed at war rates, With only the scantiest reductions.
Here is a tax comparison for a married couple with two dependents:



Net Income


    


1939 Taxes


    


1948 Taxes




$2,500


$00


$16.60




  3,000


......


  99.60




  4,000


  12


265.60




  5,000


  48


431.60




  6,000


  84


597.60



In December 1948 the gross public debt of the U.S. government stood at $252.2 billion, approximately $4.5 billion lower than at the end of 1947.
While President Truman has already launched a program to raise federal taxes, tax increases are also predicted at the state level in 1949. (In 1948, state taxes increased in more than half of the states.) Twenty-seven states now have sales taxes (the most iniquitous tax from the viewpoint of the worker in that it leans most heavily upon him who must spend all that he makes in order to live). Every month these state (and local) sales taxes inch upward.
As to the role of government spending, the February 1949 letter of the National City Bank observed that
the government is immensely more important in the country’s economy than ever before. Federal and local tax authorities now take – and redistribute – from people and corporations a sum equivalent (in 1946) to 23 per cent of the value of all goods and services produced in the country.
The governments themselves were the purchasers of 12 per cent of these goods and services in 1948 and will be a larger factor in 1949. These government expenditures will not fluctuate with business swings. They represent an unshrinking segment of business, and in case of recession they will exert a stabilizing influence proportionate to their weight.
Quite a change from the old Coolidge-Hoover philosophy! The big bourgeoisie in its public press inveighs against government spending, but it clings to the public hog trough like death itself and dares not order the spigot turned off.
Public Works
Together with the spending for armaments and aid to Europe go public expenditures for public works. It is difficult to realize that expenditures by federal, state and local governments on public works in 1948 totaled $4 billion, breaking all peacetime records. This was even before the sharp drop in employment which 1949 ushered in. Public-works expenditures in 1948 were more than 75 per cent higher than in 1936 and 1937, when expenditures were being made freely (by conservative bourgeois standards) to seek recovery from the depression. The construction industry’s information committee recently stated that states, counties and cities spent more than $1 billion on highways, streets and roads in 1948, and expected to spend more in 1949.
 
Has the Depression Begun?
In January and February of 1949 unemployment went from below 2,000,000 to more than 3,000,000. Employment dropped substantially below the 60,000,000 mark.
Most economists doubted that the sudden increase in the number of jobless marked the beginning of the depression. This is probably correct. There is no doubt that some of the unemployment is prompted by the desire of certain industries to wage psychological warfare against their workers. Particularly is this true of the railroads, which laid off more than 100,000 workers in a few days, principally as a warning to the non-operating unions not to press too hard for the recommendation of an emergency fact-finding board calling upon the carriers to institute the forty-hour week by September 1949, with no reduction in pay from the present 48-hour week level.
But this interpretation of the unemployment that suddenly developed cannot be pushed too far. Big business would not dare go too far in this direction for fear of precipitating a stampede. Most of the unemployment is “legitimate,” and simply represents the growing lack of demand for goods.
What can big business and its government do about it? It can get rid of part of the surpluses by giving them away abroad, or by destroying them. It can step up its arms program. It can step up public works. Public and private debt can pile up some more.
Whether it will take these steps, and whether it will do so in such a way as to be most effective and so as to result in the least possible disturbances and dislocations, no one knows.
 




This isn’t going to be a survey of the portal suits filed in the last few months against industry by various unions. By now the suits total several billion dollars; the steel workers alone are asking $1 billion. There is no question but that the workers are entitled to pay for the time they are forced to spend on company property going to and from work and making ready. What I want to comment upon is the way the entire governmental apparatus has leaped to the defense of Big Business in this situation. The Justice Department has filed a brief with the U.S. District Court of Michigan asking for dismissal of the portal-to-portal pay suits, on grounds that “legal history has established the rule that courts do not deal with trifles.” The billions due the Workers are considered a “trifle” by Attorney General Clark.
Clark also argued that to make employers compute employable time in terms of minutes, rather than hours, “would create a burden on the company greater than the benefits to be conferred upon the workers.” Not that the Justice Department isn’t concerned with the welfare ‘of the workers. Clark argued that “close observation of the activities of workmen,” that is, keeping track of the minutes of overtime due them, would be “humiliating,” and that the companies would be inclined to cause “Speed-ups,” which would impair the health of workmen, etc.; etc. ... If you want to beat a dog, it is enough to say he ate the frying pan, as the old proverb goes ...
The Treasury Department has also rushed to protect the bosses, by issuing a ruling that any money paid out by industry to its workers for back portal pay may be deducted from industry’s taxes. This ruling has the effect of turning the portal pay issue into a fight between the unions and the government, and, incidentally, of “stiffening industry’s spine to resist union demands,” according to the >Wall Street Journal>.
Congress isn’t inactive in this situation, either. The Senate judiciary committee has cleared the decks for fast action on the numerous bills introduced by public-spirited Congressmen, designed to outlaw portal suits. Slick attorneys for Big Business are suggesting that “a simple revision of the wage law, redefining the hours-worked clause,” can be made retroactive without violating the Constitution’s prohibition against ex post facto laws – that is, laws passed after the event.
It is useless to judge these portal suits from the legal or Constitutional viewpoint. The bosses have the power to pass any law they wish and to make it constitutional. For they own the government. It is their people, their political parties, that run the state. Why should the state decide a case like this in favor of the workers, who haven’t ONE SINGLE LABOR REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS, who haven’t even got a Labor Party yet? If I were a Worker in a union which has filed a portal suit, I sure wouldn’t spend any of the green stuff until it was laid in my hand.
A typical industry spokesman appearing before the Senate judicial subcommittee hearing testimony on legislation to block the portal suits, was Thomas F. Patton, general counsel of the Republic Steel Corporation. Patton, owl-eyed, serious, told the committee that the effect of the Supreme Court decision in the portal suit is to pervert the fair labor standards act, “an instrument of righteous correction against sweatshop employers, into an instrument to destroy the. great majority of industrial employers in this country.” Payment of the money due the workers, he said, would have “a disastrous impact on public finances,” and would “ruin” the employers. Patton defied the courts to force industry to pay any money to employees for back pay due them. He said that if a bill were passed “regulating” (that is, outlawing) portal pay claims, “any agreement forced on employers by court misinterpretation of the act in the past would not continue to be binding.”
But Patton, like the Attorney General, has got our interests at heart. If the liability of the bosses to fork over this dough were removed, he said, it would not be unfair to employes but “would merely prevent them from obtaining a windfall which would ruin the industry that furnishes their employment.” Another lawyer, William C. Chanter, appearing for the aircraft industry, sobbed that “the aircraft industry faces complete and utter disaster if portal-to-portal claims are allowed or compromised.”
*

Business Notes
Business inventories continued to rise during November, by $1.1 billion, at all levels – manufacturers, wholesalers arid retailers. Finished goods stocks held by manufacturers totaled $19.9 billion on December ... The New York Dairymen’s League, which rigged the butter market and thus made millions of dollars for its members, got off with a fine of $25,000 in federal court, after entering guilty pleas. At that price, the league can afford to rig the market every day and twice on Sundays ... Ligget & Myers Tobacco Co., which upped the price of Chesterfields 50 cents a thousand in the past year, found that it paid off. The company reports 1946 net income of $16.9 million, equal to $5.39 a share, compared with 1945 earnings of $13.4 million, or $4.30 a share. Year-end inventories were up $41.3 million compared with 1945, a record high level.
Swift & Co., one of the big meat packers, “Can look forward to a favorable year,” said John Holmes, president, to his stockholders recently. He acknowledged that “meat pipelines are filled up.” How quickly the meat got to market when the meat trust wanted to sell it ... Another packer, John Morrell & Co., also had a good year, with earnings of $5.26 a share in 1946, compared with earnings of $2.58 in 1945; in addition, surpluses rose over $1 million, and inventories were up over $2 million at the end of the year, compared with 1945.
*
Government economists figure that deflation is here. Unemployment now totals over 2,000,000, and is expected to at least double before the end of the year. They point out that consumers’ savings have shrunken drastically, under the impact of high prices ... Because the workers wages won’t begin to buy back the mountain of goods he produces, the loan sharks are preparing to help us out during the coming year, by financing our installment buying. During 1946, consumer credit of all kinds mushroomed over $2 billion to a total near the 1941 record of $10 billion. This year it will soar to $15 billion, say the loan sharks. These bankers admit that veterans and other low-income groups are now “priced out of the market,” and that the only chance they have to buy a new refrigerator or car is to buy it on time.
Banks now have $320 million in direct auto financing and $200 millions through dealers, compared to only $80 million and $55 million in 1941. C.W. Bailey, president of the American Bankers Association, says that personal loans outstanding are now at an all-time high, higher than in 1941. “We have about half the number of loans we had in 1941, but the average loan today is twice the average of 1941. The dollar won’t go as far as it did five years ago, so people are required to borrow in larger amounts. The reason for borrowing, in the majority of cases, is for necessities, paying off bills, borrowing to live, if you please.” Bailey is a little worried. “If a lot of people now find it necessary to borrow for routine living expenses, they won’t have either money or credit when the supply of durable goods comes along,” he says. It is men like Bailey who are the first to condemn the demands of unions for higher wages, or for portal pay.
 




Capitalism in its youth serves to free production from the restrictions of feudalism; but as capitalism ages it forges new fetters of production. Not a day passes but what this Marxist charge against the profit system is supported by new illustrations from the inefficient operations of this Big Business-controlled society. Today let’s talk of eggs and natural gas.
Poultry raisers, hatchery operators, produce merchants. and the Department of Agriculture, are worried stiff about what to do with the billions of surplus eggs in sight for late 1947 and 1948. (Of course there is no real surplus of eggs, in the sense that there are more eggs than people want to eat. Capitalism distorts the meaning of words as it distorts everything which it touches. When a capitalist uses the word “surplus," he means there is more of a thing than people can buy at a price.)
In recent years the Department of Agriculture has been holding up egg prices by buying the “surplus” production, and shipping powdered eggs to England. The English are just about fed up with powdered eggs and by the fall of 1947 will be getting enough shell eggs so they can turn their backs on the powdered kind. A Chicago produce dealer has suggested that the surplus dried eggs be dumped in Italy, Yugoslavia or elsewhere at a cut rate, which would mean either the farmers or the government would take a loss. Incidentally, the Department of Agriculture’s program to bolster egg prices costs the consumer about 10 cents a dozen.
Just now, some of the stupid things done under this program are coming to light. Back in 1944, according to the >Wall Street Journal>, 28 cars of iced, grade A eggs came into St. Louis. There was no storage space available. The people of St. Louis couldn’t afford to buy them at the price asked. The eggs – all 28 carloads of them – were fed to the hogs. In southern Indiana a government agent bought 6,000 cases of eggs, could find no cold storage space for them. The eggs spoiled and maggots were crawling out of the cases. Thousands of other cases were used for fertilizer.
Says the >Wall Street Journal>:
“The cost of supporting egg prices in 1944 has never been reported. Neither has anyone totaled up the number of eggs that spoiled. But the dollar cost ran into the millions and the egg loss was in the billions.” ...
A socialist society would always know how to arrange things so that surplus food and hungry people would become friends. Not so capitalism. Just recently, the press showed pictures of mountains, and fields of “surplus” citrus fruit in Texas and California – grapefruit and oranges, just the thing for growing children – rotting under the sky.
 

Why the Oil Pipelines Rust
Now for natural gas and the pipelines. The pressure of the recent war finally brought about the building of the so-called “Big Inch” and “Little Inch” pipelines, from the South to the East, whereby oil could be piped east to keep the war machine running. The government built the pipelines at a cost of $146 millions, and the lines paid their way during the war. (For decades the coal-carrying and coal-owning railroads had blocked construction of this obviously economical form of transportation.) Since the end of the war the pipelines have been rusting away. It has been estimated that they are depreciating at the rate of $10,000 a day, and costing the government $60,000 a month for maintenance.
Why aren’t the pipelines put to use? The natural gas producers down in Texas want to use them to pipe natural gas to the east. They say that enough heat goes to waste daily in “flare gas” fires to light and heat the city of Detroit. These fires are permitted to burn simply because there’s no other use for the gas – under the profit system.
A socialist system would know how to pipe this source of heat and light through the pipeline to people who need heat and light. The capitalist system doesn’t know how or care to achieve this. The pipelines continue to rust away. The flare-gas fires in Texas continue to heat the heavens.
In a few days the government will open new bids from would-be purchasers of the pipelines. But the congressmen from Pennsylvania – all trusted servants of the coal trust – say they won’t let any sale go through. Part of the pipelines, which run from the Texas oil fields to New Jersey, run through Pennsylvania. The coal trust is threatening to whip a law through the Pennsylvania state legislature to prevent the pipelines from ever being used to carry natural gas. Any potential buyer of the pipelines who proposed to pump gas through them to the east coast would face litigation all along the 300-mile right-of-way within that state.
Oh, the Great American Way of Life is the Most Efficient in the World, as the capitalist orators never tire of telling us. In a pig’s eye it is.
 

Profits Keep Rising
Everyone knows that it is Big Business that is running the world. And everyone with half an eye can see that the businessmen are running the world in their interest, not in the interest of the people. Here in the United States the people suffer from high prices, poor housing, high taxes, insecurity. But the capitalists are doing right well by themselves.
Here are some recent profit statements from enterprises owned by America’s 60 Families: The country’s leading oil companies report earnings for 1946 approximately 25 per cent above 1945, and estimate another rise of 10–15 per cent in profits for 1947. ... Procter & Gamble Co., one of the country’s largest soap makers, showed earnings in the half year ended December 31 equal to 52.53 a share, compared with $1.46 a share in the like 1945 period. In addition, the company set aside $14.5 million for a possible decline in inventories in the first six months of its fiscal year. Its net profits for the past six months total $16,300,000, compared with $9,456,033 in the same period in 1945 ...
U.S. Steel reported for the year 1946 net earnings of $88 million, equal to dividends of $7.27 on its common stock, compared with earnings of $58 million in 1945, equal to earnings of $3.77. Current assets rose $29 millions during the year, to $629 millions. ... Bethlehem Steel in 1946 reported net earnings of $41 millions, or $11.79 a share, the largest earnings since 1940 and far above the $9.52 a share earned in 1945. Despite such profiteering, Mr. Grace, president of Bethlehem, is very firm about one thing. “Any demand for increased pay, if granted, will mean higher prices for steel,” he says. It would never occur to Mr. Grace to cut down his exorbitant profits.
That is what unions and a labor party are for. To make Big Business do things it would never dream of doing ...
Even the five-and-dimes coined money last year. F.W. Woolworth & Co. reported 1946 net income of about $40 million, equal to $4 a share, compared with $2.43 a share in 1945. ... Inland Steel reported net income of $15 million in 1946, equal to $3.18 a share, compared with $9 million and $2.01 a share in 1945.
Quite naturally, Big Business believes capitalism is the best of all possible systems. It is – for Big Business. But it is hell for the people. Or haven’t you had enough yet? If you have bad enough, and are looking for a program to fight capitalism intelligently, join the Workers Party.
 




America’s 60 Families, who own the bulk of this country, enormously strengthened their grip on the nation’s wealth in the course of the recent war, by maneuvering the “defense” program in such a way as to channel most of the billions of dollars their way. Now that more normal peacetime conditions prevail, small business is destined to wake up to the facts – through being driven to the wall in the next few years. The >Wall Street Journal> recently reports that “the death rate among business this year will climb like a kite in a spanking spring breeze.”
In the retail field, businesses most vulnerable include restaurants, taverns, night clubs, sporting goods stores and appliance shops ... On June 30, 1946, there were over 3.5 million individual businesses in the nation, 700,000 more than at the end of 1943. In November, total liabilities of failing concerns came to $12.5 million, the highest since December 1941 ... The enormous profits being made in so many lines of business in recent years have inflamed the acquisitive- streak in the American petty bourgeoisie, so many of whom nurse a pitiful ambition to become Napoleons of business and finance. In 1946, four businesses were started for each one that shut its doors.
The Commerce Department has reported 227 new firms and 58 closings for every 1,000 businesses In operation. (The pre-war rate was about one new business for every one that closed.) Construction contracting was the most popular of eight major industry groups. There were 553 such firms opened last year for every 1,000 in existence at the start of the year.
The opening rate per 1,000 for other industry groups follows: Wholesale trade, 306; manufacturing, 269; service industries, 218; retail trade, 207 (chiefly motor vehicles and appliance and radio stores); mining and quarrying, 188; transportation, communications and and other public utilities, 149; finance, insurance and real estate, 113. The highest rate of discontinuance was in lumber and basic products, with 156 firms quitting business for every 1,000 in existence.
Discontinuance rates for other manufacturing industries in 1946 were: Machinery, 129; electrical machinery, 93; apparel and other finished products, 90; iron and steel and their products, 80; appliance and radio stores, 77; furniture and finished lumber products, 76; eating and drinking places, 75.
After each war, Big Business proceeds to shake the little capitalists out of the field, but the above figures show that a new crop of suckers comes along each generation. In the year 1920 the number of business failures bounced up nearly 40 per cent. In 1921 three businesses went under for every one that died in 1919, and liabilities totaled more than $500 million. Since the First World War monopoly has increased so greatly as to constitute almost a different quality.
In the next few years hundreds of thousands of men and women “on the make” to be bosses are going to be rudely shoved back among the masses. Today these aspiring titans of business and finance mouth all the reactionary nonsense that passes for social thinking with Big Business and its toadies. Tomorrow, when their dreams of ease and wealth crumble, their “human nature” will change. They will see things and feel things they had forgotten, or hadn’t seen and felt before. Some of this human material may be salvaged and converted into decent humanity, good union men and women, people on the march to change this immeasurably stupid, cruel and inefficient capitalist system into a socialist society.
*
What makes a business man tick? Where does he obtain that acquisitive drive, that passion for profit, that callousness that can overlook the social consequences of his mad race after the dollar, that ability to rationalize and excuse and justify his living off the unpaid labor of others? From the educational system, the schools, the movies, the press, the churches, of course, for all teach that it is good and desirable to be wealthy. This present system twists and distorts some people until they become little monsters, caricatures of human beings, almost like the animated dollar signs used by the cartoonists.
Here is a recent story that appeared in the press. A man named Herbert McCulla was, back in 1929, president of the National Junior Chamber of Commerce. Membership in that organization marks one as being an understudy of the wealthy, as possessing all the vices of the 60 Families but lacking their wherewithal. McCulla couldn’t wait to make his pile through the socially acceptable methods of squeezing the poor or of careful jobbery. He embezzled $9,000 from the local symphony orchestra association, of which he was secretary. McCulla, of course, was a lover of the arts. He was clumsy about his theft, was caught, confessed, received a prison term in the Nebraska state penitentiary.
There since May, 1945, he has managed to make a net profit of $1,113 as a manufacturer and dealer in novelty leather goods. He had 18 other convicts working for him, making billfolds and belts for sale to prison visitors.
In addition, McCulla, who describes himself as “a misplaced business man,” received $1,928 from the federal government as a refund on 1944 federal income tax; $437 from an insurance policy; $175 from the sale of leather working tools to convicts, and his $10 monthly salary as prison storekeeper. The warden insisted there was nothing irregular or wrong in McCulla’s business proclivities. And, from the viewpoint of capitalist morality, there isn’t, for capitalism sanctions the exploitation of the masses, even in prison.
*
The American Management Association and the National Conference of Public Relations Executives are worried at their failure to sell the American people on the alleged benefits of capitalism. The stenches arising daily from that system continue to blanket all the rose water sprayed about publicly by the capitalist hucksters.
The American Institute of Accounts finds itself in a dilemma. Its secretary, John L. Carey, told a meeting in New York recently that weighty questions have arisen about industry’s financial statements. On the one hand, he said, fuller disclosure of company operations might help to substitute orderly bargaining for industrial strife, and to supplant worker hostility with worker cooperation. If such information would dispel from workers’ minds fantastic notions about the size of corporate profits and if it would mollify what has been called labor’s dangerous hostility to profits as such, it might do much to preserve the economic system under which we live.” The objection to telling a little of the truth in financial statements, he continued, might “be the possible invitation of wage demands which might not otherwise be made and the conceivable use of such information by radical labor leaders as a stepping stone to participation in management decisions.” ...
William Franklin, controller of the Caterpillar Tractor Co., had a brilliant idea. He suggested that a company issue one financial report to employees, and a different type of report to stockholders. Franklin said – and here is something that every union negotiating committee can throw in the teeth of the bosses – that reports to employees often resemble “a child’s first reader printed on a valentine.” Mr. Franklin is all for changing the names of things. He suggests that the word “surplus” be changed to “profit employed in the business.” The new term, he believes, would erase the worker s notion that “surplus is an excess of some sort that the corporation should not be allowed to keep.”
*
And speaking of profits and surpluses: U.S. Rubber announced consolidated net income for 1946 hit an all-time high of $23 millions, equivalent to $10.23 a share compared with $13 millions and $4.44 a share in 1945 In addition, the company added $49 million to its surplus ... National Steel Corporation reported net earnings in 1946 of $20 millions, equal to $9.17 a share, compared with last year’s $11 million and $5.04 a shore ...
 




Farms in the U.S. are getting fewer and bigger. The average farm today is 50 acres larger than the average of 25 years ago. The >Wall Street Journal> says the trend is contrary to a federal policy of encouraging small farms, but this is a wilful misstatement. A monopolists’ government can follow only a monopolist program. Government policy for years has been to aid the big farmer at the expense of the small one.
In 1920 the Census Bureau counted 6,448,343 farms. In 1945 the number had dropped more than half a million, to 5,859,169. Half the 1945 farms had more than 500 acres each. In 1920, only one-third were that big. Today, 40 per cent of the farms are over 1,000 acres each, compared to only 25 per cent of that size in 1920. Even in the midwest, the average farm is 30 acres larger than it was a quarter of a century ago.
The war was most profitable for the big farmers. Farm mortgage debt at the beginning of 1946 was $5 billion, down 23 per cent from January 1, 1940. Total value of the nation’s farm plant, including all assets held by farm owners, amounted to $101.5 billion on January 1, 1946, up 12 per cent from a year earlier, and up 90 per cent since the beginning of 1940.
Only Big Business profited to a greater extent than did the Big Farmer during the recent war. Through its price support program, the federal government guaranteed huge profits to the farmers. (Imagine a federal government under capitalism, led by capitalist parties, setting aside billions of dollars to bolster up wages of industrial workers! But then the American workers, the majority of the population, have not one single representative in Congress nor in any state legislature. We haven’t even got a labor party yet.)
Secretary of Agriculture Anderson estimated the other day that the government may put up more than $2 billion more to support farm prices over the next two years. Some of the prices promised farmers by the government are so high as to encourage over-production —such as happened in 1946 in the case of potatoes, when a crops of nearly 100 million bushels more than could be used was produced. Mountains of potatoes rotted and are rotting in the open today.
*

Surpluses to Be Dumped
There’ll be a hairpin turn in the road for the farmers, though. Food prices are still 130 per cent above mid-1939, but the butter market is a harbinger of what is ahead. The price of butter has tumbled 25 cents a pound in just a few weeks, and it is still going down. Just now, some of the inside facts about the meanness of the milk trust are coming to light?—how they held the supply off the market in order to maintain an artificial scarcity, up to the point where the public had to cease buying the stuff.
For instance, did you know that the government cold storage report for January 1 showed there were 34 million pounds of 40 per cent cream in storage, AS AGAINST ONLY SEVEN MILLION POUNDS A YEAR AGO. This cream could have been converted to butter at any time, but was purposely held back. However, now the profiteers who held the cream are very jittery indeed, and are now putting it into butter. This is why butter prices will continue to slide.
In the north Atlantic states, butter output has jumped 325 per cent over a year ago. You’ll see more and more of this stupendous cream surplus converted into butter ... However, the milk trust has an ace in the hole? When butter gets down to 53 cents a pound, the government will step in to support that price.
*
Another branch of capitalism that is in for a letdown from its enormous war profiteering is the canning industry. Canners of fruit juices, for instance, are so flooded with goods they are at wits’ end. Orange juice that cost New York housewives 25 cents a can last fall, now sells three for 25 cents. Grapefruit juice that cost 15 cents a can in October now sells three for 25 cents. In Seattle oranges that sold for 43 cents a dozen six weeks ago have been knocked down to 19 cents. In Cleveland a retailer claims that a salesman offered him the other day orange and grapefruit juice free, if he’d just pay for the cans and cartons. A Philadelphia store owner says he dumped a fifth of his fresh citrus fruit stock because of spoilage.
Silver prices smacked down 5 cents an ounce the other day, from 76¼ cents to 71 cents, the biggest one-day price decline in 26 years. Even then, silver buyers didn’t rush in. (This is for foreign silver. U.S. silver producers, who own a chunk of the government, also have a nice racket. They got a bill through last July whereby the federal government buys their silver at 90% cents an ounce.)
Certain consumers’ goods items are now so plentiful that it can be safely predicted that prices will drop somewhat from the abnormal levels. During the war, business got the habit of taking war-time super-profits on its operations. An automatic washer which sold for $198 in 1940 now brings $270. The Ford two-door sedan which sold for $771 f.o.b. Detroit in 1939 now is priced at $1,367 (without extras and before taxes). Consumers cannot pay those prices.
With prices of some food items and household appliances declining, the housewife gets a break.
But wait a minute. The landlord is going to take up the slack. Rents are goiing up, to leave us just about where we were before. The worker cannot win lender capitalism. In the 1920s there was little unemployment but prices were too high. Then came the depression. Prices went down, but 15,000,000 of us were unemployed and millions of others took deep wage cuts. Then came the recent war. Most everyone working, but no consumers’ goods. Now peace. Prices out of sight, many goods still scarce. The shortages will soon be over, but by then unemployment will be crashing into the picture. It's a wonderful system, isn’t it?
*
Don’t be taken in by stories that, the reason prices are high is because material prices have gone up. (The bosses also say that prices are high because wages are high, but readers of >LABOR ACTION> know better than to swallow that one.) It is true that hide prices are about twice as high as in 1929. BUT THE “HIDE” IN A PAIR OF $10 SHOES IS ONLY WORTH ABOUT 85 cents. Cotton has trebled in price since 1939. BUT THE COTTON IN THE $1.50 SHIRT THAT THE STORE SELLS FOR $5.00 TODAY IS ONLY WORTH 25 CENTS. Cotton in a bed sheet costs less than 75 cents. Wool in a man’s suit, at present prices, is worth roughly $5.
 

The Recent Meat Black Market
Remember last year, when the Meat Trust in Chicago and elsewhere was crossing its heart that it wasn’t getting any livestock and wasn’t selling meat on the black market? The trust’s earning statements are now coming to light. What a story of deceit and merciless profiteering they tell. Wilson & Co., one of the Big Four, has just reported “one of the most profitable years in its history.” Net earnings rose to $8,311,560, equal to $3.43 a common share, from $5,036,602 in 1945, or $1.64 a share. In addition, RESERVES OF OVER $8 MILLION WERE SET ASIDE.
“Our year-end financial position shows a large increase in working capital, a substantial reserve against inventory price declines, a permanent reduction in our preferred stock dividend requirements, and for the first time since 1939, no obligations on notes to bunks,” says president Edward Wilson. Incidentally, a Wilson director is Martin Kennelly, Democratic candidate for mayor of Chicago, and the white-haired boy with all the liberals. The black market was mighty good to Kennelly, the Wilson Company, and the packing trust.
The monthly bulletin of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago reports that the meat packing industry is in the strongest peacetime financial condition in history. Let’s look at the earning reports of the three other major packers. Swift showed a 34 per cent increase in net profits. Armour’s earnings rose 2.3 times after reserves, and Cudahy’s 2.7 times, also after generous reserves. In brief, the business is wallowing in profits like a yard full of hogs. They had to sell SOMETHING to make such profits. They told the public they weren’t selling meat, weren’t buying cattle, had turned their back on the Black Market. What do YOU think, reader?
 




Here, in brief, is a picture of U.S. economy today. Total production is now roughly 13 per cent greater than the average of 1941, the last pre-war year. But the 1941 average, because of the “defense program,” was far above any earlier peacetime level in our history. This year has not only brought a restoration of the activities of peace industries, but has sent them soaring to record levels – this, despite strikes and materials shortages ...
Business inventories again rose in October, by $1.6 billions, largest rise on record, to an all-time high of $34 billions. The value of total inventories held by manufacturers was over $19.5 billions, the largest increase taking place in the form of finished goods, which accounted for 45 per cent of the rise ... Stores are full, warehouses are full, factories are full, the pipelines between are bursting. The only shortages, save for a few exceptions, are those artificially stimulated by Big Business. Put a pin there, as Daniel De Leon used to say ...
The Department of Agriculture reports that food prices have risen more in the past four months than in any comparable period during the 33 years in which records have been kept. Farm income for the first eleven months of 1946 totaled $21.6 billion, 14 per cent more than in the same period last year, and also an all-time high in history. Put a pin there ...
But now look. Savings of individuals are now the lowest since 1941, according to the quarterly analysis of savings compiled by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The trend of savings Increased sharply in 1942 and ‘43 (forced purchase of war bonds, lack of consumers’ goods), leveled off in 1944 and ’45. Not only have savings declined but there has been an increase in consumer indebtedness, as the masses fight a losing battle against high prices. Consumer debt increased by $1.4 billion In the third quarter. In the third quarter of 1946, savings declined from $5.3 billions to $4.3 billions, in marked contrast to the normal Seasonal INCREASE. A year ago, savings totaled $19.3 billions. In 1944 they stood at the peak of $39.9 billions. IT DIDN’T TAKE BIG BUSINESS LONG TO STAND US ON OUR HEADS AND SHAKE THE MONEY OUT OF OUR POCKETS. DID IT?
*
National income in 1946 reached $165 billions, twice as high as it was in the boom year of 1929, four times as high as in 1932. (Remember when we used to quote from the Brookings Institute study of America’s Capacity to Produce, and have some scissorbill in the audience challenge us.) ... Well, we ought all to be rich today, shouldn’t we? But we very obviously aren’t. Indeed, millions of us are worse off than ever. Our real wages – the goods our pay checks will buy – are lower. That this is so is shown by the unprecedented borrowing now occurring – what the >Wall Street Journal> refers to as “a borrowing binge.” People all over the country are trekking to commercial banks, personal loan companies and pawn shops for cash. Some borrow to patch up their homes. Some to pay the doctor. Most just seek money to meet the day-to-day bills that their wages don’t cover.
Federal Reserve figures show personal loans (both instalment and single payment) at the end of September at $3.9 billion, compared with $2.5 billion at the close of 1944. Charge account credit jumped from $1.7 billion to $2.5 billion over the same period. Loans made for the purchase of autos and heavy household appliances increased from $835 million to $1.2 billion ... A loan company official in Boston says that “in the last two or three months, personal borrowing, here has bounced up 50 per cent above the 1945 level.” Bankers in Cleveland say that people in that city are now borrowing money at about double the rate of last year. Police department records in Detroit show 670,000 pawnbroker tickets issued there in the first 11 months of 1946, an increase of about one-fourth over the 545,000 of a year ago. In San Francisco the Bank of America in October had strictly personal loans totaling $32 millions, compared with the total a year ago of $18.8 million. In Portland, Ore., a pawnshop owner says: “I’ll say more people are asking for loans. Gold watches are piling up so fast in this place that I can’t move around it any more. I gave $20 on a watch a few months ago. I’m only giving $10 now.”
The bankers aren’t fooled when people say they need the loan for “medical expenses.” And the bankers ought to know for it’s their system and they own the country and the very souls of the scissorbills. “If all the people who said they needed cash to pay doctor bills in the last year have told the truth,” says one Cleveland bank official, “then the medics have been paid up 200 per cent.” Another banker says: “The high cost of living has taken the savings margin out of many persons’ incomes. And when a contingency arises, they have to come to the bank for help.” Another says: “More and more people are getting behind an making ends meet.” ... Who is doing the borrowing? In city after city, they report: “Workers, mostly. Then office help, followed by foremen, sales people, school teachers, the unskilled, professional people, people with independent incomes.” That is just about everybody except America’s 69 families and their trusted retainers, isn’t it? ...
A big Seattle loan company reports that most personal loans have been going to people making $170 to $250 a month. “But very recently,” they say, “we’ve noticed an increased volume of borrowing by skilled laborers making $300 to $400 a month. And money requests from steadily employed white collar people are definitely on the increase.” ... In Washington there’s a state law that restricts the amount of a loan to any one family from one company to $500, but doesn’t prevent multiple loans from several companies. Many families have received as high as six different loans from as many companies. That is, they are in hock to the sharks for months to come. So loan companies in Seattle have organized an exchange designed gradually to limit the number of loans to three to a family.
I know there’ll be some brainy liberal reading this column who’ll say knowingly: “Sure. It’s just the workers taking out loans to blow themselves to the new gadgets on the market.”
But it is not that at all.
“During the war,” says one big hockshop operator, “we got the sporting element people who wanted to play the horses or gamble some other way. They brought in cheap rings and gadgets. Now we’re getting people who have to pay the rent. They bring in good jewelry, fur coats, expensive cameras.” ...
Loan men say that not much of today’s loan money is going to buy autos, furniture, household appliances. First, there aren’t too much of these commodities on the market. Second, government credit restrictions prevent a lot of time purchasing by lower income groups. Third, a lot of the durable goods sold are going for cash, to the profiteers. One loan man explains that it takes a monthly income of $500 to handle a new car on time. “And most people aren’t making that kind of money,” he says.
 

What It Adds Up To
Peacetime production highest in history. Big Business profits highest in history. People not getting hack in wages the value of what they produce. Over-production. The masses going in debt. B-O-O-O-O-M. The economists of the CIO are a hundred times correct when they contend that business, by and large, can raise wages 25 to 30 per cent without increasing prices, and STILL enjoy profits higher than the pre-war level. But will business agree to that? Why should they? They have the power, they own the government. But that is what unions and national labor parties and a workers’ and farmers’ government in Washington are for. To take that power over our lives away from Big Business and vest it in ourselves. Future generations will wonder why we took so long to act.
 




I’m sorry if you feel this is where you came in, Jack, but I have to take just one more crack at that >Wall Street Journal> series on how the wealthy are finding it hard to make both ends meet these days. We’ve already had a gander at the $10,000-a-year and the $45,000-a-year man. This time we observe Mr. C., “a $200,000-a-year chief executive of one of the country’s top industrial concerns.” A salary like that is the equivalent of $4 million in the bank at five per cent interest. While it is still far from the income of America’s 60 Families, it places Mr. C. as one of the trusted managers for the families who own the bulk of America.
We first glimpse Mr. C. alighting from a taxi in front of one of Wall Street’s skyscrapers. He pays his fare, then pulls a black notebook from his pocket and writes this entry: “Wednesday – taxi, station to office, $1.50, tip, 15 cents.” Mr. C. is noting all his “business” expenses these days, in order to deduct them from his income for tax purposes. Most of us take street cars to work and we don’t deduct the fare from our income. Mr. C. takes taxis and deducts the amount.
Last year, Mr. C. received a salary of $198,675. He deducted 10 per cent for “charitable contributions” – probably donations to his favorite anti-labor outfit – paid his income taxes, and had left a total of $36,611, it says.
But how can a family of five live on a beggarly thirty-six grand? Mr. C. has given up his life insurance, aggregating $250,000, because “I could no longer afford to pay the premiums. It was a tough decision to make,” he says. “It meant kicking over everything I had planned for my family. But under the circumstances it was the only thing to do. My boys won’t get as large an inheritance as they might have, but I guess they’ll be better off with less money.” There was a dubious note in his voice at this last.
The drop in income is bad enough, says C., but when it is accompanied by a rise in living costs, “brother, it really pinches.”
“At home,” he explains, “we’re paying 100 per cent more for our chauffeur, gardener and servants than we did before the war. In addition, we give them all the fresh vegetables they want from the farm (Mr. C. must own a farm), a dozen eggs each week, turkeys at Thanksgiving and Christmas.”
 

Even the Servants Go on Strike
That is Mr. C.’s story. But the servants obviously have a different story to relate, because Mr. C. confesses to the reporter that “Even with all this, they threatened to strike a few weeks ago unless they were given a $5 a week raise. They got it.”
This is interesting and significant. As a rule, servants in a very wealthy home arc more reactionary than their masters. That is, they take seriously all the expressed reactionary opinions of the rich. The King’s footman is, as a rule, more royalist than His Majesty.
Here we see that this great mass discontent sweeping the United States has struck so deep that it has entered the servants’ quarters of the fabulous mansions of the very wealthy, and has set these persons to thinking, to organizing, to rebelling; Good.
Mr. C., “like most successful business men,” is a sociable fellow. That is, he used to be. Now. he has done a “pruning job” and his total club memberships number less than five. “Where a club membership is deemed necessary for business reasons, his company pays the initiation fee and dues on the grounds they are legitimate business expenses. The company does the same for all its officers and key men.”
Mr. C. has never lived extravagantly or even elegantly, says the account. “He’s never owned a yacht or a string of race horses.” He would like to build a swimming pool behind his house, “but to build it, I’d have to sell a couple of my government bonds. I don’t like to do that, so I’m getting along without the pool. You know, I find I’m developing an inferiority complex on spending money.”
In spite of the absence of luxuries, as noted above, “Mr. C. feels he’s doing pretty well. With the exception of last year, when he drew on his savings to buy two automobiles, he’s managed to live within his income.”
Mr. C. told the reporter of the similar hard times his fellow executives were having, what with high taxes, high prices and all. The reporter asked him a good question: “If taxes take so much of their income, why not pay executives less and help them reduce their tax bills?”
That is just about what the Workers Party proposes. In the program of our party you will see a demand: Limit annual incomes to $25,000. We want to help all the C.’s with their tax problems. We want to take the money away from the rich and use it to raise the inadequate wages of the poor.
 

An “Energizer” to Prod the Poor
Mr. C. sort of bridled at that one. He sat up straight and pursed his lips. You could see he was thinking of our welfare. “High executive salaries,” he declared in an impressive tone, “are an energizer to inspire those down the line to equip themselves for the higher jobs.”
He felt this needed a little more explaining. “Just as profits are the measuring stick which judge the efficiency of management, the salary received by a member of management is the standard by which he is judged not only by others but in his estimation. It is also the most practical method of rewarding ability.”
You know what I think. I think Mr. C. isn’t paying out all that heavy sugar in taxes that he says he is. I’ve talked to several of the tax specialists employed by the rich to help them keep hold of their dough, and I know a trick or two.
So does the >Wall Street Journal>, for just recently they ran a front-page article, explaining how “Gifts to Charities can result in big tax savings to people in high bracket incomes ... Playing Santa Claus in some cases may mean an actual cash gain for the giver.”
The article goes on to explain that “When a donation is made in securities, the value of the gift for tax purposes is measured by the market value of the securities when the gift is made, not by their original cost. Thus the individual who gives securities on which he has a profit gets a double tax benefit. He saves the income tax on the market value of the gift and the capital gains tax on his profit.”
Just by happenstance, they take a man earning $200,000 a year – like Mr. C. – to explain how it works. Supposing C. gives stock that cost him $2,000 but is presently worth $10,000. The income tax saved on the gift is $8,645. The capital gains tax saved on $8,000 profit is 2,000. The total tax saving is $10,645. The net gain to our Mr. C. is $645.
As Lenin used to say, the million ways that the rich have of robbing society will never be cataloged or known.
 




Farmers’ gross national income in the United States in 1946 will total $23.5 billions, approximately $2 billion more than the previous peak in 1945. Naturally, it is divided very unevenly. Pre-war farm income was around $10–$11 billion ... The Agricultural Department is preparing to spend $1.8 billion to support prices of farm products in the next fiscal year ... A rise of 4.3 per cent in retail food prices between October 15 and November 15 boosted the food price index to 187.7 per cent of the 1935–39 average, 35 per cent higher than a year ago.
... For years the price of butter and milk in the United States has been set by the price of butter on the New York Mercantile Exchange. And for years, various individuals have utilized that fact to manipulate butter prices on the exchange. Recently the government filed criminal charges against the Dairymen’s League Cooperative Association and its officers, charging such manipulation. League officials admit they bought 668,060 pounds of butter at 84 cents a pound in the week ending December 24, because if butter had been permitted to drop below 84 cents it would have resulted in a loss of 22 cents a 100 pounds in the price of milk produced by members of the league in January. By spending a half million dollars, the league artificially held up the price of butter and milk, which cost the consumers millions and earned for members of the league a few million extra dollars ...
Incidentally, the social philosophy of the various farm producers’ cooperatives is just about as reactionary as that of the big bankers and industrialists. With a few exceptions, they support the right wing of the Republican Party ... Organized labor has registered one of its biggest failures in its relations, or rather, lack of relationships, with the farmers. Big Business is a past master at maintaining contact with and influencing the farmers, strictly to the gain of Big Business. It is good that the AFL has issued a national charter to the old Southern Tenant Farmers League. But what is really needed is a broad social program by organized labor to reorganize the whole economy, one that will offer an alternative to the present miserable system. That means a national labor party, a political approach by labor to the poor and middle class farmers.
*

Notes on Business
American Big Business is hip-deep in the riches of Venezuela, one of the richest countries in the world. The nation’s petroleum reserves are estimated at 5.6 billion barrels; it has mountains of high grade iron ore. Bethlehem Steel is building a "loading bridge" on the Orinoco River to put mined ore into 3,000-ton barges, destined for Baltimore. U.S. Steel’s subsidiary, the Oliver Mining Co. (which runs northern Minnesota) has a concession in Venezuela. United Merchants and Manufacturers, Inc., is building a plant to make rayon. General Electric, Caterpillar Tractor and International Harvester are all putting up buildings in Venezuela for warehousing. A group of U.S. bankers have formed an organization known as La Financera to finance new businesses in that country.
The biggest oil operator in Venezuela is Creole Petroleum, a subsidiary of Standard, Oil of New Jersey. Other U.S. oil companies building new refineries are Mene Grande Co., a subsidiary of Gulf Oil, and Sinclair. Socony Vacuum has a 3,000,000-acre concession. The Texas Co., Royal Dutch Shell, Atlantic Refining Co., Pantepec Oil Co., Caribbean Petroleum Co., and the British firm of Colon Development Co. all have concessions in Venezuela. Like a battery of leeches, the foreign imperialists are draining the wealth of that nation. Recently, Juan Perez Alfonzo, minister of development of the Venezuelan government, timidly suggested that his government should receive 50 per cent of the profits from oil operations instead of the present 16⅔ per cent. New York spokesmen for the oil trust immediately labeled the suggestion “impractical.” The rich and powerful always find it “impractical” to get off the backs of the poor.
*

Economic Trends
The rubber industry is winding up the biggest and most profitable year in its history. Combined sales for the 1946 fiscal year of the five Akron rubber companies are expected to be close to $1.6 billion, compared with the best pre-war record of $650 millions. Goodyear’s earnings this year are expected to amount to at least $15 a share of common stock; 1940 earnings were $3.44. Firestone’s earnings in the first half year were $6.09; Goodrich, first half year, $8.74; General, first half year, $5.19, compared with $2.20 for all of 1945; Seiberling, $3 this year compared with $1.33 last year.
The newspaper and magazine publishers have a nice racket with the Post Office in the second class mail rates. In the fiscal year 1944–45 it cost the Post Office $149 million to handle this second class mail, for which senders paid only $29 million. The extra $120 million? That came out of the profits made by the P.O. on first-class rates charged the public ... Packard has raised its prices’ on cars an average of $62, while Ford has lowered prices $25–$50 a car ... Since the end of OPA furniture prices have been raised from 10 to 30 per cent throughout the industry. Rug prices have risen 10 per cent. British exports for November totaled $368,400,000, an all-time high. This represents about 117 per cent of the 1938 export average, even allowing for increased prices. Machinery and vehicles accounted for 28 per cent of the total.
U.S. capitalism scoured the world for copper to make the cartridges during the war. Now the U.S. is facing an acute shortage of copper scrap. So it is planning to go to Germany and reclaim the copper scrap, in the form of fired cartridge cases, from German soil. There’ll be a profit in it, so the work will be done by private importers.
Both newspapers and radios are preparing to raise their advertising rates another notch ... Loew’s, Inc., one of the largest Hollywood film producers, has purchased a theater in Antwerp, Belgium, and has acquired holdings in other theaters in Geneva and Lausanne, Switzerland. Loew’s now obtains about 40 percent of its gross income from foreign sources and expects to increase this to about 50 per cent through theater purchases and increased distribution of films abroad. The company has new production studios in London ...
*

The National Debt
The U.S. has for the first time in its history a national debt that exceeds the annual national income and represents a per capita burden eight times greater than after World War I, according to a study recently made public by the Committee on Public Debt Policy. When the U.S. entered World War I the national debt represented about three per cent of the national income. By February 1946, it was 180 per cent as great as the annual national income. The burden of national debt resting upon each man, woman and child in the U.S. is today $1,981; after World War I it was $240; after the Civil War, $78. The study was prepared by the late Gen. Leonard P. Ayres, who was considered a whale of an economist by Big Business.
*

A Milestone to Decay
Few editors noted an important turning-point in the history of American capitalism that occurred December 22, when the Association of Southern Commissioners of Agriculture issued a plea for strong, protective tariffs for American agricultural products. The association denounced the reciprocal trade treaty program of the federal government, and called for an end to the 18 trade treaties negotiated under Roosevelt’s administration. For more than a century southern agriculture has traditionally been a defender of “free trade,” that is, it has fought to break down trade barriers among the nations. U.S. agricultural commodities have in the past fed a good share of the world. Indeed, American capitalism grew up on the profits garnered in the food sold abroad, food that could be sold at prices with which the rest of the world could not compete.
But now the old system is growing old, is decaying.
“Due to the kaleidoscopic changes attending the national economy of the United States in a more modern world," state the southern agriculturalists in their appeal to President Truman and the federal trade commission, "we are with reluctance compelled to burn all bridges and to make prayer to the chief executive that he now retain in behalf of our agricultural products the vestiges of tariff protection which still remain of the act of 1930 ... and that he keep the markets of these United States open to (us) for the safe of American produced crops of fats, foods, feeds, and fibers, without an overburden of competition from foreign producers of identical crops."
The petition was not confined to crops of the South. It asked for protection for wheat and corn, for livestock, potatoes, fruits and vegetables, and, of course, cotton.
The farmers would turn back the clocks of history and would seek to establish “capitalism in one country” here.
“Let us,” they urge, “in the cotton South sell our farm products in the American markets and with the proceeds thereof buy the products of our home industries.’ America then will have the products and the industrial goods. Buy your farm products abroad and ’tis true you will have the products, but they, the foreigners, will have the tractors and automobiles while our own agriculture goes back to subsistence level of diet and life.” ...
The American farmers have good reason to feel alarmed at a future which spells nothing but misery and decay for them. During the recent war, a good section of the farming population prospered here as they have never done before. But it is the last flare-up of health they are destined ever to feel, in all likelihood. The skids are greased and waiting. Why this is so I shall take up in a future article.
 




Today we continue our cavalcade of modern American tragedy, with the epic story of how Mr. H, a $10,000-a-year executive of a medium-sized manufacturing company in Chicago, “can live well on his salary but ‘can’t save a cent’.” Like last week’s story of Mr. $45,000-a-Year-X, this one is taken from the columns of the >Wall Street Journal>.
At $10,000 per, Mr. H is far from the ranks of the Big Bourgeoisie, but still a stalwart junior officer in the army of exploiters that occupies the United States.
“A young 42, he is earning 40 per cent more than he did in 1940 ... owns his own home just outside Chicago ... leads the life so, often depicted on the advertising pages of the slick paper magazines ... and generally enjoys all the pleasures of living.’ Mrs. H is a member of three women’s clubs.”
Like Mr. X, our current hero hasn’t “saved a cent in 1946. My bank account is still hovering between $1,000 and $1,500 where it was five years ago and I haven’t bought a share of stock or a bond in the past 12 months, let alone any new furniture or household appliances.”
Back in 1940, Mr. H was making $7,000 a year, including $1,000 in bonuses. He lives in a $12,000 house which will be his in 17 more years ... IF the coming great depression doesn’t declass him.
The war was kind to Mr. H. The recruiting posters and the military services were not for him. From 1942 to 1945 he increased his security holdings from $5,000 to $12,000 (more than half in government bonds). He is insured for $45,000. He pays $1,200 a year for this, but, like Mr. X, doesn’t feel that this constitutes savings. He pays federal income taxes of $1,900, it says in the Wall Street Journal. His securities net him income of $360 a year.
Mr. H keeps a sharp eye on household expenses, and no doubt he and Mrs. H have well-bred spats about this subject. “Our biggest outlay is for groceries,” he says. “Before the war we were struggling – and failing – to keep the weekly bills under $20. Now we are lucky if it is less than $37 for our family of three.” The H’s always enjoy the best cuts of meat and plenty of vegetables, and little Mary has the juice of six oranges every morning. Payments on their home and other household expenses total $150 a month. When their house needed redecorating last year, Mr. H bought some paint and did the work himself.
Mr. H is a snappy dresser. In 1946 he bought four suits at $75 per. Five years ago he had never bought a suit over $35, “and they were as good if not better than the suits I have today.” Mrs. H spends about $500 yearly on duds, and little Mary’s $300 a year for clothes doesn’t bring her sneers from her classmates.
Mr. and Mrs. H are popular, it says, and they do a lot of entertaining, costing about $75 a month.
Mr. H belongs to three clubs and a church, all for business reasons. The church doesn’t receive the Biblical tithe, but only $250 a year. That is Mr. H’s contribution toward supporting superstition and prejudice among the population. His country club monthly bill runs around $65 a month, and his company pays his expenses in the other clubs.
But by God, there is one place where the H’s save money. Mrs. H gets along without a maid by having a woman come in to clean and wash one day a week. “We have a real bargain there,” says Mr. H proudly. “She charges only 40 cents an hour, carfare, and her meals on the job.”
Mr. H is a careful shopper but at the same time he wants to keep up with the neighbors. He’s got his name on the lists for a new Oldsmobile, and also a Buick. At present he drives a 1941 Ford. In 1947 he also wants to buy a deep freeze box, a washing machine, a piano and a television set. He’d like also to take a vacation, and Mrs. H is planning a trip to Europe to visit relatives there.
I don’t pass on information about the X’s and H’s just to interest you, though I know it does that. Few things about people are as interesting as how they earn and spend their money. That is what we like about the novels of writers as far apart as Horatio Alger and Theodore Dreiser. They tell us how their characters earn money and how they think about it. I consider information about how the bourgeoisie live as an important element in the political education of the American people. It is not the X-Y-Z of Marxism, but only the D-E-F. All of us should know all we can about the economic, social and political aspects of every type in society – of the Catholic priest and the Catholic layman, the cotton farmer and the cattle rancher, the doctor and the atomic physicist, the preacher and the major, and so forth. The more we know about these people the more will we be able to influence them, or to combat them, with our scientific program to revolutionize society. Trotsky, I know, all his life long was a keen student of every social type that the world breeds It aided him immeasurably in his mastery of politics. We cannot match Trotsky’s knowledge but we can all strive to do so.
 



The Political Career of Floyd B. Olson
by George H. Mayer
The University of Minnesota Press, 329 pp. $5.
The author’s theme is one of the most serious and interesting in American political history – the organization and growth of a successful labor party on a state scale, and the career of the brilliant lawyer who came over from the Democratic Party to accept the nomination of the Farmer-Labor Association and to serve as the Farmer-Labor governor of Minnesota from 1930 to 1936.
The son of a railroad worker, Olson was born in Minneapolis in 1891. After graduating from high school he became a migratory worker, and joined what Mayer refers to as the “International Workers of the World,” returning to Minneapolis in 1913. While clerking in a law office he won his law degree at night school, and immediately entered politics. He sought the Democratic nomination for Congress in 1918 and 1920, but remained on good enough terms with the Republicans to receive from them an appointment as assistant attorney general in Hennepin County, and in 1924 wangled the Farmer-Labor gubernatorial nomination. Thus his bent for straddling all parties was shown early.
The book discusses Olson’s successful campaigns in 1930, 1932, and 1934, his struggles with a hostile legislature, his extraordinary handling of the unemployment and farm problems, his rise to national prominence as a left wing of Roosevelt, the 1934 Minneapolis truck strikes with Olson uncomfortably in the middle, and the gradual taking over of the Farmer-Labor movement by the Stalinists through their candidate, Elmer Benson. (The author’s political naiveté makes him miss this perfidious game.)
The account closes with the governor’s death, in 1936, of cancer. His death, concludes the author, “enhanced Olson’s reputation because he died before public apathy and the increasing threat of war undermined the reforming zeal of the 1930’s.” The appraisal is partly true. Had Olson lived, there were ample indications that he would have become more and more enmeshed with Roosevelt’s plans. His final political testament was an appeal from his death bed that “liberals must unite in 1936 to re-elect Franklin Roosevelt and to prevent the election of reactionary Alf Landon.” It was largely Olson’s doing that the Farmer- Labor movement was committed to Roosevelt, in return for Democratic support of the FLP state ticket.
Mayer, a member of the Purdue University faculty of history, economics, and government, is not equipped to handle the complex and vital subject he discusses. His unfamiliarity with labor and socialist movements and ideas prevents him from grasping the significance of the Farmer-Labor movement and understanding the conflict between Olson’s “All-Party” politicians and the trade union base which built and maintained the party – a key to an appreciation of the situation.
When Olson agreed to accept the nomination of the Farmer-Labor Association, he insisted on the right to set up an “Olson All-Party Committee” outside the association, to attract political opportunists from the two old parties who supported Olson in return for the promise of state jobs and other political favors. During his governorship, Olson used the “All-Party Committee” as a weapon to attempt to eliminate the association and convert the movement into a personal political machine.
Mayer completely accepts Olson’s “All-Party” viewpoint. This view, of course, would not vitiate Mayer’s work. It is his failure to recognize and come to grips with the complex problems of the party, and to grasp the vital differences between the Farmer-Labor movement and the old capitalist parties that make his book a piece of popular journalism, and nothing more. Interesting journalism, yes, for with such a subject one could hardly write an unexciting book.
In 1944 the Minnesota Farmer-Labor movement merged with the Democratic Party to end 26 years of activity as an independent party. Olson’s plan to scuttle the movement was finally achieved by a loose coalition of the “All-Party” politicians, the state employees, the Stalinists, and a block of trade union officials (chiefly in St. Paul and Duluth) who had always been hostile to independent labor politics.
It was because the Farmer-Labor Party was a party of organized labor, a political federation of trade unions, largely financed by a per capita tax from the affiliated unions, that it alone survived of the many third party movements that arose from the political upsurge following the First World War. Both the farmers’ Non-Partisan League and the Working People’s Nonpartisan Political League, which merged in 1923 to create the Farmer-Labor Federation (later the association), were permeated by socialist ideas and stemmed from the socialist movement. It was the political climate created by years of socialist education, and the FLP’s firm trade union base, that permitted Olson to play far to the left of Roosevelt on occasion, in a manner that so captivated Mayer and which he so little understood.
It is not practical to discuss the oversights, misinterpretations, and errors in Mayer’s book. At what level is one to discuss political ideas with an author who believes the Trotskyist leaders of Local 574 held the primitive concept that the general strike is “the most effective weapon of class warfare”? Where is one to begin to discuss trade union problems with a writer who can find equally reprehensible the behavior of employers and police who set a murderous trap for union pickets, and the strike leaders who insist on picketing in the face of employer threats and gunfire?
The best account of the 1934 truck strike is that contained in Charles Rumford Walker’s American City, which also discusses some of the fundamental problems besetting the Farmer-Labor movement. For a socialist criticism of the FLP, the reader is referred to the many campaign leaflets published by the Trotskyists in Minnesota from 1934 on, to an article A Party Without a Program, by Walter Beirce, in the March 1939 New International, and to the article entitled The Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party, by Warren Creel, in the March 1946 Fourth International. This last article, written by the former secretary of the educational bureau of the Farmer-Labor Association, is particularly recommended as correcting the grosser misconceptions of Mayer.
Not that the last word will ever be said on the FLP. In the April 1951 issue of Harper’s Magazine, Samuel Lubell, in an article Who Votes Isolationist and Why, confirmed statistically that one of the factors in the defeat of the FLP in rural Minnesota was the defection of German-Americans who deserted the FLP when its leaders followed Roosevelt down the path to war. According to Lubell, these were the same voters who had earlier left the Democratic Party because of “Wilson’s war ...” Stearns County, Minn., with an overwhelming German-Catholic population, and traditionally Democratic, gave Harding 86 per cent of its vote in 1920; four years later, LaFollette carried the county. In 1940, Roosevelt’s vote in this county dropped 34 percentage points below his 1936 vote.
Lubell shows that in 1918, when the Farmer-Labor label first appeared on the ballot, five of the eight principal German-American counties went for the new party. Between 1936 and 1940 all these counties were to revolt against Roosevelt and the FLP in protest against involvement in a war with Germany. The right-wing “realists” of the Farmer-Labor movement, whom Mayer lauds, lost supporters both in the countryside and the big cities by following Roosevelt’s pro-war policy. Yet so strong was the Farmer-Labor appeal that right up to the end, in 1944, the party was still polling 38 per cent of the state vote. You could read The Political Career of Floyd B. Olson ten times over and still lack an explanation for this political phenomenon.
 




The consensus of economists in and out of the government is that Washington’s rearmament program will become the dominant economic force as 1948 unrolls, and many observers believe a new wave of “hyper-inflation” is on the way. Martin R. Gainsbrugh, chief economist of the National Industrial Conference Board, recently declared that “each dollar spent for rearmament in the months ahead will push us steadily away from the possibility of absorbing the unparalleled inflation of World War II, toward a new sequence of hyper-inflation ... We now are embarked upon a new adventure with inflation which may not be so favorably resolved.”
Joseph M. Dodge, president of the American Bankers Association, pointed out in Chicago recently that whatever is taken out of present production for military use will have to be taken out of the consumer’s interest in present production. That would reduce the deflationary effect of production increases.
“There is none of the universal optimism which has been one of the most important factors in the development of past inflationary cycles,” he said. “Everyone is worried and thinking about the problems of either inflation or deflation.”
Mr. Gainsbrugh, in his analysis, said that prices would rise, particularly for manufactured goods. He predicted higher direct and indirect taxes, with tighter government control over the economy.
“The sapping character of the new re-armament program is not sufficiently stressed,” he added. “It comes after the world’s costliest war, followed by a period of hyper-full consumption and hyper-full capital replacement. The prolonged character of Rearmament II is also foreboding. Little prospect of reducing its strain exists, unless we engage in the costlier process of war itself.”
Parallel with the rearmament program is the Marshall Plan, which in the 12-month period from April 1, 1948, to April 1, 1949, will take the following U.S. materials to Europe: Iron and steel, 2,500,000 tons, up 40 per cent from 1947; machinery and industrial equipment, up about 2½ times over 1947, to $1,000,000,000; petroleum equipment, $250,000,000; steel producing machinery, $50,000,000; farm machinery, $120,000,000, about double 1947; coal mining machinery, $80,000,000; electric equipment, up 50 per cent over 1947, to $100,000,000; electric power plant construction equipment, $120,000,000; lumbering equipment, $20,000,000; industrial machinery, $250,000,000; office equipment, $45,000,000; aircraft, about $50,000,000; merchant ships, sharply down, to $50,000,000; freight cars and trucks, $300,000,000; coal, 33,000,000 tons; petroleum, the same as last year; chemicals, $350,000,000; non-ferrous metals, $70,000,000; wheat, down 15per cent, to 250,000,000 bushels; fats and oils, down to 320,000,000 pounds; other foods, up 25 per cent; raw cotton, up from 1.3 million bales to 2.3 million bales; tobacco, a 20 per cent increase to 440,000,000 pounds; timber, up slightly to 780,000,000 board feet. The above buying estimates are tentative, but serve to give a fair conception of the strain on the U.S. economy represented by the “stop Russia” European Recovery Program.
 

Profits, Prices Up
You will note that heavy industry accounts for most of the Marshall Plan spending, and will understand that it is heavy industry that is most firmly committed both to support of the Marshall Plan and to the rearmament program.
Estimates of 1948 profits indicate that, after all-time records in 1946 and 1947, they will be higher than ever in 1948. An analysis of earnings of 111 companies in 15 industries shows that in the first quarter of 1948 these companies had earnings 26 per cent above 1947, “to dispute a widespread belief that profit margins of business generally are shrinking,” as the Wall Street Journal put it.
A dozen oil companies almost doubled their profits in the first three months of 1948, compared with the same period a year ago.
Prices are jumping up again. Almost all automobile manufacturers have raised prices from 5 to 10 per cent in the last 60 days. Lumber prices have bounced back to last year’s peak. The prices of wool, both domestic and imported, have hit their highest peaks in 25 years. The clothing industry is estimating it will raise prices sharply on men’s and women’s suits in the fall. The price of hides has risen 25 per cent since the first of they ear. Cotton seed oil rose from 21 cents a pound in February to 35 cents; soybean oil, from 16½ cents to 26½ cents.
The Commerce Department’s Office of Business Economics reported that prices moved upward during April in all major commodity groups. Wholesale commodity prices were uniformly higher in April, indicating that the trend of retail prices will continue upward.
Well, what is the consumer doing during this profit festival? He is going further into debt, of course. According to a recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia:
“In the year and a half since prices were decontrolled, the cost of living has risen by one-fourth. At the same time, consumer expenditures have increased and personal savings have decreased at about the same rate as the price rise.”
Lower income groups were found to be using “war-accumulated liquid assets” at a rising rate; there was a slowing down in repayment of debts and some rise in new debt, particularly for buying consumer goods and housing. The bank predicted “further heavy dissaving on the part of at least one-fourth of all spending units” in 1948. That’s a banker’s way of saying that one-quarter of the American people will be worse off at the end of the year than they were at the beginning.
 




The Republican Congress calls Truman “the poorest president
 since George Washington.” The President calls the 80th
 Congress, just ended, “the worst in history.” There is an
 awful lot of truth in both charges, and it is high time the trade
 union movement acted to defend the American people from the old
 capitalist parties.
From the viewpoint of labor’s rights, housing, prices, civil
 liberties, freedom from militarism, and aid to the world’s
 oppressed, the working class majority in the United States has been
 hit hard in the past year and one-half. 
What Congress Did
First, let’s look at what Congress did:

It passed the Taft-Hartley bill, thereby placing formidable
	obstacles, in the path of the unions, and making it many times more
	difficult for unions to function in the interests of their members.
	The federal Anti-Labor Law has revived the use of the injunction,
	has subjected unions and union members and leaders to huge fines,
	has permitted government snoopers to stick their long noses into
	union affairs, and has made it much more difficult for workers to
	choose their own union and their own leadership. The boss parties
	are already agitating for an amendment to the Taft-Hartley law which
	would outlaw industry-wide bargaining, thus whittling down the
	unions to a size where they would be all but helpless to defend
	workers’ interests. 
	On housing, Congress upped rent 15 per cent, and left large
	loopholes for greedy landlords to drive for still higher rent
	boosts. 
	It turned over $13,000,000,000 to the armed services –
	a larger amount than the whole average pre-war annual budget. 
	So for as foreign policy is concerned, Congress and the
	White House teamed up to support reaction everywhere in the world,
	aside from that peculiar form of reaction represented by the Russian
	government and its subject peoples. Washington is supporting
	monarchical reaction in Greece, fascism in Spain, imperialism in the
	Far East, militarism in China, despotism in Korea – and
	everywhere in the world, Washington is defending the interests of
	Standard Oil and the other large corporations with extensive
	interests abroad. 
	Congress pushed through a peacetime draft bill to subject the
	youth of the nation to enforced service in the armed forces. 
	It passed a tax bill which saved pennies for the poor and
	literally billions of dollars for the rich. 
	It passed a bill outlawing portal-to-portal wage suits, thus
	depriving workers of billions of dollars. 
	It waved the Mundt-Nixon “anti-Communist” bill
	over the country for weeks, as a means of terrorizing political
	minorities. 

What Congress Didn’t Do
What Congress didn’t do is as important as what it did do.

Congress didn’t lift a finger to control prices, at a
	period when most economists warn we are in for a session of
	“hyper-inflation,” and at a time when the cost of living
	is again reaching new all-time peaks. 
	Congress didn’t lift a finger to defend civil
	liberties, to outlaw poll taxes, to make lynching a federal offense,
	to require employers to hire without discrimination, or to end Jim
	Crow in the armed forces. 
	Congress didn’t lift a finger to put a roof over a
	single American family. 
	Congress shrugged its shoulders as the big monopolies
	continued to pick the pockets of the people. Just to demonstrate
	sharply Its reliable service to monopoly, in the closing days
	Congress shoved through the Bulwinkle bill exempting the nation’s
	railroads from the anti-trust laws. 
	Congress refused to increase the legal minimum wage, at a
	time when a fourth of the American people are going more deeply into
	debt each month. 
	Congress refused to enact a government health insurance
	program. 
	Congress refused federal aid for education, at a time when
	the nation’s educational system is grossly inadequate for the
	needs of the people.

Even in the little things, Congress catered to selfish interests.
 After making handsome gestures, it left the silly and unfair taxes on
 oleo; jammed through high tariffs on wool and other commodities;
 continued farm legislation in the interests of the big farmers. 
Truman’s Record
Truman was not a shade better than Congress. The Democrat in the
 White House exercized equal energy in kicking labor in the face.
Truman’s criticism of the Republican Congress is as phony as
 the counterfeit $10 bills which have recently been flooding Chicago.
The Wall Street Journal in its June 22 editorial took care
 of Truman on this point. After listing some of Truman’s “must”
 legislation which Congress dumped, that paper stated:
“Now each of these passed-over measures was first
 suggested by the late President Roosevelt at a time when he had as
 complete control over Congress as any President has ever had. Mr.
 Roosevelt had a Democratic Congress and the bills weren’t
 passed then.
“President Truman took over the Roosevelt
 program and proposed all these same things to Congress while he, too,
 had a Democratic majority in both Houses. Again the Congress rejected
 the administration’s plan! Curiously, although both Presidents
 Roosevelt and Truman included these matters in their messages to the
 Democratic Congresses, THERE WAS NEVER MUCH PRESSURE FROM THE WHITE
 HOUSE FOR ENACTMENT UNTIL A REPUBLICAN CONGRESS CAME ALONG. (my
 emphasis – J.R.).
“It strikes us that if two Democratic Congresses
 were dubious of the wisdom of the social legislation offered by a
 Democratic President it is hardly justifiable suddenly to berate a
 Republican Congress for showing the same cautions.”
Neither the Democratic nor Republican wings of the boss political
 monopoly can criticize each other with either justice or grace. But
 the workers who are fleeced by the capitalist political machines can
 certainly do so.
That’s the record of the President and the legislators who
 were elected to office, most of them with the support of the
 conservative trade union leadership.
That record provides new proof that what labor needs is not a new
 deal, but a new party – a national labor party – to take
 over Washington and form a labor government. We’ll never get
 justice from the Wall Street-dominated old parties.
 




As the year nears its close, two recent developments in the nation’s economy deserve attention. The first is the slight falling off in department-store sales; the second is the growing number of layoffs in various Eastern industries. Neither has developed to the point where It may be considered a serious threat to the economy. Both are early symptoms of the chronic disease of too-high prices and too-low wages which have marked the post-war economy but which have been held in check by the unprecedented peacetime scale of spending for the military and for foreign aid.
For the week ending December 4, department-store sales in the Chicago district were 4 per cent under 1947 figures for the same period. It was the sixth consecutive week of decline. Similar sales for the same week were off 4 per cent in Detroit, in Milwaukee 1 per cent, in Indianapolis up 1 per cent, and in other cities of the Midwest off 4 per cent.
The regional pattern was exactly reflecting department-store sales throughout the United States, which were also off 4 per cent from a year before. All the Federal Reserve districts reported declines for the first week in December, ranging from 2 per cent for Boston to 6 per cent for New York and 8 per cent for San Francisco.
Several economists have voiced the belief that the drop in sales is largely the result of a widely-held belief that President Truman and the 81st Congress will “do something” about high prices – that is, that the people still have money in their pockets but are just holding off to see if prices will be lowered early next year by governmental action.
Such an interpretation is improbable, for two reasons:

If people do have money to spend, as a rule they will spend it in the holiday season to try to make their family’s Christmas a happy one, or to provide at least winter wardrobes for their families;
 
Who but a few god-forsaken Democratic labor bellwethers can really believe that Truman will or can do anything to lower prices?

The president’s proposed military budget, his. commitments to Europe and to China, his promises to the farmers, the cheap-money course dictated by the tremendous burden of war debt, preclude any hope that prices will fall because of anything that the administration consciously does.
 
Layoffs Grow
A roundup of statistics reflecting recent layoffs reveals the following:

Republic Steel in Canton, Ohio, has laid off 300 workers in the stainless-steel sheet and strip operations. The Hoover Company in Canton laid off 400 and acknowledged a reduction in sales in recent months and a dwindling order backlog. Diebold, Inc., in Canton, said it had cut its production force by about 165 in the last two months, because of a reduction in the backlog of orders.
 
In Northampton, Mass., the Propper-McCallum Hosiery Company laid off 125. Officials of the CIO Textile Workers were quoted as saying there was “an apparent buyers’ strike” against women’s hosiery.
 
In Cleveland, Jack & Heinz Precision Industries, Inc. (remember – the first that was capitalism’s darling during the war) laid off 200 in the fractional horsepower electric department.
 
Western Electric Company in Chicago has laid off 775 employees and says that operations are still “above normal.”
 
In the Pacific Northwest a number of lumber mills have closed down “because of the recent break in the price of lumber,” throwing thousands out of work.
 
Approximately 47,000 fewer workers were employed in construction in November than in October throughout the country, according to Labor Department statistics.
 
Large layoffs are reported by New England woolen mills and the California motion-picture industry.
 
Consolidated Vultee Aircraft Corporation said it had let 600 go in San Diego, Stamford and Greenwich, Conn., and that 2,000 more might have to go by June 1.
 
In Cleveland, Apex Electrical & Manufacturing Co. fired 300 the first week in December, and said 400 more would be let out January 1. National Carbon in Cleveland laid off 100 and said further cuts were possible. Addressograph-Multigraph of Cleveland has dismissed 80 office workers and 200 production workers. Foote-Burt Company, of the same city, has laid off 50 out of 350 in recent weeks because of “lack of orders.”
 

Turning Point Ahead?
Businessmen in Stamford and Greenwich, Conn., have called a meeting to “fight unemployment” in that industrial area. They say employment is down 8.7 per cent there from last year, with 1,739 persons from the two towns mow unemployed and looking for work.
A month or so must pass before it will be clear whether these scattered layoffs mark a turning point in the economy. Similar situations have developed several times since 1945, and each time the artificial injection of war orders or foreign- relief orders has enabled the economy to recover temporarily.
These achievements, have led many observers to the belief that the national administration can continue indefinitely to buoy up the economy with similar devices. Such a deduction is false because the United States does not possess inexhaustible wealth.
A year-end economic survey which I am preparing will show how far along the road to exhaustion the economy has come since a similar survey published in Labor Action last January.
 




(Continued from Last Week)
The people see many unions demanding higher wages without a thought for higher prices, without a thought of demanding of the corporations that they not raise prices. The people have learned to expect no consideration from the corporations and monopolies. They expected more from the unions.
The people can see, as can most union members, that it is stupid to seek wage raises without also demanding that prices not be increased. The people know that corporation profits almost reached the $20 billion mark in 1947, that industry has been gouging the nation without mercy through high prices, that industry could well afford wage increases without price increases; yet it sees the unions ask only for higher wages, a demand which (if granted) is soon wiped out by price rises, to everyone’s hurt.
The people are as sick of the Democratic-Republican sham battle as you are. But they see no other claimant to leadership.
Instead they see Philip Murray and William Green and A.L. Whitney proclaiming that Truman is a liberal, a friend of the people, a cohtinuator of the New Deal (as though that were good), when everyone with half an eye can see that Truman is an incompetent and bewildered little man who is the helpless tool of big business, and that Truman’s policies, both at home and abroad, are designed only to increase the profits of America’s Sixty Families.
If labor continues on its present course, there is the danger that the people will not give a damn if Congress takes another swat at labor, and another swat, until the unions are seriously weakened. Think again!
 
Paste This in Your Hat!
The whole drive of the national economy, of foreign policy and world affairs, the whole direction of old- party politics, spells increasing reaction in the United States, new repressions against labor, further weakening of the unions.
Either labor will break away from its cowardly political past and build its own labor party, begin to assume leadership and responsibility for the broad masses of the people – or labor leaves itself open to be hamstrung.
Here is a prediction that will come true as sure as night follows day. If the labor bureaucrats get away with their present policy of holding onto the coat tails of the old parties in the 1948 elections, the 81st Congress will pass new repressive laws against the union movement. It makes no difference who is elected to any office – Republican or Democrat, “friends of labor” and liberal promise-makers or reactionaries – this will be the outcome.
Until the day when labor’s ranks force the leadership to break with company-union politics, labor’s position will grow steadily worse – new legal weapons will be forged against us – new reactionary forms of taxation will be applied to us – militarization of the nation will increase – the First Atomic War will come closer – Washington’s foreign policy will continue to be used against the interests of the masses on every continent – and American labor will steadily lose friends.
There is something else happening too. Let’s take a look at one state, for example.
The St. Paul Union Advocate in Minnesota complains that a check has revealed that as many as 30 per cent of the membership of some unions are not qualified to vote by reason of failure to register. Why hasn’t this 30 per cent registered? Because they see that their own leadership has driven them into the blind alley of company-union politics. Because they sense that labor has no stake in the success or failure of any capitalist political candidate. Because they believe that the present political course of the union leadership is hopeless.
All the pleadings and threats and fines that the leadership applies can’t force the ranks to play the game of political company-unionism. They’ll vote in their own way – by staying away from the polls and from a ballot that offers them only a choice of bad and almost-as-bad. They are right. The union leadership is wrong.
The same union paper, in a later issue, discussed its current campaign to defeat one of the former “friend of labor,” Senator Joe Ball. Says the Union Advocate:
“There isn’t a member outside of organized labor who gives two hoots in Hades what Joseph H. Ball would like to do to the basic liberties of every union man or woman in the nation. There isn’t one farmer in a thousand who is offended at Ball’s riding herd on labor. As a matter of fact, most farmers think he did a mighty smart amount of good by his efforts to crucify the trade- union movement on a cross of his own personal hatreds. Nor is the small, so-called independent businessman incensed over tho fact that Ball is popularly associated with the crusade against trade unionism.”
Assuming that the Union Advocate knows what it is talking about, this is a horrible indictment of the political policies which organized labor has been following.
If it is true that today in Minnesota no one outside of organized labor, or not one farmer in a thousand, gives a damn about the fate of the union movement, the blame can be placed on the capitalist-minded leaders of the unions.
Fifteen years ago, Minnesota labor had hundreds of thousands of friends outside the union movement. It is a verifiable fact that in the heyday of the Farmer-Labor movement, from 1930 to 1936, when the movement was furthest to the left, when Governor Floyd Olson was proclaiming “I am not a liberal, I am a radical,” the farmers went down the line with the unions at the polls.
In those days, the union ranks were on the march and shoved aside the objections of conservative officials, and built an independent labor party and gave it a radical program – and the farmers and “little people” of the towns and cities loved it.
Then Governor Benson and the Stalinists, from one side, and the leading state AFL officials from their side, tore the Farmer-Labor Party to shreds, drove it into a merger with the Democrats, and in place of independent labor politics hired a press agent who writes nice advertisements to be placed in papers like the Chicago Journal of Commerce, to tell businessmen that labor in Minnesota is housebroken and docile and won’t some capitalists come to that state and exploit its workers and its resources.
And now the conservative union leaders complain that labor hasn’t any friends in Minnesota today, and that the union ranks aren’t interested in registering and voting. This situation in Minnesota, once the stamping ground of a vital farmer-labor movement, reflects what has taken place in the other forty-seven states also.
(To be concluded)
 

   THE Constitution of the United States, of course, makes no mention of political parties. When this nation was organized in the heat of revolutionary struggle against the British, there were no political parties as we know them today. Nor were there in the early days of the republic. It was only as opposition developed among the Southern plantation owners to the steps taken by Alexander Hamilton, secretary of the treasury, on behalf of Eastern business interests that the people of the new nation gradually divided into two parties. These parties, solidly grounded in class economic interest, grew steadily in coherence and definiteness of program. They were known as the Federalists and the Anti-Federalists. The Southern Anti-Federalists later took the name of Republicans and still later the name of Democrats, the present party of that name. The Federalists, during the regime of Andrew Jackson, took the name “National Republicans,” then “Whigs.” The party was more and more torn by class issues, by trying unsuccessfully to represent more than one class. One splitoff was the Know-Nothing or American Party, a sort of forerunner of today’s anti-labor, anti-Semitic, anti-Negro movements like Gerald L.K. Smith’s. In February 1854 a number of Whigs and Northern Democrats assembled at Ripon, Wisconsin, and oganized the new Republican Party – to fight, not against slavery, but against the extension of slavery into new territories. In the 1856 elections, the Republicans ran John C. Fremont for president, against Whig candidate Millard Fillmore and Democratic candidate James Buchanan. Fremont split the anti-Democrat vote and Buchanan won. (The Philip Murrays and A.F. Whitneys of that day uttered agonized cries against the Republicans for “splitting the progressive vote.”) But the Republicans had hold of the red-hot issue of the day – anti-slavery – and it made its own way, as a good idea does and will. In 1860 it was the turn of the Democratic Party to split wide open, one faction nominating Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois to oppose the domination of the Southern planters, and the Southern Democrats nominating John S. Breckinridge of Kentucky. The candidate of the young Republican Party, Abraham Lincoln, won, though receiving less than the combined votes of the Democratic factions. The election of Lincoln represented a basic class shift in American political life. The national government ceased being an instrument of the slaveholding South and instead became the pliant tool of the capitalist North. Ruling classes, however, do not give up power without a struggle. A civil war followed which established the supremacy of capitalism in the nation. The slave system was destroyed. The all-powerful Republicans permitted the Democratic Party to survive. Capitalism bent both parties to its will. The story of politics in the United States since the Civil War, as related by Beard, Parrington, Lundberg, Josephson and other historians, is the story of the gradual erasing of distinctions between the Republican and Democratic Parties in the North, the subordination of both to big business, and the early attempts by enraged farmers and workers to oppose the bankers and industrialists with Populist, labor, farmer-labor and socialist parties. At certain stages in history there have been differences between the Republican and Democratic Parties, and one or the other of the parties has served a progressive purpose. But for decades now there have been no vital issues between the two parties.  No Important Differences The only political issues permitted in American life have been those involving the interests of one section of big business as against another section. Great social issues affecting the lives of the people – such as the issue of war or peace in 1917 and in 1941, or the issue of monopoly control, or of socialism versus capitalism – these have never separated the two parties under the system of political monopoly obtaining in the United States. Or rather, such issues make their appearance only as vague campaign promises, which those in the know understand perfectly well will never be redeemed. Political patronage, public plunder and robbery on a colossal scale, debauchery of municipal, state and federal government, corruption of the law, courts and the regulatory commissions have become widespread in American politics. From time to time in various communities, liberal “do-gooders” and disappointed politicians organize “reform” movements to “throw out the rascals.” If the reformers succeed, they very often take over all the scandalous practices of the rascals whom they follow into office. If the American people had all the facts before them, the facts would convince them that this nation is run by the monopolists, and that the monopolists dominate both the Republican and Democratic Parties. “The men placed in the highest public offices from McKinley through Hoover were all the political creatures of the wealthy,” wrote Lundberg in his America’s Sixty Families. The monopolists contribute impartially to the treasuries of both old parties. “Families that contributed both to the Republicans and the Democrats,” recorded Lundberg, “included the duPonts, Harknesses, Vanderbilts, Fleischmanns, McCormicks, Goelets, Whitneys, Strausses, Guggenheims and Bradys. Where identical estates did not contribute to both parties on a family basis they often did so on a corporate basis. Many corporation officers in the lower brackets of contributors gave funds to the party formally opposed by the head of a particular [financial] clan. In this way the avenue of approach was kept open to the key men, the financial managers, in each party. “The Wall Street banks, incidentally, while Republican in politics, make a regular practice of keeping a few outstanding Democrats among their chief officers,” said Lundberg.  Two Factions of Wall Street’s Party The Democratic and Republican Parties are themselves only factions of Wall Street’s party, maintained by the wealthy to oppose labor’s interests and to advance the interests of the wealthy, at home and abroad. The maintenance of the capitalist two-party system and its ability to mislead the people depend in large measure upon deception, upon the fiction that there are major and decisive differences between the Republicans and Democrats. During the recent war and in the postwar period the differences between the two parties and their candidates have tended to dwindle to a narrow margin, if not to vanish altogether. Both parties had common war programs, both supported Wall Street’s plans for maintaining monopolist control during reconversion. Both agreed on handing over billions in government-owned plants and equipment to private ownership at fire-sale prices. Both are united in support of the aggressive foreign policy which gives support to the most reactionary government in the world, just so the latter be anti-Russian. Both parties unite in keeping the Negro down, in upholding Jim Crow in the armed forces, in preventing passage of a fair employment practices law. Both parties unite in shackling the union movement, in placing the costs of government on the workers’ backs. What more could the rich have received and the poor have suffered in recent years had a Republican rather than a Democrat been in office? Today the political parties of big business are united on one program: to place squarely upon the backs of the workers the burden of the recent war and of postwar militarism, expenditures for atomic weapons, the disorganization of the world’s monetary systems, and aid to reactionary governments throughout the world. “If we don’t elect Tweedledee, then Tweedledum will be in the White House,” the shills of the old parties scream. As though that would make any important difference in the policies of the national government!  Roosevelt’s Role as Capitalist Politician Candidates and campaign platforms are not especially important to the monopolists today. The current needs of big business always comes first with both old parties. That the personality of a president is unimportant to the capitalists may be easily indicated by the briefest look at some of our recent presidents – the amiable reprobate, Harding; silent Calvin Coolidge, the sour pickle; the pompous mining millionaire, Hoover, he of the stiff collar; and that unhappy little man in the White House, Truman. Franklin Roosevelt, one of the most talented politicians the capitalists of this or any other country have ever used, sticks out like a sore thumb amid the political nonentities who preceded and succeeded him on the political scene. The New Deal government of Roosevelt was called into being in 1933 to save the capitalist system and to buy off the growing mass sentiment for revolutionary change. Roosevelt succeeded eminently in his task. He swerved the masses from a radical road and, with the help of conservative labor leaders, convinced good numbers of workers that he was their friend, while starving them on and off WPA and handing over more and more of the wealth of the country to the rich. Finally, when the policies of his administration utterly failed to revive the capitalist system to anything approaching health, Roosevelt took the country into the imperialist war. (To be continued)   
   THE truth is that something new has been added to American life, something that our grandfathers and great-grandfathers did not have to put up with: the growth of monopoly in all fields of life. Beginning in 1900 with the organization of the first billion-dollar corporation, U.S. Steel, industry after industry has been captured by monopoly, until today there are more than forty billion-dollar corporations exercising a controlling interest in almost every important field – banking, insurance, railroading, steel, auto, rubber, aluminum, shipping, food, liquor, farm machinery, etc. The system has grown old. Capitalism, which at one time permitted a progressive development of the nation’s resources, has today turned into a fetter to further development. Free land has disappeared. New inventions, unless they have a military value, are suppressed by the hundreds. The national debt has increased to more than $250 billion. The nation is being more and more saddled with a military hierarchy. The fingers of the big banks are everywhere. The federal police apparatus has grown enormously, together with repressive laws against the people. Transportation and distribution costs each year take a larger share of the nation’s income, swallowing up 58 per cent of the consumer’s dollar. The dollar itself becomes of less and less value as prices rise to the highest in history. Corporate profits in the opening months of 1948 are at an all-time high. But there is no prosperity for the masses.  Monopoly Spreads Liberal capitalism, based upon free trade and competition, has receded into the past, never to be recalled. It has been succeeded by monopoly capitalism, the rule of the banks, and by bureaucratic government “planning.” The United States, which from 1790 to 1890 appeared to the world as a great progressive force, the enemy of every tyrant and the friend of every free man, has turned into its opposite. The U.S. appears today in Europe and Asia and Latin America and Africa as a reactionary force. There is no anti-democratic gangster government anywhere on the earth outside the sphere of its Russian rival but cannot be assured of support from Washington – whether it be in China, Indonesia, Iran, Egypt, Greece, Turkey, South Africa, Italy, France, Colombia or Brazil. By all odds, the one most important factor bearing upon the lives of every person in the United States is the spread of monopoly. Steadily since 1900, monopoly has imprisoned segment after segment of the American economy, removing it from competition, lifting it above the people. Under both Republican and Democratic administrations, monopoly has quietly advanced. Never did it grow so swiftly as under the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, from the days of the Blue Eagle to the war. With the post-war gift of the war factories to the monopolists, the latter may be said to have virtually completed their conquest of the United States. They have within their iron grasp all the most important industries of this nation, and can only grow further by gobbling up each other or by expanding their grip beyond the borders to other continents. How hypocritical was big business in 1946 when it ordered its politicians to end price control, with the sly lie that “the play of natural supply-and-demand factors” would bring down prices! Here is the point. Once monopoly controls an industry, that industry is lifted above “the play of natural supply-and-demand factors.” Supply and demand, the old “law” of competitive capitalism under which our grandfathers lived, no longer operates in a monopolized economy. The monopoly, through its control of the supply, can charge any price it wishes, usually selecting that price at which its profits will be largest. Monopoly pricing factors disregard the needs of the people. The monopoly takes its toll from the entire nation, forcing not only consumers but other less strongly organized industry to pay it ransom.  Giants of Capitalism How much of our economy is now within the kingdom of monopoly? In many industries (according to the government’s Temporary National Economic Committee) concentration has reached the point where one or two companies control nine-tenths of the supply. A partial list of industries where there is only one dominant company (in 1937) would include: aluminum, shoe machinery, glass container machinery, optical glass, nickel, molybdenum, magnesium, magnesium alloys, telephone service, international communications, Pullman cars, transoceanic aviation, beryllium, etc. Summaries of corporate income-tax returns for 1937 (the last “normal” year) showed that the 394 largest corporations in this country – less than one-tenth of one per cent of the total number reporting – owned about 45 per cent of the total corporate assets. A special Securities and Exchange Commission study prepared for the TNEC showed the distribution of ownership in the 200 largest non-financial corporations in the United States. These 200 giants owned 40 per cent of the assets of all non-financial corporations, and accounted for nearly 45 per cent of the dividends distributed by such corporations. Their capital stock was valued at 65 per cent of the total of all non-financial corporations listed on the New York Stock and Curb Exchanges at the end of 1937. The SEC study showed that, in 1937, 75,000 persons owned fully half of all corporate stock held by individuals in this country. Since the above figures were compiled, monopoly has walked in seven-league boots, impelled by the war during which 100 large companies held 76 per cent of all war supplies contracts in excess of $50,000. Those industries not already controlled by monopoly achieve economic results similar to a monopoly through secret nationwide price-fixing agreements by which all pledge not to cut prices below a certain figure. A tremendous extension of the price-fixing racket, covering even small items sold in drug and grocery stores, is the “Fair Trade Practice” law, whereby retailers are refused permission to handle an item unless they pledge, under penalty, not to sell it below a certain figure – that is, to hold up the public. The monopolists today hold in their hands the threads that control the economy and the politics of this nation, and that determine the life of every person in America – what price we shall pay for the commodities we must have to live, whether we shall go to war, and where we shall go to war. Where were the Republican and Democratic parties when the monopolists were taking over the economy? – the outraged “innocent” may ask. The answer is simple: One of the fields where monopoly holds sway is the field of politics. The Republican and Democratic parties are the political servants of the monopolists, as we shall shortly show. These parties protect the monopolists and guard them from the charge of evading the law. Oh, to be sure, the Department of Justice prosecutes the monopolists. It is forever filing anti-trust suits against the monopolists. But nothing happens. The monopolists control the courts, from the Roosevelt-packed Supreme Court on down. Occasionally (and more and more seldom as the monopolists wax stronger) light fines are levied, which the monopolists pay as easily as you pay your carfare to work. For the monopolists can gouge the amount of the fine from the public in an hour of business. How long has this been going on? Since 1900 and before, when U.S. Steel and Standard Oil were formed. Under Theodore Roosevelt, under Taft, Wilson, Harding, Coolidge, Hoover, Franklin Roosevelt, and Truman. Time and again the parties of capitalism have investigated the trusts. The facts have been recorded. The most notable of these investigations were the Trust Investigation of 1900; the Armstrong Committee of 1906; the Stanley Committee of 1911; the Pujo Money Trust investigation of 1912; the Industrial Commission of 1916; the belated exposure of war profiteering by the Nye Committee in the 1930; the O’Mahoney Monopoly Committee (Temporary National Economic Committee was its official title); and the Truman Committee of the Senate. But nothing has ever been done.  Monopoly and War Just as the conquest of the American economy by monopoly has made for artificially high prices at home, so has it made for war abroad. Most of the American trusts have large financial stakes in other countries, in Latin America, Europe, Asia, Africa. They own factories abroad, obtain raw materials abroad, have large investments abroad, have markets abroad, and they all hope with good reason (under the bipartisan foreign policy of their political agents) to further enlarge their foreign holdings. Whenever a war begins anywhere in the world – even such a “little” war as in Palestine – it immediately threatens the interests of American big business. The bankers go to work on the State Department, the State Department goes to work on the warring powers, and if the private investments abroad of U.S. capitalists are not protected, the State Department and the White House find means of provoking “incidents” which demand the intervention of the U.S. army and navy. The country is in the war. It was thus in 1917, it was thus in 1941, it will be thus tomorrow. Why are American warships and marines in the Mediterranean today, why is President Truman giving hundreds of millions of dollars to the tyrannous rulers of Greece and Turkey, why is Washington pursuing a double game in Palestine and waging a “cold war” against its imperialist rival, Russia? It should be crystal-clear to anyone with an elementary knowledge of the world’s resources that a large part of the answer lies in the fabulous oil reserves of the Near East, in the huge stakes in those reserves by U.S. oil companies, and in the threat to those investments from Russia and from the Palestinian hostilities.  Monopoly in Politics Too Long before Marx saw the light of day, American political philosophers like James Madison and Alexander Hamilton understood very clearly that politics is but a reflection and extension of economic interests, and that the dominant economic interests in any nation dictate the policies of that nation. So it has proved with the monopolists, as the next chapter will show. Just as the economic wealth of the nation has become concentrated in the hands of fewer and fewer individuals commanding immense wealth, so have these same individuals extended their monopolist sway over the politics of the nation. It is no exaggeration to say, for instance, that one corporation such as Standard Oil and its sister companies and subsidiaries swings a thousand times more weight in Washington than the 16 million members of organized labor. Big business since 1900 has monopolized the politics of the nation, as it has monopolized the nation’s economy. This booklet presents a plan and a program to the workers and farmers of America to break the political monopoly of big business and to build a labor party which can take over the federal government and the state governments and place the political control of the nation in the hands of those who produce the nation’s wealth, not in the hands of those who exploit the wealth and the people for their own narrow interests. (To be continued)   
   THE labor party will be based upon and controlled by the unions. The policies of the labor party will be determined by the unions. A democratic union is a forum for various programs. The union members with different viewpoints put forward their own political and social programs for the union. This is right and proper. In the long run, if the union is democratic, that social and political program which best defends and advances the interests of the union and the working class will win the support of the union. We socialists of the Workers Party will also put forward our program for the union and the labor party and seek by all democratic and honest means to win support for this program. But if this program is not the one which the labor party adopts, the Workers Party will still loyally support the labor party in its struggles against the old capitalist parties. Where we believe the labor party in principle or practice falls short of defending and advancing labor’s interests, we shall criticize it. At certain times and places, where in our opinion the interests of the working class will best be served by such action, the Workers Party will run its own candidates for office, on the platform of our own party. If the unions were to put a national labor party in the field now, the Workers Party would advance the following program for that party:  Repeal the Taft-Hartley Law and all other anti-union 	legislation. For the unrestricted right of labor to organize and 	strike.  For price control by labor and the consumers. Wipe out 	profiteering and high prices. Labor must have the decisive voice in 	determining the prices of consumer goods. For wage increases without 	price increases. For popular price-control committees.  For a living wage. For an immediate wage increase to 	meet the high cost of living. For job and wage security through a 	guaranteed annual living wage, at a minimum of $5,000 annually for 	each family.  Clear the slums, build homes. For a $250 billion 	five-year program to provide decent housing at low rentals for all. 	For a national plan to begin work immediately on the erection of 25 	million permanent low-cost housing units. For modern mass-production 	techniques. Give the AFL building-trades workers first priority on 	factory jobs building prefabricated houses at union wage scales.  Tax the profiteers. For a $25,000 ceiling on all 	annual incomes. No taxes at all on incomes under $5,000. Shift the 	tax burden to the rich, force them to pay for their wars.  Nationalize big business. For the nationalization of 	the big monopolies – the industrial establishments, 	transportation and communication systems, the mines and the banks – 	to be owned by the nation and operated under workers’ 	control.  End discrimination against the Negro people. For full 	social, political and economic equality for Negroes.  Open the doors to the Jewish refugees. For full and 	unrestricted immigration to the United States by the persecuted and 	homeless Jews of Europe. For the right of the Jewish people to 	unrestricted immigration to Palestine or any country of their 	choice.  For generous economic and educational opportunities for 	veterans. For a veterans’ wage of $40 a week for single 	men and $55 for married men for on-the-job training, plus $5 a week 	for each additional dependant. For immediate granting of a federal 	bonus of $1,000 for each year of service.  For peace and freedom. For the right of all peoples 	and nations to decide their own future. For self-determination for 	all nations. For freedom of the colonies. For the withdrawal of all 	armies of occupation. Bring the American troops and ships and planes 	home. For an end to conscription and the increasing militarization 	of the United States.  For a socialist America, a socialist 	United States of Europe, a socialist world federation!  *  Chapter 13How Long Will It Take?  THERE is no guarantee. It took the British trade unions a generation before they convinced the majority of the British people that labor should lead the nation. On the other hand, in a critical situation somewhat comparable to labor’s situation today, it took the new Republican Party only six years to start from scratch (in 1854) and spring into undisputed leadership of this nation. As against the slave-holding group which controlled the Democratic Party, the young Republican Party then represented the progressive capitalist class – just as today, the infant labor-party movement represents the progressive working class as against the old and decaying capitalist class. It may take four, eight, even twelve years for the labor party to take over the reins of government. It will almost certainly take more than four years, unless the whole capitalist system meets some unlooked-for catastrophe that finally enlightens tens of millions of people as to its monstrous, murderous character. Even if we get the bulk of the union movement and its leaders to subscribe to and work for a labor party and to run a national slate, the real crisis will come at the first election when we fall short of the goal. Then all the hidden enemies and “plants” of the old parties in the ranks of labor will try to stampede us back to their rotten political machines. They’ll start whispering campaigns; they’ll whine that the whole thing is a mistake; they’ll encourage the summer patriots to introduce proposals that the labor party give up its fight and that labor resign itself to subservience to capitalism; they’ll strive to water down the program of the labor party with the argument that the movement is too radical for the people; they’ll try to organize deals with the old parties. We must prepare for such moves and be prepared to thwart them. We must understand in advance that the fight will be a long one, that a thousand obstacles, some of them unforeseen, will be thrown in our path, that a thousand tricks and manuevers will be used against us. (Churchill’s Conservative Party in Britain was not above using forged letters against the British Labor Party in 1924.) We must become inured to the permanent red scare which will be the obvious weapon of capitalism against us, even if the Stalinists are a negligible factor in the labor party. This red scare will never let up, it will become more and more hysterical, as we begin to open up a path of hope for the people, it will batter at the labor party and try to terrorize it in all sorts of ways. Union men and women who are serious about fighting for a labor party must learn how to shrug off contemptuously the red-baiting of the capitalists and their politicians, must learn how to expose its roots and to counterattack, to educate, to enlighten, to explain, and thus to render ineffective the reactionaries’ appeals to ignorance and prejudice. Another obvious weapon that will be used, especially at election time, is that of seeking to induce the young labor party to make “deals” with the discredited capitalist politicians who, seeing that they cannot lick us, will try to join us. Many forms of “all-party” committees and political blocs will be proposed, many squeezed lemons among the capitalist politicians will try to jump on our bandwagon and mislead the movement. We must particularly guard against the proposal – which is sure to be made by one or another of the old parties – that we run our own candidates in the state elections but support one of the capitalist politicians on the national scene. The labor party must show such people and such proposals the back of its hand. While the labor party will welcome and encourage and win thousands and hundreds of thousands of supporters from among the intellectuals and the middle class, these people must come to the labor party on its own terms, understand its goals, recognize labor’s right to lead the movement and determine its course. Why labor’s right? Because labor, by its position in capitalist society as the most exploited class and at the same time the class best organized by its position in the factories, is the only class that can lead a progressive struggle against the capitalist class. The labor party must take particular efforts to win over the farm organizations and farm cooperatives, by advancing progressive demands that defend the interests of these people, by conferring with them and giving sympathetic consideration to their plight and their ideas. Today, it may seem unlikely that a labor party can win much mass support from the farmers. But we base ourselves upon tomorrow. We know that this present hopped-up, artificial and uneven prosperity cannot possibly last. We know that so long as the capitalist system survives, longer and longer depressions will follow briefer and briefer periods of prosperity. The farmers who today may disregard labor’s overtures, tomorrow will frantically look to us for aid in giving them leadership to solve their problems. And they will aid us in solving our problems. A particularly fruitful field for the labor party will be among the youth, in the colleges and in the factories. Since the end of the war, the labor movement has lost contact with the youth, especially the veterans in the schools and colleges studying under the GI “bill of rights.” While the federal subsidy to such students has been grossly inadequate, yet it has been enough to separate them for a period from the working class. In the colleges they have had their heads stuffed with all sorts of nonsense about the grandiose prospects capitalism has for them. Unless we misread the signs, just about the time many of these young veterans are to graduate from college the depression of 1929–40 will have resumed its sway. There will be few jobs for the millions of graduates, and what few jobs there are will pay little. Reality will strike these youth like a bolt of lightning. We can expect a very rapid radicalization of the youth. One can expect that the youth will seize upon the labor-party idea and help to carry it far along the path to success. *  Chapter 14What If a Labor Party Is Not Built?  HAVE you thought of what is in store for the union movement if it doesn’t find the resources within itself to take the road of independent labor political action? Failure to take this step will inexorably lead to the weakening of organized labor, the cutting down of the unions, loss of membership, and finally the disintegration of the very organizations which the old-time labor leaders think to save by their “sane” tactic of pressure politics and “support of the lesser evil.” These are new times. The tactics that worked from 1890 to 1940 don’t work any more. Capitalism is going downhill fast. In Europe it is already bankrupt. Big business in the United States can no longer afford the luxury of strong unions and union wage scales, union working rules, the luxury of civil liberties. This is the meaning of the Taft-Hartley Act, the proposals for abolition of the forty-hour week, the increasing attacks on workers’ rights by most of the state governments, the proposal to outlaw union contracts on a national scale, the red scares, the growing militarization of the nation, the influx of Wall Street men into policy posts in Washington. This is the meaning of high taxes upon the workers. The union movement is facing a major crisis, and its leaders haven’t the courage to sound the alarm, to mobilize the ranks for an all-sided fight. Their tactic of tailing the old parties in the 1948 election will only lead to new disappointments, to more cries of “betrayal” as the politicians whom they now label “liberal” and “friends of labor” obey their real masters after elections. Given the tactic being follower by Murray, Green, Hutcheson, Whitney & Co., it is inevitable that reaction will continue to grow after the 1948 elections. The passage of the Taft-Hartley Act should have opened everyone’s eyes to the true state of affairs. There is no explaining away the hard fact that the majority of both old parties voted for the slave-labor act. And the even more ominous fact that the non-union public itself raised no outcry. Why didn’t the people protest against the Taft-Hartley onslaught on labor? Because too many people have lost confidence in the labor movement. Because many people, watching the antics of the big union leaders, believe that labor is as selfish and narrow as are the monopolies, that labor is interested only in protecting its own rights, that the unions are only job trusts, that the union leadership has no higher ideals than the corporations and the capitalist politicians. The people see the AFL building-trades unions con spire with the building-materials trust and the contractors and local political machines, to prevent an easing of the housing situation by the introduction of modern prefabricated housing. The people see a brutal bureaucrat like Dan Tobin run his teamsters’ union as though he were Czar of All the Russias, crushing democracy in local after local, issuing edicts to the members as though they were soulless serfs, precipitating jurisdictional strikes whose only “aim” and “ideal” is that of forcing more dues-paying members into the teamsters’ union. The people see Gorman of the AFL Butcher Workmen, obviously carrying the ball for the packing trust, come out against meat rationing at a time when prices have placed meat beyond the reach of the average American family. (Chapter 14 continued next week)   
   OPPONENTS of the proposition that the labor movement of the United States should build its own labor party are not too inventive. The arguments that one hears today from the union officialdom and the liberal do-gooders are the same (in many cases, word-for-word the same) as those that have been advanced by opponents of the labor-party idea in the past two generations. Here are the chief arguments, and here are the answers: 1) It is not the time to build a labor party. Answer: To the Republican-Democratic monopoly, and to its followers and beneficiaries in the leadership of the trade-union movement, 1948 was not the time for the unions to organize their own party and place a ticket in the field. Neither was 1946 the time. Nor 1942. Nor 1936. Nor 1928. Neither will 1950 be the time. Nor 1952. Nor 1956. Nor 1960 (presuming that the atom bomb has not deposited radioactive dust over all people, and hence over all politics, by that time). If these opponents of the labor party were to speak their true minds, or rather truly reflect the minds of their political superiors, they would say: “Never is too soon to build a labor party.” But why should we – who are paying in declining living standards and increasing insecurity for every month of delay in the building of a labor party – hearken to this argument? 2) A labor party in the field will weaken the Democratic Party and ensure the election of reactionary Republicans. ANSWER: The majority of trade-union leaders are affiliated with the Democratic Party and this is their stock argument. Naturally, such Republican union leaders as William Hutcheson of the Carpenters Union and (occasionally) John L. Lewis deny the validity of the argument, in favor of the Republicans. We deny it in favor of the labor party. Look! Is there such a measurable difference in the character of the two old parties as dictates to labor that it should continue to abstain from politics so as to throw its support to the Democratic Party? If there is such a difference, how is it revealed? On the vote on the Taft-Hartley Act? But majorities of both parties voted for that act, and voted to pass it over Truman’s veto. But, after all, Truman vetoed it? Of course. It was politically expedient for him to do so. In his place, a Taft or a Stassen would have done the same thing – since he knew it would be passed over his veto. Is one party less subservient to Wall Street than the other? No. The big banks and industrialists impartially support both parties. Henry Wallace and the Chicago Tribune are only speaking the truth when they enumerate the Wall Street characters who are breathing down Harry Truman’s neck in the White House and setting policy for the Truman administration. Is one party less war-minded than the other? If anything, the Democratic Party has the worst of this argument, if only because there are more isolationists in the Republican Party. Who is hottest for universal military training, if not Truman and his party? Whose diplomacy ensured that the U.S. would enter the Second World War, if not Roosevelt’s? Do not both parties support the Marshall Plan, which proposes to organize Europe behind Wall Street for the Third World War, under the guise of aiding Europe? Which party has more corruption? Isn’t it a tossup between the Democrats’ Flynn, Kelly, Pendergast, Curley, and Hague machines, and the Republicans’ Pew and Green machines, etc.? Which party does most to foster Jim Crow and hatred of the Negro, and thus to weaken labor by fostering race prejudice based on ignorance and superstition? The Democratic Party, with its solid cracker section in the South, doesn’t look too good here. Let’s agree that both old parties are abhorrent in this respect. There are differences between the two parties, but they are secondary differences. The intelligent worker understands that both old parties are used impartially by big business to suppress him, and that it is of no interest to him which old party retains or gains office. The intelligent worker understands his only legitimate interest is to work to throw both old parties out of office, and to replace them with a party which will be in every respect their superior – more responsive to the needs of the people, more conscious of the ability of modern industry, when properly organized, to give a decent living and security to all the people, more interested in human than in property rights, more interested in planning and spending for peace than for war, more interested in getting along with and aiding the exploited peoples of other lands to throw off their exploiters than to strengthen their exploiters to stay in power. 3) If a labor party were organized, with the support of the trade unions and failed in its first attempt to elect its candidates to office, then “labor would be without representation or standing in Washington, the state capitals, the city halls.” Answer: Don’t make me laugh, my lip is cracked. Labor, thanks to the treacherous political policy of the labor leaders, has been without representation in Washington and elsewhere for generations. Labor’s suggestions and prayers have been met with contempt by both Republican and Democratic officeholders. Labor’s bloody struggles for higher wages have been opposed by Democratic Mayor Kelly’s police and by Roosevelt and Truman’s national guard no less than by Stassen’s “slave-labor law” in Minnesota or by Taft-Hartley’s national anti-labor law. The struggle of the unemployed for relief standards that would keep body and soul together was met with imprisonment at the hands of Roosevelt’s Department of Justice as well as with criminally inadequate relief standards fostered by both old parties. The old parties quibbled about granting one billion dollars for relief in 1939 – and spent hundreds of times that amount in the next five years “relieving” workers in other lands of their lives and homes. We are glad that was brought up – the one about labor’s having no representation in Washington. If the Democratic-Republican setup is truly representative of the interests of all the people of this nation, as its supporters claim, how come there is not one single worker in Congress? There are, as Murray and Green and Whitney will admit, approximately 16 million organized workers and twice that number unorganized. Yet, far from being represented in Congress, the entire working class of the United States is disfranchised. A cursory examination of the biographical section of the Official Congressional Directory reveals that, of 96 Senators, the following occupations are represented: lawyers 61, businessmen 10, bankers 6, publishers 7, broker 1, newspapermen 2, farmers 3, educators 1, embalmer 1, plain politicians 4, workers 0. The social composition of the House is just as anti-labor. Of the 434 members of the House in the Eightieth Congress, the following occupations, are represented; lawyers 241, businessmen 37, realtors 8, accountants 4, publishers 21, personnel managers 2, educators 22, bankers 17, newspapermen 17, farmers 3, preacher 1, stage star 1, plain politicians 48, pharmacist 1, brokers 5, ranchers 7, insurance men 7, contractors 2, military 3, doctors 4, architects 2, missionary 1, veterinary 1, public relations 1, ex-union official 1, workers 0. It is this Congress which has removed federal price controls with the promise that prices would not thereafter rise; which dealt a staggering blow to unions through the Taft-Hartley Act; which put money in the hands of the real-estate operators through the easing of rent control; which approved a foreign policy which promotes monarchical reaction in Greece, semi-fascism in China, imperialism in Southeast Asia, and neo-fascism in Western Europe; which has placed the costs of the imperialist war largely upon the backs of the working class. (Chapter 9 continued next week)   



IT IS possible generally to foresee, with workable accuracy, what the next few years hold in store for the American people.
The 1929–40 depression – temporarily lifted through the artificial stimulants of the Second World War – will be resumed, with devastating social and political implications.
Capitalism in the U.S., developing for over a hundred years under the most favorable conditions for the system – an immense territory without an inner tariff barrier, a continent richer than most in natural resources, an inexhaustible labor market through immigration, the absence of a European-type militarism until recent years – even this U.S. capitalism has been periodically shaken by crises, beginning with the first one in 1819, the next significant one in 1837, and thereafter one every nine or ten years, up to the First World War.
Then came the post-war crisis of 1921, then a boom period of prosperity (a period, however, in which one fifth of the industrial plant and equipment was idle) and then the crisis of 1929, the sharpest and most appalling in the history of capitalism.
That crisis began in agricultural areas such as the Balkans and Latin America, swept with growing fury across the earth and finally rolled up on the shore of this country in November with an impact that gradually numbed trade and production, doomed tens of millions of workers to unemployment, shattered the morale of the capitalist class, and called into being the New Deal government of Roosevelt in 1933 to save the system and buy off the growing mass sentiment for revolutionary change.
From 1933 to 1940 the New Deal administration vainly strove to restore the functioning of capitalism in this nation. Leaning on the theories of capitalist economists, the government sought to spend the nation into a state of prosperity. Relief or WPA jobs were given to millions – not to all who needed them, but to millions. The economic system gradually and slightly lifted by 1937, and then again in 1938 fell flat on its back. In 1939, when the Second World War broke out in Europe, there were still more than 10 million unemployed here.
Roosevelt’s policies failed to rescue the economy, as had Hoover’s before him. But the war which Roosevelt and world imperialism brought on temporarily revived the patient. Capitalism came back with a bang once the war really got going. But it is an artificial recovery.
Since the end of the war it has been a feast-and-famine economy – a feast for the rich, whose profits reached an all-time high of approximately $20 billion in 1947, but a famine for the masses, who in the first two years after the war were deeper in debt than they ever had been in history.
The post-war “prosperity” was built on a number of factors, chief of which were the following: huge military expenditures, record installment buying, unprecedented volume of investments in new plants and equipment, extremely large expenditures by business for inventories of goods, vast increase in foreign trade between the United States and the European nations ruined by the war, and pent-up consumer purchasing power from the years of war scarcities.
Most of these factors exhausted themselves by the spring of 1948. It is only a question of time until the American economy once more hits the skids. When the new depression comes, American capitalism will confront it in a much worse position than in 1929.
A national debt of at least $250 billion will be hanging overhead at the very start of the depression. The economy is even more monopolized than in 1929. Military commitments are huge. The rest of the world is insolvent. There is growing unrest in the colonial world. At home the workers are better organized in unions, a little wiser, a little harder to control by the old methods.
After seeing big business spend hundreds of billions of dollars for destruction in the war, the unemployed (who will number tens of millions) will be in no mood to accept a miserly one billion dollars a year in relief, as Roosevelt and Congress tossed them in the last depression.
In such a depression, it is more than probable that labor, fighting desperately to gain a bare living for the people and to maintain and protect its economic organizations, will be forced to supplant the present conservative union leadership – professional, narrow-minded, selfish, brutal, jealous, bribed and corrupted by big business.
We believe that labor will build its own political party, based upon the unions, controlled by the unions, with a leadership responsible to the unions and removable by the unions. We believe that this labor party will attract to it, through its program and policies, the majority of farmers and middle-class people, both of which groups will be ruined by the vast depression.
We believe that this labor party will be forced by each new turn of the screw to adopt increasingly radical demands which will go beyond capitalism, that labor will finally see that the solution of mankind’s economic and social problems lies not within the capitalist system at all but beyond it, in a socialist order.
 

   THERE will be no mistaking the labor party when it arises. Whether it comes into being first on a local or regional scale or as a full-blown national organization, it will have certain characteristics. First of all, it will be organized by and based upon considerable sections of the trade-union movement. It will be led by, financed by and fought for by union men and women. It will be controlled by union labor. Its political program will reflect labor’s needs. Its candidates will for the most part be union men and women. Its national committee will be composed, in the majority, of delegates from the unions. (In addition it may have, as the Farmer-Labor Party in Minnesota had, precinct and ward clubs.) With the capitalist-minded labor leaders still in political control of the union movement, it was not possible for the ranks of labor to throw off these parasites in time to run a national labor party ticket in the 1948 election. That is our No. 1 task for 1952. But we can start, today, to clean up our own locals, to organize in opposition to those who would weaken us by keeping us tied to the corrupt and corrupting capitalist parties. We can insist that our union leaders, if they are members of the capitalist parties, either break their alliance with such parties or face a contest for union leadership. We can organize in the cities to run city and state labor party candidates in 1950. As each local labor-party movement gains strength, it owes it to its own future to invest a part of its money and energies in educational work to further the movement in its own state and adjacent states, to help other union localities to get on the right road. And the most far-sighted labor party leaders must keep constantly in mind the goal of a national labor party and must energetically seek to build a movement aimed at this goal. *  Chapter 8Why Old Union Leaders Oppose a Labor Party  WHY don’t people like Green and Murray and Tobin and Lewis and Dubinsky and Whitney support the campaign for a labor party? Certainly, they cannot contend that the two old parties have given anything to labor in recent years – except the Taft-Hartley Law, return to the labor injunction, higher taxes, the end of price control, heavy court fines and increasing militarization and regimentation. The main reason that the conservative labor leaders oppose a labor party is because they think like capitalists, they believe in capitalism and its politics. They are rich men, receiving $12,000, $20,000, $30,000, $40,000 a year, plus all sorts of perquisites. They no longer live the same lives as do their union members. They have been out of the mines and factories and locomotive cabs for many years. They hobnob with the rich, dine with them, travel with them, drink with them, and absorb the ideas and politics and social views of the rich, to whom an independent labor party is abhorrent. Not only are such union officials opposed to an independent labor party, they are for and often a part of the boss parties. A poll of 410 AFL and CIO leaders was taken in May 1947 on the question: “As far as national politics are concerned, would you during the next two or three years prefer to work for labor’s viewpoint within one or both of the major parties, or would you prefer to set up a new labor party entirely separate from either of them?” The second course was favored by 12 per cent of the AFL leaders and 23 per cent of the CIO leaders. This is encouraging and shows that the labor party already has a good nucleus of support among the union leadership. It can be assumed that in the union ranks the proportion in favor of a labor party now is very much higher. A slightly higher percentage of the union officials polled was in favor of a labor party “within the next ten years” – that is, “never, unless we are forced to move.” Answers to the poll showed that two-thirds of these AFL and CIO leaders were members of the Republican and Democratic Parties. Within the the AFL, 10 per cent of the leadership belonged to the Republican, 49 per cent to the Democratic, 5 per cent to “other parties,” 24 per cent to no party, and 4 per cent did not answer. In the CIO, 7 per cent were Republicans, 65 per cent were Democrats, 8 per cent “other,” 17 per cent no party, and 2 per cent did not answer. Thus, 59 per cent of the AFL officials and 72 per cent of the CIO officials were affiliated with the political company unions of the employers. This is a key fact about the present-day union officialdom, and unless you understand this, you won’t understand why we haven’t a labor party already, or what must be done before we can have our own party. The chances are that you do not even know that the top official of your union is, in all likelihood, a member in good standing, and a peculiarly important member, of a boss political party. That he caucuses regularly with other members of his party – with bankers and manufacturers and editors and police chiefs and mayors and governors and aldermen, all in the interests of preserving the party which safeguards the profits of the bosses. Why do union officials affiliate with the boss parties? Because they think like the bosses on political questions. Because the boss parties often help protect the union leaders in their union posts. Sometimes, to get a cut of the political graft. The hidden political connections of the union leaders don’t often come to the surface. It takes a crisis to bring out such hidden connections. Such a minor crisis was the announcement of Henry Wallace that he intended to run for president on a third-party ticket. How the union bureaucrats scurried then to repudiate Wallace and to reveal that they were and are members of the Democratic Party, that they are loyal to the party of Hague and Flynn and Kelly and Crump and Farley and Arvey and a thousand other political bosses! The reason these labor lieutenants of capitalism opposed Wallace was not because they were for a genuine labor party and Wallace was for a third capitalist party. They opposed Wallace because they were for the old Democratic Party, and Wallace’s candidacy appeared to threaten the fortunes of that party. How can we get a labor party if our unions are headed by leaders belonging to, or looking for guidance from, the old parties? In the first place, there are at least 20 per cent of the union officialdom already won over to the idea of the labor party. (Another 20 per cent is neutral, not tied up with the capitalist parties.) This is a formidable group lying directly at hand, to help launch the fight. Progressive unionists, both in the ranks and in the leadership, should begin immediately to form a labor-party caucus in their union locals; to draw in sympathetic representatives from other unions. As soon as the movement has a base among the unions, try to draw in representatives of other organizations in the locality that might naturally be disposed to a labor party – consumers’ cooperatives, the Farmers’ Union, parents’ groups, tenant leagues, Negro organizations, etc. Analyze the local political situation. Draw up a program that really meets the needs of the people in the locality – their housing needs, health needs, school needs, wage needs, union needs, transportation needs, the needs of the veterans, Negroes, youth, aged. Determine which offices the labor party should seek. Launch the political campaign. We’ll probably lose the first time out, even the second time out, but we’ll gain invaluable experience and we will have started the educational work which in time will bring the labor party to victory. Time and the tide of events are working for a labor party and against the old bankrupt parties. (To be continued)   
   FOR generations, the union leaders of the United States have accepted the monopoly of political life by big business. They have accepted the perpetuation of the Republican-Democratic system, and have rejected the theory that labor must organize independently on the political field as it has on the economic field. Trade-union politics has been summarized in Gompers’ old political slogan, “Reward your friends and punish your enemies.” In effect, the carrying out of this policy has meant that union leaders have sought to encourage the workers to vote for those candidates of either of the old parties designated by the leadership as “progressive,” and have sought to discourage the workers from forming a labor party which would run labor’s own candidates. American trade-union officials, alone among the trade-union leaders of the world, have taught for generations that the economic struggles of the workers can be divorced from their political struggles. Since the days of Samuel Gompers, founder of the American Federation of Labor, right down to 1948, the big majority of union leaders have united on the following proposition: That it is 100 per cent right for workers to organize into labor unions on the economic field, and 100 per cent wrong for workers to organize into a labor party on the political field.  Political Company-Unionism on Way Out All the leaders agree on this today, no matter what other questions divide them – Green and the AFL Council, Murray and the CIO Executive Board, John L. Lewis, A.F. Whitney, the Stalinists, all of them. In no other nation in the world is such a backward and ignorant and treacherous union political policy permitted. For generations the workers of England, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Australia, New Zealand have had their own labor parties, which from time to time have taken over political leadership of their respective nations. Whether these labor parties of our fellow workers in foreign lands have pursued policies that were wise or unwise, bold or timid, consistent or inconsistent, is not our subject now. That such labor parties have been successfully organized and have intervened forcefully in politics in the name of the unions is undeniable. We would be the last to deny and the first to proclaim that there are special reasons for this unusual delay (what the professors call this “cultural lag”) on the part of the American trade-union movement to arm itself with a labor party. Among the unique forces in U.S. history which have tended to postpone such a development are the following: The granting of male suffrage on a broad basis in the United States at a comparatively early stage in the nation’s history; unparalleled tides of immigration which brought workers of many diverse nationalities to these shores and which, while they enriched the nation and eventually the union movement, at first made it more difficult for labor to achieve unity in action; the existence of a frontier of cheap or free land right up to the turn of this century, to which the dissatisfied city worker could move, relieving class discontent; the anti-political prejudices of important figures in the American labor movement, such as Gompers (founder of the AFL), Bill Haywood and other IWW leaders; the Jim Crow policies of many trade unions, which prevented unity between the white workers and the remaining one seventh of our nation; the greater mobility of the American worker, his willingness when impoverished in one community to try his luck in another; the size of the nation, which has made the building of a nationwide labor party a formidable task; the narrow craft jealousies of American workers, encouraged by the old union leadership; above all, the ability of the two old capitalist parties to find tools within the union movement willing to serve the Republican-Democratic machine and to perpetuate political company-unionism. The probability is great that the end of the road for such a politically backward labor policy is fast approaching. The attempt, in our time, to separate the economic struggle from the political is less feasible than ever before. This is indicated by the fact that administrative decrees or legislative acts are brought into play to cut workers’ wages, to raise prices, to open union finances and membership lists to the inspection of the employers, to send the police or the military against labor, to place the weapon of injunction in the hands of the employers, to shift burdensome tax loads from business to labor. So do the progressively deeper depressions, the increasingly destructive wars. Not only will the pressure from labor’s ranks for more aggressive action on the political field mount, but the very trade-union leadership which plays bill with the old parties will find its own position increasingly threatened – from these old parties. The political company-unionism of Green, Murray, Whitney & Co. is failing utterly to defend the interests of the workers. It isn’t paying off in adequate wage levels – nor in security – nor in freedom from war – nor in freedom from oppressive taxation – nor in enhanced civil liberties – nor in freedom from the necessity to strike – nor in a fair break for the Negroes. It hasn’t even protected the union movement against a smashing blow like the Taft-Hartley Law – passed, let it always be recalled, by a majority of both Democratic and Republican congressmen.  Three Assumptions of Pressure Politics Labor’s position has greatly worsened since the war’s end. Everyone acknowledges this. Something must be radically wrong with the theory of “pressure politics,” the theory that labor should continue to “reward its friends and punish its enemies” in the old parties. Let’s give this theory the once-over. Pressure politics as practiced from Gompers’ time to today is based upon three major assumptions:  That labor itself is too weak, poorly organized, and 	outnumbered to launch its own political party.  	That the old parties are not the political tools of the 	capitalists, but are non-class vehicles which are impartially 	receptive to anyone who wishes to ride them.  	That capitalism not only can continue to give the working 	class what it has given in the past, but can even increase the ante. 	Or, if it cannot give a decent living to all the workers, at least 	it can “take care” of the aristocrats of labor.  The first assumption may have had some point prior to 1900. Today it is ludicrous. Today labor is far and away the largest class in the population. The American workers are better organized economically than any other working class in the history of the world. At its 1947 convention the AFL claimed 7,600,000 members, represented by approximately 100 international unions, 48 state federations of labor, more than 800 city central labor bodies. The CIO convention in 1947 represented 41 international unions, 36 state and 231 city industrial union councils. President Murray reported the total CIO membership to be in excess of six million. There are in addition more that a half million workers organized in the independent railroad unions and a couple of millions organized in other independent unions such as the machinists, brewery workers, telephone workers, etc. With an apparatus like this, given the will to build a labor party, almost overnight the working class could confront its enemies on the political field with a formidable party that would force respect. We have shown that the second of the assumptions mentioned above is false. The Republican and Democratic Parties belong to big business, which owns them and directs their policies. Labor leaders are permitted to solicit votes for these parties. But they are not permitted to determine party policy. If it is to the interests of big business to throw this nation into war, both old parties embrace pro-war policies. If the fundamental interests of American capitalism are best served by granting a measure of relief to the unemployed or the aged, such relief is given. If it serves the current needs of American capitalism to cripple the trade unions, a Taft-Hartley Law is passed. Labor has no voice in such decisions.  Capitalism Running Dry The last assumption, that American capitalism can continue to give the working class what it has given in the past, is equally false. Throughout the world, the capitalist world is on the skids. What the First World War and the 1929-39 depression started, the Second World War pretty well finished. Capitalism with its depressions and wars has brought all of Europe to ruin, and has sapped the system in the United States, as will become shockingly clear at the very start of the next depression. In Europe and Asia the old economic and political machines of the capitalists can go through the motions of functioning still, fed as they are by billions of dollars which the Republican-Democratic machine syphons out to them. The system is through, all over the world. Only in the United States is capitalism still able to look alive and prosperous, and then only because of the ruination of the rest of the world. From now on out, American capitalism will be able to give less and less to the American people – less security, fewer of the good things of life, less freedom for the unions, fewer civil liberties. In store for us are higher taxes, increasing militarization, increasing repression, and ultimately – unless the labor party is formed to launch a workers’ government in Washington – fascism, the final scourge which capitalism visits upon its victims. This is the course of politics under capitalism, in all countries: from liberal capitalism, to monopoly capitalism, to fascism. The poorer the country, the more rapidly the cycle is completed. The cycle can be broken only by labor’s active, aggressive, radical intervention in the political life of the nation. (To be continued)   
   (Continued from last week) Perhaps Murray or Green would argue that there are some or a few friends of labor in Washington. If there be such, they surely haven’t fought for labor in the way that true friends fight – the way that the true friends of the Southern employers fight proposals to abolish Jim Crow, for instance. The real truth of the matter is that once labor showed it was on to the crooked dice of boss politics and refused to play that game any longer, once it turned its back on the old parties and struck out on the path to independent politics, it would receive a thousand times more consideration from the boss politicians than it does today. Because then the old parties would be put on the defensive, they would be put on their best behavior, they would try by many means to convince labor that they were still its friends, they would know that every further exhibition of labor-hatred on their part would only hasten the success of the labor-party movement. 4) The fight to build a labor party is too difficult. Answer: We do not for a moment minimize the tough work involved in building a labor party – the thousand and one legal restrictions which the old parties have drawn up to protect their political monopoly, etc. But that is no reason to duck the fight. The fight is, after all, not impossible. In many states there would be no fight at all. The Wallace-Stalinist movement, much as we disagree with its politics, has shown that much. Every argument advanced to show the difficulty of organizing a labor party was also advanced, generations ago, against those brave characters who undertook to build the trade-union movement. Yet the union movement was built, at what cost only its intrepid pioneers know. 5) Look at what happened, in 1924 to LaFollette. Answer: Well, really look at the 1924 elections – and what has happened since. In 1924 the official union movement came out for old Robert LaFollette for president, on a third-party ticket. He was a progressive boss politician of his day, nothing more. He didn’t run on a labor-party ticket. He didn’t have a labor party behind him. His platform wasn’t particularly attractive to labor. Leading Democratic and Republican union officeholders knifed his campaign. The whole union movement in those years numbered only about four million. Yet LaFollette won about five million votes, more than 12 per cent of the total. But look at the union movement today! Four times as large. About 16 million trade-union members. Why, if a campaign were organized with a whole heart, if the proper educational work were done, if a platform were adopted which answered the needs of the exploited, if they were drawn into the work, made to feel truly that it was their party, the labor party in its very first try could soar far beyond LaFollette’s record, and could capture scores of state offices and congressional posts. By the second election the labor party would be ready to aim at the White House and the establishment of a labor government. After all, labor has learned a thing or two since the LaFollette campaign. It has been through the long depression and the second long war. It has had to endure post-war inflation. It has had to endure the continuing indifference of both old parties to its needs. It is ready for change, to a much greater extent than it was in 1924. Those are the stock arguments against the labor party, and their answers. But there is one new argument, advanced only recently by the editor of Labor, a weekly newspaper published by the railroad unions. The argument deserves inclusion if only for comic relief. 6) Labor should be smart like big business. You don’t see the bankers and industrialists try to build a new party of their own. No sir, they work through the old parties. You bet big business works through the Democratic and Republican Parties! Those parties belong to them. All the machinery of those parties, and of the government which those parties administer, has been adapted and modified so that those parties and the governmental machinery serve big business. So why should the rich organize a new party when they are so loyally served by the two existing parties, eager and trained to do the bidding of the rich? The editor of Labor must have had a tiny hole in his head when he let that howler get into print. *  Chapter 11How Labor Can Win the Support of the Majority of the People  THE largest social class in the United States is the working class. The organized workers alone total more than 16 million, and with their families constitute almost a third of the population. The unorganized urban and rural workers bring the total to well over half the population. In addition to the working class there are 8 million farm families and an even larger number of middle-class families whose breadwinners work as salesmen, lawyers, small proprietors, dentists, accountants, clerks, artists, etc. The remaining 5 per cent of the population is made up of the very wealthy and the upper middle class. Exceptional members of this group can also be won to the working-class cause. Our chief problem is to consolidate our own class and to aim to win over substantial numbers of the lower middle classes in the city and country and to neutralize the remainder? How does the working class win allies? The bureaucrats at the head of the union movement – the Greens, Tobins, Murrays, Dubinskys, Hutchesons, Lewises – don’t know. Indeed, they never even ask the question, because they reject the very idea that the workers should organize politically as a class. To their mind, the workers should tag along after big business and its two- headed party system. But supposing a labor party is organized, as it certainly will be: How will we win support of the masses? There will be thousands of clever liberals eager to tell us: “Look as much like the Republican and Democratic Parties as possible. Wave the flag. Sing a-men. Then the masses will follow you.” No, then the masses will not follow the labor party. Why? Because the two old banker-controlled parties can always wave the flag more furiously and convincingly than we can, can shout twice as pay-triotically over twice as many radio stations and in twice as many newspapers. Because it is just exactly this old blarney that the masses are sick to death of. The people sense that only a radical solution of the social problem offers them hope. For years they have seen the labor leaders support the old-party candidates, hail each election as a “great progressive victory,” and then, a few months later, curse the government as “the most reactionary ever.” When labor comes out always at the same tree, it has lost its way. The people sense this. They saw what Roosevelt’s liberal phrase-mongering has added up to. They are listening carefully for what they want to hear. Once they are convinced that the union movement has a political program for all the exploited and is determined to advance that program, the people will flock to the labor party. The great General Motors strike of 1946 showed this. When Reuther advanced the slogan of wage increases without price increases – a union’s way of telling the public it will protect the public interest against the corporations – opinion polls showed that the people were overwhelmingly for the United Auto Workers and against General Motors. Why? Because here, for the first time, a union was thinking in broad social terms, was not only protecting its members but protecting the public interest. Of course the people want this, and of course they will respond. You cannot win broad support by the old, narrow-minded, selfish trade-union politics of tailing the old parties, seeking wage increases and forgetting about price increases, engaging in jurisdictional strikes against the interests of the workers involved and of the public. A labor party that breaks cleanly with the hateful double-crossing capitalist parties, that boldly proclaims a new program of progressive demands for the masses and a new concept of government, that expresses its determination to take over control of the nation’s destinies in the name of and in the interests of the overwhelming majority of the people, will win the support of the overwhelming majority. It will take a little time and a great deal of education, but it will win. (To be continued)   
   WHAT do we want out of life? Of the 145 million people in this country, only a very small number dream of acquiring or retaining fabulous wealth, or having magnificent homes with a large retinue of servants, fleets of expensive automobiles and a yacht or two. The vast majority of the population is made up of workers (and their families) in the factories and mines, railroads and offices; small farmers, tenant farmers, sharecroppers and farm laborers; professional people such as teachers, doctors, dentists, engineers, musicians. Among us there are many differences in standard of living, in taste, in outlook. But we have many things in common. In one way or another, all of us work for a living, most of us for an employer; and we are very much alike in what we want to get out of life. Except for the tiny minority which has great wealth at its command, the first thing that all the common people want is a decent standard of living. No man wants to live merely in order to work. A man works because he wants to live. Before he satisfies any other interest, he wants decent food to eat, decent clothing to wear, and a decent home for himself and his family.  Abundance Is Possible! This is a pretty modest ambition. A hundred years ago, only very few people could hope to realize it, even in a country like the United States. But in our own time this ambition is realizable for, every man, woman and child in the country. With our tremendous industrial capacity, our modern machinery, our very numerous and highly efficient labor force, our adequate resources and raw materials and our access to the world market, this modest dream could be realized almost overnight for everybody – provided society were organized rationally. The second thing that people want is security. People don’t want a decent standard of living that will last only for the period between depressions. They want one that will last a lifetime. They want to know that their children too will enjoy a decent standard of living, one that grows better all the time, richer, more tasteful, more ample. A job that pays pretty well is a very fine thing, but at least half the enjoyment of it is wiped out if one must always be thinking: “But how long will it last? What of tomorrow?” There is no reason to consider the demand for security any less modest than the demand for a decent standard of living. With very few exceptions, everyone is ready to do his share of work in order to make a living. That provides the country with an ample labor force. The need for the good things of life is always present. That provides the market. And today we have the industrial equipment and the materials to satisfy those needs even if they were twice as big as they now are. Why shouldn’t there be the continuous production and the continuously rising prosperity that would completely guarantee economic security for all?  The People Want Peace The third thing people want is peace and order at home. Nobody with a lick of sense likes an industrial lockout for its own sake. No worker likes this business of having to fight bitterly, sometimes by means of long-drawn-out and exhausting strikes, to get a few pennies extra pay. No one with any sense or feeling feels anything but horror at the spectacle of racial conflict in this country, pitting men of one religion against men of another, making men qf one color deny men of another color their most elementary human rights and even shoot down and lynch those who lay claims to these rights – as happens with terrible frequency to Negroes. People want to enjoy the good things of life and to pursue their particular interest, be it handicraft or travel, music or fishing, sports or photography, without being molested or dictated to and without molesting or dictating to others. And people want peace throughout the world. They may not know very much or even care Very much about other countries and other peoples and their problems. They may not be moved by any great principle of human solidarity with peoples of other lands. But one thing we in the United States have certainly learned since 1914 and 1939 is that what happens in one part of the world very soon affects all other parts of the world. And still another thing learned is that the invention and perfection of modern weapons threaten to wipe out all humanity if another world war should come to pass. Regardless of who wants war, the common people of every country certainly do not. What do they get out of war? No parent with an ounce of human feeling wants to raise children who, before they have even tasted the joys of life, are sent otf to perish in war with another people about whom they know little or nothing and with whom they do not and cannot have any quarrel. Every parent shudders at the realization that each new generation has a new war to die in. Man does not live by bread alone. Each of us, in his own way, wants more things than these. But all of us have at least these things in common: We want a decent standard of living, security, peace and order at home, and peace all over the world. What we want is right and natural. What is wrong is that we do not have these things. How many of us enjoy a really decent standard of living? Very few. How many of us feel secure in the standard of living we do have? Even fewer. In the country as a whole there is no peace and order, but only a continual series of social outbursts, sharp class conflicts, and the unmistakable rumblings of even more violent and disrupting conflicts to come. As for peace all over the world, who among us has any serious belief that it is. assured for generations to come – or for our sons and daughters – or even for ourselves – or even for the next ten years? Even now, three years after the Second World War, there are six minor wars being fought, any one of which may suddenly blaze up and fire the rest of the world – in Palestine, Greece, Indonesia, Indo-China, China, India. A good half of mankind is involved in these “small” wars. We call them minor wars because the great powers have not yet openly entered the arena. What We Are Getting What we have received in this country – if we are an average family – is largely the very opposite of what we want. We want a decent standard of living. Instead we are going into debt at an appalling rate, just to “make ends meet.” According to the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, it requires from $3,200 to $3,600 for the average worker’s family of four to maintain a “modest” American standard of living, “without frills.” In October 1947 the average wage for factory workers stood at $50.97 a week, or roughly $2,650 a year, if employed full time the year around. That is from $550 to $950 less than the minimum budget. One of every three American families has no savings. Total consumer credit outstanding in December 1947 was at an all-time high, more than $13 billion. Within two short years after the war, the people have had to go deeper into debt than ever before in history just to keep their heads above water – and this at a time of peck employment, peak production, peak profits for the owners of industry, peak foreign trade. It is a dark harbinger of the future. We want decent homes for our families, in a clean neighborhood. We receive a housing situation that is a national scandal – one third and more of the nation ill-housed – resulting in shattered families, broken marriages, suicides, shoddy pew houses sold at inflated prices, tragedies of all kinds.  What Stands in the Way? We want, most of us, freedom from racial or religious trouble. We get periodic lynchings in the South, race riots in the North, restrictions against Negroes and Jews, every discrimination against the colored people, anti-Semitic manifestations in scores of cities, persecution of religious and conscientious objectors to war. We want freedom from strikes, yet each year millions of us must march on the picket lines, in a desperate effort to win a few cents more an hour from hostile employers, in order that our pay checks may retain at least a nodding acquaintance with sky-high prices. We want peace. We got the war with Spain at the end of the last century, then the First and then the Second World War. Today, several years after the last war, the United States government is spending more for war preparations each year than the total pre-war budget. Hundreds of thousands of people are even now at work producing the horrible weapons of the First Atomic War. The hour of decision is close at hand. To get the things we want out of life, we must act. Good things do not come of themselves. We know what we want. The first thing to do is to find out what it is that stands in the way of our desires, why it is that we haven’t gotten what we want up to now. Then we will decide what we must do. (To be continued)   




Prices – No Ceiling Sighted
Readers will recall one of my December columns devoted to the pending railroad freight rate increase by the Interstate Commerce Commission, and my not very bold prediction that commodity prices would surely rise further because of the increase. On December 30, 1947, the ICC unanimously gave the railroads another 10 per cent rate boost, on top of the 10 per cent boost granted on October 5, 1947. The recent rate increases, it was estimated by the ICC, represented a gift of $1,230,000,000 to the nation’s railroads. It’s nice to be a capitalist, is it not, with a capitalist governmental apparatus ready to do your bidding and hand out billion-dollar gifts for the asking?
Anyway, commodity prices have already begun to rise. Chicago coal prices immediately advanced 10 cents a ton, “reflecting new higher rates, in that amount, granted to the railroads,” according to the Chicago Journal of Commerce. ... January 8 the Deep Rock Oil Corporation announced an increase in all tank wagon prices at all points in the mid-west. “These increases will vary from two-tenths to four-tenths cent per gallon, and reflect the higher rail freight charges which are effective January 5,” said the company vice-president ... Blatz Brewing Co. announced a plan to raise beer prices, attributing the move in part to higher freight rates. So it will go, in every field.
Commodity prices will go up further before they come down. Wholesale prices – a cue to retail prices of future months – have risen steadily for more than 10 weeks, recently reaching a new post-war high of 165.5 per cent of the 1926 average of 100. This is 17.5 per cent above the like 1947 week, and less than two per cent below the all-time peak in May 1920. Higher prices for non-agricultural commodities more than offset lower agricultural prices recently.
The new Sears, Roebuck catalog contains prices averaging 2.8 per cent higher than those in the corresponding 1947 catalog ... Prices of California oranges have risen $1.38 a box, to $3.54 in recent days, compared with $2.23 a box a year ago ... Corn has jumped 18 cents a bushel, oats 12 cents a bushel, bran $13 a ton. Corn that now brings nearly $2.80 a bushel in Chicago sold as low as 40 cents in 1939. These higher grain prices today mean higher meat prices this summer and fall ... At the January furniture show in Chicago, furniture buyers found wholesale prices were up 10 per cent to 20 per cent over a year ago, the Wall Street Journal reports. The increase in retail prices will be greater, of course. ... Men’s suits will cost about $5 more each this spring. Men’s shirts will increase 25 cents. Women’s spring dresses and boys’ spring clothes will be up 5 to 7 per cent ... International Shoe Co. has announced wholesale price increases ranging from an average of 35 cents a pair on children’s shoes to an average of 95 cents a pair on men’s shoes ... and the Housing Expeditor has removed trailer camps from rent control, to the dismay of tens of thousands of unfortunate families ...
Pittsburgh bakeries have cut two ounces off their bread loaves, reducing the loaves from 19 to 17 ounces. The price remains the same, 16 cents. All big bakers have ordered smaller baking pans, and in the next few months will be giving you a shorter staff of life for your money ... The daily newspapers have managed to muffle their outrage at these rising prices. They are saving their outburst for the unions, when the latter get down to negotiating a 1948 boost in wages to help the workers’ families keep a nodding acquaintance with the grocer, the butcher, the clothier.
By the way! Do you remember all the hulla-balloo raised by General Electric recently when it announced, with the demureness of a shy maid, that it was cutting prices 3 per cent to 10 per cent “on a wide variety of consumer goods.” Do you know what this fourflusher did the very same week? It quietly informed radio distributors and manufacturers of a 12 per cent increase in its prices of radio tubes. No newspaper ads for THIS price change.
The more U.S. exports drop, the more Big Business works through Truman’s party (ahem, Mr. Murray) to push through its “European relief” program. In November 1947, exports dipped eight per cent: Imports dropped $454,900,000 that month, for a seven per cent dip. Exports fell off in ten of the eleven commodity groupings. Capitalism and its wars have so ruined the rest of the world, it appears now to experts in the Department of Commerce, that U.S. exports in 1948 are going to be lower than they were in 1947 even if Congress grants the full appropriation of approximately $7 billion asked by the administration for the European Recovery Plan.
 




Several months ago, I ended an article in Labor Action on Harold Stassen by mentioning that, although James Farley had failed to mention Stassen among the top Republican contenders for the GOP nomination, Stassen just couldn’t be counted out.
“Throughout his career he has established the record of always making a much better race than advance notices indicated,” I wrote. “He has a faculty of tapping those hidden points of support among Big Business circles which carry a candidate to the top.”
I believe that the Stassen showing in the Wisconsin and Nebraska primaries bears this out. His total vote soared beyond the expected Stassen support. His Republican opponents charged that heavy money poured into those states turned the tide for Stassen.
There is not the shadow of a doubt but that a very large number of wealthy business men are making substantial contributions to Stassen’s campaign, because; they firmly believe that he – more than any other Presidential candidate – can best serve their class and personal interests.
Writing in the April 22 Chicago Journal of Commerce, Holmes Alexander said he had had “a quick peek at the list of his (Stassen’s) financial backers. Some of the names are secret and some are not. Suffice it to say that there are Vanderbilts, Whitneys, Cookes, steel men, automotive men, flour millers and heavy industrial equippers on the list.
“People with vast wealth and booming business,” wrote Alexander, “do not put their money on ‘soak the rich’ and ‘share the wealth’ politicians. They are even chary about putting their money on progressives – as the word is understood these days. Stassen has convinced these men – plus thousands of small businessmen – that his economic theories are sound.”
The Chicago Tribune, supporting Taft for the Republican nomination,has exposed the fact that a committee of nine of the biggest businessmen in Minnesota is sending letters throughout the business and political community of the nation, soliciting campaign funds up to $1,000 for Stassen. Among the nine are the chairmen of the boards of General Mills and Pillsbury Mills; the presidents of the Minnesota Valley Canning Co., the Minnesota & Ontario Paper Co., the Josten Manufacturing Co., the Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co., and the chairman of the board of Geo. A. Hormel & Co.
This group of industrialists has raised more than $250,000 of the more than $700,000 spent thus far by Stassen on his pre-convention campaigns,according to the Tribune.
A number of Minneapolis businessmen are touring the country, asking other businessmen to kick in to the Stassen fund. Unquestionably, the ex-Minnesota governor has made commitments to big business which satisfy them. But should such commitments satisfy those who are not millionaire bankers and industrialists?
 
The Stassen Myth
The myth that Stassen is a “liberal” continues on, despite all evidence to the contrary. It is carefully nurtured by the press monopoly – by the Luce, Cowles and Knight papers and others.
The record shows that he accepted support of the Silver Shirts in his Minnesota campaigns for governor. The record shows that his accomplishments in office were of an unmitigated reactionary nature; That he shoveled money to U.S. Steel by cutting the state tax on iron ore mined from the Mesabi Range; that he raised the legal interest on small loans from 8 per cent to 36 per cent; that he put through a vicious old-age pension plan that forced old people accepting relief to turn over all real property, including homesteads, to the state; that he put through the Stassen Slave Labor Law, forerunner of the Taft-Hartley law; that he broke up the liberal state department of education by forcing the resignation of John Rockwell; that he resisted all appeals for public housing, etc.
Currently, Stassen has come outwith an outrageous piece of fakery. Speaking recently in Toledo, where he is challenging Taft for some of Ohio’s votes, he told a Lions Club luncheon that “secret ballots for union men voting to strike, accept a contract, or name officers would be the best method of ending arbitrary control by some labor leaders.”
 
Some Stassen Fakery
Anyone might believe from this that Stassen thinks democracy is a good thing for the union movement. But when he was governor of Minnesota, he didn’t think so. In the fight between the Minneapolis General Drivers Union Local 544 and Dan Tobin, international president of the Teamsters Union, back in 1941, Local 544 sought time after time for an election so that the drivers could choose which union they wished to represent them. The Stassen Slave Labor Law made such an election mandatory if a majority among the workers signed cards specifying a union of their choice. Local 544-CIO several times presented such cards and petitions, signed by a majority of the Minneapolis drivers. Yet Stassen’s labor conciliator, acting on orders from the governor, certified Tobin’s union as bargaining agent for the entire Minneapolis trucking industry without an election.
Stassen in his current campaign is double-dealing, as he always has – talking one line and following another. Slippery as ever, he is a butter man in the dairy states, an oleo man in the vegetable oil states. He is critical of the Taft-Hartley law in the industrial states, and a crush-labor man before industrialists and bankers.
In return for his aid in breaking the power of the Trotskyists in the Minneapolis labor movement, the officials of the Minnesota State Federation of Labor and the Stalinists supported Stassen in the 1942 state elections. I see that the AFL state labor officials in Minnesota have finally turned on Stassen, and are denouncing him weekly, in the St. Paul Union Advocate. A politician too far to the right for those birds is really “right.”
Yet, who do these labor bureaucrats have to nominate for President? They haven’t dared come out for Truman. They denounced Wallace for the wrong reasons. And they won’t permit the formation of a labor party to take the place of the Farmer-Labor Party which they helped so much to scuttle. That is the tragedy of the 1948 campaign.
 




The workers in the United States have, in the period from 1941 to the present, enjoyed the best that the capitalist system has ever given them or is ever likely to give them. There have been more jobs available than ever before. Money wages have been higher than ever before. More goods have been turned out than ever before.
Yet, just how much better off are we today than we were in 1939?
Let us sit as a jury-and-judge and pass our judgment on what capitalism has to offer us – not in its worst days, not from 1929 to 1939, but in its palmiest days, flushed with war and postwar prosperity.
Today let us receive evidence from one of the journalistic bulwarks of capitalism. Not from the CIO research department, not from socialist archives, but; from the U.S. News and World Report, issue of May 7, an article entitled: End to Easy Raises in Pay: Workers’ Gains and Losses.
”Pay raises are going to come harder from now on,” the article begins. “This is to be true of raises in wage rates and in salaries as well.”
The remainder of the article is a succinct report of what has happened to various groups of workers since 1939, measured by changes in weekly “real” incomes (that is, wages adjusted for cost-of-living increases, after federal taxes).
 

What Happened to Wages
Here is what the report shows:

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WORKERS: Earned $36.16 in real wages in 1939; earned $30.35 in real wages in July 1945; earning $30.94 in real wages today.
LIGHT AND POWER WORKERS: In 1939, $34.38; in 1945, $33.82; today, $32.26.
RAILROAD WORKERS: In 1939, $36.17; in 1945, $34.98; today, $36.74.
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING WORKERS: In 1939, $32.42; in 1945, $31.58; today, $33.55.
IRON AND STEEL WORKERS: In 1939, $27.52; in 1945, $33.88; today, $31.20.
SCHOOL TEACHERS: In 1939, $27.64; in 1945, $26.54; today, $26.41.
RETAIL WORKERS: In 1939, $21.17; in 1945, $21.04; today, $21.10.
AUTOMOBILE WORKERS: In 1939, $32.91; in 1945, $35.63; today, $33.33.
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS: In 1939, $30.24; in 1945, $37.00; today, $35.58.
TEXTILE WORKERS: In 1939, $16.84; in 1945, $22.35; today, $24.83.
SOFT-COAL MINERS: In 1939, $23.88; in 1945, $34.07; today, $40.35.
RETIRED FEDERAL WORKERS ON PENSIONS: In 1939, $23.01; today, $16.70.
VETERANS ON COMPENSATION: In 1939, $23.00; today, $18.70.

That ends the simple exhibit.
In the light of this evidence, do you believe: “the changes in ‘real’ take-home pay since the war end have meant only modest gains or actually have brought losses,” as observed in U.S. News. “All the strikes and turmoil of the last three years led to a general marking up of price tags, both for wages and salaries and for goods. Yet the net addition to living standards, except for a few groups, was not great.”
 

Proves Need of New Weapons
In the light of this evidence, do you believe:

That the trade union leadership of the United States through its policies has adequately protected the interests of the American working class?
 
That if this is the BEST that capitalism has to offer, the capitalist system is worth defending?
 
That socialism, with its program of collective ownership of the means of production under the democratic control of the workers, and production for use and not for profit, could possibly do worse than capitalism at its best has accomplished?
 
That the workers can afford to continue their struggle for better living conditions without a new weapon, the national labor party?

 




A picture of a debt-and-tax-ridden world such as has probably never before been seen in history emerges from figures compiled by a committee of U.S. government experts at the request of Congress. Capitalism, in the bare few centuries of its existence, has managed in every country to place a veritable Alp of debt and taxes upon the backs of every man, woman and child – not only those now living, but for generations to come. Most of the debt and taxation burdens are traceable directly to the hideous wars which accompany the capitalist system step by step down its bloody way to ruin.
This situation, according to the Institute of Life Insurance, from the long-run point of view has a direct bearing on the financial welfare and security of all the peoples of the world, now and for generations hence – their incomes and earning powers, their savings, their standards of living, and the whole structure of family life. (The Institute cannot conceive of a future freed from capitalism. – J.R.)
“The worldwide extent of the public debt and tax burden makes it a problem of the first magnitude for virtually all nations, large and small,” declares the institute. “The major cause of this situation is the war and its astronomical cost. Neutral nations have been severely affected as well as belligerents. The problem for a time showed signs of easing as public expenditures in various nations declined from the peaks with the end of the war, but government outlays, as in this country, are displaying a renewed uptrend due to the international situation.”
 
$1.00 out of every $4.00
The experts’ figures, which are for central governments only, and do not include state and local figures, compare the years 1936 and 1946. One measure of the burden is that in nearly a score of nations the tax burden in each one in 1946 was the equivalent of $1.00 or more out of every $4.00 of their national incomes in that year. In a few cases (including France) the 1946 tax burden was the equivalent of MORE THAN ONE-HALF the national income in that year.
The United States, which had been well down on the list before the Second World War, led all nations in the per capita tax burden in 1946 with $313. Russia was second with $297, and the United Kingdom third with $279.
In the public debt burden (which the taxes help to carry), the United States in 1946 was second only to Britain. The British public debt was the equivalent of $2,095 per capita, and that, of the U.S. $1,830 per capita. Canada was third with $1,365 per capita; Australia fourth, $845 per capita.
The Institute noted that in 1939 Germany led the world in the per capita tax burden with $157, equivalent to approximately $1.00 of every $3.00 of German national income in that year. Russia was in second place with $129 per capita. In contrast, the U.S. was in 15th place with a 1939 tax burden of $43 per capita, equivalent to approximately $1.00 out of every $13 of American national income in that year.
From 1939 to 1946 the per capita American tax burden increased over sevenfold, or far more than that of any other nation, and the per capita debt burden grew more than fivefold. The Institute noted that aggregate state and local taxes in the U.S. in 1946 were the equivalent of just under $80 per capita, or more than a fourth of the equivalent per capita federal government figures.
No one doubts that so long as capitalism exists the tax-and-debt burden will grow increasingly heavy.
Just consider this: In 1939 the total U.S. national budget was $8,700,000,000. In 1949, Dewey and Truman are agreed, the U.S. budget for war preparations along will reach $20,000,000,000, and the total budget more than twice that. Even allowing for the doubling of prices, one sees that the overhead costs of maintaining capitalism are mounting at a jet-propelled rate.
Preparations for the First Atomic War will wring higher taxes from the American workers. The slight tax cut permitted the masses as a sop in preparation for the 1948 elections, and as a bribe to hold back the drive for a new national labor party, will in all likelihood be withdrawn by the 81st Congress and even heavier taxes imposed. This will be a certainty if American and Russian imperialism fail to reconcile their current differences.
 




CHICAGO – The upset was as complete, and as unexpected, in Illinois as it was nationally. No local newspaper or politician or poll had led anyone to expect any result but a sweeping Republican victory. As late as Wednesday morning the Chicago Tribune was still proclaiming a Dewey victory, though already conceding that Stevenson and Douglas, Democratic candidates for governor and senator, had won. The Chicago Journal of Commerce, like its sister paper in New York, issued day-after election editions hailing the Dewey victory as an endorsement of the Taft-Hartley law and explaining in detail what the Dewey administration would mean.
No Democratic politician in Illinois really expected a victory. Jake Arvey, Illinois party boss, was one of the many who opposed Truman’s nomination on grounds the President could never be elected, and nothing that happened between the convention and the election indicated he had changed his mind. Governor-elect Stevenson, the lawyer and bank director, talked to a Chicago Daily News reporter after the polls had closed Tuesday night. “He felt he had done a good job of campaigning, but he really thought he had lost,” declared the reporter, Paul R. Leach.
Labor was the force that turned the tide, in Illinois as elsewhere. Secretary of State Barrett declared that “labor was our precinct captain,” and there was a deeper truth in that than he perhaps meant to reveal. All through the nation labor was in the role of precinct captain, getting out the vote for the Democratic lords and nobles at the top. Labor had no voice in nominating the candidates. Labor had no say in drafting the platforms. Labor will have no control over the victorious politicians. Labor was the precinct captain. It collected and spent the money and got out the vote.
Everything but the state Senate fell to the Democrats. Stevenson’s plurality over Governor Green was 400,000. Paul Douglas, Democratic candidate for U.S. Senator, beat Brooks by a slightly lesser plurality. Both Green and Brooks were Chicago Tribune souls. The Democrats took all other state offices and won control of the lower state house. The Illinois Democrats retained their six old seats in the House and gained six more.
Wallace got about 10,000 write-in votes in Illinois, despite instructions from the Progressive Party not to write in his name (they feared the ballots might be scratched).
Krueger, the man who said he wanted to run on a labor party ticket but who tried to make a deal with the Democrats, polled 4,500 votes for Congressman in the 2nd District. O’Hara, his Democratic opponent, won over the Republican, Vail, about 91,000 to 85,000. Krueger polled about the same vote as the Progressive Congressional candidates.
None of the local newspapers has yet reported the vote polled in Illinois by Norman Thomas and the Teichert SLP ticket.
 
Why Did Labor Do It?
The total vote, both in the nation and in Illinois, was smaller than anticipated. It was not a large vote for a presidential year. The Tribune had predicted a national vote of 52,000,000, whereas the total vote was about 4,000,000 less. Approximately half the voters showed up at the polls.
But labor showed up. The various union campaign machines – those of the AFL, the CIO, the railroad brotherhoods, the machinists, etc. – concentrated on dumping those Congressmen who had voted for the Taft-Hartley law. Of the 54 House members who lost their seats November 2, 51 had raised their hands for Taft- Hartley. Truman was the beneficiary of labor’s determination to get the Taft-Hartley Congressmen.
And while labor went to the polls to vote against the T-H proponents, it tossed its vote to Truman in the presidential race.
Why? One Chicago truck driver explained himself this way, in a conversation with me. “I don’t think much of Truman, but I’ll be d–––– if I could vote for that Republican b––––.”
That altitude must have been very prevalent.
Truman indicated in his campaign talks and in post-election statements that he wants price controls, repeal of the Taft-Hartley law, a housing bill, continuation of rent control, civil rights legislation, continued support for farm products, continuation of his pro-war policies, a $20 billion armament bill, and continued persecution of the Communist Party and of left-wing groups.
Labor wants repeal of the Taft-Hartley law, low taxes, low prices, a substantial housing program, tightened rent control, civil rights legislation, peace.
It really doesn’t expect to get these things from a Democratic administration. It recalls that Truman HAD a Democratic Congress back in 1945 and 1946 and didn’t come through with anything but bad news for labor. It also recalls with some cynicism that a majority of Democratic congressmen voted FOR the Taft-Hartley bill. It further realizes that the Democratic Senate will be controlled by old-line conservative committee chairmen like McKellar of Tennessee, Connally of Texas, Tydings of Maryland and Thomas of Oklahoma.
“We do feel we ought to get the Taft-Hartley law rubbed out,” a group of striking printers in Chicago told me.
That’s about what the union movement expects of the Truman administration.
Chicago liberals don’t go that far. They talk about REVISION of the Taft-Hartley law, extension of the tattered rent control law, maybe an FEPC law.
 
Labor Party Prospects
Just because a group of Republican politicians was replaced by Democrats hardly gives assurance that reaction won’t continue in the United States. Just because a group of Taft- Hartley supporters was run out of Washington does not mean that the boss politicians who are to succeed them will be any less anti-labor. To be sure, many a campaigner said he was a friend of labor. But that was when he was asking for votes. Now he has the votes.
It will take time for American labor to see that it was suckered again in the 1948 election. For the next six months, the labor party idea will probably have to mark time.
The capitalists understand this clearly.
Phil S. Hanna, business reporter for the Chicago Daily News, wrote some interesting things on the election. Riding in on the morning train with other suburbanites on November 3, the group (he said) didn’t feel bad about the results.
A Dewey victory would have meant that “with the Democratic Party practically extinguished, it would have been easy to build an extra labor party. The GOP might also have been extinguished in four years. But Truman saved the Democratic Party and probably extinguished the Wallace outfit. The hundreds of Wall Streeters with great influence and the conservatives in the South are still in position to use their minority (!) powers to temper things within the Democratic Party.
“Gillette of Iowa, for example, doesn’t want to lose his millions; ditto for many others in the party ...
“Furthermore, if the world ferment for leftism is sweeping our shores there is a vastly greater chance for compromise with the Democratic Party still doing business. AT LEAST THE AMBITIONS OF THE REUTHER CROWD HAVE BEEN CHECKED FOR FOUR YEARS.”
By “Reuther crowd,” this business reporter means the movement for an independent labor party. He is too optimistic in thinking such a movement can be staved off for four years.
The time will be measured in months, not years. It won’t take Truman and the 81st Congress too long to demonstrate pretty openly that, though labor “won” the election, it is Big Business that calls the tune, and the needs of Big Business that Congress must heed. When the disenchantment comes, the mass revulsion may be as startling then as it was for the Republicans a few days ago.
What About The Polls?
There wasn’t a poll in America, either the straw or the “scientifically weighted” type, that pointed to the truth.
It is not true that polls like Gallup’s (who the day before election gave Dewey 49.5 per cent and Truman 44.5 per cent) or Roper’s (who had predicted Dewey would win in a landslide, as Roosevelt did in 1936) are simply propaganda devices, at least on elections.
You see, election forecasts are always subsequently verified at the polls. It is not like a poll which shows the majority of the people want war, or a poll of some similar issue on which the people are never permitted by Big Business to vote.
Public opinion polling is itself a big business, upon which some $20,000,000 a year is spent. The business future of the pollsters depends upon their ability to predict elections with accuracy. By their showing in this year’s election, they have done themselves irreparable damage. A false prediction of the 1936 election put the old Literary Digest out of business. Even if Gallup and Roper don’t lose all their clients, the public will never take them seriously again. Why should it?
It is obvious that the so-called scientific pollsters did not weigh their samplings heavily enough with workers.
Theoretically, it is possible to select scientifically a small sampling of a large aggregate, and predict a trend or outcome upon the basis of the small sampling. But who would trust a Gallup or a Roper or a Crossley to select the sampling accurately after their ludicrous results in 1948?
Gallup’s post-election alibis are as funny as his pre-election forecasts. “This is the kind of a close election that happens once in a generation,” he says.
Why didn’t his forecasts indicate that?
“Over 3,000,000 voters remained undecided on their presidential choice right up to the week before election,” he says.
Then why didn’t he hedge correspondingly in his predictions?
REPUBLICANS: Besides losing control of Congress, the Republicans lost eight governorships and now hold only 16. Wrath against Dewey and his inane campaign burst out after the election, from both Eastern and Western Republicans. It is probable that the GOP will get a new leadership. But so long as there is no national labor party, the GOP will not disappear into a coalition with the Democrats. It is too valuable to Big Business to have two parties under its control, with one always in reserve when public dissatisfaction has temporarily exhausted the other.
DEMOCRATS: After a possible initial honeymoon, Truman will have the usual trouble on his hands. Southern Democrats and Northern labor- haters will bloc with Republicans against the so-called “liberal” Democrats, that is, those from the industrial centers. If the post-war depression comes during the next four years, it will be the Democratic Party which will take the rap. The Democrats have the misfortune, thanks to their electoral successes, of having to take full responsibility for running the government, at least until 1950. Probably, the most that Truman hoped to get was a Democratic Senate.
WALLACE: So long as it serves the interests of the Stalinists, the Progressive Party will continue, with or without Wallace. It is possible that the fight between the Stalinists and anti-Stalinists in the Progressive Party may come to a head shortly.
LABOR PARTY: As mentioned earlier, not much headway may be made by the labor party movement for the next period, until labor clearly sees that” it can obtain little from the Democratic administration. Then progress could be very swift. Labor showed it can organize the vote. No editorial writer in the future will dare to sneer at the labor vote. The whole problem is to organize the labor vote for labor’s candidates rather than for the candidates of Big Business and Wall Street, of which Truman is certainly one.
DIXIECRATS: Truman pulled through despite the 38 electoral votes garnered by the rabid Negro-hater? Superficially, it might appear that Truman could now tell the Dixiecrats to take a long flying jump. But Truman has to depend upon Southern Democrats (almost all of whom are Dixiecrats at heart) to organize Congress. The future of Thurmond and his millionaire backers among the Texas oilmen is not clear today.
 




CHICAGO, Ill. – Disunity in the union movement, even more than the Taft-Hartley law, is responsible for the economic and political weakness of the working class of this city on the eve of May Day 1948. Though many thousands of workers are courageously engaged in bitter strikes of many months’ duration in this city, they are fighting under the severe handicaps of an antiquated craft union structure, of the continuing division between the AFL and CIO, and of the current political jockeying between the pro-Wall Street and pro-Russian top union bureaucrats.
The longest strike is that of 1,500 members of the AFL Typographical Union No. 16 against the Chicago daily papers. Since the strike began November 24; the publishers have been issuing papers reproduced by the varitype method. The Chicago papers and the American Newspaper Publishers’ Association provoked the strike ostensibly over refusal of the union to sign a written contract. Actually, the publishers offered to permit the union to continue all its former working rules if No. 16 would give up its demand for a wage increase to meet the rising cost of living. Late in March, a federal judge in Hammond, Ind., issued an injunction against the ITU, along the lines sought by Robert N. Denham, czar of the Taft-Hartley law. The injunction forbade the union from continuing its “no contract policy.”
The union is negotiating, as ordered by the court. But it is still on strike.“This injunction doesn’t mean we have to accept the Taft-Hartley brand of open-shop contracts which the publishers have been demanding,” announced union officials.
The ITU is on strike in nine cities. Strikers have received the moral and financial support of many internationals, thousands of local unions,and hundreds of veterans’ posts, women’s clubs, and civic organizations. The union is asking all workers to refuse to buy the Chicago daily papers. A sad feature of the strike is that other craft unions in the newspaper industry, including many members of the striking union engaged in other work such as mailing, have continued to work throughout the strike. AFL drivers have continued to drive through picket lines. At no time have the labor-hating Chicago publishers felt the UNITED POWER of the workers.
Since the middle of March, several thousand members of the ITU in 47 commercial printing plants of Chicago have also been picketing, having been locked out by the owners when they refused to toil on “struck work.” Mailers are negotiating for a new contract to replace the old agreement which expired January 3.
 
“Hog Butcher” Is Idle
A division of the nation’s meatpacking workers between the AFL and CIO is responsible for the failure of the packinghouse workers to receive a decent wage increase from the industry. Since March 16, more than 100,000 packinghouse workers have been on strike against 62 plants, many of them in Chicago. An emergency board appointed by President Truman has sided with the bosses by terming “adequate” a measly offer of a 9-cent hourly wage increase. CIO strikers are demanding 29 cents. Since the strike began, Mayor Kennelly of Chicago (a director of Wilson’s, one of the “Big Four”) has kept 1,500 to 2,000 cops on duty in packing town. This “liberal,” hailed by the union bureaucrats as a great friend of labor’s when he ran against Albert Goldman, mayoralty candidate of the Workers Party in the last city election, hasn’t touched a single major problem facing the people of Chicago since he took office, but has spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in protecting the big packers and the scabs.
At this writing, Armour & Co. has broken off negotiations with the United Packinghouse Workers and has announced it will try to operate with scabs. Police Captain George Barnes’ hated strike-breaking detail has begun to arrest pickets, and the mayor has thrown 500 more cops against the picket line.
The CIO strike has been greatly weakened by the fact that the AFL Amalgamated Meat Cutters accepted the 9-cent raise and members of that union throughout the nation have continued to work, 7,500 of them in Chicago. AFL-organized plants of the Big Four in other cities, together with unorganized independent plants, have moved into the marketing field previously held by the Chicago packers.
 
North Shore Rail Strike
Since March 26 about 800 employees of the Chicago North Shore & Milwaukee Railroad have been on strike, following refusal of the railroad to grant a wage increase of 15½ cents hourly which an emergency board recommended for the nation’s railworkers. Though the line has $2,400,000 in cash in the till, and doesn’t owe a dollar, it has refused to grant its workers the same increase obtained from other rail carriers. It is demanding a 100 per cent increase in fares of its 72,000 daily passengers from the Illinois Commerce Commission before it agrees to pay the wage increase and resume operations.
The same union involved in the above strike, the AFL Amalgamated Association of Street Railway Employees, has demanded a 23-cent hourly increase, with double-time for work on Sundays and holidays, from the Chicago Transit Authority for the 20,500 operating employees of the city-owned street cars and buses. The present union contract expires June 1.
For the past several months a valiant little army of AFL Building Service Employees has been striking against Chicago’s swank Union League Club on Jackson Boulevard. Republican big-shots in the club have been manning elevators, shoveling coal, and sweeping the joint up.
 
Political Dead End
The Chicago unions have not only been disunited in their current struggles, but they have gone into battle without the protecting guns of their own political party.
Thanks to the Phil Murrays and William Greens and A.F. Whitneys, the Chicago workers are as impotent politically as their brothers and sisters elsewhere. President Truman is held in such contempt by the city’s masses that Jake Arvey, Democratic county chairman and former Mayor Kelly’s chief henchman, has openly come out for Eisenhower, as has Professor Paul Douglas, a liberal phony whom the Democrats have nominated for U.S. Senator. The Democrats are doing their best to keep the “Progressive Party,” a Wallace outfit, off the ballot in November. Locally, the Stalinists have nominated Grant Oakes, international president of the CIO United Farm Equipment Workers, for governor on the Illinois Progressive ticket. The state and city CIO councils, controlled by followers of Phil Murray, have come out against Oakes. So far, Chicago workers have been offered only a choice between Wall Street politicians in the Republican-Democratic party and men like Wallace and Oakes who defend Russia’s brand of imperialism. Sentiment for an independent labor party, locally and nationally, grows increasingly stronger, but thus far the top union bureaucrats have been able to prevent its taking organizational form.
On the bright side this May Day must be recorded the important victories of union militants in a number of recent local union elections, and the very noticeable increase in interest among Chicago students and veterans in the teachings of revolutionary socialism. They are foreshadows of a brighter future in the tremendous mass struggles which are shaping up in this city in this Year of Discontent.
 




Henry Wallace’s running mate on the no-name third party ticket is a rather interesting Stalinoid liberal who will be, at least until 1951, the senior Senator from Idaho (population, 524,873). This man, Glen H. Taylor, rose in the United States Senate the other day and tossed off an amazing literary comment.
“One of the most serious complaints that Mr. Kravchenko has to make against Russia in his book I Choose Freedom is,” said the Senator, “that Russian government executives must work long hours trying to make their economy work ever better and thereby raise the standard of living of the Russian people.”
A man who could so distort the substance of Kravchenko’s exposé of the murderous bureaucracy has either (1) never read the book, (2) read the book but understood not one word, or (3) read the book and decided to misrepresent its contents, for the purpose of covering up for Stalinism. Senator Taylor’s recent history points unmistakably to the third interpretation.
 
The Evolution of a “Wallace Man”
Taylor was born April 12, 1904, in Portland, Oregon. His folks came from Texas, where they were active in Democratic Party politics. His father, Pleasant John Taylor, was the youngest Texas Ranger in history. Glen was the twelfth of thirteen children, all of whom have been actors. He was reared on a homestead near Kooskia, Idaho. A sign outside the town reads: “You Are Coming to Kooskia. Population, 411.”
Glen’s father had come to the Northwest for his health. He became a traveling sky pilot, preaching in mining camps and sawmills. This was the period when the IWW was a strong factor among the migratory workers of the West. The Wobblies had a certain attitude toward skypilots, summed up in Joe Hill’s song:



Long-haired preachers come out every night,
Try to tell you what’s wrong and what’s right.
But when asked “How ’bout something to eat?”
They will answer in voices so sweet:
“You will eat, by and by,
In that golden land above the sky.
Work and play, live on hay,
You’ll get pie in the sky when you die.”



*
Glen left school at the eighth grade to make his living. He herded sheep in the Bitterroots for a while. At the age of 13 he became manager of two theaters owned by his brother. A little later he moved to Santa Rosa, Calif., where another brother lived, and played in the stock company there. The two Taylor brothers formed their own company, the Taylor Players. When the depression of 1921 sank that enterprise, Glen switched to a job with the Slade Musical Comedy Company. In 1922 he married for the first time, in New Mexico. He separated from his wife in 1926, divorced her in 1929, married his present wife in 1931. From 1926 Glen was, in his own words, “owner and manager in various branches of the entertainment field.”
The 1929 depression meant tough times for the little theatrical troupes with which Taylor traveled. The depression, as it decreased Glen’s intake of vitamins, increased his receptivity to ideas, as it did with so many millions. Glen was particularly impressed, he has told interviewers,with two books – Stuart Chase’s A New Deal and a pamphlet written in 1924 by King Gillette entitled The People’s Corporation. Both books are pretty sorry things, but they represented the best sociological ideas that Taylor had run across.
There followed a period of unemployment. In 1935, Taylor (according to Current Biography, October 1947) tried to organize a Farmer-Labor Party in the mountains of Nevada and Montana. This was about the period when the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party was sending Howard Y. Williams around the West trying to extend the Minnesota organization into other states: It was also the period when the Stalinists, in the course of their switch from Third Period ultra-leftism to People’s Frontism, were also attempting to organize Farmer-Labor Parties. None of those who have written articles on Taylor has traced the influence which set him to organizing a Farmer-Labor Party. This was the closest Taylor ever came to the right political path for the masses.
 
A “Full-Blown Hummer” Enters The Senate
But building a Farmer-Labor Party requires stamina. It’s a hard job. Taylor soon gave up in disgust. According to The Nation (August 24, 1946), “his failure convinced him that the Democratic Party under Franklin D. Roosevelt was the only practical vehicle for the common people to ride.”
In the next few years, Taylor made his decision. If he couldn’t rise with the masses, he would rise above the masses. He entered Democratic Party politics to get himself elected to office, of course, and not to educate and organize the masses for their own self-emancipation. There followed, a series of unsuccessful attempts to gain office.
In 1938 he ran for Congress in Idaho, finishing fourth in a field of nine. In 1940 he ran for the U.S. Senate in a race to finish Borah’s unexpired term. He lost in the finals to Thomas. Taylor went to California, worked as a painter’s helper and in 1942 bought a horse and a big hat, returned to Idaho and campaigned on horseback, again for the Senate. Thomas again beat him. Taylor sold his horse, went to San Francisco and took a job in a war plant as a sheet metal worker. But his heart was back in Idaho politics.
In 1944 he returned to Pocatello. He wrote 3,000 letters in longhand to acquaintances and “names,” drumming up interest in his current campaign for the Senate. Taylor beat D. Worth Clark in the primaries by 216 votes. In the finals, his Republican opponent was Governor C.A. Bottolfson. Taylor beat him by 5,000 votes and headed for Washington.
Taylor has been a Wallace man for years. When he made his first speech in the U.S. Senate, wrote Kyle Crichton (in the June 30, 1945, Collier’s),he “spoke on behalf of Henry Wallace in such fine ringing tones that ancient solons ... looked up I npained surprise. What they were hearing was the voice of the musical tabloid show and the dramatic repertoire troupe. Mr. Taylor was the first full-blown mummer the U.S. has ever known.”
In Idaho, Taylor was known as the crooning cowboy. He conducted his first campaign at the head of his own theatrical company. With his wife Dora playing the trombone and he the banjo, the pair gathered a crowd, whereupon Glen launched into a speech.
Undoubtedly his stage training gave a certain form to his speeches. Vardis Fisher, the Idaho novelist, has said that “I listen to Glen every time I get a chance, not because he ever says anything but because he says nothing superbly.”
In his 1944 campaign he would wheel into town in a sound truck, yodel Oh, Susanna! and launch into a speech. His two main campaign issues were the need for federal aid to construct a Columbia Valley Authority modeled on the TVA and the need for a strong international organization to preserve peace. To this day, indeed, Taylor professes to believe that it is possible to have peace under capitalism.
 
Presenting: The Liberal Song-and-Dance Routine
Early in his political career, Taylor noted that a number of Southern demagogues were getting themselves elected by campaigning with hillbilly bands and similar shenanigans. He decided to use the same techniques. He justifies his clowning by claiming it is the only way he can get publicity. In the summer of 1947 he began a “Paul Revere” horseback ride from California to Washington to arouse the people against the Marshall Plan and the war danger. He had to cut his trek short when Truman called the special session of Congress.
*
Taylor lives in a $15,000 house in Washington. As is quite common with Congressmen, his wife is his secretary. He quickly joined the “liberal bloc” of the Democratic Party and received assignments to the following committees: banking and currency, Indian affairs, public lands, post offices and post roads, and claims.
Until his agreement to run on the Wallace ticket as vice-presidential candidate, Taylor was a fair-haired boy with both The Nation and New Republic. He has the liberal song-and-dance routine down pat.
Senator Taylor was one of the sponsors of the Murray-Wagner full-employment bill, and warned that jobs for all are necessary to the preservation of the private enterprise system. He has sought in the Senate to strengthen the United Nations, that tool of U.S. imperialism; has espoused the Zionist cause; has urged the nation to break relations with Franco Spain; has opposed Truman’s program for aid to Greece and Turkey as an “oil grab.”
Originally a supporter of the $4,000,000,000 loan to Britain, according to Current Biography, “he reversed his stand upon hearing that it might lead to an Anglo-American economic bloc competing with a Soviet bloc.”
Taylor supports Wallace’s farm program of planned scarcity. In January 1947, he told Secretary of Agriculture Anderson, the synthetic farmer, “about the need for potato dumping to maintain ‘support’ prices” for Idaho spuds.
In January, 1947, Taylor introduced Senate Resolution 1, to bar the seating of the late Senator Bilbo. Other bills he has introduced called for the coinage of $50 gold pieces; for a modified Townsend old-age pension plan. He endorsed the Capper bill to ban national liquor advertising. He joined in sponsoring the Pepper bill for federal aid to state maternal and child health services. With Vito Marcantonio, Taylor introduced an anti-filibuster measure. But in June he joined Pepper and Morse in filibustering against the overriding of Truman’s veto of the Taft-Hartley Act. The Southern Senators have always been successful in their reactionary use of the filibuster against bills which threaten Jim Crow practices. The Taylor-Pepper-Morse filibuster was not successful. The liberal trio pooped out in a few days.
Taylor has also introduced a resolution calling on Congress to publish at the end of each session a “tabulation of the voting records of all members on all roll-calls, together with a brief description of the issues voted against.”
This isn’t a bad idea, and the proposal so enraged a group of Senators that they complained to Pageant magazine that Taylor is “the least effective member of the Senate.”
 
“The Champ Is Dead but the Game Goes On”
Up until his recent defection to Wallace, Taylor has been an advocate of the policy of building up the Democratic Party. Taylor wrote a letter to The Nation, published in the issue of July 19, 1947, about “my last-ditch effort to block the Taft-Hartley Act.”
The Democratic Party in 1946, wrote Taylor
“... had forthright and progressive candidates in the field. Throughout the country the Democratic primaries had resulted in a long string of victories for progressive pro-labor candidates who were connected by word and by deed to the continuation of the New Deal. Yet many people allowed themselves to be confused by the constant emphasis on petty wartime shortages and annoyances in the always pro-Republican press. Too many allowed themselves to forget the real issues,which had been classically stated and restated over the years by President Roosevelt. (There is a good rolling sentence in the style of Wallace, calculated to warm the cockles of liberal hearts everywhere. – J.R.) Indeed, ever since the death of President Roosevelt too many Americans, including union men, are like the baseball fans whose interest in the game dropped off after the retirement of Babe Ruth. But politics is much more serious (this from the banjo-playing, yodeling, horseback-riding ex-actor). Sure, the champ is dead, but the game goes on. The Democratic Party will be as progressive as you make it, but it is up to every union man, every farmer and every small businessman to do a real job.”
His warm praises for the progressive character of the Democratic Party just eight months ago hardly square with his current attacks on that party from Wallace’s third capitalist party platform.
 
And the Senator Presents His Ideas
A glimpse of the ideas which are currently coursing through the brain of the senior Senator from Idaho may be had by studying his 35,000-word speech presented March 9 and10 in the Senate, against the European Recovery Plan and in support of his own bill, the “peace and reconstruction act of 1948,” which provides that the U.S. shall contribute immediately to the United Nations $5,000,000,000 for that body to administer in financing a reconstruction and economic development program for Europe.
The underlying purpose of this nation’s foreign policy, began Senator Taylor with some show of obvious accuracy, “is the economic domination of as much of this world as we can possibly bring into our sphere of influence by the most extravagant expenditure of billions of dollars and a great show of military strength.”
Taylor still believes in the UN, he says. “It is our only hope,” he declared, charging that the Marshall Plan will undermine and eventually destroy the UN.
He explained the current war scare in a truly liberal way. Wars, as every liberal with penetrating eyes will agree, do not occur under capitalism because of the driving forces generated by the economy of each imperialist nation, but because the “wrong people” are in power. At the close of the recent war, he argued, the generals were afraid they would be out of work, and began a plot against the peace. In Taylor’s world, the military leaders tell big business what to do.
At every point in his speech Taylor “covered up” for Stalin. “I believe our recent publication of the secret documents (concerning the interesting history of the Stalin-Hitler pact) was the most senseless piece of war-mongering one can possibly imagine,” he said. Taylor would like to keep the documents secret and the masses of the world unenlightened as to the realities of power politics in the world.
 
Offers Hair-Raising Program for Germany
His program for Germany is positively hair-raising, the Senator still clinging at this late date to the essentials of the Morgenthau-Roosevelt plan of reducing Germany to a backward nation.
“Instead of dismantling any large number of German plants and turning them over to the people of the lands they devastated,” he complains, “we are breaking our word, and going to leave them in Germany where the boys can build them up with the help of their old friends who so recently were helping Adolf. We will build up Germany again. That will prevent the other European nations from ever becoming very prosperous, but we will have quite a war potential there for this party the boys are cooking up for Joe.”
As an economist, it can be seen that Taylor possesses not the slightest understanding of the key role that Germany must play if there is to be any industrial revival at all anywhere in Europe. As a politician, Taylor embraces the fallacy that the German people as a whole must be punished for the sins of the German imperialists and Hitler. As a Stalinist stooge, Taylor will use any argument to protect the interests of the Soviet bureaucracy. He hasn’t a trace of faith that the German workers themselves might possible decide that German industry shall be used neither to aid U.S. nor Russian imperialism. Very likely this thought would scare Taylor more than any other.
Questioned by Senator Cain of Washington, Taylor gave his own program for Germany:
“We should leave Germany just the minimum necessary to let her people have a decent standard of living, but not as good as their neighbors whom they have devastated. Just leave them a decent standard of living and remove the excess plants to the neighboring countries – the ones they overran and destroyed.”
As though there are any “excess plants” in Germany today, after the vultures from the U.S., Britain, France and Russia have got through lifting everything of value from that unhappy nation.
When one of the Wall Street puppets in the Senate questioned Taylor’s patriotism, Senator Pepper of Florida, the other Stalinoid in the upper house, rushed to Taylor’s defense, magnanimously proclaiming:“There is not a better American in the United States Senate, or in America, than the Senator from Idaho.”
In the course of his speech attacking the Marshall Plan, Taylor leveled extremely effective criticism at the plan. That is, it would have been effective if more than 90 of the 96 Senators hadn’t left the chamber when he began talking. He went round the world, country by country, beginning with the Philippines, showing how Washington’s reactionary foreign policies have alienated the masses everywhere, until today the people of all nations hate and fear the United States and would welcome the chance to oppose this nation in a war with Russia.
This is absolutely true. It is also true that the masses everywhere have reason to hate and fear the Stalinist bureaucracy and would combat it effectively were they presented with genuine socialist weapons. But Taylor didn’t say this, of course, because he is a Stalinoid. This is THE truth that capitalist and Stalinist politicians everywhere are conspiring to hide. The tragedy of world politics today is that nowhere, outside of a minority in the Trotskyist movement, is there a voice to proclaim it.
*
Taylor’s decision to string along with Wallace is a shrewd one. He retains his seat in the Senate, of course, and by the year 1950, he figures, the political situation in the nation will have so altered that his 1948 campaign will either have been forgotten, or will be a political asset. Taylor realizes that Truman is a dead duck, and that the chances are great that a Republican will be elected to the White House in November.
Wallace’s vice-presidential candidate has shown one dominating principle, which is to get elected to office. He recalls that in 1944 he got precious little support from the Democratic State Committee in Idaho, and that the Idaho Statesman and the Pocatello Tribune regard him as a clown. Still he got elected.
With all his clowning and his present support of Stalinism, one receives the sad impression that Taylor, had he come under the influence of the socialist movement at a certain stage, could possibly have contributed to the emancipation of the working class. He has considerable talents and energies. And if he hasn’t the right friends, he certainly has the right enemies and knows how to face up to them. Unlike almost all his colleagues in the Senate, Taylor has endured the seamy side of life and knows what it is like to work in a factory, if only for a few years.
As the Marxist movement grows in the United States and as the real Labor Party begins to form and take root in the unions, men like Taylor will gravitate to and take political direction from it, instead of from the tools of the Stalinist bureaucracy in the United States.
 




The government’s new military program is of such scope that it becomes a decisive factor for the immediate future of the nation’s economy. It will more than compensate for other factors – such as a drop in foreign trade, a drop in do mestic tool orders, growing unemployment, lack of consumer purchasing power – which were taking the economy downhill. That is the consensus of the nation’s leading economists.
The Truman-Forrestal program to increase the already huge $11 billion armament program for the fiscal year 1948–49 by $3 billions, to $14 billions, has reversed the field. The program came hardly a day too soon to bolster the post-war boom .Prices will rise yet higher for many commodities. Labor will soon become scarce. Industry will begin to tool up for war. Government spending will again exceed government income. Profits o fwar industries will rise to new heights.
Together with the Marshall Plan, the military program will put off any economic collapse in the United States for many months. If the new war program is not just a diplomatic move calculated to influence the Italian election, if it is an action which will be carried through regardless of political events of the next few months, then it means that the beginning of the First Atomic War is not far off, if Wall Street’s will prevails.
Up until Forrestal placed his enlarged military program before Congress, the trend of the economy was unmistakably downward. Industrial employment was falling. Business failures in January and February of 1948 totaled 1,152, almost twice the 630 businesses whose doors closed in the same period last year, business expansion plans, while still substantial, were not “gaudy.” Inventory buying was slowing up, credit was getting tighter, department store sales were disappointing, there was a decline in order backlogs. Cancellation of furniture orders were climbing. Bakery goods and soft drinks were harder to sell. The output of radios and small motors had outstripped demand. Food prices had lowered slightly since the February 4 commodity break. Shoe prices were preparing to fall.
A fairly good business indicator is dine-and-dance patronage at the leading hotels. Such patronage dropped 27.5% in 34 of the nation’s leading hotels in January and February, compared to the same months last year. Nearly one-third of the cabarets not owned by hotels have had to discontinue operation in recent months. Incomplete returns for March indicated that the downward trend in dine-and-dance business is proceeding at an accelerated rate, according to a survey just completed by a group of leading Chicago hotel operators.
A prominent firm of investment counsellors warned that the crest of the inflation spiral had passed; that the movement of textiles and shoes through retail channels had been discouraging since the first of the year; that a further decline in employment in the coming months was indicated; that even a modest decline in building activity would lead to sharply depressed prices for building materials; that capital expenditures would be smaller this year than in 1947; that “unless an unexpected reversal in trend occurs,” cotton prices will decline sharply; and that sales of men’s clothing were running below expectations. This prognosis, made after the announcement of Truman’s military program, indicates that deflationary forces were so far advanced that they would continue to gain momentum in the near-term future, because the expanding influences as the result of increased military expenditures may not be generated in time.
As recently as March 14, a group of government economists queried by the N.Y. Journal of Commerce agreed “that a rapid deterioration in the international situation, accompanied by much higher military outlays, was the only force in the foreseeable future that might set the inflationary spiral on an upward course again.”
Truman and Forrestal must surely have been informed of this analysis. Possibly it was a factor in their decision.
Industrial capital goods manufacturers are jubilant about the war program. They were reporting a falling off in new orders for such equipment as hydraulic and mechanical presses and machine tools, and even smaller tools. New orders are not keeping up with delivery rates.
All that is to be shortly changed. The produce-for-war program outlined by Washington offers a radiant future to the tool manufacturers. Some executives, it is reported, believe that the new military program, combined with the European aid plan, will necessitate a return this year to priorities and materials allocations, such as were used during the early stages of the war program in 1940 and 1941.
 

Shape of Things to Come
No sooner had Truman delivered his military preparedness message than Washington economists agreed that the Presidential action could be expected to give another fillip to the inflationary spiral. Said one expert: “Only an improved international outlook can dim the business outlook.”
Expectations of larger military orders will more than offset the repercussions of the February 4 commodity price break, it is believed. Truman’s new tough military policy means not only large defense budgets for some years, but probably means larger budgets than had been anticipated. There is a report current in Washington that in addition to the $3 billion addition to the U.S. armament expenditures, proposals are secretly being prepared to help arm “friendly governments” through legislation akin to lend-lease, at an additional cost of $2 billion.
The financial pages are drooling as the war danger grows (the full import of a Third World War has not yet sunk in).
“Imminence of war would unloose a great wave of government buying, similar to that of the enlarged defense program following the fall of France,” says a writer in the New York Journal of Commerce. “Aircraft and other munitions manufacturers would get the lion’s share of the new orders, particularly since other manufacturers would require some time to convert again to war production. While earnings would tend to rise in industries directly or indirectly concerned with war, they would be adversely affected in others ... War should bring both an expansion of sales and higher prices for the economy as a whole, once the initial readjustments have occurred ... Government expenditures would soar, the budget surplus would disappear,and tax increases rather than reductions would be the fiscal issue of the day.
“The stock market declined immediately after the entry of the U.S. into World War II because the excess profits tax was expected to cut deeply into corporate profits. This expectation proved generally unfounded. It was shown that aggregate profits could increase despite imposition of an excess profits tax. It is doubtful, therefore, that a similar wave of liquidation due to fear of the excess profits tax would occur.”
 

Work-or-Else Program Coming
What about the effects of a return to the draft on workers? Its impact on the industrial economy “is hard to overestimate,” according to a recent story by Ray Moulden in the Chicago Journal of Commerce.
“This time there is no sizable backlog of unemployment and the removal of a relatively few workers from industry could have a severe effect immediately. Therefore, there is concentrated thinking under way in Washington on revival of manpower controls so as to have a program ready much earlier than it was before the last war. If there is any doubt in businessmen’s minds that we are preparing for this sort of thing, they need only talk to the Army and Navy reservists in their employ. The Navy has called in many officer reserves and asked them to accept active duty voluntarily, with the notice that they will be forced up ultimately. There is a sizable rush for commissions in all branches of the service.”
The Army-Navy Munitions Board is of the opinion that for the immediate future the new military program will have a moderate impact on the civilian economy “if the foreign situation does not get worse in the next few weeks” (a reference to the April 18 election in Italy – J.R.). What the program does mean, the board agrees, is no recession, assured high employment, sustained prices, “and a consequent effort by banks to seek higher earnings.”
The President’s Council of Economic Advisers describes the situation as “very sobering.”
“You can’t put the new arms program on top of a $6 billion foreign recovery program without a very strong inflationary push,” believes Dr. Edwin Nourse, head of the Council.
 

Factory Surveys Begin
The armed services are beginning the task of surveying 25,000 to 30,000 factories across the country, cataloguing production possibilities and capacities, lining up certain factories for specific branches of the armed services, offering “educational orders.” At the same time, war agencies are beginning to train business executives. According to accounts in the Wall Street Journal:
“Another M-Day – if it comes – would bring quicker, more complete governmental control of industry than anything seen in the last war ... Mobilization plan blueprints, as they’re made, will be passed around the country to leading industrialists for suggestion and criticism. One such preliminary plan is already circulating among a hundred or so key businessmen.”
M-Day plans! Do readers recall that book by Rose Stein entitled M-Day, issued before the1939–45 war, with dire warnings of Army plans to take over the day war was declared? That was not the way it worked out. Instead, parts of the old industrial mobilization plan were introduced piecemeal as the war progressed.
Just the other day Col. J.V. McDowell, of the industrial mobilization planning division of the quartermaster purchasing office, explained what happened to the old M-Day program. In outlining the Army’s current industrial mobilization plan for the underwear industry, to the Underwear Institute, Colonel McDowell said:
“There are several reasons why the overall Industrial Mobilization Plan that was formulated by the services prior to World War II was never put totally into effect. There was no sharply defined M-Day, and we progressed through the period of emergency and the initial stages of the war in a creeping type of mobilization. Furthermore, the plans developed had been too generalized and did not recognize the extent to which the country’s entire economy must contribute to modern warfare. This error is understandable, but is also one we cannot again afford to make. American industry was able to support their armed forces to the extent necessary for victory in the recent conflict ,largely because we had powerful allies who provided our country the time in which to mobilize our resources and economy. Allies and time are not assets that we are likely to enjoy in the event of another war. Victory or defeat may well be determined by our effectiveness during the first year – perhaps even during the first six months.”
There in brief is the consensus of some leading economists and military men on the recent war developments in Washington.
 




“Why, I was better off on WPA, bad as that was. The family had better food, and I had a car. Today, I’ve got my job and more dollars, but no car. We seldom have meat on the table. If the old refrigerator should give out, don’t know what I’d do ...”
Many, many times in the past three months I have heard the above words, or quite similar ones, uttered by workers, by white collar employees, by urban middle class people.
Here we are. This is the radiant post-war prosperity that Big Business promised would follow the “war to rid the world of dictatorship.”
How do you like it, fellow worker? Let us see what has happened and what is in the cards for 1948.
You’ll find only two predictions in this survey. The first: Prices will continue to soar. The second: In X years there will be a tremendous bust, that will make the last depression seem like good times.
 
What Are Ideal Capitalist Conditions?
First, for a few concepts that will help us understand the present state of the American economy. Let us in the beginning try to define what are the best possible economic conditions for capitalism. Such a state would include the following factors:

A low national debt, one that is easily manageable at a fairly high rate of interest.
 
Plenty of elbow room for expansion, that is, for the investment of surplus capital in new industries, new regions.
 
A reasonably satisfied working class, disinterested in ideas of change, either unorganized or organized in unions with a safe capitalist-minded leadership acceptable to the ranks.
 
The chance to more or less freely exchange; goods with foreign countries without hurdling high tariff barriers. A peaceful and solvent world.
 
Absence of monopoly, which takes its toll from all the rest of industry.
 
The chance for young men on the make to start up new businesses unhampered by patent pools, licensing restrictions, monopoly, or political discrimination.
 
A farming class with an assured domestic market for most farm production, and an assured foreign market for any surpluses; low land values on the farm, low transportation costs for agricultural commodities and for farm machinery, reasonable prices on the manufactured commodities which the farmer buys.

*
These are just a few of the conditions which one could abstractly posit for an ideal capitalist system. Almost all of them were present in the American economy from the end of the Civil War up to 1900. Almost, all of them are absent today. The capitalist system has grown old. Its arteries have hardened into monopoly. Its heart has slowed down and can only be revived by periodic massage through military adventures. Its blood. has difficulty flowing to the extremities. The whole system is dying on its feet, as an honest examination will confirm.
The second concept it is important to keep in mind is one of chronology: Where is the system today in relation to the past?
Capitalism in the U.S., developing under the very most favorable conditions for the system for over a hundred years – an immense territory without an inner tariff barrier, a continent richer, than some in natural resources, an inexhaustible labor market through immigration, absence of a European-type militarism, absence of a class system of political parties – even this U.S. capitalism has been periodically shaken by crises, beginning with the first one in 1819, the next significant one in 1837, and thereafter one every, nine or ten years, up to the First World War. Then came the post-war crisis of 1921, then a period of great prosperity (a period, however, in which one-fifth of the industrial plant and equipment was idle), and then THE crisis in 1929, the sharpest and most devastating in the history of capitalism, which began in agricultural areas such as the Balkans and Latin America,. swept with terrific and growing fury across the earth and finally rolled up on the shores of this country in November with an impact that gradually numbed trade and production, doomed tens of millions of workers to unemployment, shattered the morale of the capitalist class and called into being the New Deal government of Roosevelt in 1933 to save the system and buy off the growing mass sentiment for revolutionary change.
 
The New Deal Failed
From 1933 to 1940 the New Deal administration strove, WITH TOTAL FAILURE, to restore the functioning of capitalism in this nation. Leaning on the theories of economists Keynes and Hanson, the government sought to spend the nation into a state of prosperity. Relief or WPA jobs were given to millions – not to all who needed them, but to millions. The depression gradually and slightly lifted by 1937, and then again in 1938 the system again fell flat on its back. In 1939, when the Second World War broke out in Europe, there were STILL more than 10,000,000 unemployed here, and a nation-wide strike broke out that year over the question whether Congress should give $700,000,000 or $1,100(000,000 to WPA. Think? Over a matter of a piddling $400,000,000 – what Truman shoved to the Greeks and Turks this year, a tiny fraction of the hundreds of billions which America’s Sixty Families were shortly to spend on world-wide destruction.
Roosevelt’s policies failed to rescue the economy, as had Hoover’s before him. But the war which he and the other capitalist politicians and bankers and industrialists encouraged, temporarily revived the dying patient. Capitalism came back with a bang once the war really got going. But it was an artificial recovery, just as our present so-called prosperity is bogus, artificial.
 
But Production Is Up ...
Back in 1933 the Brookings Institute in Washington published a study entitled America’s Capacity to Produce, a work which created considerable interest and which was quoted frequently by socialists to substantiate our contentions that this nation, given an over-all economic plan and workers’ control, could turn out goods in much greater abundance than capitalism had ever done. “
The study indicated that from 1925 to 1929 available pjaht was used between 80 and 83 per cent of capacity. If this unused capacity, rendered useless by the idiocies of capitalism, were put to work, annual productivity would have increased by approximately $15 billions, or from the $81 billions realized in 1929 (the peak productive year up to then) to about $97 billions.
The actual production of 1929 was accomplished on an industrial work week which averaged close to 51 hours (before the CIO remember?) and the potential 1929 production was predicated upon the same week of 51 hours.
Today we are producing at a rate far beyond that hopefully envisioned in the Brookings report. In the third quarter of this year, the Department of Commerce reported that the gross national product, which is the total output of goods and services, reached an annual rate of $232 billions. Even making allowances for the depreciation of the dollar since 1933, this is well beyond the 1929 production, and the work week is actually at an average of about 45 hours compared with the 51 hours used in the Brookings study.
Not only is production way up. So is employment. Henry Wallace’s “dream goal” of 60,000,000 – savagely attacked as visionary by big business in 1945 – has been attained and bettered. By late June the number of civilian jobs had risen to a record high of 60,055,000, surpassing even wartime employment.
 
... And Profits Up Too
Profits are “out of sight.” The period since the end of the war has been an endless banquet for big business, and the food gets richer with each course. Net corporate profits – after taxes but before tax rebates – in 1946 were at a record high of $12.5 billions, $2 billions over the previous peak set in the wartime year of 1943. Corporate net dividend payments to stockholders last year totaled $5.6 billions, an increase of 26 per cent over 1945.
In 1947 profits rose yet higher. The number of American corporations with assets of one billion dollars or more reached an all-time high of 45 in 1947, compared with 20 in 1929, and 28 in 1939. The assets of these 45 corporations total more than $103 billions. Of the 45 companies, 19 are banks. 12 are insurance companies, and six are railroads. The fact that more than two-thirds of the 45 billion-dollar corporations are banks and insurance companies, should surprise no one familiar with Lenin’s analysis of the role of the banks in the period of finance capitalism.
Time magazine reported in August that U.S. corporations were making a fabulous $33,000 a minute. The Department of Commerce estimated that for the first six months of 1947 profits were at an annual rate of $29 billions before taxes, up $8 billions from last year and $4.5 billions above 1943’s previous all-time high. Estimated profit after taxes this year would be $17.4 billions, up 28 per cent over last year.
As company after company released its second-quarter earnings reports, it was noted that, profit increases of 100 to 300 above the very profitable 1946 period were not uncommon. Of 342 companies surveyed, 237, or more than two-thirds, showed bigger earnings, and 67 showed decreases. For the third quarter of 1947, a survey by the Wall Street Journal (see October 31 issue) showed 149 major companies in 15 industries “raked in earnings of $446,147,392, a spanking 42 per cent above last year’s third quarter. Earnings for all 1947 up to the end of last month unquestionably added up to the highest ever recorded for such a period.”
Nor is the prospect for big business in 1948 less sunny. “A bright New Year for U.S. business is being predicted at the 52nd annual congress of American industry of the National Association of Manufacturers,” recently reported the Wall Street Journal, adding that “delegates wandering through Peacock Alley and chatting in the grand ballroom of New York’s Waldorf-Astoria Hotel are facing up to 1948 with little of the pessimism recorded a year ago ... With a year of near-peak record earnings behind them, businessmen think the New Year will be just as good – maybe better than 1947.”
 
Does It Spell Prosperity?
So we have production at an all-time high, employment at an all-time high and profits at an all-time high.
Does all this spell prosperity? Viewed from the ruling class summits, it undoubtedly does. But viewed from the sunless economic canyons where dwell the masses, the picture is startlingly different.
It is a strange sort of prosperity, when prices we relatively so high that automobile workers cannot buy the cars which they produce, when workers in household appliance factories cannot afford to purchase those goods for their own use, when coal miners earning $65 and $75 a week cannot afford to buy the meat with which to keep up their health and strength.
Elements of the situation are reflected in recent headlines in the nation’s financial press:

VETERANS CASH LEAVE BONDS SIX TIMES FASTER THAN BONUS WAS IN 1936.
 
BUYERS BORROW, TIGHTEN BELTS TO KEEP ABREAST IN LIVING COST RACE.
 
COST OF REARING A CHILD RISES 50 PER CENT IN DECADE.
 
WHOLESALE FOOD PRICES UP 160 PER CENT SINCE MID-1939.
 
INGERSOLL DOLLAR WATCH BACK IN 1948; NEW PRICE: $2.50.
 
REAL WAGES NOW UNDER 1939.

The situation may be summarized through a recent release of the Department of Labor’s Bureau, of Labor Statistics, in which the Bureau estimated that today it requires from $3,200 to $3,600 for an average worker’s family of four to maintain a “modest” American standard of living, “without frills.” In October 1947, the average for factory workers stood at $50.97 a week, or roughly $2,650 a year IF EMPLOYED FULL TIME THE YEAR AROUND, That’s from $550 to $950 less than the minimum budget.
(Continued next week with a detailed examination of today’s “prosperity”)
 




(Continued from last week)
If you cannot fairly call the present situation prosperity for the masses, neither can you call it a depression. It is not a depression when over 60,000,000 are employed, many of them at the highest peacetime dollar Wages they ever received. It is not a depression or recession when steel, automobiles and many other heavy industries have markets for all they can produce, and more.
What you might call it is a period of feast-and-famine – a feast for the rich and famine for the poor. It is a depression-without-unemployment. A real depression is what we shall see in “X” years – when both the market at home and the market abroad for U.S. goods have exhausted themselves and when even the mighty resources of this nation can no longer afford to be given away in the effort to save the dying system in Europe.
The present domestic market is a strange one. Following the end of the war in 1945, most American industries, unlike the atom bomb plants, reconverted and began turning out civilian goods. Millions of war workers who had been forced to purchase government bonds and thus to save, cashed in their bonds in 1946 and early 1947, and bought those items which they needed – a new washing machine to replace the old one which had broken down during the war – a “new” second-hand car to transport them to the factory or perhaps to move them and their families to a different community – or a store, or furniture, or they spent it for a deferred operation in a hospital or at the dentists.
Today the American workers have almost exhausted their savings, through such purchases and through long periods of unemployment due to strikes, and through the high cost of living. They are priced out of the market, for all but basic necessities. This is a key fact in any analysis of the economy: The masses are priced out of the market, and require all their wages just to live from day to day.
This situation is veiled from the public and the reason that it is hidden is that the upper middle urban Classes and the upper middle farmers are so extremely well-off due to their enormous incomes and profits that they are still able to buy up a very large proportion of heavy consumer goods that come on, the market. What they don’t buy is being sent abroad.
 
Let’s Look at This “Prosperity”
What else has served to carry the post-war economy thus far without shattering resumption of the pre-war depression?
1. In 1930 American military expenditures were negligible. Today these expenditures exceed the total pre-war national budget, assuring orders for steel, chemicals, planes and other heavy goods.
2. A second factor which has helped keep up consumption is the increased volume of consumer credit, or buying on time. The volume of consumer credit outstanding increased $221 million in June 1947 to bring the total to $10.8 billions, a figure 38 per cent above that of a year ago.
The AFL in a recent analysis of the current economic situation pointed out that while the volume of goods and services produced rose by $6.4 billion in the first half of 1947, consumer income aftet taxes rose only $1.6 billion. “Because their income did not rise enough to compensate for high prices,” the survey stated, “consumers spent a billion dollars out of wartime savings and borrowed half a billion through instalment buying and other forms of consumer credit.”
The federation concluded, and correctly, that prices would not come down, that the then pending cashing of terminal leave bonds (about $1.8 billions) would be just a shot in the arm to maintain consumer demand, and that therefore workers must increase their consuming power on their own hook. To this end it advocated that union members organize cooperatives and credit unions to raise buying power. But, obviously, this too would be “just a shot in the arm.”
Instalment buying will increase, just as it did prior to the 1929 crash. A recent survey on instalment credit by the Northern Trust Co. predicted just this – a steep rise in instalment buying. Last year, according to the survey, between four and five per cent of the total retail sales in the U.S. were made on an instalment basis. This is still relatively low, compared with an average of twelve per cent for the three years before our entry into the war. Prior to the war, about sixty per cent of new and used cars, more than fifty per cent of the dollar sales of household appliances, and about fifty per cent of furniture sales were on the instalment basis. The trust company observed that a low-priced car could have been financed in 1940 with a cash payment of $320, about one-third of the purchase price, and 18 monthly payments of $43 each. But today, the down payment amounts to about $500 and the monthly payments over the 15 months allowed by the government amount to $76 each.
 
Consumer Credit Reaches All-Time High
Credit granted to instalment buyers increased by $170 million in October, a Federal Reserve Board report issued in December showed. That lifted the total instalment credit oustariding to $5,454,000,000. The all-time record, set shortly before Pearl Harbor, is $6,000,000,000. Total consumer credit, which includes charge accounts and loans repayable in a lump sum as well as instalment transactions, increased $79 millions in October 1947 to a new record high of $1 billion.
Within two short years after the war, the masses have had to go deeper into debt than ever before in history, just to keep their heads above water. It is a dark harbinger of, the future.
3. A third factor that has served temporarily to stave off the resumption of the 1929–40 depression is the unprecedented volume of investments for new plants and equipments. In its recent monthly bulletin the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia stated that such expenditures are running at a record annual rate of $16 billions, >MORE THAN THREE TIMES THE ANNUAL AVERAGE FOR THE 20 YEARS PRECEDING THE WAR. (In 1939 dollars, $16 billions melts down to about $10 billions.)
From such vast capital expenditures the money spent comes back in some measure to the working class, in the form of wages for building construction men, toolmakers, etc. So the temporary affects of capital expenditures sustain the economy. But if U.S. foreign trade should drop off to pre-war levels, if domestic consumption should dry up much more, if a depression should start, all this vast new plant and equipment would be shut down, with even more shocking affects than if it had never been built.
4. Yet another factor that has served the current business boom is the extremely large expenditures by business for inventories of goods. I have harped upon this often in my column, and won’t add much here, save to observe again that the stores and warehouses and rail freight depots and manufacturing plants are bursting at the seams with goods, with inventories the highest in history. Business inventories boomed over the $40 billion mark in September, and grew at an even faster clip in October.
“Government officials have become increasingly concerned about the rate at which inventories have been climbing,” stated the N.Y. Journal of Commerce. Retailers, the officials pointed out, accounted for over half the September rise in inventories, but retail sales did not rise as rapidly as inventories. This mountain of goods is suspended over the heads of the nation out of reach of the masses, but destined at a certain point to back up in the factories, crowding out the workers and their jobs. Manufacturers can no longer count on inventory demand to support the production, the Department of Commerce recently warned. It said that the end of the post-war inventory boom was at hand and that one of the strongest props of the post-war economy is vanishing. President Truman, in his midyear economic report of July 21, acknowledged that “this unprecedented prosperity” is based largely on “temporary props,” which he summarized as follows:

The reconversion demands of business and the backlog demands of consumers.
 
Extensive use of savings and credit, with consumers spending more than 93 per cent of their incomes. A Federal Reserve Board survey indicated that nearly one-fourth of the families in the country had no government bonds nor bank accounts as far back as last February. (In the latest issue of Consumer Credit, C.F. Gilbert, Westinghouse Electric Corporation, stated that thirty per cent of American families by now have virtually no savings, and half have savings under $1,500. – J.R.)
 
An extraordinary excess of exports over imports.

5. On this last factor of foreign trade: Between the First and Second World Wars, the U.S. became first among its imperialist peers in the matter of foreign trade and foreign investments. In 1939 the U.S. had a little more than fourteen per cent of the total exports of the world, and more than eight per cent of the imports. But in 1946 the U.S. recorded thirty-seven per cent of the exports, and twenty per cent of the total imports. Dollarwise, in 1946 U.S. exports totaled $15.1 billions, while imports ran to $7.1 billions. For 1947, the National Foreign Trade Council estimates, U.S. exports will hit $18-$20 billions, and imports $8 billions. The U.S. government estimated that imports wouldn’t go over $5 billions, and it was the more accurate estimate.
 
Value of Foreign Trade for U.S. Business
U.S. exports currently represent nearly ten per cent of the nation’s production. If this ten per cent were lopped off, it would mean an addition of, more than 2,000,000 industrial workers to the unemployed rolls, that is, a doubling of present unemployment. This would begin to constitute a heavy drag on the entire economy.
Rather than risk this, U.S. imperialism prefers to give away the difference between its exports and its imports. The question arises, who shall it be given to? Naturally, Washington prefers to give it away to the best political purpose, that is, to weaken the position of its leading imperialist rival, Russia. This is one of the factors that looms very large in the calculations behind the European Recovery Plan. The reason Truman had to rush part of the plan along through a special session of Congress is because of the painful dollar “famine” abroad.
 
What It Adds Up to in Economic Terms
Who will pay for these billions of dollars of gifts made to bolster up reactionary governments in Europe and Asia, and to keep the capitalist system staggering along here at home? The American people will pay for them in the form of yet higher prices and higher taxes. Of course there is not the slightest guarantee that such gift loans will permit the capitalist system abroad to revive. The ERP, which will drain off huge amounts of goods from the U.S., will serve to keep prices high at home, and indeed to push them still higher than they are at present.
What does all this adds up to?
Our present hopped-up economy is based on several clearly-defined factors – pent-up consumer purchasing power from the years of war scarcities; tremendous peacetime military expenditures, a by-product of the atom plants; swollen and artificial exports; the building up of huge inventories of goods at all levels; increasing instalment buying; heavy capital goods investments.
We have looked at these factors individually, and concluded that most are nearing the point of exhaustion. Some of the factors can be kept alive for a period of time. The European Recovery Plan can keep exports flowing. Loosened credit restrictions can keep consumer goods flowing for a brief period. The huge national debt of about $259 billion doesn’t leave much room for tax cuts, but some relief is possible and might help (the catch here is that Congress is ready to give tax relief – but only to the wealthy; who can already afford to purchase all they need and still set aside huge sums for savings and investment and speculation).
But the big props of the post-war economy have been washed out – the pent-up consumer purchasing power in the form of war bonds and savings in the hands of the masses; the dollar credits amassed in Latin America during the war; the building up of inventories; the heavy capital goods investments.
 
Capitalists Are Losing Hope Over Their Future
Prices will continue to rise until the big turn comes. The pending huge increase in rail freight rates and the launching of the ERP alone guarantee this. When the depression comes, it will be world-shaking. In the U.S. plant capacity has doubled since 1929. The population is up ten per cent. The masses are better organized, a little wiser, a little harder to control by the old methods. The economy is more monopolized. Military commitments are greater. The national debt is many times larger, even BEFORE the depression begins.. The farm capacity is greatly increased. The rest of the world is insolvent. The unrest in the colonial world continues to grow. How near is the crack-up? Here is one figure which, if taken alone, |a positively frightening in its implications. According to a recent article by Ray Moulden in the Chicago Journal of Commerce, “economists most listened to in the financial market ... think there is only a very slight edge of demand over supply, not more than a ratio of 101 would-be durable goods buyers for each 99 items. They believe this delicate situation could very easily change and that the first sign of equalization will start cutbacks throughout production lines, with unemployment coming first, then price declines,”
It would be a gross error, however, to believe that we are that close to the precipice. The government still has resources at its command – tax cuts, a third round of wage increases, a veterans’ bonus, further relaxation of credit controls, still larger export gifts. All are palliatives, all will make the day of reckoning so much sterner, but all help rouge the cheeks of the patient to keep him looking as big as life and twice as natural.
There’ll be many a bourgeois economist to dispute the above analysis publicly, should it come tp his attention. Privately, it’s another matter. And there are myriad signs that important figures in the upper world have lost hope in the system and are resigned to a smash-up.
A sober conservative economist like Roger Babson purchase’s an abandoned lead mine in Kansas, where he plans to establish a select community which might survive the threatened war of fissioned atoms and deadly bacteria, and which might issue forth at the end of the war to begin anew the centuries-long task of rebuilding the same old system that today tortures most of mankind and condemns it to lifelong insecurity.
There is the economist Ralph Borsodi, whose strange book, Inflation Is Coming, is today so widely advertised and sold. What does Mr. Borsodi predict? “Inflation, national bankruptcy, nation-wide unemployment, world-wide business depression.”
He likens the present situation, with its inflated currency to a community living at the foot of a gradually crumbling dam, behind which is the irresistable onrushing force of inflation. His advice: Head for the hills, boys, the dam is doomed. Government securities are worthless. Dig in on a homestead and try to weather the storm.
Since Mr. Borsodi wrote his book, in 1945, the money in circulation has increased still further, to a total of $28,817,000,006 the week ended December 3, 1947. Incidentally, of this total, the Federal Reserve Board can account for only $17 billions – a measure of the vast money hoarding on the part of the rich, to escape taxation. I do not agree with Mr. Borsodi’s analysis, and will criticize Inflation Is Coming in an early column in Labor Action. I mention the book here only as an aid, in establishing the prevalent mood among thousands of capitalists.
 
They Know It’s Coming but Are Helpless
The columns of the nation’s financial press literally read these days like the ravings of a maniac. One day they are full of sunshine and hope the next day the same paper, even the same writer, issues such gloomy forecasts that the very weather ceiling touches the ground. Such a column is that written not so long ago by Ray Moulden, head of the Washington bureau for the Chicago and New York Journals of Commerce. Moulden is an able, sensitive and sympathetic reporter of capitalism, with broad contacts. His colurnn is worthy quoting – especially, to those of faint heart in and out of the radical movement, those who insist on giving an unlimited letter of credit to capitalism; and to those young friends who have read a lot of Keynes and nothing at all of Marx and who say, like the infant at its mother’s breast: “Mama is the best cook.”
Here is the column:
“To many businessmen walking the tightrope of inflation, the major question of the day is no longer if, but when will the crash come and how far will they be carried in the fall. Few practical men who most concern themselves daily with the struggle to buy materials, arrange for their fabrication and to merchandise the resulting product, can see anything ahead but chaps ...
“They appear to be economically trapped. If they continue to do business they must involve themselves so far ahead at speculative prices in order to insure material supplies that each such protective venture indicates a worse position when the break occurs. Many of our largest firms are wondering how much further they can thus extend themselves without unduly jeopardizing stockholders. Once they become convinced they can no longer take these -risks, they themselves will supply the downward incentive by their very contraction. And they know it well.
“The Marshall Plan seems to insure a relatively high level of exports, for a fair number of years, which, coupled with labor costs and federally supported farm prices, indicate continued high prices. But at some point in this spiral the consumer is going to stop buying ...
“Never have there been so many speculators in all producing centers buying up anything they can get their hands on to hold for a premium later ... Once a price break comes, of course, these speculators will unload heavily, but the legitimate merchandiser and manufacturer will be stuck with his high-priced goods bought to insure supplies and the necessity to get a fair return oil the product made from them.
“If the break is delayed for many months, this trip across the tightrope becomes more and more shaky, the tension mounting with the risk.
“So what executives are asking themselves is how long can this situation go on before someone or something cracks, and the whole edifice comes down? At what point will boards of directors call a halt to over-expansion and competition with speculators and call it a day, starting the contraction that can only result in an enforcedly self-made toboggan?
“None can see any way out of the maze. Even those most inclined to be isolationist and to say we should. sever the world contracts that are contributing to the debacle admit we cannot cut loose from Europe. We must support the rest of the world for fear its economic failure will break us; yet in the process of insuring our safety we may be smashed financially anyhow.”





 


 




Before commenting on the recent drop in grain prices, I’d like to point out a few more examples of the trend toward RISING PRICES for non-agricultural foods, as cited in my February 16 column. The most important of the increases since then has occurred in steel. Carnegie-Illinois, a subsidiary of U.S. Steel, has advanced its price of semi-finished steel by $4.89 a ton. Other steel-makers quickly followed suit. The increases were made quietly and shiftily. What happened was that the steelmakers announced they were shifting certain price quotations from a gross-ton basis (2,240 pounds) to a net-ton basis (2,000 pounds). With this shift to the lighter ton, prices per ton even actually dropped – the only catch being: that there are 240 fewer pounds to the ton. Adjustments in extra charges brought the average price increase for semi-finished steel to from $7 to $10 a ton. Smaller non-integrated steel firms are expected to boost prices on finished steel. Already, other grades of steel are rising. On February 20 Allegheny Ludlum added $10 a ton to the price of its hot and cold rolled carbon strip. Prices of silicon shoots and strip were raised by $15–$25 a ton.
Everyone knows that a price increase in steel is followed shortly by increases in the prices of durable consumer goods – autos, refrigerators, washers, stoves, etc. Philip Reed, chairman of the board of General Electric, has already been quoted by the Wall Street Journal as saying that “there’s no question but what steel price advances will have some effect on the costs of finished goods ... depending on how much steel goes into the end product.”
Other price increases announced since the February 4 grain market break include newsprint, up $10 a ton; worsted wool fabrics, up 8 per cent to 12 per cent; brick, up $3 a thousand; coach fares on the western railroads, up 14 per cent.
Draw your own conclusions as to whether there appears any hope of a significant drop in living costs in the next few months.
The deep swing in grain prices was a shock to everyone, but most of all to the Truman administration. Despite lip service to lower prices, that is just about the last thing Truman wants, at least until after the elections. It was extremely enlightening to watch the day-by-day attempts of the administration to rally the grain market.
Food prices had hardly begun to slide before Secretary of Agriculture Anderson was hinting that maybe the government might lift its grain export goals and begin buying heavily again by spring. A $570 million program for aid to China was whipped together and announced – $130 millions would be used to buy cereals in the next four months, and $193 millions more for wheat or its equivalent in the early months of 1949 – $150 millions for 750,000 bales of cotton, etc. Then Secretary Anderson issued a “warning” that while the world grain situation had improved, it had not yet caught up with the world’s needs. He predicted that next year the U.S. would have to export about 300,000,000 bushels of wheat and 100,000,000 of coarse grains. He further predicted the government would purchase between 30 and 50,000,000 bushels of new crop wheat next June from the early crop movement.
The anonymous experts in the Agriculture Department let it be known that, not only is the price probably higher than before. “In speaking to housewives,” shrewdly observed the Wall Street Journal editorially, “the agricultural experts were slyly speaking to farmers, too. In effect they are advising farmers not to sell their products at today’s ‘low’ prices – wait awhile and prices will soon be up again.”
It is too early, at this writing, to say definitely whether grain prices will pick up again. Farm produce prices in general have risen much higher in proportion to other commodity prices and at a certain stage an adjustment is going to be made. The prices of grains and livestock and dairy produce are going to fall in relation to steel prices, etc., or it could be that the prices of steel, etc., will rise beyond farm prices.
If grain prices show a substantial rally during the spring months, it would not he unprecedented. The same thing occurred in 1920 and again in 1937. In both cases, the rallies were followed by genuine economic collapses on a broad front.
 

Poor Won’t Get a Break
The one economic fact that is sure is that an industrial collapse will occur in the United States that will be heard round the world, and will have unimaginable reverberations, both here and abroad,
In the meantime – a union official would have to have a hole in his head as big as a head to drop or softpedal union wage demands merely because the grain market fell off a bit, from the tenth to the eighth story, let us say. The dollar a week or so that the housewife may temporarily save in some cities on food, she will fork over in higher prices an clothing, rent, transportation, hard consumer goods.
It is the commonest of fallacies to believe that the poor can, in some way, get a break under capitalism. We can’t. In periods of depressions, prices are low, but so are wages, for those who are working; in periods of war, jobs are plentiful, wages are “high,” prices and taxes arc higher, few consumer goods are available. In “good times” consumer goods are available, but at prices beyond the pocketbooks of most. Prices of some goods fall, but other prices rise. A general fall in prices brings not good tidings but only heartaches. Because a general fall in prices could only mean the start of a depression that would visit the miseries of unemployment upon millions of families.
A second common fallacy is to assume that the capitalists or their politicians can “cause” or control a break like that in the grain market. I have heard workers conjecture that the drop in grain prices was engineered by big business to take the wind out of the unions’ drive for third-round wage increases. This is untrue, friends. Big business cannot “control” the market, for more than a few days. Government, even the most powerful in the world, with a world relief program to manipulate, cannot “revive” the market, either, for more than a brief period. Remember how Roosevelt sought to bring back prosperity – and utterly failed.
To assume that the capitalists or their political agents can control capitalism is to give them much too much credit. They cannot. It is an anarchical system, and cannot be harnessed to plans. That is why it must be succeeded by socialism which CAN PLAN FOR HUMANITY.
 





A Slight Touch of Unemployment
Employment dropped 798,000 in January, the Census Bureau reports, carrying the total number of persons holding jobs down to 57,149,000, lowest level since April 1946. The number of jobless rose to more than 2,000,000. In February the trend continued, adding an additional 600,000 to the jobless total to bring: it to 2,600,000. While the general level of the economy remains high, a few soft spots are showing up here and there. In Cleveland, for instance, approximately 4,600 workers in four major companies have been laid off since the first of the year. As a result of a reduction in the work week from five to four days at the American and Cuyahoga works of American Steel & Wire, some 2,000 workers got the gate. White Motor in Cleveland laid off 600, eliminating a third shift and cutting back its second shift to a four-day week. Electric Vacuum Cleaner, a GE subsidiary, knocked off 300 workers in January and an additional 200 on February 26. A sharp decline in orders for both domestic and industrial cleaners was the reason given. Approximately 1,500 persons, or 38 per cent of the working force, have been laid off by Jack & Heinz. The supply of motors has caught up with the demand, the company said ... In Akron, Goodyear has reportedly cut back production 30 per cent at two of its tire plants. Several of the other rubber companies have many of their workers on part time. The Union Pacific Railroad has announced the lay-off of many hundreds of workers as the result of a general decline in business. “Business is falling off. There’s just nothing for the men to do,” a company spokesman said.
A recent N.Y. Journal of Commerce survey reports that business developments in March “tended to strengthen the view that a slow process of erosion is under way as far as business activity is concerned ... Layoffs were reported by a number of important companies – in industry as well as in distribution. Overtime operations are being cut by others. All is not well in such lines as electrical goods, automobile parts, radios, soap, women’s dresses, and some household appliances.”
As business falters slightly in the United States, sentiment for the European Recovery Plan – with its nice juicy orders for thousands of U.S. firms – mounts. And so does the sentiment for war with Russia. Not only because of a slackening in business, of course. But this gives an added fillip to the feelings of business men about aid to Europe and about getting tough with the main imperialist rival, Russia.
 

A Bad Case of Profititis
Now that the yearly corporation statements are being published, one begins to realize the truly enormous extent of big business profiteering in 1947. Nothing like it has ever been seen before, in war or, in peace. Let’s run through a dozen companies.
Remember Union Pacific (see above) which quickly laid off hundreds of workers at the first sign of a falling off in traffic. UP consolidated net income in 1947 totaled nearly $56 million, equal to $23.40 a common share, compared with about $34.2 million in 1946, or $13.60 a share in 1946. Not bad, not bad.
Shell Oil enjoyed a net income in 1947 of $60 million, equal to $4.44 a common share compared with a net of $33 million or $2.44 a share in 1946. Remember how Shell, together with all the other oil companies, upped oil prices about 30 per cent this winter. It paid off.
Net profit – after taxes – of Pittsburgh Plate Glass rose to a record $27 millions in 1947, compared to $17 millions in 1946.
Net income of Yale & Towne more than doubled in 1947, amounting to $2.8 million compared with $1 million the previous year.
Coca-Cola announced record earnings in 1947 of $31.2 millions, from $23.5 millions in 1946.
Electric Auto-Lite’s earnings rose 163 per cent in the year to $10.7 millions, compared with $4.0 in 1946.
Earnings of the P. Lorillard Co., manufacturers of Old Golds, were the best in ten years;
Earnings of Win. Wrigley Jr., Co., rose 30.5 per cent to $8.5 millions, compared with $6.5 millions in 1946.
Celanese Corporation profits in 1947 showed a 50 per cent increase in net income, to $24.1 millions compared with $16 million a year earlier.
That company spent $36.4 million in 1947 for expansion and plant modernization.
Eastman Kodak reports 1947 output, sales and earning all at new highs. Earnings amounted to $3.46 a common share, against $2.85 a year more than 250 per cent above the 1946 earnings of $8.8 millions.
General Electric’s net profits last year were the largest in its 56-year history. (This was the company that patted itself so resoundingly on the back for paring prices on a few items.) Net profits of GE totaled $95.2 million, compared with $43 million In 1946.
Net income of Colgate-Palmolive-Peet last year totaled $19 million, compared with $14.4 the previous year. The net income was AFTER appropriation of $3.7 million for the reserve against inventory price declines. Indeed, the. profits reported from other companies also DO NOT INCLUDE THE ENORMOUS SUMS SET ASIDE TO HELP THE FIRMS WEATHER HARD TIMES A-COMING.
 

Economic Notes
Despite Doctor Kildare and his professional colleagues, a 40-year-old man’s life expectancy has lengthened only four years since 1789, the Northwestern National Life Insurance. Co. reports. “However, the life expectancy of the average male child at birth has increased from only 28 years in American revolutionary times to over 64 years today ...”
More American families are living “doubled up” this year than ever before, the Institute of Life Insurance has reported. Surveys made some months ago show that 2,764,000 married couples, or 8.3 per cent of all couples in private households, were sharing the living accommodations of other persons in April 1947. This is a new high and represents a gain of 918,000 couples living “doubled up” since April 1940, when the number was 1,844,000 or 6.5 per cent of all married couples in private households. These figures give the lie to the real estate interests who claim that the housing shortage is due to more people “spreading out” in more rooms ...
 





Diamonds on the Sidewalk, No One Picks Them Up. Why?
The brokers, the Wall Street letter writers, the financial commentators cannot understand it. They shake their heads and mutter to themselves. There are precious stones glittering up from the sidewalks at the base of the canyons in Wall Street and LaSalle Street: – and no one stoops to pick them up.
The diamonds are the current prices of the stocks in American enterprise. They are the richly-embossed certificates that epitomize private enterprise in the fortress of world capitalism. The various industrial enterprises which issued the stocks are coining money as they never before have in all history. The stocks are paying phenomenal dividends. The financial reserves behind the stocks are stupendous. Behind the stocks are billions of dollars of wealth, all the so-very-wonderful “know how” of the go-getting capitalists, an Army and Navy that span the earth and command the air over the earth, an imperial government in Washington that stands at the peak of its power, dominating the modern world to a greater degree than did Rome in its grandeur the small world of yesteryear. People won’t buy its stocks. Why?
Once upon a time, in the days between the two world wars, the speculators and brokers and other honest businessmen thought stocks were worth buying if they sold at no more than ten times their annual earnings. But look! Today there are stocks, good stocks, in famous companies, selling at no more than five – or four – or three, or even two times their annual earnings. Still no one buys.
Here is Glidden, purveyor of paint and soybeans, earning $7.67 a year, selling at only 23½ – Lukens Steel, earning $8.92, selling at 22¾ – American Smelting, earning $12, selling at 51½ – nice substantial share of Goodyear Tire, earning $12, selling at 42 – the king of all the trusts, U. S. Steel, earning $12.50 and selling at less than six times that amount, 73½.
Perhaps you are avid for yet greater returns on your investment. Take the plunge with the packing trust. You know how meat prices are. Here’s Cudahy earning a rich $4.32 on a share you can pick up for about $12; and Armour, earning $4.85 and selling for 133/8.
Does the sugar market interest you? Here’s Cuban-Atlantic Sugar, selling for only 18½ and earning $10.68. Double your money in 21 months on that one. Cuban-American is almost as good, earning $6.13 on a 13¾ price.
For a red-hot daily special, there is, Botany Mills. Botany earned $16.50 in 1947 on a share of stock that sells for only 22. Why, you could almost get back your investment on Botany in a year, and still have the stock.
WHY DON’T YOU DO IT?
Don’t you want to get out of the working class and be a capitalist. Here’s your chance. Red-hot tips from Ranger’s dope sheet. You’re entitled to something substantial on the dollar you pay for a year of Labor Action. Invest $1,000 today, and then in ten years, retire. Tell the foreman to go way back and sit down. Go to sunny California with your family and relax in the sunshine. Travel round the world. Be in the big money.
Go on. You can’t lose. Why, Truman’s economic advisers have given us a glimpse of the nice, cozy life in the good old U.S.A. ten years hence. Surely you believe the President of the United States. There’ll be exactly 64,000,000 jobs. People will spend at a rate more than 25 per cent above the present. There’ll be a third more goods and services. Cities and highways will have been rebuilt. There’ll be TVA’s on the Columbia, St. Lawrence, Missouri rivers. New schools. A million new houses a year. The steel industry will have expanded 20 per cent, the petroleum industry, 50 per cent.
Perhaps you are one of those tough-minded people who doesn’t believe it all. Too bad, my friend, you’re missing out on a good thing.
But then, there must be people who believe in the future of American capitalism. Philip Murray, for instance. He insists that the workers support one of capitalism’s candidates. William Green, and Dan Tobin, and A.F. Whitney must believe, for they all tell the rest of us to vote for Truman. Hutcheson of the Carpenters Union must, too, because he assures the workers that the other old capitalist party has a rosy future in store for us. And unlike you, perhaps, these men have p-1-e-n-t-y of money. They all make twenty grand or more a year. Why don’t THEY pick up stocks at these bargain-basement prices? Or why doesn’t James Burnham? There’s a man with faith in the future of American capitalism. Or Henry Wallace? Wallace clears over $50,000 a year on his corn processing plant, he is a capitalist, he has dough to spare, and he says the system has a future. Right now, he says the future may not be as rosy under Harry as it would be under Henry, but still he says it has a future.
 

They Just Don’t Believe It
Their actions give the lie to their words. Not a one of them believes in the future of capitalism. NOT ONE. Not the brokers, the financial commentators, the labor lieutenants of capitalism, the politicians of capitalism, the money hoarders. They wouldn’t give you a plugged nickel that the system would be anything at all worth living in EVEN FIVE YEARS FROM NOW. Because if they did have the faith in their hearts, they’d be picking up those stocks in a hurry. And stock prices would be up to “normal,” where they were between the two great wars.
You and I aren’t the only ones who see this and say this. In the February 2 Time, Thomas W. Phelps, a partner in Francis I. duPont & Co., a commanding figure in Wall Street, says it: “Many Americans, despite their dislike of Communism,” he says, “lack enough faith in capitalism to risk their money on its ability to produce sustained prosperity. Many others ... lack not faith but cash to buy stocks after paying record high taxes and living costs.”
The rich haven’t the faith. The scissorbills haven’t the cash.
Time quoted another expert as confessing he is “baffled.”
J.A. Livingston, writing his Washington business column in the Chicago Daily News, says “it’s the kind of problem that makes you stop, think and shake your head.”
The poor stock market can’t get anywhere, not even in the wake of all the fine, flowery New Year’s forecasts for 1948, he says. The news can’t explain it, he says. There was a fine earnings report by U.S. Steel, he says. There were individual increases, stock splitting, he says.
Yes, it should make every one of us stop and think.
 

   The weekly rail unions’ newspaper Labor in its Canadian column of the August 28 issue headlines a story: “Socialism seems far off in Canada, except to the CCF.” The story declared that the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation [Canada’s socialist party] at its recent national convention approved a platform proposing more socialism than ever before and more than the socialist labor government in England had tried to put into effect; and Labor mentioned Canadian newspaper opinion that “there is no sign the CCF will get a chance to govern Canada and carry out its program.” The Canadian newspapers are wrong. The Canadian economy is due to enter a crisis of the most far-reaching proportions. Socialism is bound to appear as an increasingly attractive program to the people of that nation. Canada’s economic dilemma and foreign-exchange crisis are dealt with in a 28-page report just released by the National Foreign Trade Council. Though the council’s economists, like good capitalist employees, do not draw the necessary conclusions, they are all implicit in the statistics presented. Canada’s industrial growth in the last two decades has been phenomenal. By 1944, manufacturing accounted for almost 60 per cent of the national economic product, as contrasted with 7.5 per cent for the forest industries, 7 per cent for mining and mineral production, and approximately 23 per cent for agriculture. Between 1939 and 1947, 5,000 new companies were added to Canadian industry; the volume of machinery and related capital equipment built in 1947 was almost four times that of 1939.  Conditions Now Different Most of this development of Canadian industry has been financed by U.S. big business. By 1945, American capital invested in Canada amounted to $4,982 million, accounting for about 70 per cent of total foreign investments in the country. Of the income from American direct investments abroad, U.S. business derived about 27 per cent from Canada in the period from 1940–1946. Since 1946, however, the amount of annual new U.S. investments in Canadian enterprises has sharply declined because the conditions under which earlier investments were made no longer prevail. What has happened is that the imperial preference system, under the hammer blows of the recent war and the ruination of England and Europe, has broken down. Big business in the U.S. launched subsidiaries in Canada for one main reason, the assumption that the commonwealth and imperial market would require increasing quantities of goods of Canadian manufacture. Expanded industrial investment by U.S. banks and industries in Canada has rested on the British preferential system and on the convertibility of sterling obtained from exports to other British countries. Today sterling is no longer freely convertible. A vital market for Canadian goods is fast disappearing.  Foreign Trade Difficulties As the NFTC study reports: “A further complication in this situation has been that under the protection of the imperial preference system, much of the industrial development of the country has resulted in duplication of manufacturing facilities in the United States. Often subsidiaries are competitors of the parent companies in this country (the U.S.) developed because of tariff protection advantages ... Relatively heavy capital investment has been made necessary in many cases, where a small expansion of a plant in the U.S. would have been sufficient to fill Canadian requirements ... “A fundamental change has occurred in the Canadian industrial economy. Exports to imperial markets on which many industries have relied historically have declined relatively, at a time that much the greater part of required imports have had to come from hard currency areas [i.e., the U.S. – J.R.] necessary for the continued functioning of the industrial plant.” Canada is neck-deep in foreign exchange difficulties. “With a total foreign trade of $74 billion in the period 1918–1947, exports to the U.S. were valued at $16 billion, about 38 per cent of all Canadian shipments.” But 71 per cent of Canadian imports, or roughly $23 billion, were of American origin. “The most distinctive feature of the post-war years has been the marked accentuation in imports from the U.S., the inability of the British economy to supply needed industrial goods, and the non-convertibility of sterling. Despite an export balance of $237,800,000 in Canada’s visible foreign trade in 1947, a debit balance of $918,100,000 was registered in trade with the U.S.”  Rough Time Ahead Thanks in part to the extremely high prices charged Canada by U.S. big business, Canadian holdings of gold and U.S. dollars declined $743 million in 1947. Dividend payments from Canada to the U.S. were $182 million in 1947 alone. In a desperate attempt to stem the tide, the Canadian government, last November imposed severe restrictions on imports from the U.S. This has hardly solved the problem, but instead has created two more problems. The restrictions “reduce the volume of American exports and thereby lower the quantity of products available to the Canadian consumer. Inflationary pressures are increased and the pace of industrial development retarded.” What does it all boil down to? This: For decades U.S. business, by launching subsidiaries in Canada, has smuggled under the umbrella of Britain’s preference system. But the umbrella no longer protects. Currencies throughout the empire are no longer freely convertible, and progressively lose ground to the U.S. dollar. The barriers to the conduct of multilateral trade both within and outside the imperial market grow more numerous. The market for Canadian industry is fast drying up. Capital has ceased to flow into the country and, indeed, is flowing outward. The Canadian market itself can absorb but a fraction of the goods which the Canadian economy can produce. Canada’s industrial structure faces ruin. World capitalism is like a man doomed with cancer extending throughout the organism.   



A few weeks ago in Chicago the armed forces’ Industrial
 College held a special, semi-secret two-week industrial and economic
 mobilization course for big businessmen.
Only one newspaper, the Chicago Journal of Commerce,
 covered the event, and that paper was permitted to discuss only
 certain portions of the information divulged. Interesting facts about
 the plans of industrial and military men for the coming war were
 divulged in the Journal’s series.
The student body consisted of 140 “civilian conferees”
 – executives from seven banks, two large merchandising firms,
 four utilities, five railroads and 80 manufacturing and other
 companies, together with seven universities. About 140 high-ranking
 reserve officers also attended.
Competition among industrialists to attend was reported “very
 keen,” the reason no doubt being that attendance would place a
 halo of “know how” around the persons and companies
 represented, and would also give them “connections” with
 the nation’s military leaders in charge of placing war orders.
It is significant that the favored companies were instructed to
 send not their chiefs but the “heirs apparent” in the
 next decade. This might indicate that the U.S. political and military
 leaders do not contemplate any immediate armed conflict with Stalin’s
 government. 
Tooling Up for War
Army lecturers revealed that the productive capacity of 7,780
 American manufacturing plants had already been tentatively allocated
 to one or more of the three military services in the program of
 economic mobilization which began last winter. Allocation of the
 principal production facilities of some 11,000 additional factories
 is in process, with the overall goal embracing 22,000 establishments.
The allocation process includes a concrete agreement providing for
 the major part of a plant’s industrial capacity to produce a
 specific item of munitions at a specific rate of output, according to
 the Journal. The corps of engineers is planning requirements
 for a period described as M-Day plus two years, and is vigorously
 pushing the allocation program through six area procurement offices.
In preparation for the coming war, the Army-Navy Machine Total
 Committee has set itself the objective of stockpiling 182,000 tools
 as a national reserve. In addition to the equipment already acquired,
 the military has impounded in cosmoline the war production machine
 tools of 161 large plants.
(Naturally these war preparations do not bring sobs from the
 machine-tool builders. The last war saved their financial necks. In
 the depression years their annual sales went down to only
 $22,000,000. By 1942 sales had increased 65-fold, to $1,320,000,000,
 and in 1947 were at a level above $300,000,000.)
One of the most interesting talks must have been that made by
 Lt.-Col. James Massey, He warned his audience that if the armed
 forces and industry consumed as much of the nation’s natural
 resources in another war as they did in the Second World War, “we’ll
 be bankrupt. We wasted as much as we used.” 
Bedrock Economy
If and when the United States is called upon to fight another
 major war, the American standard of living will be cut to bedrock, he
 said. Massey and other brass made it clear that the civilian economy
 would take second place in the war. Commander W.T. Greenhalgh said
 that the conversion to “bedrock economy” would be “quick,
 brutal and absolute.”
The lectures on manpower were not reported, but they must have
 hinted at plans ominous for the future of the labor movement and of
 civil liberties.
Apparently, the bankers, industrialists, politicos and military
 men are seriously concerned about the possibility of a “collapse
 of the home front” in the event the nation suffers the rigors
 of atomic war. Commander Gold said that present planning was directed
 solely toward victory, “with the single reservation that the
 home front must be guarded against collapse, as the civilian economy
 of Germany collapsed in earlier wars.”
That is the classic position of the capitalist class in wartime:
 Victory if possible, but by all means hold the lid down at home.
As in the last war, it is probable that the political leaders of
 the nation will not be able to apply a rigid, preconceived plan
 designed to strap the people into the strait-jacket of war. Rather it
 will be an inch-by-inch affair, with democratic rights and civil
 liberties being progressively withdrawn. At the rate events are
 moving – Taft-Hartleyism, Goldsborough injunctions,
 red-baiting, the draft, both parties committed to universal military
 training – the process has already been set in motion. If the
 course of affairs is not challenged sharply in the near future by the
 creation of a national labor party, the worst of the new plans will
 be able to be pushed through.
 




Thanks largely to the absence of a national labor party in the field, the 1948 Presidential campaign has to date been one of the most insipid and uninteresting in the nation’s history. Local columnists throughout the nation report that popular interest in the elections is at a low ebb. The only incidents that provoke much discussion are those involving the violence against Henry Wallace by Ku Klux elements in the South, the stoning of Progressive Party candidates in Illinois, and the crooked deals by both Democratic and Republican machines to keep the minor parties off the ballot.
Among the masses of voters there is little enthusiasm for either Dewey or Truman. Neither of the two candidates, in their current speaking tours, has indicated that he would behave any differently in the White House in the next four years than he has always behaved throughout his political career. Neither has indicated that the people have anything more to hope for from the government after the elections than continued war-mongering, continued higher taxes, an intensified crack-down on labor, more red-baiting, nothing new on housing.
The only true words spoken by either candidate were those uttered by Governor Dewey aboard his campaign train that “beginning next January 20 we will have the biggest, toughest, most successful unsnarling, unraveling house cleaning that our government ever got.”
 
Not Kidding About One Thing
For the American people, THAT will be the end result of the campaign. All the energies of the Republican Party are devoted to replacing the Democratic Party’s control of the executive branch of the government, while in other respects leaving matters exactly as they were. The whole sham campaign aims at the substitution of one clique of the ruling class for another.
Dewey wasn’t kidding when he promised to clean house. Republican camp-followers have been out of office for 16 years, and they all have their tongues out, panting for the jobs of incumbent Democrats. And they’ll get many of those jobs. Democratic office-holders who think they are protected by civil service had best prepare for some shocks. A Republican, Rees of Kansas, is head of the House civil service committee, and Rees’ party will find all sorts of ways to get rid of government employees suspected of partisanship to the rival party.
Dewey has shown himself to be even more platitudinous than one would suspect. Here is a sample of his recent discussion of domestic issues delivered in Illinois:
“As a nation we are troubled today by many things and we must remove many fears. We are troubled by high prices and we must end the maladjustments which cause them. We need more houses for our people. We must widen the opportunities of our youth. We must increase the security of our older people. We must protect our enterprise system from monopoly while encouraging free and fuller production for the benefit of all our citizens,” etc., etc.
 
Truman Does No Better
Such empty generalities are downright comic.
Truman does no better. Like Roosevelt before him, he holds up the scarecrow figure of Herbert Hoover in a high stiff collar, shakes it in front of the nation, and warns that a Republican victory will bring another economic crash.
Both the AFL and CIO like to wear a politically neutral tint. In principle, the high officials of these federations hold in horror all definiteness in respect of political views or conceptions of the world order. Most of the union officialdom rejects with loathing the idea of a labor party.
These people, you see, are “practical.” But they are not even smart at practical politics. It must be clear to every reader that Dewey is a cinch to be the next President, and that he will carry into office a Republican majority of Congress. A really practical politician would string along with the New York governor.
But not the AFL nor the CIO. The AFL after adjournment of Its recent executive board meeting in Chicago, reconstituted itself as a committee to re-elect Truman. The CIO officialdom too is behind Truman. In Illinois, the CIO Political Action Committee has issued a list of indorsed candidates which with but two exceptions were the Democratic national, state and Congressional tickets. Presumably the CIO in other sections is doing the same thing.
The PAC says that the Taft-Hartley law is the key test – conveniently overlooking the fact that that measure became law with the active support of a MAJORITY of the Democrats in Congress.
The Republican Senator from Illinois, Brooks, slyly observed the other day that Truman’s attacks on the Taft-Hartley act “constitute an indictment of the 126 Democrats whose votes for the bill made possible its enactment ... When the 80th Congress enacted the measure into law, we Republicans were joined by 20 Democratic senators and 106 Democratic representatives,” Brooks said. “Without them, the Republican bloc in both branches of Congress could not have passed the bill over the Presidential veto ... The President is only embarrassing a great many of his own party members.”
 
Stop This Sham Battle
It is clear that the margin of difference between the Republican and Democratic parties is narrower than at any time in history. It is likewise clear that labor’s influence with both wings of the Big Business political machine is declining to the vanishing point.
This explains the widespread apathy surrounding the 1948 elections. Voters generally reject Wallace because of the Stalinists controlling his movement. Voters feel they have no place to go.
The United States will never be as ripe for the building of a labor party as it will be in the coming months and years. It will require such a labor party to bring meaning into the nation’s politics, and to bring hope to the people, whose apathy will turn to anger once they see that a Republican administration offers them nothing more than have 16 years of Democratic rule.
Today, the American workers constitute the largest and mightiest organization in the country, an army of more than 15,000,000 union members. Why should they be without a political party of their own, a program of their own?
The old capitalist parties have not protected labor. They have united to shackle the unions, to deny the people decent housing, to send prices sky-high, to involve the nation in war and warlike skirmishes. Labor must protect itself politically, and this requires that labor build its own party.
 




All the wastes traceable to operations of a capitalist system, wastes which drain the wealth of the world at a hundred thousand points, will never be uncovered this side of a socialist overturn which will throw open the books of the capitalist monopolies to the public.
There is one outrageous source of capitalist waste which has momentarily been spotlighted recently, and which deserves to be widely known among the working class, particularly among those working on the railroads. I refer to the recent rulings of the Federal Trade Commission outlawing the basing point system, when used to further monopoly, and the three decisions of the Supreme Court upholding those rulings. The essence of the matter is as depicted below:
For decades many of America’s heavy industries have been locked in a conspiracy to sell their goods on a basing point system. Under such a system, a consumer in San Francisco will pay the same price for a load of steel as a consumer in Pittsburgh, let us say, even though the steel is made in Pittsburgh, and the Pittsburgh consumer drove up to the Pittsburgh steel mill with his own truck and hauled the steel away. In some industries, the conspirators have used a multiple basing point system, with several shipping points throughout the country designated as bases.
In general, basing points have been located at the plants of the large producers, who use the basing point system to maintain and strengthen their monopoly of the market. The smaller producers have been located at a considerable distance from basing points. Under these circumstances, the big producer at the base has been able to sell as profitably next door to his smaller rival, perhaps 2,000 miles away, as at his own mill door. The small non-base producer, on the other hand, has been handicapped in selling toward the base by the fact that, as his freight expenses increased, his net profit fell. All markets have been open to the big producer at the base. Only local markets have been open to the producer away from the base.
 

Originated in Railroad Conspiracy
Under the system, consumers have been paying fictitious freight rates, or “phantom” freight, as it is commonly called. For instance, the Federal Trade Commission has estimated that in Chicago, the fictitious freight upon a ton of steel worth $30, produced 20 miles away in Gary but priced as though it had been shipped from the basing point of Pittsburgh, was $7.60: in Duluth, $13.20.
But there is one aspect of the basing point system that is known hardly at all to the general public, and that is that the system resulted from a conspiracy among the nation’s railroads and the nation’s heavy industries, and that the basing point prices were based on RAILROAD freight rates. When customers have used lower-cost forms of transportation, such as by barge or truck, they have still had to pay the higher RAILROAD freight rate.
The very essence of the basing point system has been its encouragement to an extravagant interpenetration of markets, involving excessive cross-hauling from one end of the country to the other. This has been so because the system deprives buyers of any incentive to purchase from nearby mills rather than distant mills.
Do you understand now how the railroads gained under the conspiracy. Supposing there were two steel mills, one in Chicago and one in Pittsburgh, and two customers, in the same two cities. With the basing point system, a Chicago customer would often buy the Pittsburgh steel, and the Pittsburgh customer the Chicago steel. The railroads of course gained from this “featherbedding.”
The FTC estimated in 1932 that unnecessary transportation of this sort in the cement industry cost more than 24 cents a barrel, about 20 per cent of the total costs of producing and selling the cement.
One is absolutely safe in assuming that the same waste occurred in the case of iron and steel, corn syrup and dozens of other industrial products.
As Charles M. Schwab, the former steel magnate, said in 1928:
“It is manifestly uneconomic for a steel manufacturer in Chicago to ship 100,000 tons of steel to Pittsburgh at a time when a Pittsburgh manufacturer is shipping a like quantity of like material from Pittsburgh to Chicago ... It should be obvious that this waste is paid for jointly although perhaps indirectly by the consumer as well as the producer of steel products.”
 

Trusts Have Been “Bust” Before!
The pious railroad lords who have been handed tens of millions of ton-miles of freight under the basing point monopoly are the same men who dare to accuse the railroad unions of “featherbedding” when the unions insist on establishing minimum standards of safety in operating the railroads.
The real featherbedders are the capitalist monopolists, who by their economically senseless but personally profitable wastes, running to monstrous proportions, dissipate the wealth of the nation and of the world.
At this point, the liberal with the penetrating eyes will proclaim: Ah, but the FTC and the Supreme Court have now outlawed the wasteful basing point system. This proves that the government can clean up capitalism and make it work for the benefit of the people.
Preposterous. The railroads and the steel trust and the cement trust have just begun to fight. They have set up a Congressional committee headed by Senator Capehart which will take “testimony” from businessmen on the basing point decisions. The lobbies and agents of the trusts are going up and down the land organizing the fight to induce Congress to pass a law protecting the basing point system. In the meantime, the steel trust and other industries have used the court decisions as an excuse to raise prices still further, under the fraudulent claim that the court decisions required such price increases.
You can bet your bottom dollar that capitalist monopoly will not cease its monopolistic behaviour just because a few government bureaucrats, in an election year, take a swipe at the trusts. The politicians have been busting the trusts since 1890. The trusts are flourishing as never before.
 




Back in January, 1940, the Polish government, then in exile in France and under the domination of Britain, published a notice that owing to the exigencies of war, payment of interest on all Polish loans would be suspended for the duration of the war, but that the government recognized its obligation to foreign bondholders and had firm intentions to resume payments. The other day the current Polish government, owned by the Stalinists, published a little ad in the Wall Street Journal, “reaffirming” that earlier declaration, and proposing that negotiations for the resumption of payment should begin next year ... Governments come arid go, but the American bondholders’ interest payments continue.
 
Is a Bust Coming?
Banks throughout the country, expecting a bust soon, are tightening up on credit, shortening terms of loans, inching up interest rates, and stamping “rejected” on more and more loan applications. They say they’re concerned chiefly with what they call “over-extension” of inventories – what you and I, dear reader, would describe as “too many companies holding too much goods off the market in the plot to keep goods scarce and prices high.” in short, the banks fear that the pipelines from the manufacturers to the retailers are so full they are bound to burst soon.
The number of unemployed in October, according to the Bureau of the Census, was 1,950,000, a decrease of 5 per cent from September, but 27 per cent above a year ago ... The Department of Agriculture acknowledges that world wool stocks stood at 5 billion pounds on June 30, more than three times the pre-war stock. Of this year’s 5 billion pound carryover, the British government owns 81 per cent, the U.S. government, 19 per cent.
*
Back to Normal
Millions of bushels of potatoes are going to freeze this winter, though there are millions of underfed Americans and tens of millions of starving persons in Europe and Asia. Blame it on the irrational capitalist system. The Department of Agriculture’s price-support program guarantees the farmer an abnormally high return for his produce and places a premium on over-production. Warehouses in the potato states are bulging and there is no room for the spuds, which are piled in pits, barns or any place else the farmer can pile them. Nearly all the potatoes not in storage will be rotten when the loans come due In April 1947. The government will take the loss. The government price-support program, granted the farmers to whip up their enthusiasm for the recent war, must be carried on for two years After the end of the war, which officially is not yet over. Piles of potatoes as high as houses are reported exposed to the northern winter in many states.
*
Back Wages Due
There is about $6 billion due United States workers for back wages, as a result of the U.S. Supreme Court’s recent portal-to-portal pay decisions. One such suit pending is that of the CIO Steel Workers against U.S. Steel, for $300,000,000 ... But Big Business is quietly preparing to use its government to get out of paying the workers what is due them. The labor legislative committee of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce held a special session November 21 in Washington, laid plans to rush legislation through the 80th Congress that would overide the court’s ruling and amend the wage and hour statutes to block a pile of lawsuits filed by unions. The $6 billion figure was presented to the Chamber of Commerce on the basis of confidential reports from leading industries, which indicated that many unions have valid cases under the court’s ruling in the Mount Clemens Pottery Case.
 
*
Items in Passing
Price Administrator Paul Porter announces he has taken “a strong stand” against any general rent ceiling increase at this time. Now we are doggone sure a rent increase is coming. Everytime he has taken one of his “strong stands,” prices have shot up.
The distillers have grown hog-fat during the war, because they were making high profits two ways, on their liquor business and on producing alcohol for the war program. And what rotten likker they’re making nowadays! Seven years ago, at a hearing before the Temporary National Economic Committee, officials of the Big Four –  Schenley, Seagram, National and Hiram Walker – testified that the best whiskey in the world could be made for 29 cents a gallon. Today you are paying $6.75 and more for a fifth of a gallon of bourbon, and about $4 for the blonds. There’s more profit in the blends, and most distillers are now peddling the stuff.
Monopolistic trends have grown tremendously in the war years. Schenley, for instance, went out to California and bought up a good share of the wine industry, Roma, Cresta Blanca, and others; went to Milwaukee and bought a brewery; bought out some of the European liquor factories; is now considering going into the food industry. In the fiscal year ending August 31, Schenley established new sales and net earnings records. Net income after a special contingency reserve of $1 million rose to $49 million, or $13.64 a share, against $6.43 a year ago. The company gathered in two more Kentucky distilleries in the year, too.
 
Prices Are Still Going Up
On November 20 nylons and rayon hose went up 25–33 per cent; batteries went up 15–20 per cent; copper, up 2 cents a pound; sugar, up 36.5–40 cents a 100 pounds. Other recent price rises: Industrial alcohol, up 1.8 cents a gallon; paper prices, up $20–$25 a ton; cocoa, butter, fowl up; livestock prices only 50 cents below the all-time high; some cotton goods up as much as 50 per cent over old ceiling prices ... But, thank God, the price of Adam hats has come down to $8.50. Now, if all of us spent all our income on hats ...
 




The international lamp cartel, headed by General Electric Co., one of the Morgan properties, has purposely lowered the quality of light bulbs and shortened their life, in order to sell more bulbs and make bigger profits. This disclosure is made by the Twentieth Century Fund, which quotes from some interesting correspondence. One General Electric executive, for instance, wrote to another, saying: “The constant process of reduction of lamp life that we have been carrying on has kept the volume of business up.” ...
In a memorandum from a G.E. engineer to another official, it is stated:
“Two or three years ago we proposed a reduction in the life of flashlight lamps from the old basis, on which one lamp was supposed to outlast three batteries, to a point where the lamp and one battery would have about the same life. The battery manufacturers went part way with us on this and accepted lamps of two battery lives instead of three. We have been continuing our efforts to bring about the one battery life lamps. If this were done, it would increase our flashlight business about 60 per cent.” ...
An electrician tells me that another trick of the lamp trust is to market Christmas tree lights, bunched in eights in such a way as to guarantee that the lamps will be ruined in one season, thus making it necessary to purchase a new light string. One way to get around this trick is to string three or four more bulbs onto your tree lights. All will last longer ...
But to return to our theme: What do you think of a social system whose rulers deliberately cheapen and worsen their goods so that they will wear out, all to the end that the profits may be larger? Short-lived lamp bulbs, automobiles that will only last a few years, houses that gape and settle before their occupants hardly get in the door, shoddy woolens and clothing, shoes that come apart in wet weather, adulterated foods and drinks. The list of capitalist crimes in this particular category is endless. A socialist society would have no such incentive for cheating and rooking the people. On the contrary, it would have every reason to make everything of top quality, with an abundance for everyone.
 
Who Owns General Motors?
It has come to our attention that the General Motors Corporation is peddling a lot of pious baloney in its house organs, addressed to its workers, calculated to make them believe that that fortress of the duPonts is a “democratic” institution, because, don’t you see, its stock is widely held. Everyone in the financial world knows that G.M. is one of the duPont enterprises. Here is what the National Resources Committee study of the Structure of the American Economy had to say about this segment of America’s 60 Families, back in 1939:
“The duPont group comprises only four companies, three industrial and one bank, but they are all in the top rank with respect to size. Like the Rockefellers, the duPonts exercise control through substantial minority stockholdings. Theirs is a compact, closely knit group. The k.ey company is E.I. duPont deNemours, which the duPonts control through a family holding company, the Christiana Securities Co. The latter owns about 25 per cent of the voting stock of E.I. duPont deNemours, which in turn owns approximately the same proportionate interest in General Motors Corporation. DuPonts and duPont representatives dominate the management of both companies. The third industrial in this group Is U.S. Rubber Co., in which another duPont family holding company, called Rubber Securities Co., owns about 20 per cent voting power. The duPont bank is the National Bank of Detroit, on the board of which sit five General Motors officials.”
Industrial assets of the duPont group in 1939 were valued at $2,232,000,000, but of course have grown c.onsiderably since 1940.
 
“New Money” Preferred Stock
On November 27 a nationwide group of investment bankers, led by Morgan Stanley & Co. offered the largest single “new money” preferred stock issue in the history of American finance – General Motors’ offering of $100 million new preferred stock, at $100 a share. The Wall Street Times reported that “Charitable funds and banks purchasing for the account of trusts managed by them will rank high on the list of subscribers. Three of New York’s ‘Big Five’ life insurance companies will be listed as buyers. Other probable buyers were said to include universities and schools.” ... But never forget –  no matter how widely G.M. stock is held, control is still tightly held by the duPonts, who skim the cream off for themselves.
*
Chrysler Corporation has increased prices on its entire car line, from $8 to $104 ... Studebaker announced increases ranging from $32 to $64 ... Hudson Motor Car Co. announced increases of $60–$90 on all models ... Kaiser-Frazer has raised prices of its Kaiser auto by $94 to $1,739, and of its Frazer car by $124 to $1,919 ... General Electric recently increased prices on its home appliances, without even a public announcement. It acknowledged the move only after word had leaked through distributors.
 
The Landlord Breed
A Chicago landlord, writing in the November 29 Wall Street Journal, says he’s worried about the fact that the “strike bug” appears to have bitten some landlords. He was referring to the action taken by his fellow parasites in many parts of the country whereby vacated apartments were held off the market. He suggested a slicker way to cheat the homeless. The landlord, he writes, “should have enough common sense to send the prospective tenant to the OPA rent control office for written permission by the OPA to pay the owner a reasonable increase (in rent). The OPA will not grant the permission ... but this denial by the OPA will make a lot of GIs and other prospective tenants very angry at the OPA. Landlords might try this method which will prove very bitter to the OPA, but will gain a great many friends for the owner.” ... And, he should have added, will still keep the vacated apartment off the market, leaving tens of thousands of GIs and other prospective tenants homeless.
 
Nationalization in England
From London come reports of sharp rises in the prices of rail and highway transport shares following publication of the transport nationalization terms of the Labor Party government. All transportation in England is due for nationalization on January 1, 1948. The nationalization bill states that undertakings will be compensated for on the net value of shares, plus extra compensation in some cases. That’s right up the alley of the wealthy British owners, who have already earned many times their original investments. The fair way would be to nationalize the railroads without a penny of compensation to the owners. The Labor Party, in its present condition, would never take such a radical step.
 
Tweedledum And Tweedledee
President Truman is vying with the Republican Party to see which can cut the federal budget deeper. The joker for the people is that with both boss parties vigorously supporting a program of Imperialist expansion, no budget cut can be very deep. Truman contemplates a budget of $37 billion for the 1948 fiscal year, with the Republicans talking of a $29 billion budget. Here are some items that will not be cut by either party: Interest on the national debt to the bankers, $5 billions; tax refunds to Big Business, $2 billions; military, $10–12 billions; general government costs, about $1.9 billions; veterans’ benefits, about 7 billions.
 




Much as I dislike intruding on the reader’s happiness during this joyous Christmas season, I feel I must burden you with a tale that will tear your bleeding heart right out of your breast. It will make ”tears as large as grapefruit course down your cheeks,” as Comrade Shachtman would say.
The story has to do with the sorry plight of “Mr. X,” and is based oh “the first of several interviews about the personal budgetary problems of families in all income classes.” It appeared in the December 18 Wall Street Journal. If you can read it without audible moans escaping from your grief-compressed lips, you are a case-hardened scoundrel. Here we go, for the story of how “Mr. X barely manages to make ends meet on $45,000 a year.”
Mr. X, it is related, ”derives about half his income from his salary as president and general manager of a West Coast firm employing over 250 men. The remainder comes from income on his investments. A man in his mid-forties, progressive and a hard worker (see bit about his club-life below), he typifies thousands of other corporation executives over the land.”
Mr. X lives with his wife and three young children “in a 14-room house on one acre of ground in an upper-class San Francisco suburb.” From this description, you can immediately see that he is ill-housed. Frank Lloyd Wright, the great architect, has recommended that each family have at least one acre for each member thereof.
Mrs. X, it appears, receives for household allowances the piddling sum of $1,250 monthly. ”Before the war,” Mr. X recalls nostalgically, ”it ran to about $700 a month.” Mrs. X has the devil’s own time getting the housework done. To help her she has a cook, a governess, a second maid and a gardener, whose wages come to $460 a month. ”Before the war we paid $75 a month for a cook,” says Mr. X. ”Now it’s $150. We paid $90 a month for a nurse then; now it’s $160. Second maid and gardener each draw $75 a month.”
But that isn’t all. “You’ve got to remember we have to feed these people three times a day,” continues Mr. X. “With food prices where they are that comes to a tidy sum each month.” Mr. X’s sums are always tidy.
So the cost of keeping Mr. X’s home in running condition adds up to $15,000 a year. He pays, he says, $20,000 a year in taxes, leaving only $10,000 to go on.
Mr. X, being R-I-C-H, is naturally burdened with club dues. He belongs to five clubs, three in the city ”because of his business connections, and two country clubs.” Dues amount to $1,100. In addition he has to figure on $160 a month for the four months in mid-year when family social life revolves in a degree around one of the two country clubs. His ”golfing club” costs, him another $60 a month, mostly for caddy fees which have jumped from $1.50 to $3 for 18 holes.
When Mr. X takes his family on a month’s vacation each summer, that costs $1,500, “even though Mr. X is a family man and doesn’t indulge excessively in Lake Tahoe’s expensive social life.”
These social and entertainment expenses cost Mr. X around $4,000 a year. It leaves him with $6,000, of which $4,000 goes to pay premiums on $100,000 of life insurance. “That $4,000 for insurance is all my savings now, if you want to call it that,” he says bitterly. All right, let us call it that, and get on with the sordid story.
To make ends meet as prices climb, “Mr. X is applying a business axiom to his living standards: ‘The only way to meet these costs is retrenchment,’ he says.”
“A lot of dining-out has gone by the board,” he relates. ”I just won’t go to these restaurants and pay those awful prices. On Thursday night out, the family eats at home.”
“I buy my suits four or five at a time.” He’s due for some suits now, at $200 per, but is going to put it off. He’s only got one car in the garage, a lousy Cadillac, and finds he can get along all right, “for the present at least.” When he takes those business trips to the east several times a year, at company expense, he no longer takes his wife along because “you know how it is when the women are let loose in those eastern cities.”
Mr. X is “filled with astonishment and wonder” at the free spenders he sees tossing dough around. “Sometimes I wonder if all those people you see throwing their money away are dodging taxes or what,” he muses. Mr. X, of course, does not dodge taxes. He pays them. It says so, RIGHT IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. He is strictly a square, from Delaware, with sharp corners.
Up to now, this story has been gloomy, macabre, almost like something from Dostoyevsky. But it has the old twist to if, after all, the Hollywood ending. By dint of saving here and there, Mr. X still lives within his income. He says he intends to continue cutting down expenses rather than biting into savings. ”I’ve never operated that way and I don’t intend to start now,” he said grimly.
One of the first places Mr. X is going to start cutting is in the wages he pays employees and servants, presumably. Our hero feels pretty strongly about “the labor problem.”
“In spite of higher costs,” he says, “the workingman has made a net gain in real income because of pay raises. But I don’t think an executive on a salary has any way of off-setting increased costs. The executive suffered a net loss in real income.”
Here, take my handkerchief.
 
Economic Notes
The Reynolds Tobacco Co. will have a 1946 income in excess of $27 million, compared with $19.2 million in 1945. Those extra pennies you pay for a pack of Camels today mount up, you see ... The Justice Department, which during the election year of 1940 instituted an anti-trust suit against the American Petroleum Institute and the oil trust, has now quietly dropped the suit, “without divulging the division’s reasons for recommending dismissal.” ... The U.S. Maritime Commission has been accused, by the House Merchant Marine Committee, of paying 2.5 million to the California Shipbuilding Corporation to take a free gift of $39 million worth of shipyard facilities and materials off its hands ... Steel prices have jumped sharply recently. Whereas the OPA ceiling was $19.25 a ton for No. 1 heavy melting, quotations now range from $30 a ton upward ...
Standard Oil of New Jersey and its fellow member of the trust, Socony-Vacuum Oil Co., are going to add approximately $13.4 million to their joint oil investment in Iraq. The two companies own 23% per cent of Iraq Petroleum Co., part of the world oil cartel. This latter company has concessions which now ”include almost the whole of Iraq, as well as certain areas in Syria, Palestine, the Sheikdom of Qatar and the Trucial Coast on the Persian Gulf. They cover some 370,000 square miles.” ...
Net income of Philadelphia & Reading Coal & Iron Co. for the first nine months was $3,432,221, about triple the earnings in 1945 ... In the middle of 1946, a government tabulation showed that 27 per cent of the auto industry’s working force was comprised of ex-service men and women, compared with the all-U.S. manufacturing industry average of 18 per cent ... The buyer of a $1,500 automobile in 1946 paid an average of $133.74 in special taxes in the purchase and first-year operation of the car ... Boris Shishkin, economist for the AFL, believes that the most dependable index pointing to an early recession is to be found in the expenditure for dental work. When such expenditures expand, the indication is that good times are ahead. When these expenditures contract, as they now are doing, he says, we are in for a recession.
 




Don’t Understand Own System
There are a hundred signs to show that the capitalist system is headed for an economic crisis. Not in the next few months, to be sure, but in the next few years, we are going to witness here in the United States another acute crisis of the sort that sent business crashing in 1929, when you had to walk with care through the financial canyons of the big cities to avoid being hit by the hurtling bodies of the bankers committing suicide.
Not all the capitalists understand this. Indeed, few of them do. It is a fact that the capitalists and their front men – the teachers, preachers, editors and economists – do not understand their own system.
Let us look back to 1928 and 1929, just before the crash that laid bare the decaying body of capitalism. What were the capitalists telling us then?
Charles E. Mitchell, president of the National City Bank of New York, said:
“A revolution in industry has been taking place that is raising all classes of the population to a more equal participation in the fruits of industry, and thus, by the natural operation of economic law, bringing to a nearer realization the dreams of those Utopians who looked to the day when poverty would be banished.”
Listen to James H. Rand, president, Remington-Rand, Inc.: “The economic revolution of the 1920’s will appear as vital as the industrial revolution in England and it will likewise mark the beginning of a new era.”
Listen to Andrew W. Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury and a powerful financial capitalist: “America has adjusted herself to the economic laws of the new industrial era, and she has evolved an industrial organization which can maintain itself not only because it is efficient, but because it is bringing about a greater diffusion of prosperity among all classes.” (A few years later there were 20 million unemployed.)
Or Melvin A. Traylor, president, Continental National Bank of Chicago: “We need not fear a recurrence of conditions that will plunge the nation into the depths of the more violent financial panics such as have occurred in the past.” (A few years later Traylor’s pal, Samuel Insull, was fleeing to Europe from the ruins of his midwestern utility empire.)
As Lewis Corey, author of The Decline of American Capitalism, put it:
“Captains of industry and finance appear Jovelike in prosperity and bewildered in depression, but at no time do they really understand the movement of the economic forces they exploit. Their pre-1929 invocations to the ‘new era’ expressed sheer misunderstanding; but they also expressed, if partly unconsciously, the defensive, self-justifying ideology of predatory capitalism.”
Those words of Corey’s came back to me as I listened to the fat boys spiel at the recent convention of the National Association of Manufacturers. Their words were a mockery of reality, revealing vast areas of ignorance and unawareness of the economic forces that are irresistibly marshalling to launch the next crisis.
Here is what the retiring president of the NAM, Robert R. Wason, said: “It is conservative to say that ... we are on the threshold of the most glorious period of man’s eternal struggle to improve his economic wellbeing.” ... And here is what the executive vice-president, Walter Welsenburger, crooned: “The future is so promising ... only a spinster could have any legitimate reason for not being interested.” ... The servants of capitalism in Washington see not a whit clearer than their masters. Here is what Civilian Production Administrator John Small wrote Truman in his letter of resignation:
“Still higher levels of production will pave the way to an even higher standard of living for the American people.”
Are these people trying to fool themselves, or are they trying to fool us, I asked myself. Cannot they see what is occurring: The unprecedented currency inflation in the United States, the mountainous national debt that will never be paid, the swollen profits of the rich (and the other half of the picture, the low wages of the people which do not permit them to buy back what they produce, and thus insure a glutted market); Europe and Asia bankrupt; the people groaning under the heaviest tax burden in history; billions still being squandered in an effort to police the world with the U.S. Army and Navy. Can’t they SMELL the decay in the air? ...
The Bantus, an African tribe, have a proverb: “Breadfruit is obtained from the breadfruit tree.” Yes, and from the tree of capitalism grows depression and war, and mass misery and death. So long as the people of the United States permit capitalism to endure, new depressions and wars are inescapable. The capitalists may fool themselves. Do not let them fool us.
*.
Economic Notes
The giant installment finance corporations are jittery at the lack of dough in the pockets of the American people. They say that new autos will be choking retail salesrooms before the end of the next year unless the government repeals present restrictions requiring purchasers to make a down payment of one-third upon a new car, with full payment in 15 months. The people haven’t got that kind of dough, say CIT Financial Corporation and Commercial Credit Corporation ... Frozen foods are rapidly glutting the market, with cold storage warehouses bulging with 860,000,000 pounds of frozen fruits and vegetables, 50 per cent above a year ago and four times the pre-war high. Before the war there were 35 frozen foods brands, today 450 commercial firms are freezing food. One frozen food official predicted “fire sales in strawberries before next spring.” ... Farm commodity prices are drifting lower. Wheat tumbled 20 cents a bushel the week of December 7; corn, 13 cents; hides, 7 cents; lard, recently selling as high as 55 cents a pound, went to 28 cents; cotton dropped a dollar a bale.
At least a third of farm staples are now selling below “parity,” parity prices, being those theoretically giving farmers a buying power equal to that of 1909–14. In Louisville at the fall tobacco auction, prices tobogganned, with an average of $37.50 a 100 pounds, compared with $48.13 last year, a decline of $10.63. Do you think the cigarette companies, which have’ recently boosted cigaret prices, will now lower their prices? I don’t either ...
Landlords in Flint, Michigan, have raised rents 10-15 per cent, through a ruling of the City Commission, over objections of CIO representatives. OPA officials say they are helpless because of a 1942 rent agreement with the city of Flint, whereby all rent control matters are handled by the municipal courts ...
The oil monopoly is indignant because a recent public, opinion survey showed that one of every three persons believes the oil business is a monopoly. Recently the American Petroleum Institute announced it would spend $1 million to tell the people “it ain’t so.” ... While farm prices are declining, the prices of semi-manufactured products bounced up 11 per cent in November.
 




The aim of Big Business, to legalize the former black market prices, is now complete. With practically all price controls scrapped, OPA officials snickeringly refer to their agency as the Office of Rice Administration, rice being almost the only commodity left under control. But it isn’t a funny situation at all. For the people of this nation, it spells tragedy. Here, for your record, is what has happened in the first four days since President Truman’s sweeping decontrol order of November 9:

Hide prices – soared over 100 per cent over previous price ceilings.
Steel scrap – up $2.50 a ton, November 12, another $2.50 November 13.
Rayon – up 10-20 per cent.
Copper – up 25 per cent.
Lead – up 30 per cent.
Building materials – up an average of 25 per cent.
Electrical appliances – up 10-60 per cent.
Laundry and dry cleaning prices – up 10 per cent.
Typewriters – up 10–15 per cent.
Sweaters – up an average of $1.
Sheets, towels, pillowcases – up 5 per cent.
Men’s hosiery – up 5–8 per cent.
Lingerie – up 10 per cent.
Shoes – some companies raised prices 20 per cent.
Paint – rise of 30–40 per cent predicted immediately.
Inner-spring mattresses – up sharply.

General Motors announced it had immediately increased prices of all cars and trucks $100. Willys-Overland increased prices on jeeps and station wagons by $44 and $48 respectively. Zenith raised prices of. its radios from 2 to 20 per cent. Carpets went up 5–10 per cent. Some cotton goods went up 25 per cent. Gum turpentine went up 20 cents a gallon. International Harvester increased prices on all farm implements and tractors 9 per cent. Minneapolis-Moline farm equipment went up 10 per cent. U.S. Steel announced it would raise prices of those products “now being sold below cost.” ... The New York Journal of Commerce predicted that decontrol would drive the general commodity price level up about 10–12 per cent the first week.
 
“Businessmen Tormented”
“Pricing dilemmas forment businessmen,” writes the Wall Street Journal. Manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, are being torn between their ingrained cupidity and their fear that the consumers won’t and can’t take it ... The AFL recently compared food advertisements published in Washington, D.C., newspapers in June 1939, and those appearing November 1, 1946. “Increases as high as 500 and 600 per cent were noted in basic and routine items on the average American table,” said the AFL. The Labor Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, on the other hand, says its retail price index shows “only” an 86.2 per cent increase for the same period. Guess it depends on who does the figuring ... The Journal of Commerce’s daily index of 30 sensitive commodity prices has risen 50 points since July 1946,’ as much as the total increase from 1942–1946.
 
Foreign Trade Bust Coming
Big Business in this country is worried about the foreign trade situation, afraid that the boom will break when foreigners have no more cash. Foreign nations have been buying U.S. exports with dollar surpluses built up during the war, or with money shipped out of those countries before the war, or with loans from the Export-Import Bank. They will soon run out of dollars and will have to borrow more money – or sell to the U.S. “Sell what?” is the question that worries U.S. industry. The recent war lessened this country’s dependency on the outside for raw materials ... For instance, in 1940 the U.S. paid $570 millions for three big commodities – tin, rubber, silk. But nylon and rayon factories have finished off the great silk trade. The U.S. consumed 463,000 tons of synthetic rubber in the first seven months of 1946, and only 106,000 tons of natural rubber. Only tin remains ... Whereas before the war, U.S. exports averaged about 20 per cent above imports, today they are about double imports. This off-balance situation cannot prevail much longer.
*
Housing Situation Worse
The housing situation will grow worse. The sharp rise In the price of lumber, plumbing fixtures, brick and clay, roofing, insulation, electrical equipment, will just about finish off the hopes of many people to build their own homes. Rents are sure to go up shortly about 15 per cent. A head-on collision is coming between the landlords and their natural enemies, the tenants ... A survey of servicemen being discharged reveals that 55 per bent are searching for housing in the so-called “middle-rental bracket” of $30–$40 monthly. Some 34 per cent want housing in the $30-or-less bracket, and only 11 per cent can afford to pay $50 or more. Almost everyone of these servicemen are doomed to disappointment.
*
The Insurance Man’s Soul
I always wondered what insurance salesmen had in their souls. Now a fellow named Wendell F. Hanselman, president of Agency Management Assn., let’s us in. Speaking in Chicago the other day, he said:
“One of the greatest obstacles to communism is the group of more than 100,000 trained life insurance salesmen. These men have imbedded in their souls the sermon of thrift and free enterprise.”
*
Getting Rid of Surplus
With all the talk of shortages, representatives of 13 nations are now meeting in London, behind closed doors, trying to figure out what the hell to do with the vast wartime accumulation of wool, without upsetting the world market. One official thought it might take “12 or 13 years” to get rid of the surplus.
 
What Happens in Washington
Under pressure of many unions, Congress and Truman created a “full employment” braintrust not so long ago. The Wall Street Journal reports that members of the “Council of Economic Advisers,” so created, are “nourishing ideas that may make labor leaders whistle in surprise.” Their thinking, it seems, “has most nearly crystallized in the direction of legal curbs on union activities.” The group has held off-the-record discussion with John Steelman’s Office of Reconversion, and proposed a revision of the National Labor Relations Act to the benefit of the employers, abolition of “union monopolies” to make it impossible for a union to bargain on an industry-wide basis, and other means of hampering labor demands and ability to take strike action. The council, it is reported, hopes that a bit of “scare talk” will frighten the unions out of “any rash acts they may be contemplating.”
 




With price controls fast fading, this column may shortly discontinue its weekly report of price boosts granted by the Office of Price Administration. Anyway, here is the record for the week: Mattresses, ceilings increased 9 per cent; refrigerators, increases granted; radio tubes, up 14 per cent; increases on low-cost rayon and cotton dresses; imported leathers, up 10–16 per cent; Colorado coal, up 10 cents a ton; linseed oil, up 1.7 cents a pound; children’s knit sleeping garments, up 30 per cent; asphalt and tarred roofing, up 13 cents a hundredweight; lath, up SI a thousand; enameled cast-iron plumbing fixtures, up 11.5 per cent. Prices of canned pineapple and juice rose 10 per cent. Among the items decontrolled were edible and inedible oils, ice, fats, most consumer durable goods such as radios, lamps, small electric appliances, cosmetics, rubber drug supplies, paper supplies, and hardwood logs. With price control removed from all shoes, hides, skins and leather, OPA predicted a 30 per cent increase in shoe prices.
 
“Dismal Reading”
The mad dance of the profiteers continues. But a disturbing note intrudes itself in the picture. “Recent unpublicized marketing surveys on ‘consumer resistance’ make dismal reading,” reports the Wall Street Journal. They show that many a line of products is in danger of being priced out of a substantial part of its market.”... As an indication – prices of raw fur have been off 10–30 per cent in recent weeks, raising a danger signal for other luxury goods. The silver fox cape that Mr. Feverish was going to buy his girl friend will have to wait. Mr. Feverish’s stocks and his holdings in cotton have taken a rude jolt in recent weeks ... The masses don’t buy expensive furs. They buy things like meat – but not at today’s prices. Right across the continent comes story after story relating how housewifely resistance to high prices is forcing the meat trust to pare its prices.
 
A Look at Profits
It takes a colossal gall and conceit for Big Business to oppose wage increases these days. For profits have never been so high in most industries. U.S. Steel, for instance, had a third quarter net profit of $33 millions, compared with a net of only $11 millions for the corresponding period in 1945. Shipments of steel products were the highest since June 1929 ... Let’s take one of the great department stores of the world, Marshall Field & Co., of Chicago. It reports a net income in the third quarter of $3,046,989, or $1.49 a share, against $1,033,819, or 45 cents a share, a year earlier. Profit in the nine months ended September 30 was over $10 million, compared with $3½ million last year ... Or take a woolen company, Botany Worsted Mills. Earnings for the first nine months totaled $2,302,788, compared with $817,891 for the entire year of 1945. Dividends this year should equal $13 on 100,000 shares of B stock, compared with a dividend of $8.43 on only 50,000 shares in 1945 ... Here’s another company that availed itself of tax credits from the ever-generous government. General Electric Co. took itself a credit of $4.8 million in the first nine months for federal taxes on income, and is back in the black, despite that nine-weeks’ strike in the first quarter. The government, in short, underwrote the company resistance to union demands.
 
100 Corporations
The Civilian Production Administration, in Its final report on war industry facilities, reports that 100 corporations operated 60 per cent of the country’s war-built industrial plant. Some 75 large manufacturers managed almost $14 billion of the $22 billion expansion in manufacturing facilities, and 25 railways and utilities managed $2.5 billion out of the $6 billion expansion in industrial service facilities. Heading the manufacturers list were du Pont de Nemours and General Motors, each with more than $1 billion worth of war facilities added to pre-war production capacity. A.T.&T., with almost $400 million in new facilities, topped the list of industrial service expansions. War plants added about one-third in terms of plant space and equipment to the country’s prewar manufacturing facilities.
 
Stock-of-the-Month
What is believed to be the highest ratio stock split-up on record is in the making. The Book-of-the-Month Club plans to split its 400 shares of no-par value on a 2,000-for-l basis, creating 800,000 shares of $1.25 par. In addition, the company has 100 authorized but unissued shares which are to be changed into another 800,000 shares, at a ratio of 8,000-to-l. The company showed net profits for the first seven months of 1946 of $921,775, compared with a net profit of $778,850 for the entire year of 1945.
*
Though the war has been over for more than a year, most of southern California’s aircraft factories are cloaked in denser secrecy than in wartime. If is even more difficult for an outsider to get in, reports the Wall Street Journal. An officer of Northrop Aircraft estimates that about three-fourths of the company’s capital investment and personnel are engaged in military work. An official of North American said the same. Lockheed, Douglas, Consolidated Vultee and Ryan all have sizable secret military protects under way. Latest official figures for the whole industry show a military backlog at close to $650 million, compared with $473 million for commercial aircraft.
*
A recent survey for the Federal Reserve Board showed that total asset holdings of three-fourths of the American people amount to less than one-fifth of their annual income. Or. in the words of Raymond Rodgers, N.Y. University professor of banking, “disregarding unemployment insurance and assistance from relatives and friends, 2.4 months of unemployment will put 75 per cent of our people on relief.”
The margin between the present artificial “prosperity” and a depression that would shake the world to its foundations is just that thin. No wonder those who profit most from the present system are gloomy. One of them is Paul Hoffman, president of Studebaker Corporation and chairman of the Committee for Economic Development. “The principle cause for concern,” he says, “is the fact that so many businessmen accept recession as inevitable.”
 




One of the best chapters in Lewis Corey’s book of a decade ago, The Decline of American Capitalism, was that early one wherein he listed scores of optimistic quotations from leading American capitalists and politicians, uttered just before the 1929 crash, showing the complete unawareness and ignorance of the social and economic forces which these men purported to control or at least to understand.
Let’s start keeping tabs on some of our current heavy thinkers.
Here’s a prediction by John W. Snyder, Secretary of the Treasury: “The nation is on the road to a continuing high level of prosperity.”
And here is one from Civilian Production Administrator John Small: “A recession will not come next year if business generally acts to maintain a high level of production.”
 
U.S. Controls the Oceans
The United States, which in 1939 had only 14 per cent of the deadweight tonnage of the world’s merchant fleet, today owns more than 50 per cent, a recent survey compiled by the Maritime Commission shows. The U.S. fleet increased from 1,379 ships in 1939 to 4,961 vessels in 1946. The British Empire fleet decreased from 30 per cent of the world’s deadweight tonnage in 1939 to 24 per cent today. All the other nations showed reductions in merchant fleets except Russia, which had a one per cent gain. Percentage declines in tonnages were: Norway, from 9 per cent to 4; Netherlands, from 4 per cent to 2; France, 4 to 2; Japan, 9 to 1; Germany, 6 to 1; and Italy, 5 to 1. Actually, U.S. domination of the world merchant fleets is even more pronounced than these figures indicate. Approximately 8 per cent, or 526, of the vessels in foreign fleets are owned by the U.S., although included in the statistics of the fleets of other countries.
 
Who Delays Housing?
Untold quantities of such scarce housing materials as white lead paint, toilets, soil pipe, plumbing fixtures, nails, veneer and plywood lie hidden away in War Assets Administration warehouses in six central states, according to a navy veteran who just spent three weeks investigating the situation in Illinois, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Iowa. Enough building material is stored in government warehouses to complete all unfinished houses in the area and to build thousands more, said Arthur Marcus, the investigator, and member of the national committee on veteran housing of the American Legion.
In one warehouse was 11,361 feet of conduit pipe, enough for 100 homes; another had 92 toilets; a third depot contained 2,000 toilets, 500,000 square feet of plywood and veneer, and enough nails to build 12,000 houses.
Marcus, obviously a Republican, charged that the Truman administration was holding the materials off the market in an attempt “to delude veterans into the belief that their only salvation is government housing.” Such a charge is fake. One of the many rotten policies that helped defeat the Democrats was their miserable failure to solve the housing shortage, though it was in their interest to make some kind of a showing.
A further investigation would show that the big insurance companies and banks, who own such a large proportion of the nation’s housing, together with the building materials trust, are responsible for holding such materials off the market, in order to smash rent ceilings and increase the value of their present holdings. This section of big business DOESN’T WANT THE HOUSING SHORTAGE ALLEVIATED, and both boss parties connive with it ... The stall in new housing has been successful, and it is now certain that rent ceilings will be further lifted.
What a joke Housing Expediter Wilson Wyatt’s program has been. Despite repeated warning from veterans, he insisted upon concentrating on the building of houses at a cost of about $10,000 and up, rather than construct low-cost housing projects. Wyatt’s program wasn’t designed to help the veterans at all, for how many of them can spend $10,000 to house their families? Rather the program was aimed to help the upper middle class.
*
New U.S.-China Treaty
U.S. intervention in China is now beginning to pay off – for the wealthy. On November 1, the United States signed an extensive 5-year treaty with the Chinese government, broadening the rights and privileges which American corporations can exercise in China. The State Department “emphatically denied” that conclusion of the pact at this time is a move to strengthen Chiang Kai-shek’s central government. In the language of diplomacy, “to emphatically deny” means “to affirm.” ... By terms of the treaty, which must be ratified by the U.S. Senate and the Chinese Yuan, American corporations are permitted to “reside, travel and carry on trade” in all parts of the country – including the so-called Chinese Communist territory which Chiang does not control. They can carry on “commercial manufacturing, processing, scientific, educational, religious and philanthropic activities,” can “acquire, hold, erect, or lease and occupy buildings and acquire land.” Merchant ships of one country can travel in the territorial waters and put in at the ports of the other ...
This treaty obviously gives Washington a big stake in keeping Chiang or some puppet dictator like him, in power, for the treaty does not necessarily expire after five years, “or ever,” says the N.Y. Journal of Commerce. Once past the five-year date, the pact will be ended only one year after one of the countries announces its intention to terminate it. Obviously, it is to the interest of American big business to see that no Chinese government ever takes power which might abrogate such a juicy treaty ... Coincident with signing of the treaty, there was announced in New York the formation of the first American trade association devoted solely to the promotion of U.S. commerce in China, the China-American Council of Commerce and Industry, designed to produce “a unified and authoritative voice pressing the viewpoints and interests of American business.”
*
Washington is already objecting to Britain over sections of the British-Argentine economic agreement, on grounds it violates promises Britain made the U.S. in obtaining a $3,750,000,000 American loan. One provision of the British-Argentine pact prevents Argentina from spending blocked sterling where she desires under certain circumstances. The U.S. State Department has also told Britain it dislikes the long-term exclusive basis of the four-year meat agreement with Argentina. Britain has similar exclusive meat pacts with Canada, New Zealand and Australia.
 




All of Washington’s pretenses that it was making efforts to control prices on the nation’s food and drink have now gone out the window, with the lifting on October 23 of price controls on remaining items such as flour, bread, whisky, beer, soft drinks, restaurant meals, fish, desserts, and canned goods. Only items remaining under “control” are rice, sugar and syrup.
A combination of real and artificial scarcities, mixed with Big Business politics, has now lifted living costs so far beyond the means of the average family that bourgeois economists are worried. There is no mass labor party in the United States to organize a buyers’ strike – but such a strike is nevertheless taking place. High faxes and low wages do not leave the housewife enough to permit her to enter the market for items that were once looked upon as staples in the “American way of life” – like meat, butter, cotton sheets and pillowcases and towels. From all parts of the country, butchers and shopkeepers are complaining that the people won’t buy their wares.
I look for prices on many commodities to tumble somewhat after the November elections. The Republican Party has done a good organizational job in persuading businessmen to hold their commodities off the market for the purpose of making Truman look even sicker than he is as a politician. But the planned scarcity tactic cannot be pursued much longer. Each businessman is becoming increasingly worried that, if he holds off much longer, he will be left with a lot of goods and no buyers at the high price level.
The Wall Street Journal reports that a flood of cotton goods will deluge the public by December – that is, after the elections. Civilian Production Administration officials believe that during recent months as much as 60 per cent of production of cotton cloth has gone into warehouses rather than to the market. Buyers for the big retail stores are getting cautious. “Manufacturers have been making all this cotton stuff right along and have a lot ready to dump in our laps,” said a Cleveland retailer. “The pipelines are filled up. All it takes is for some one to turn on the faucet.”
Cotton mills are now producing at the rate of about 9.5 billion yards a year, a third more than in pre-war years.
 
Your Taxes
A phenomenon of recent years has been the extremely rapid growth of the sales tax as a means used by the wealthy to finance their government. The sales tax, as Lenin once pointed out, is one of the most unfair methods of taxation, in that the poor, who must spend all they earn in order to live, thus pay a disproportionately large tax, the wealthy being taxed on only that portion of their income which they spend. The very existence of the disgraceful and unfair sales tax is an index of the political immaturity and weakness of the American workers.
Now the wealthy are becoming even more brazen in their fax policies. Big Business in California, for instance, is preparing a bill to increase the present 2½ per cent state sales tax to 4 per cent ... Wealthy tax lawyers are cooking up a scheme whereby their clients can claim a “travel for health” tax deduction, based on a wintertime jaunt to Florida – on the doctor’s orders, of course.
The sales tax on cigarettes has been a bonanza for state governments. Cigarette and tobacco taxes have spread more rapidly in recent years than any other single form of taxation. Thirty-one states are now resorting to such taxation, as contrasted with 26 states in 1940. Revenue derived from such taxes in 1945 amounting to over $164 millions, this year has jumped 85 per cent. In 1930 the comparatively few states then levying taxes on tobacco received only $10.5 millions. Rates vary today from 2 cents to 5 cents a pack. Seven states levy a tax of 2 cents a pack; eight states collect 3 cents; three states collect 4 cents; while the others – Arkansas, Louisiana and Oklahoma – collect 5 cents. Several states, including Illinois, are proposing as part of a state soldiers’ bonus program an increase in cigarette taxes.
The cigarette tax racket is so good that some cities have gotten into the business. Among the major cities currently collecting cigarette taxes, and the amounts thus derived in 1944, are: St. Louis, $1,281,081; Kansas City, $645,290; Denver, $330,037; and Birmingham, 377,372.
 
Schweinhaut Quotes The Bible
Henry A. Schweinhaut, the scrofulous young attorney whom the Department of Justice sent out to Minneapolis in 1941 to prosecute the Trotskyists, was rewarded for his work by being made a justice in the district court in Washington, D.C. The other day a defendant charged with stealing a few bottles of liquor appeared before Justice Schweinhaut. The defendant pleaded guilty, but quoted from the Bible on the virtues of forgiveness. Schweinhaut came right back with the verse from Exodus, “Thou shalt not steal,” and gave the defendant up to four years.
*
The Mormon Church is one of the wealthiest groups of spookery peddlers in the world. The Mormons, who next year will celebrate their centennial in Utah, own department stores, hotels, railroads, airlines, mines, sugar beet and canning factories and other properties. A member of the Council of Twelve Apostles of the Mormon Church, addressing the church members recently, called for outlawing strikes, on grounds that the strike “breeds lawlessness, eventuates in anarchy and will destroy any government or society.” Successful strikes in Utah would also cut into the profits of the spook artists.
Attorney General Tom Clark has written to the nation’s lawyers asking them to see that participants “in mob violence” are speedily brought to justice. The copper, expressed “deep concern” over the increasing number of oases of mob violence throughout the country. Reminding the lawyers’ organizations that, unfortunately, the authority of the federal government in cases of mob violence is extremely limited, Clark promised that the Department of Justice would investigate carefully each such case, and make its reports available to state and local authorities. The government knows that its policies are inevitably forcing large masses of workers to struggle. When such struggles develop, Clark is promising the bosses full support of his department.
 




Approximately $15,000,000,000 worth of optimism in the future of capitalism has been knocked out of the American gamblers on the Stock Exchange since May. This is the amount which a declining market has clipped from the value of stocks listed on the Exchange.
On September 3 the stock market suffered its worst break for a single day since June 1930 eliminating all the gains since V-J Day.
Stock markets the world over trembled at the tremendous selling rush in Wall Street recently. Prices on the London exchange broke sharply. Selling waves swept the Paris Bourse on all issues, both foreign and domestic. The slump in Wall Street caused “local nervousness” in Johannesburg, with diamond, copper and Free State issues all marked down appreciably.
Sellers of luxury goods and black market operators in this country were gloomy. Commodity prices began to dip, and the asking price for real estate in many cities bumped downward for the first time in years.
The very thought of another “1929” haunts the world’s wealthy. That is not yet in the cards – not yet.
Wall Street and its U.S. State Department are desperately and boldly pouring wealth into Europe, hoping to shore up a sagging system that is crushing European’s millions. In this very process, the artificial market abroad for goods from this country creates a feverish boom in the United States.
*
American Big Business taunts the shallow economist, Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace, that it has already provided more than the 60,000,000 post-war jobs demanded by Wallace. But it is premature in its boasts. The test of capitalism, its ability to provide jobs for those who want to work, will come when the stream of goods going abroad begins to slacken.
*
Unemployment in the United States today stands around 2,200,000, compared with a March 1946 peak of 2,700,000. The Social Security Administration reports the federal unemployment fund stood at $6,700,000,000 in July. Another deep depression, producing an estimated 20,000,000 unemployed, would wipe out the fund in short order.
Much of today’s unemployment stems from the fact that many factories refuse to hire new men over 45 years old, or. women over 35. Over 53 per cent of the men and 55 per cent of the women drawing unemployment compensation in Illinois are above 45 and 55 years of age, respectively, reports a Chicago administrator.
 
Notes on U.S. Imperialism
Trans-Arabian Pipeline Co’s plans for a pipeline from Saudi Arabia to the Mediterranean will have the full support of the Saudi Arabian government, that government’s finance minister has announced. Trans-Arabian is jointly owned by Standard Oil of California and the Texas Co. The pipeline has secured rights through Lebanon, Trans-Jordan and Palestine, and is now negotiating with Syria. In return, Saudi Arabia has been granted a ten-year $10,000,000 credit agreement with the Export-Import Bank. Of course this transaction influences the position of Washington on the demand of the Jews for free immigration to Palestine ... A delegation from the All-India Manufacturers’ Association is now in the United. States seeking to buy industrial equipment ... A Turkish trade mission has just placed large orders for cotton textile machinery with American manufacturers. Turkey aims to expand its textile capacity by 60 per cent by 1951. “Turkey’s doors are and will continue to be open to American businessmen,” said Frazil Turga, head of the trade mission. It is natural that Wall Street should support Turkey in its refusal of Russia’s demands on the Dardanelles.
*
Banker’s View of Hollywood
Through the aid of Washington, which is insisting on special clauses in foreign loan agreements, the film industry is driving to recapture its market abroad and to carry its own distorted version of the American Way of Life to new markets. Before the war, approximately one-third of total film rental revenues was derived by the average Hollywood company from foreign business with the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Brazil, Argentina, Sweden and France. Expansion is particularly aimed at undeveloped markets in Asia, Africa, and Central and South America.
Hollywood’s blatant jingoism during the war paid off. Twentieth Century Fox's gross operating revenues rose from $46,500,000 in 1941 to $178,200,000 in 1945. Net earnings this year will hit $24,000,000, or approximately $9 a common share. The company is now negotiating an alliance with Italian movie interests. RKO this year redeemed all of its preferred stock and has retired all its previously existing funded debt. The company’s 1946 second quarter earnings almost tripled those of the corresponding period last year. Warner Bros. reports a net of $14,792,202 for the nine months ended June 1, representing more than a 100 per cent rise over the same period last year. The per share earnings of Loew’s, Inc., which last year were $2.61, are expected to hit $3.50 this year. Paramount Pictures, Inc., and all of its world-wide subsidiaries are now entirely free of mortgages or funded indebtedness. Elimination of the excess profits tax almost tripled net in the first quarter of this year.
*
The official fur auctions for the account of the Russian government, which before the war were held in Leningrad, will henceforth be held three times a year in London, as a result of a recent agreement signed between the Russian government and a firm of British fur auctioneers. The Hudsons’ Bay Co. fur auctions are also returning to London, from New York, a further step to rehabilitate London as a world fur center.
*
Now that the British, with the backing of Washington, have set the Greek king back on the throne and thus saved the eastern Mediterranean for western imperialism, let us take a look at Greece’s economy. Greece is heavily dependent upon imports for survival: – for food, the bulk of raw materials and machinery. Before the war, Greece paid for her surplus of imports out of shipping and tourist receipts and emigrant remittances. The Greeks have lost three-quarters of their pre-war merchant fleet; a revival of the tourist traffic is not likely for several years; and emigrant remittances last year were less than half the 1939 total. To top off the sorry picture, Greece has lost her major markets in Germany and other central European countries, and Russian satellites in the Balkans are not likely to provide a substitute.
*
Japanese industry is in such desperate straits under American occupation, according to the Wall Street Journal, that the American Military Government general headquarters is seriously considering the nationalization of Japan’s coal industry in an effort to boost production.
“All our problems trace back to coal,” stated one military planner. “Thirty per cent of train operations have been suspended for lack of coal. Steel output is under 20 per cent and manufacturing in general is below 50 per cent of the bare existence level requirements .... The Japanese are not mining; they are trying to find food and a place to live, and restlessly organizing and quarreling with management. Food distribution is progressively deteriorating; miners have not been receiving the rice promised them.”
The output per miner per shift is said to be half the pre-war output.
*
Earnings of the Big Four rubber companies in the first six months of the current fiscal year were 112 per cent, ahead of the like six months in 1945. Goodrich reported $8.74 a common share this year against $3.52 in 1945. Goodyear earned $6.59 against $2.90; Firestone, $6.09 compared with $3.08; and U.S. Rubber $4.15 against $2.57. It is estimated that the rubber companies should be able to do at least as well in the second half as they did in the first.
*
Brazil, in a move calculated to combat the severe economic crisis and the acute shortage of most consumer products, has slapped an export embargo on a long list of commodities – grain, cereals, flour, potatoes, cottonseed, cotton textiles, tires, shoes, live stock, meat and meat by-products, hides, leather, timber and vegetable oil.
 




At the suggestion of several readers, this column for a period will keep tab on the price boosts that pass through the OPA sieve. For the week of September 11–18, check the following:

Flour, retail consumer price boosted from 1–2cents per five-pound package.
Cotton work gloves, retail price up 3 cents a pair.
Window and picture glass, 18 per cent price increase.
Glazed sash and doors, ceilings up 4 per cent.
Major cotton textile items, average 2 per cent price increase granted.
Sugar, ceiling prices increased 1.5 cents a pound.
Facial tissues, up 2 cents per 25-cent box.
Toilet paper, manufacturers get 5 per cent increase.
Salmon, fishermen’s ceiling raised 2 cents a pound.
Rice, $1 a barrel.
Upholstery springs, 3.5 per cent increase.
Road and maintenance machinery, 3.5 per cent increase.
Apples, ceiling rates for storage raised 5 cents a bushel.
Household furniture, lower-cost manufacturers get 4 per cent increase.
Broom handles of Douglas fir, 35 per cent increase at producers’ level.
Tallow oil for soap, a 9½ cents per pound increase.

In addition, the OPA wiped out all ceilings on razor blades, baby carriages, fountain pens, dry batteries, lawn mowers, grass and fibre floor coverings, and comforters.

Ford, Mercury and Lincoln cars – retail ceiling prices raised an average of 6 per cent, the fifth raise since last November.
Bed linen, towels and napkins, up 2½ per cent.
Cotton clothing, prices raised about 1 per cent.

There, in a nutshell, is the extent to which every reader of this column had his pockets picked by OPA during one week. Never did the American people so desperately need a heavy-handed agency to crack down on the profiteers. Instead, the Democratic and Republican parties and Big Business offer the present OPA.
* * *
On the subject of auto prices, here are some figures quoted by C.E. Wilson, president of General Motors Corporation, at his recent press conference, figures not generally published in the daily press:
The Chevrolet Master Sedan was $748 list price in 1941, and is now $1,005. Chevrolet prices are approximately 34 per cent over 1941, approximately 21 per cent over 1942.
The list price in 1941 of the Buick 51-C was $1,105, is now $1,567, a 41.8 per cent increase. The ’40 series was priced at $985 in 1941, and is now $1,346.
A Ford car which in 1941 sold for $753 was selling at $1,093 BEFORE the recent further increase. A Plymouth which in 1941 sold for $774 is now $1,142; a Nash that was $765 is now $1,206.
Here are comparative figures on Ford’s line for 1942 and today:



 


    


1942


 


New ceiling




Ford de luxe


$ 885


$1,131




Ford super


   930


  1,202




Mercury


1,065


  1,412




Lincoln


1,700


  2,185



To the question, How much further price advance do you think you should have, Wilson of General Motors said: “If you want a nice round figure, about $100 an automobile.”
How many workers can afford new autos at nice round prices like these?
* * *
Scores of corporations, including the largest in America, are resorting to the use of carryback tax credits, so thoughtfully provided them by a boss-minded Congress that wouldn’t dream of granting tax relief to the people.
Westinghouse Electric reduced a loss of nearly $43,000,000 to $340,000 by using credits in the first half of 1946. General Motors, with an operating loss of some $120,000,000, set up tax credits of $80,000,000. U.S. Steel, through the transfer of $28,300,000 of strike costs to its reserve and the use of $7,300,000 credits, was able to show a net of $24,100,000 for the half year. Under the tax carryback plan, the U.S. Treasury refunds to corporations some of the taxes paid to the government in the war years as taxes on large profits. This single governmental action has poured billions of dollars into the laps of Big Business. Life is so pleasant when it is
YOUR government that is running the nation.
* * *
The factor of relatively lower wages in Puerto Rican factories has given birth to a new enterprise, Willis Air Service, which will fly a four-motored freight cargo plane between New Jersey and San Juan, with a capacity pay load of 16,000 pounds. On its shuttle flights it will take raw textile materials and leatherwork goods to Puerto Rico, returning with dresses, negligees and underwear. An estimated $1,000,000 worth of textiles and leatherwork will be moved each month.
 




Big Business, now that it has dynamited the government’s price control program, is laughing behind its hand at the “revived” OPA. It has a telling simile for the present OPA law – “like trying to wrap 50 pounds of nails in a wet newspaper.”
* * *
The N.Y. Journal of Commerce can’t take seriously the talk of a war between the United States and Russia. Terming such an event “a very remote possibility,” the paper lists the following reasons: The great technical superiority of the western nations over Russia; the war weariness which pervades the world; and lack of evidence that Russia’s foreign policy involves "inevitable conflict with the basic vital interests” of the United States.
* * *
The Argentinian bourgeoisie are stepping up their drive to oust foreign imperialism. The Peron government has established itself by decree as the sole sales agent for the $350,000,000 annual meat export business. The decree establishes prices the government will pay to foreign-owned packing plants for export meat. Previously the meat had been sold by the packing plants through their New York agents; the decree eliminates the New York factors. Argentina has not renewed the recently-expired British contract to buy all the former country’s export meat ... The Argentinian government has completed arrangements to purchase from the International Telephone & Telegraph Co. its Argentine subsidiary, United Telephone Co. of River Plate, for approximately $95,000,000. I.T.&T. will continue as technical advisor in the operation of the Argentine properties for 20 years and will supply the necessary equipment for operation of the facilities.
* * *
The increasing industrialization of Iran has got the Persian rug importers worried. They say that weaving has been seriously curtailed because weavers are leaving their small communal groups and heading for the cities where considerably higher wages are being offered.
* * *
Real income at the start of July, 1946, was at least 11 cents on the dollar lower than a year earlier, according to a recent study by Investors Syndicate. “The typical American consumer, on the average, nationally, in June had to pay at the rate of $1.04 for essential goods find services which were purchased at the rate of $1 in June 1945,” the study stated, acknowledging the impossibility of gauging the even higher prices paid on the black market. “Wage payments in June were at the rate of 86 cents, compared with $1 in June, 1945.”
* * *
Insurance underwriters are now becoming worried about the increasingly serious fire hazard created by overcrowding of dwellings. The city building inspector in Minneapolis blames overcrowding for a recent fire which took the lives of two persons. He says there are many such potential hazards in the city. His office has received hundreds of complaints of landlords crowding in twice as many, and in some cases three and four times the families for which permission has been granted. They are hailed into court but revert back to the practice as soon as the inspectors leave, stated John Nelson, the inspector.
* * *
The Wall Street Journal expresses disgust at some of the dodges used by veterans to continue drawing their $20 a week unemployment compensation. In San Francisco, it is reported, the USES has many listings of GIs who say they are diamond cutters. There is no use for such a skill in that city. On the other hand, many veterans who say they have no skill at doing anything are proving a problem for the USES, reports the above paper. Some even claim unfamiliarity with a shovel when sent out on a common labor job. The Journal omits to say that if there were jobs at decent wages available, few veterans indeed would cling to the meager $20 a week.
* * *
Rebuffed in attempts to negotiate air agreements with Russia, Poland, Yugoslavia, Hungary and Bulgaria, the U.S. is doing its best to persuade Brazil, China, Australia, India and South Africa to sign aviation pacts permitting U.S. air lines to acquire landing rights. Romania and Hungary have formed aviation companies jointly with the Russians, with 50 per cent of the ownership vested in Moscow and with a Stalinist director.
* * *
Though Henry Kaiser has yet to place an automobile on the market, the Kaiser-Frazer Export Corporation is already constructing factories in Ahmedabad, India, and Stockholm, Sweden, for production of the two cars. Kaiser cars will also be produced in Melbourne, Australia, and will be assembled in Argentina.
* * *
The Army-Navy Munitions Board is reported discussing a system of industrial mobilization that would operate on virtually a push-button basis in case of war. Principal features of the plan are: (1) Two production lines in each important factory, one with peacetime products, the other with a small amount of wartime products; (2) special Munitions Board, purchasing, engineering and supervisory staffs in the plants of major prime contractors, suppliers, subcontractors and primary producers; (3) retention of war-built facilities from more than a score of industries for standby purposes; (4) stockpiling of vast quantities of metals, minerals, and materials for any future emergency.
* * *
The New England textile machinery industry is enjoying its greatest boom in history, with some manufacturers speaking of potential orders so huge their plants will be busy for a decade. Buyers from throughout the world want to replace war-destroyed machinery or to equip new textile industries in their countries. American textile machinery makers aren’t accustomed to such foreign demand. Before the war, England was the exporter of looms, Germany of knitting machinery. England has not yet reconverted her machinery-making plants from war production, and German plants in Saxony have been either destroyed or grabbed by the Russians.
* * *
Want to know one reason why cotton goods are hard to buy? In 1937 American cotton farmers harvested the largest crop on record when a yield of approximately 19,000,000 bales was reported. They realized an average price of 8.5 cents a pound, or about $807,500,000. The 1946 crop promises to be about 9,000,000 bales, for which farmers should realize an average price of 36 cents a pound, or approximately $1,620,000,000. In the space of nine years, the income of cotton farmers has doubled, although actual production is cut in half. The larger farmers in particular have profited from the government program of planned scarcity.
 




First, for our account of the extent to which the Big Business controlled OPA picked our pockets during the week, from September 26 to September 30:

Window shades – Ceiling price up 11 per cent at retail.
Standard work shirts – Up 10 per cent, from $1.43 to $1.58 at retail.
Cocoa – Ceilings on cocoa and chocolate products up 27 per cent.
Paints – Ceiling prices on eight categories up 2–6 per cent.
Fabrics – Price "relief" granted producers of fabrics made from wool or rayon mixed with cotton.
Woodworking machinery – Up another six per cent.
Sand-lime brick – Manufacturers allowed $5 a 1,000 premium for production in excess of quotas.
Oleomargarine, cooking and salad oils, mayonnaise, salad dressing and shortening – Up two and a half cents a pound.
Oranges – Up 12 cents a 75-pound container of California oranges; up six cents a 90-pound crate of Florida oranges.
Coated fabrics – Up 17.5 per cent.
Soybean adhesives – 27 cents to 70 cents per hundredweight increase.
Rubber items used in manufacturing – Up 15–17 per cent.

In addition, OPA removed from price control the following commodities: Honey; specified frozen fruits; aluminum furniture; chewing gum; prepared flour mixes; some insecticides.
*
The nation’s railroads, which enjoyed their most profitable years in history during the war, continue to holler for higher rates and state they are losing money. Recently, the ICC authorized the Seaboard Air Line and the Atlantic Coast Line railroads to operate lines in western Florida to serve a new plant being constructed by the Victor Chemical Workers, designed to manufacture yellow phosphorus from ore. The two railroads estimate they will divide a yearly profit of $133,454 on gross revenues of $361,882 for the one operation ... Class I railroads had an estimated net income after interest and rentals of $35,000,000 in July, the carriers have reported to the Association of American Railroads.
*
Farm Notes
The U.S. Department of Agriculture is already readying plans for a scarcity program to keep farm prices up. The Department plans to extend a system of crop "guides” over major farm commodities, telling the farmer in advance how much of each important crop is needed, and how much of that total his own soil shall produce. There is a system of indirect penalties for those not cooperating.
The Department, as a start, is “planning” for 16 per cent fewer potatoes next year ... Farm machinery production in August totaled $66.7 million, a 13 per cent gain over July, and the highest monthly output in history. The new peak was achieved despite work stoppages at Allis-Chalmers and Case plants ... International Harvester will have in production next summer a new cotton picker which will do the work of 30 to 60 cotton pickers ... The American Military Government in Japan has announced a two-year plan to achieve an agrarian reform calculated to abolish absentee landlordism – requisition 70 per cent of Japan’s rented farmland, reimburse the landlords in government bonds, and re-sell the land on 30-year terms, to Japanese peasants. But the American bourgeoisie is incapable of carrying through even such a mild bourgeois reform as is contemplated by the Army in Japan. Already, doubt is being expressed in the plan’s efficacy, for enforcement has been placed in the hands of the Japanese bureaucrats, who are thereby being asked to oust their own class from political power, to force their own fathers, brothers, uncles and cousins to sell their land. It won’t work the Army way.
*
Following the wave of bank failures during the big depression of the 1930’s, the government established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to insure bank deposits against bank failures. The year 1945 was the first calendar year in three-fourths of a century without a bank failure.
Capital and surplus of the FDIC now stands at $929 millions.
What is not widely known is that that figure represents only 59/100 of one per cent of the total insured bank deposits of $158 billions.
There are no less than 17 banks in the nation, each with deposits in excess of the capital and surplus of FDIC. That is, failure of just one of these banks might practically wipe out the FDIC.
Banks today don’t retain the ratio of capital on hand to meet deposits that they used to. The ratio of total capital accounts to total assets has gradually declined from 35 per cent in 1875 to 5.7 per cent at the end of 1945. In the words of the FDIC: “The degree of protection afforded depositors by the capital of banks is now materially less than in former years.”
The FDIC was established largely for psychological reasons – to give the masses a feeling that their money in the bank was secure.
*
A huge world oil oversupply looms in the next few years, according to Minor S. Jameson, Jr., economist of the Independent Petroleum Association of America. The reason? Because the potential production of foreign fields, particularly in the Middle East, which can be developed “within a reasonably short time, is so much larger than any foreseeable world demands.” Jameson says the world oil market could easily be flooded with an additional 6,800,000 barrels per day, of which about 5,500,000 barrels daily would come from the Middle East. He sees a growing pressure to invade the markets now supplied from U.S. sources, and urges convocation of an oil import policy meeting between government and industry.
 
Notes
Canadian Car & Foundry Co., Ltd., of Montreal, just completed the final section of an order for 4,000 steel gondola cars for South African railways and harbors. The same company also has an order for gondolas for the Portuguese East African roads. In each case, the Canadian company obtained contracts for equipment formerly made by British and European producers ... The Aetna Life Insurance Co. is in the process of purchasing five California department stores and a warehouse, at a cost of $10,000,000. The Los Angeles and Oakland stores of I. Mangin & Co., and the Los Angeles warehouse of Bullock’s Inc., already have so changed hands. Next spring Aetna will buy the Bullock stores in Pasadena and Palm Springs. Last January, Aetna paid $6,750,000 for the Bamberger stores in Newark, N.J. ... Aetna, incidentally, is one of the “poorer” life insurance firms. In 1935 it ranked twelfth down the list of insurance companies, one-eighth the size of Metropolitan.
 




First, let’s climb the price spiral for the week ending October 11: Pots and pans and enamelware sold by mail order, up 5 per cent; clothing and other items of cotton, up 1–2 per cent; poultry prices, not under control, up 50 per cent in the past month; increases in the delivered prices of iron and steel products; Douglas fir doors, ceiling raised 4.5 per cent; pine millwork, up 3.9 per cent; cafe price ceilings on meat meals, up 15 per cent; California rice, up 23–85 cents a 100 pounds; rubber, up 4.21–14.12 per cent; household soaps and cleaners, prices raised; prices of meals on dining-cars decontrolled; cigarettes, up 1 cent a pack, or 6 per cent; salt fish, up 2–4 cents a pound; herring, up 4½ cents a can; California sardines, up 14 per cent or 1½ cents on a 15-ounce can; ceilings on veal, up 7–8 cents a pound ; on beef and pork, up 1–2 cents a pound.
Week by week, from every direction, Big Business nips our pocketbooks. Flushed with wartime super profits, insatiable in its greed, industry shoves the prices of its commodities ever higher. When the masses, goaded desperately, dare to strike to obtain wage increases, all the watchdogs of capitalism shriek in chorus.
The government that protects the wealthy in their robbery, turns with a snarl to confront the workers when they demand decent wages.
In the marathon between wages and prices, except for isolated instances, the bosses can always win, because they have the government on their side. The only ultimate solution for the workers lies in a workers’ government and a socialized economy.
*
Personal borrowing of money to be paid back in monthly instalments has soared 50 per cent since the end of the war. One prominent instalment banker told the Wall Street Journal he believes many people are borrowing just to make ends meet on day-to-day living costs. “With living expenses racing ahead of their earnings,” he said, “they may be borrowing just because it’s the easiest way to keep their heads above water pending a hoped-for increase in pay or a cut in living costs.”
The business of making instalment loans is fabulously profitable. Most states permit interest rates of thirty-six per cent. Most instalment loans go to men and women with low incomes, in the $l,500–$4,500 a year bracket. The business is so attractive to banks that 80 per cent of them now make personal loans, whereas 15 years ago almost none of them did.
*
Here is yet more evidence that the plight of the people is worsening in this beautiful post-war world: Total redemption of E bonds (those are the bonds the bosses made you buy during the war if you wanted to hold down your job) in September were $406,136,000, or $98,290,000 in excess of E-bond sales for the month.
 
The Wall Street Mind
I am always interested in examples of how the minds of the wealthy work, and especially so when the evidence comes from the rich themselves. Here’s a pure example, quoted from a recent letter to the Wall Street Journal. The writer, apparently a landlord, relates that recently one of his tenants ran an ad for common laborers. At least 100 men answered, all wanting work. “This is the first time in several years,” he writes, “that I have had an associate tell me he had been able to turn workers away in numbers to amount to anything. It is a very hopeful sign.”
Ponder on that. How callous must be the person who can find gratification at the sight of a hundred unemployed men seeking work and being turned away. Each one of the hundred is a man, with all the needs and feelings and thoughts and hopes and cares that are common to us all. Many of them are fathers, husbands, with children at home waiting to be fed and clothed, with wives worrying over how to make ends meet.
Yet this scoundrel sees “hope” in the fact that these men are denied work “in numbers to amount to anything.” To make a man like that really sing before breakfast, a good spate of unemployment – say about 10,000,000 – would do the trick. Then wages might be battered down, then profits could soar still further.
 




No Soap
The strike of the meatpacking trust not only brings us “no steak” but “no soap.” The critical shortage of soap is worsening rapidly. The average bar of soap is 50-70 per cent tallow. The tallow comes from steers. When steers are held off the market by the banker-controlled cattle associations, the supply of soap begins to dry up. The average bar of soap also has 20–30 percent coconut oil, crushed from the imported coconut meat (copra). The coconut oil industry is now holding its product for higher price ceilings, offering almost no oil for shipment in October and November.
Things are getting to the point where it is difficult or impossible to send your clothes to the laundry either. Recently for the first time in its history the biggest laundry in Philadelphia was told by its soap supplier that soap deliveries were being slashed in half. A Pittsburgh laundry says it has been given a soap quota of about 25 per cent of normal. Proctor & Gamble, big soapmaker, says its supply of soap fat on hand totals only 50 per cent of its supply in 1940–41.
My advice to Labor Action readers is to rush to the stores and buy up all the soap you can, before them damned hoarders get it.
 
Foreign Notes
The U.S. State Department is urging American businessmen to protest immediately to the Polish government against nationalization of more than 900 firms in Poland, “some of which involve American interests.” Here is what the Polish government plans: On September 30, it published a list of 513 firms to be nationalized without compensation to the owners, on grounds the plants were owned by the German government or German citizens. In addition, the Poles published a list of 404 firms for which it proposed to compensate the owners. We all accept it as a natural thing that our State Department would seek to organize a protest against any action of a foreign government that might threaten the interests of wealthy Americans.
But can you imagine the U.S. Labor Department ever urging American labor to protest against a foreign government that was exploiting or murdering workers ... Brazil has taken over the 60-mile Sao Paulo Railway, held by British interests since 1856. The road is the nation’s most important commercial line, running from the coffee port of Santos inland to the industrial city of Sao Paulo. The British are quite happy about the deal. Brazil pays them about $26 million for the road, in federal bonds, at seven per cent annual interest ... Despite U.S. protests, Sweden has signed an agreement with Russia, extending to that country a credit of $278 millions for Russian purchases in Sweden during the next five years.
Under the pact, the two countries will barter annually $55 millions worth of goods. Russia expects to buy electrical machinery, locomotives, and other heavy equipment ... Stimulated by demands of the recent war, Mexican mining and manufacturing expanded greatly, according to a report just released by the U.S. Tariff Commission. Among the new enterprises in Mexico are plants for the manufacture of iron and steel, tin plate, rayon fibre, acetic acid, copper sulfate, cellulose and cement.
*
To give you an idea of how the building supply industry is prospering. The Celotex Corporation has just reported to its stockholders on the nine months ended July 31, 1946. Consolidated net earnings, after all charges and taxes, were $2,436,329. This compares with $489,498 in the same period a year ago. Dividends rose from 49 cents a share to $2.62 ... Net income of the privately-owned electric power and light industry for the eight months ended August 31, is $457 millions, or $106 millions more (30 per cent higher) than the same period in 1945 ... Fairbanks, Morse & Co., despite a 5½-month strike at its Beloit, Wis., plant, will show a profit for the year ending December 31, it reports. How? Simple. While the company suffered a net loss of $357,363 for the first six months, it took itself a $1 million tax carry-back to more than wipe out the loss.
*
Squeeze Play at the Treasury
The American Bankers Association and the big insurance companies, together with Treasury Secretary John Snyder, are cooking up a good one. It probably won’t be served this year, but it’s worth watching. The bankers want the government to discontinue its policy of borrowing money for short terms at low interest rates, and to adopt a policy of long-term borrowing at high interest rates. The reason for their concern is obvious. The treasury is now paying about ⅞ths of one per cent for money for one year. The bankers want a special 25-year 2% per cent bond. A long-term bond would increase the present staggering $5 billion annual interest load on the public debt. A 2½ per cent bond of $3 billion face value, such as the bankers want, would cost $75 million in interest. A short-term $3 billion issue paying ⅞ths of one per cent interest could cost about. $26.24 million. The bankers would get a handout here of $48 million yearly on interest. And that’s just on $3 billion, remember. Treasury bills, notes and certification are now maturing at the rate of $8 billion a month. Further, a change in the Treasury’s borrowing policy would have the effect of raising interest rates throughout the country. In the recent lush years, thousands of corporations have completed their refunding operations at low interest rates.
 




Paste this one in your hat, to refer to when the Eightieth Congress reconvenes in January. President Truman’s advisers, who have been racking their brains to figure out a way to outlaw strikes in the basic industries, have come up with a plan whereby, when such a strike appears, a committee of both houses of Congress would proclaim that a “national emergency” had arisen because of the strike and would invoke compulsory arbitration. The Labor Department believes that a blanket compulsory arbitration-law would be too crude, but that if introduced piecemeal – as each strike arises – such compulsion could be put over.
The men around Truman are also preparing for a drive on Congress to repeal the statutes which exempt unions from anti-trust prosecution. Industry-wide strikes are to be designated “monopolistic conspiracies against the general interest.” The idea is to bar industry-wide bargaining by a ruling that would prevent a union from bargaining with more than one-half of the industry in joint negotiations with several companies. The aim is to smash the effectiveness of nation-wide unions and reduce bargaining to the local plant level.
Big Business knows that its policy of continuously raising prices will make inevitable new labor disputes early in 1947. It figures that, with the 1946 fall elections out of the way, the new Congress is the one that can be depended upon to hamstring the union movement.
 
*
Here are some increases in the prices of uncontrolled meat subsidies since meat was recontrolled: In San Francisco, eggs up 5–10 cents a dozen, to 95 cents; in Washington, D.C., chicken prices up 10 to 50 per cent; in Chicago, halibut up 4 cents a pound, shrimp up 10 cents a pound. The dearth of fresh meat is rapidly spreading to prepared and canned meats.
In the four days from September 19 to September 23, milk went up 1½ cents a quart in Chicago. The OP A granted increases up to 8 cents a square foot on imported skins for tanners’ leathers – granted increases of 2–3 per cent on building materials by permitting the manufacturers to add increased freight rates to existing ceilings – increased the ceiling price on casein by a substantial amount – permitted a 10 per cent increase on candy bars – and upped the price of inner-spring mattresses 12 per cent.
*
As the legal market in meat is turned off, the black market is turned on again by the packers. Most of the nation’s meat markets are closed or closing. The AFL Butcher Workers have nothing to propose but the program of the bosses: i.e., end OPA control of meat prices. Black market prices in New York are about double the ceiling, with 2¾-pound steaks selling for $2.10 (ceiling, $1.21). Some black market shops are predating their invoices to dates when meat was uncontrolled. Others are selling direct to the consumer’s back door through delivery boys. One operator near New York City reported that customers are beginning to ask for credit. “Apparently some people are finding such expensive meat is busting their budgets,” says the Wall Street Journal.
In St. Louis less than 20 of the largest retailers have 5,000,000 pounds of meat in cold storage.
One fact throws a lightning flash on who is profiting from the black market. Under the black market that prevailed until June 30, profits of the meat packers were at a very high rate. With ceilings off, profits of both Armour & Co. and John Morrell & Co. declined, 20.6 per cent and 12.6 per cent respectively. With the reinstatement of ceilings and the return to the black market, it will be interesting to observe if profits of the meat trust again zoom. That would be important evidence that the great packing plants are maintaining “kept” black market plants somewhere in the east, to which they divert animals from their plants in Chicago, East St. Louis and Kansas City.
*
Despite the continued shortages of consumer goods, business inventories reached an all-time high in July. Inventories were $18 billion at the manufacturing level, $4.6 billion at the wholesaler level, and $7.4 billion at the retailer level, for a total of $30 billion. The Treasury is concerned, and warned banks to use caution in making loans on inventories. In the past, swollen inventories have foreshadowed a curtailment of demand and a weakening of commodity prices. For the first time since V-J Day, in July the value of new orders received by manufacturers declined from the previous month’s level.
*
Department store sales for the week ending August 31 in 16 leading cities were 45 per cent above the corresponding period a year ago. A good share of these increased sales figures is accounted for by higher prices ... Earnings of Henry C. Lytton’s (the Hub Store in Chicago) increased 500 per cent for the first half of this year ... Montgomery Ward & Co. reported record sales of $91,864,402 for August, as compared with sales of $48,686,552 for August, 1945 – a gain of 89 per cent. Sales of Sears, Roebuck were up 55.8 per cent from 1945 at the end of the first six months. Sales of Aldens, Inc., were up 44 per cent in the same period; of Spiegel, Inc., up 54 per cent.
*
The Union Trust Co. of Pittsburgh and the Mellon National Bank, both Mellon institutions, have consolidated to become the Mellon National Bank & Trust Co. With a combined capital and surplus of $150 million, the bank ranks fifth in the world among commercial banks. This is the 53rd bank merger of the year in the United States.
The Mellon family and a small number of close associates control a substantial segment of the American economy. Among the industrial corporations closely held by them are Gulf Oil Corporation, Hoppers Co., Aluminum Co. of America, and the giant Pittsburgh Coal Co. Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Co. is also assigned to the Mellon group, which also has large holdings in Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, American Rolling Mill Co., Crucible Steel Co. of America, and Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co. The only Mellon railroad is the Virginian Railway Co. Mellon utilities are the United Light & Power Co. and Brooklyn Union Gas Co. Total assets of the Mellon group were estimated at $3,332 millions in 1939 by the National Resources Committee. During the war the family, of course, made super-profits, and the figure is doubtless much higher today.
 

