


“BREAD AND FREEDOM”
This is the theme and battle-cry of the Poznan working class. Bread and Freedom: simple and profound; literal, yet eloquent and touching; an elementary appeal and because of it, elemental and thoroughly revolutionary. With such slogans inscribed on their banners, the revolutionary workers of Poznan have struck a mighty blow against dictatorship. Poznan followed by three years the June uprising of East Berlin workers, and because it was the second such event – and because of its special timing – its repercussions are even greater.
The Poznan revolution is far from aborted. The working class of that industrial city has not been crushed. The Poznan revolution was a dramatic, planned revolutionary action which must be regarded as a phase of the mounting revolutionary ferment behind the Iron Curtain. The momentarily “defeated” populace of Poznan, itself, understands this. In none of the reports in the press can one detect that the Poznan workers feel defeated or demoralized. On the contrary, all the evidence points to a defiant working class in Poland’s fourth largest city which understands the service it has performed for democracy, for independence – for Bread and Freedom.
The aspirations of the Poznan workers went beyond the town limits, and their demands were far more general than economic reforms. Their battle against low wages and high production quotas was but an element of their revolutionary protest against political and economic dictatorship, against Russian invaders and Polish Quislings. “Tell the outside world that this is our revolution,” the Poznan workers shouted to Western businessmen in the city (expecting to attend an international trade fair).
In this they were not frustrated. The entire Stalinist empire has been shaken by the repercussions. Poznan was a preview of what lies in wait for the totalitarian ruling class. The entire working class of the city revolted and they had the complete support of the civilian population. More than that, the revolutionary workers were aided by soldiers and even by police. Arms were secured Tanks were captured. Barricades were erected. The hated symbols of oppression, the headquarters of the Communist Party and the local prison were captured, the latter gutted and the prisoners released.
What happened in Poznan can happen in all Poland, and can spread throughout the length and breadth of the totalitarian empire. And this thought strikes home most clearly to the oppressors. They are a hated minority, hated by the workers, by the peasants, by housewives, by the young, by the old, even by many in the army. They could contain the Poznan rising, but they know that the social conditions which generated it exist throughout the empire? Thus, in East Germany, with the Berlin uprising still fresh in mind, the CP responded to the Poznan events immediately and with understandable alarm. The East German Party organ, Neues Deutschland, attributing the Poznan revolt to the work of “provocateurs” issued a warning that could only be intended for the working class of East Germany: “[It is] a big mistake that democratization means a softening toward the brutal enemies of democracy.” Furthermore, “freedom for the people and freedom for provocateurs is a different thing. There is no freedom of the second kind with us.” By “provocateurs” is meant all those who oppose the regime, i.e., the overwhelming majority of the population.
 
WHAT OF THE “DEMOCRATIZATION” that is going on in Poland? What of the “conflict” between the “softs” and the “hards” in the Polish Communist Party? Following the Twentieth Congress it was in Poland, presumably, that “relaxation” and “democratization” were moving forward most rapidly. Now, all the stupidities which have been uttered from all corners of the globe by politicians and experts who had been taken in, hoodwinked, have been exposed in Poznan. Conflict does exist within the Polish Communist Party. Some bureaucrats want to relax, others fear to do so; some, perhaps, would like to act a little freer of the Kremlin, others fear to chance a show of independence; some want to make concessions to workers’ “grievances,” others in the Party are opposed to any dealings with the rabble. These inner-party conflicts are not to be denied. They are important. But what is of greater importance is to understand the limitations of these conflicts. And their boundaries have been shown at Poznan. The hundreds of workers who were killed, the thousands arrested attest to the limitations of totalitarian “democratization.”
The Polish Party leaders have their differences. Ochab, the Party secretary, is the reputed “hard” Premier Josef Cyrankiewicz, is the “soft.” Ochab is in favor of trials of the Poznan prisoners in a spirit of retribution; Cyrankiewicz favors punitive measures, but, as he assures the British Labor Party, not in a spirit of vengeance. Is there a difference? Obviously. A great difference, a fundamental cleavage, a conflict between one leader moving toward democracy while another stubbornly upholds the banner of totalitarianism? Hardly. Ochab is the “hard” and Cyrankiewicz is the “soft,” but it was Premier Cyrankiewicz who upon learning of the Poznan revolt immediately broadcast over the Warsaw radio: “everyone who raises his hand against the people may be sure it will be hacked off in the interest of the working class, in the interest of raising our standard of living, and in the interest of the fatherland.
Cyrankiewicz the Soft, is prepared to hack off the hands of the entire Polish working class ” in its own interests, of course. It is of such stuff that totalitarian “democrats” and “softs” are made.
 
POZNAN DESTROYED THE MYTH of totalitarian “democratization.” This myth is not its only victim. It is no less decisive a proof of the bankruptcy of those in the West, intellectuals, real and professed, ex-radicals, superannuated students, academicians, disillusioned nobodies, all of whom will assure you that the working class really isn’t very much. Highly overrated “strata of society.” “Karl Marx,” they will tell you, “is thoroughly outdated, disproven. He said the working class would fulfill its historic mission of liberating itself and all society from oppression and it hasn’t done it yet.” And while the disillusioned, cynical and learned mediocrities elaborate on this theme and write off the working class, the working class, living under conditions of terror, continues to elaborate on its own revolutionary theme of Bread and Freedom preparing to wipe out dictatorship. That is one lesson of Berlin, June 1953, and Poznan, June 1956.
 




One of the means whereby Stalinists keep their various parties intact locally, and in harmony internationally, is their highly skilled manipulative use of language. The cliches employed by the Stalinists internationally and their constant repetition of favored terms assume the proportions of a separate tongue – a sort of Stalinist Esperanto. Accompanying this special language and giving it form and substance, the Kremlin has devised standardized rationalizations for its innumerable twists and turns tantamount to a special Stalinist school of “reasoning” – a sort of mumbo jumbo which, combining the best in jesuitism and voodooism, can prove yesterday’s Deity today’s Demon. Or vice versa.
Following the Twentieth Congress of the Russian Communist Party the Stalinist Esperanto has received many worthy additions: Cult of the Individual and Cult of the Personality will match the catchwords Social-Fascist or United Front From Below or Disruptor in Stalinism’s literary museum. But of all the new, standard terms there is one that is outstanding for its extensive use: “Revelations.” In the major documents of all Stalinist parties, in their letters, discussions and speeches the word invariably appears to describe Khrushchev’s uncovering of Stalin’s crimes.
 
Revelations
It is as if the ominous storm clouds above Red Square dramatically parted-much in the manner as the Red Sea opened up before Moses – a shaft of clear, penetrating sunlight, breaking through the dark cumulus formations, suddenly illuminated Stalin in his tomb and for the first time it could be seen that where a halo was thought to be were two enormous horns. The man was a devil in subhuman form. It was the most significant and magnificent Revelation in the history of world Stalinism, one that by its very nature could only be witnessed first by the leading oracles of the Russian Communist Party. But once revealed the Revelation suddenly struck the leaders of the world Communist parties with more or less equal force at more or less the same time. In London, in Paris, in Rome, in New York and, of course, in all the satellite countries and China the Revelation was attested to by the Party leadership. Here and there, such as is reported to have been the case with Maurice Thorez, the Revelation was “resisted” – but only for a moment. For what was now seen so clearly by the Russian Politburo could not be overlooked for long by its international servitors. When the Revelation took hold of Foster he could see that Stalin was “pathological” (and where might that eventually lead Foster who was personally groomed by Stalin to take over the American party?), Togliatti acknowledges that Stalin had organized a reign of terror, Pollitt and Thorez now recognize the crimes of Djugashvili. The entire world leadership was seized with religious tremors following the miraculous Revelation on the Kremlin Mount and the devil is now being exorcized with ritualistic incantations against Stalin, “the cult of the personality,” “the cult of the individual,” “the reign of terror,” “errors,” “crimes,” etc., etc. Public penance and self-criticism is on the order of the day.
But is Khrushchev’s account of Stalin’s crimes accurate? Perhaps this Revelation is only a delusion, the handiwork of dark, malignant, disruptive forces? Woe unto the party leader who takes this view, who doesn’t recognize a Revelation when the Politburo asserts it in such gory detail and with such urgency! No one in the top leadership dares publicly and persistently to challenge the charge that Stalin murdered innocent people or dispute the thinly veiled charge that Stalin killed Kirov. For twenty-five years there was not a single critical word of Stalin or the Politburo in any Communist Party publication in any country. For twenty-five years the leaders of world Stalinism have “loved” their “genial Stalin.” What are the facts which have made such a fickle thing of their love? How do they know now that their entire lives were a monstrous lie as they now stand stripped naked, bereft of any personal dignity and deprived of that private psychological sanctuary that must have been sought by even the most calloused Stalinist leaders who paid daily homage to Stalin and Russia? Where are the facts?
But who needs facts? There has been a Revelation! a miraculous event of such force that by comparison the passion evoked by the vision of Joan of Arc was but a country girl’s passing fancy.
 
THE READINESS WITH WHICH the leadership of the world Communist Parties accepted the repudiation of Stalin the Criminal was Act I, the first phase of their reaction, i.e., acquiescence, to the Twentieth Congress. The curtain has already been raised on Act II and much of its performance concluded. The theme of this Act is: we are not wholly satisfied with Khrushchev’s report, please give us a good “Marxist explanation” for the rise of Stalin the Fiend. The text for the Act was largely written by the leaders of four non-satellite Communist Parties.
Here are a few excerpts from Act II:

Togliatti: “What is necessary is to furnish an 	explanation based on Marxist criteria showing how such errors were 	able to slip [sic!] into the evolution of the Socialist Society.”
 
National Comm, of the American CP: “A basic 	analysis of how such perversions of socialist democracy, justice and 	internationalism were permitted to develop and continue unchecked 	for 20 years must still be made by the leadership of the CPSU. It 	needs also to be made by Marxists everywhere.”
 
The French CP Politburo: “A profound Marxist 	analysis is necessary to determine the over-all circumstances in 	which the personal power of Stalin could be exercised.”
 
The British CP calls for “A profound Marxist 	analysis of the causes of degeneration in the functioning of Soviet 	democracy and party democracy.”

All of the above lines were read within a week or so of each other. What perfect timing! What uniformity of language and criticism! And what independence of Moscow! It would be remarkable, in the realm of the miraculous – if only this display of independence were genuine and self- determined. But the “criticisms” of Moscow, the demand for “Marxist explanations” from Moscow, are so obviously predicated on the permission of Moscow, that it is almost painful to read of the “experts” on Russia and international Communism, who believe that Dennis, Togliatti, Thorez and Pollitt are leading – not beheading – a rebellion against the Kremlin.
In the first place it should be noted that the “criticisms” and “demands” made of Moscow by Western Communist leaders are much blander than has been suggested by editorialists and headline writers. The strongest prose used was by Togliatti in a statement to the Italian CP’s Central Committee and nothing in those portions reprinted in the American press (which, naturally, seeks the most lurid excerpts) bears out the false impression recently created that there are genuine and deep differences between Moscow and any Western Party hetman. “Questions” are asked, “problems” are raised, “skepticism” is voiced, greater party autonomy is suggested, but all in a tone of proper respect and cordiality.
 
ONCE THE LEADERS of the non-satellite Communist movements have accepted the Revelations they have proven conclusively that they are to remain in the service of Russian totalitarianism. If there is to be a break between Togliatti and Moscow, for example, it will be at the initiative of the latter only. An intimate of Stalin’s, he has been the sharpest in his condemnation of the Stalin reign of terror – on the instructions of the Russian Communist Party. An enemy of Tito, a man whom he hated, Togliatti was forced to do penance before him, and made to do so – by the Russians. To believe that this man is now defying Khrushchev is to believe that a mollusk is prepared to give battle to a shark.
Even the “criticisms” by the Western Communist leaders, if one wanted to take them at face value, could be interpreted as part of their efforts to ingratiate themselves with Khrushchev’s Politburo. For they are actually saying to Moscow: we are so convinced of Stalin’s crimes and the merit of your exposures that they need further amplification and explanation. You have informed us that we have lived the Big Lie for at least 20 years and we agree. But please give us a plausible explanation in the best Marxist phraseology. Thus, rest assured that we will not dispute your Revelations which have their source in your unimpeachable authority and be advised that your Marxist explanation will receive the same consideration.
But the leaders of the Communist parties would hardly choose public criticism of Moscow as its way of communicating its servility if that were its sole purpose. They have less subtle ways of demonstrating their fealty. Public criticism by the leaderships, no matter how sham it may be for them, is nevertheless a sensational event in the history of Stalinism, one that nobody would have or could have predicted a year ago. Its source lies primarily in the confusion, resentment, demoralization and disaffection which quickly followed the Twentieth Congress among rank and file party members and supporters the world over. Their god was destroyed, myths were discarded, the entire Stalinist folklore shattered before their bewildered eyes. Where the top leaderships of the Western parties feign independence of the Moscow hierarchs for not having exposed Stalin sooner, the rank-and-file of these same parties are genuinely indignant with their leaderships for not having seen through Stalin’s crimes, for having been puppets, for their complicity in Stalin’s monstrous acts. Thus the desanctification of Stalin and general efforts of the Russian bureaucracy to relax its control by terror found their unhappy repercussions – unhappy for the Communist parties – among the ranks of Western parties. If Khrushchev could denounce Stalin, why shouldn’t an aggrieved rank and filer in the United States feel free to take Foster to task for his complicity in Stalin’s rise to power and for any other special grievance which had been repressed until now? What is more, he must continue to reason, if our party was so closely tied to a country tyrannized by a maniac, then let our party be more independent in the future and avoid such hazards. Given the prevalence of such attitudes, had the leadership tried to stampede the rank-and-file and the secondary leadership into line, it would only have destroyed itself, its party or both in the process.
The criticism made of Russia by the top Stalinist bureaucrats is a forced response to pressure from below. But it was made with the understanding toleration of the Russian dictatorship. It has even been suggested by some that it was made at the Russians’ behest; perhaps – that cannot be excluded; but it is not necessary to go that far. Anyone who has a serious doubt of this, be it a befuddled Dulles or a sophisticated Deutscherite, exhibits a major gap in his understanding of Stalinism as a world movement and an inability to interpret what is made so obvious by the simultaneity of response and similarity of language used by the abject heads of the Communist parties in their temporarily assigned roles as “polycentric” (to use Togliatti’s term) independent thinkers and friendly critics of Russia.
 
DOES A MAN LIKE TOGLIATTI enjoy his assumed role as the chieftain of a “polycentric” Communist party? Does it awaken some nostalgia for the days when he was more man and less pup pet? Perhaps. Who knows? We are consoled in our ignorance of Togliatti’s psychological mechanisms by the knowledge that no one else knows either. At any rate it is of tertiary importance. What is important to remember is that Togliatti – or Thorez, or Pollitt or Foster in their native lands – is the leader of an Italian movement which seeks to reorganize Italian society on Bureaucratic Collectivist beginnings and that he is the representative of a strata within Italian society which aspires to rule as a Bureaucratic Collectivist class.
There is nothing in any rule of formal logic to exclude the possibility of a party of Bureaucratic Collectivism, such as in Italy or France, breaking with the ruling monoliths in Moscow, even before coming to power. (Where Bureaucratic Collectivism already rules the problem of its relations to the Russian ruling class is potentially more explosive.) Politically, however, it makes no sense at all. Togliatti, for example, as a representative type, cannot initiate a break with the Russians. There are many reasons for this.
In the first place, for reasons of mass psychology Togliatti cannot repudiate the Russian system or disavow the ruling Russian Communist Party. It is partially on the prestige and power of the Russians that the Italian Communist Party is able to maintain its grip over the Italian working class. With “socialist” Russia as its benefactor and ally, and added to it the enormous realm of the satellite “people’s democracies” and with the inspiring example of the Chinese “republic,” the Italian Communist Party is able to impart to the working class a feeling of confidence and a sense of involvement in the vast irresistible rush of historical “progress.” “Socialism has conquered capitalism in half the world,” the Togliattis say, in effect. “Our world movement and our national Communist party is invincible,” they conclude. To break with Russia, now, or in the foreseeable future, would eliminate from the arsenal of Italian totalitarianism one of its most effective political weapons.
Second, to foster or to permit a split, or, even to insist upon actual independence from Moscow, in any way determined by Khrushchev’s Revelations, would immediately endanger the position of the present leadership of the Italian – or any other – Communist Party which could hardly be certain of escaping retribution for its own complicity in Stalin’s crimes.
Third, to seek independence from the Moscow orbit now, as a reaction to the Revelations of monstrous violations of democratic rights in Russia, could only encourage and activate tire democratic instincts of many rank and file party workers and supporters. They might begin to question, to dispute, not only today, but tomorrow, insisting upon party democracy as their natural, permanent right. That would be anathema for a Bureaucratic Collectivist party, particularly a mass party such as exists in Italy or France. The leadership tries to create within the party the authoritarian atmosphere of a totalitarian state, whose level of authority, of course, is circumscribed by its limited, non-governmental character. It cannot execute dissenters, it expels them; it does not dictate repressive legislation, it promulgates manifestos which must be adhered to at the risk of losing membership status; it does not exercise a state police authority over the masses, but it does aspire to achieve an iron discipline and unthinking acceptance of the latest party line. A microcosmic precursor of the totalitarian state, the party cannot abide an extended democratic, internal life.
But isn’t there dissension in the Communist parties now? Aren’t the leaders of various Communist Parties permitting differences to appear in the party press? Hasn’t that miserable agglomeration at the head of the American Communist Party organized a “Discussion Committee” which fills the pages of the Daily Worker with auto-lacerations, inviting the membership to take a turn with the whip? Isn’t this taste of internal discussion and criticism of the Russians unique?
We repeat: the top leaderships of the Communist Parties have been forced into this position against their wishes. Ferment among the rank and file produced by the Revelations could not be coped with by standard operating procedures. In permitting a relaxation of internal discipline the world Communist Parties are leading from weakness, not strength. They are trying to make the best of a bad situation, to forestall mass disaffection and bring the party to its more accustomed techniques without too many casualties.
It is axiomatic that in the relations between the Kremlin and the Communist Parties, particularly in the West, there can be no independence and no equality. But Moscow needs the support of the Italian and French working class. It can dispense with the services of a Togliatti or a Thorez – which it may yet decide to do – but its mass base in Europe is another matter. To maintain its influence over millions of European workers the Kremlin has given the national leaderships the green light to criticize. Some of these leaders may have used this green light to bypass the normal show of uncritical devotion to the Kremlin with unseemly speed. But the Kremlin is sure of such types as Thorez and Togliatti. It is not so sure of the French and Italian parties’ memberships. It had no alternative to authorizing the national committees of these parties to go along with the rank and file, to harmonize with their moods, even to simulate disapproval.
Thus the stage for Act III was set (an act only insofar as it concerns the subordination of the leadership of Western parties to the Kremlin). The theme of this act is Explanations: good Marxist Explanations for the rise of Stalin’s reign of terror. Following the Explanations, which will be mulled over for a moment or two, the performing hirelings at the head of the Communist Parties will then murmur their lines, in some cases with the necessary affected hesitations: “Well, comrades, we demanded a Marxist explanation and here it is.” Fissures in the national parties will be sealed, it is hoped, with the rank and file appeased by Moscow’s explanations and by the show of independence of leaders locally. That this is Moscow’s tack should have been clear to anyone with a modicum of understanding of Stalinist totalitarianism and of the relationships of Moscow to its subordinate agencies in other lands. But with the events of the past few days it is barely a matter for theorizing or speculating. On June 27th, Pravda printed, without comment, a recent report of Eugene Dennis, high potentate of the American CP. In Dennis’ report to his national committee were “criticisms” of Khrushchev’s report and a plaintive call for a Marxist explanation for Stalin’s rise to power. Dennis did not have long to wait. A week later a “Marxist explanation” was given by the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party, and others are likely to follow. Alongside absurdities in its explanation of Khrushchev and Co.’s forbearance of Stalin’s crimes, e.g., Stalin was too popular to be removed, the present collective leadership did not realize the extent of Stalin’s crimes, etc., there appeared much that is incontrovertible. The rise of Stalin is related to the fact that after the Bolshevik Revolution, Russia “was like a besieged fortress situated in a capitalist encirclement.” “In the shortest space of time, our country, without any economic help whatsoever from abroad, had to liquidate its centuries-old backwardness ...” In order to raise its technological level and “liquidate” its backwardness this “besieged fortress” had to make extreme demands on its populace, calling for “iron discipline, ever-growing vigilance and a most strict centralization of leadership which inevitably had a negative effect on the development of certain democratic features.”
Now, however, the report argues, Russia is no longer isolated, it is surrounded by friendly “People’s Democracies” and the Chinese “Republic.” Its productive forces are much greater than after the Russian Revolution. Thus, the social-economic base for an all powerful maniac no longer exists. Very “Marxistical.” Terribly “scientific.” Most convincing – to the CP’s top hacks.
The report singles out the criticisms of Togliatti by name. The monarch of the Italian party, whose rule is made uneasy by his own past, by disquiet in the ranks and his endangered alliance with Nenni’s PSI (which made serious inroads in the CP support during recent elections) had asked if Russian society has not reached “certain forms of degeneration?” Togliatti is told “There are no foundations for such a question.” He is even quoted against himself to show that he doesn’t really mean it. And what is the response of this tiger of Italian Stalinism? It is that of a well-fed and well-trained pussycat. The ink is barely dry on the “Marxist explanation” before Togliatti rushes into print with a statement of his own printed in Paese Sera voicing “unreserved approval” of Moscow and praising the “Marxist explanation” as a major step “toward clarification of questions that have been raised in the international workers and Communist movement.” And not far behind Togliatti is the statement of the Central Committee of the French Communist Party “warmly approving the resolution of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union that shows how the cult of the personality of Stalin has been surmounted in the USSR.” The French leadership is now “fully satisfied” that Russia remains the land of victorious socialism. And here, in the United States, Eugene Dennis dashed onto the front page of the Daily Worker of July 4th with a statement. Its opening sentence: “The Soviet Communist Party’s resolution is a most welcome development in the friendly interchange of opinion among Marxists of the world,” the concluding thought: “In my opinion the resolution of the CPSU goes a long way in explaining – while clearly not justifying – what has become known as the growth of the cult of the individual and the unforgivable violations of socialist legality and principles that took place in the latter period of Stalin’s leadership.” The Russian party’s statement was made known on July 1st and excerpts were printed in the New York Times the following day. The complete text was not printed in that paper until July 3rd, the same day that Dennis wrote his statement! Dennis the “independent,” Dennis the “critic” of Khrushchev’s report, Dennis the bold, demanding of Moscow a Marxist analysis thus provides us with a true measure of the depth and sincerity of his critical attitude.
For the first time the totalitarian Communist movement is faced with the possibility of internal disintegration. Its membership is both shaken and indignant. The Kremlin is forced to offer “Marxist Explanations.” But the explanations might not stick. Compounding its difficulties the Kremlin has been obliged to tolerate a breath of “democracy” in its international parties. At least one is now permitted to look crossly at the “collective leadership” and its local satraps. Compared to what existed before, this is “democracy.” For the leadership of the Communist Parties this “democracy” must be a short-lived expedient. But for the ranks this novel taste of “democracy” might become an ever more demanding habit. Such habits are deadly – for totalitarianism.
Let us not underestimate the cleverness of the Kremlin-ruled Communist movement. With the indispensable help of bourgeois politicians, the Kremlin may calm its turbulent waters, turning today’s retreat to tomorrow’s advantage.
Coincidental with the Revelations of the Twentieth Congress the Russian-directed Communist Parties embarked on their new popular front policy. The new strategy is to turn the cold war into a “smiling war,” to borrow an apt phrase from the New York Times. Where socialists, liberals and bourgeois politicians were all coupled and all condemned a short while back, their good graces are now sought. United Front is on the order of the day. Mollet is backed in the French Chamber and the Democratic Party looked at wistfully in the United States. To sell the liberal and social-democratic world once again its rotten wares the Kremlin needs to soften them up. It is here that Moscow is attempting to turn its internal world crisis to its own advantage. With Stalin denounced, Russia now ruled by the cult of collective leadership, with differences manifested within national Communist parties and between various party central committees and the Russian Politburo, the totalitarian Communist movement is attempting to pass itself off as one of amiable, independent, peace- loving democrats. Incredible as it may seem the attempt has achieved some measure of success. From many sources one now begins to hear barely audible whispers, hints, suggestions that perhaps there is really a fundamental democratic change taking place, not only in Russia, but in the structure and attitude of various Communist parties. With short memories, weaker insights and an enormous gullibility and bureaucratic mentalities, the confused liberal, the kindly pacifist and the overwhelmed social-democrat is, here and there, sucked in by the Kremlin’s New Look. And not only they. An authority no less than the Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, has given mankind the benefit of his expert analysis which must have earned him at least one round of wild applause from the Russian Politburo. In a widely heralded TV interview Dulles analyzed the division between Moscow and its Western parties as follows:
The Communist parties in the United States, France, Italy and the United Kingdom have all made statements which indicate their dissatisfaction and their belief that something must be done to make the Communist party, or international communism, more broadly based to prevent such concentration of power and provision for terrorism as existed during the Stalin era.
There is no agreement yet as to what shall be done, but there are demands arising from all quarters that something has got to be done about it.
The Secretary of State, a few moments later, underscores the above:
I think the statements issued by the various Communist parties show a very high state of dissatisfaction with the present leadership of the Communist party as exemplified by the Soviet Communist party. There is a good deal of criticism of the Khrushchev speech and a feeling it does not properly evaluate the situation, and that the trouble with Communism is much deeper than is indicated if you merely attribute it to the so-called aberrations of one man.
Is it possible that the leaderships of Western parties criticized Khrushchev with permission, possibly at the invitation, of the Russian Politburo? Dulles categorically replies:
I reject that theory. To my mind the evidence is so strong the other way that, to me, it is quite conclusive that this is coming about as a result of real differences, and that there is not a prearranged pattern in this matter at all.
“Real differences” between whom? Between Moscow and Togliatti or between Moscow and the CP rank and file? There is no doubt that Dulles means the former.
With these insights the Secretary of State continues to build his now solidly rooted reputation as nobody’s fool but his own.
Those who, like Dulles, accept the sincerity of, say, Togliatti’s “criticisms” and demands of assurances that Russia will be protected from a reincarnated Stalin must also ask us to credit Togliatti with a genuine ignorance of Stalin’s crimes. What Dulles asks of us is to believe that Togliatti on learning the truth about Stalin from Khrushchev, became so indignant, that he turned on this portly Russian who had just enlightened him and wagging his finger at Khrushchev said: “Look here, Khrushchev, better give me a Marxist explanation for how that murdering Haggard, Stalin, got so much power, and give me some security that it won’t happen again, or we’re through.” How delighted Togliatti and Khrushchev must be with this view of Dulles’, which, in effect, absolves the Togliattis from responsibility for Stalinist crimes committed during the “Stalin era.” Also they could ask for nothing better than to have the U.S. Secretary of State announce to the entire world that there are, in Dulles’ phrase, “real differences” between Togliatti and Khrushchev. More than that, if it is true, as Dulles assures us, that the Western Communist parties (not merely the rank and file membership) are beset by doubts, “that the trouble [sic] with Communism,” they now feel, “is deeper” than one-man rule, that they are determined to prevent such a concentration of power and provision for terrorism as existed under Stalin, then isn’t it true that the Communist parties, as such, are moving toward democracy? And if they are moving in this direction is it unreasonable for a peace-loving, democratic minded individual or group to respond positively to the new CP appeals for a United Front for Peace?
Dulles’ analysis is an involuntary, but signal service, to the latest political strategy of the Kremlin.
 
AS NEVER BEFORE the possibility exists for socialist parties throughout the world to win to themselves entire sections of the Communist rank and file. The disturbing and potentially disintegrating effect of the Revelations on the Communist parties is without precedent. Even the Stalin-Hitler pact was passed off as a maneuver. It was all a clever trick to stall Hitler until Russia was ready to smash him. It did not involve a repudiation of the past, it did not mean the smashing of idols, above all the Idol. While thousands, hundreds of thousands of Popular Front recruits and peripheral apologists broke with Stalinism after the Pact, the Parties were able to keep their hardened core, their experienced and most devoted members in line with its mumbo jumbo. Unlike the Pact the events of the Twentieth Congress hit at the very core, the hardened cadres, rank and filers, branch secretaries, district leaders, etc. Everything they have said and done of importance in the past, if not repudiated entirely, is now, at best, of suspect merit.
For socialist parties to capitalize on the ferment inside the CPs, however, there are two preconditions: one, there can be no compromising the fight against the Kremlin dictatorship and no let-up in exposing the hypocrisy and sham criticisms of the party leadership; second, the socialist parties must offer a militant, fighting alternative to the now vulnerable memberships of the Communist parties. The French Socialist Party can gain tremendously from the CP – but not so long as it pursues its present crass imperialist policies so repugnant to the French working class. The Italian social-democrats can make a significant dent in the CP but only if it abandons its political apologias for Western imperialism; and Nenni’s Socialist Party (PSI) might become the party of the Italian working class but only if it decisively repudiates the Italian CP and Russian totalitarianism. Political independence from the two war-camps, and a socialist democratic aggressiveness can reduce Stalinism in Europe to impotence today. Otherwise we are faced with the dreadful prospect of these totalitarian parties recovering with relatively minimal losses.
July 10
 







In our previous installment we examined the political character of the communist left-wing in the Socialist Party. In this issue our discussion is continued with a review of the events leading to the organization of two rival Communist parties and a summary of the main factors responsible for the decline of American radicalism in the post-war period. – J.F.



* * *
The Left Wing Splits
The first split in the American communist movement took place before its birth; what finally emerged out of the womb of the Socialist Party were twins; similar though not identical organizations with no fraternal love lost between them.
Prior to the formal organization of the left wing, its generally accepted tactic was to consolidate and organize its forces for capturing the Socialist Party. Largely due to the insistence of the left wing the party leadership called an emergency national convention to open in Chicago on August 31, 1919. It was there that the left wing planned to make its bid for power. As we have already seen, however, the Socialist Party leadership in an effort to retain its hegemony expelled or suspended more than a third of the party’s book membership. The problem then posed for the left wing was whether to continue in its efforts to capture the party at the convention which would require the seating of elected delegates from suspended and expelled sections or to ignore the SP convention and prepare a founding convention of a communist party.
At the June National Conference of the left wing this question split the party opposition in two. One-third of the 90 delegates, led by a bloc of Russian Federation and Michigan SP leaders, walked out on the conference when the majority agreed that despite expulsions and suspensions it was necessary to try to win the party for the left wing. The majority’s strategy was outlined in the Revolutionary Age as follows:
All state and local organizations of the Socialist Party (whether expelled or suspended) must elect their delegates to the Emergency Convention. Not to do this is to abandon the struggle in the party, to surrender to the bureaucracy.
If the Emergency Convention refused to rescind the disciplinary actions of the party leadership and seat the disputed delegates, then and only then, “all left wing delegates will secede and organize a new Communist Party.” The Russian-Michigan bloc’s refusal to participate in the SP convention was condemned as striking “directly at the left wing and revolutionary socialism.” The majority set up a National Council as an administrative body to carry out the political and strategical line adopted at the Conference.
The so-called minority of the left wing, which claimed, not without some justification, to represent more individuals than the Conference majority, organized its own leading committee, the National Organization Committee (NOC). The NOC issued The Communist (not to be confused with the New York Communist), first appearing in July, 1919. It was published in Chicago and edited by Dennis E. Batt, a prominent Michigan socialist. In The Communist and in Novy Mir, the official organ of the Russian Federation, the Conference majority was roundly condemned as “centrists” and “capitulators” for its policy aimed at capturing the SP. Whatever chance did exist for the left wing as a whole to win the party was lost by the uncompromising activities of the Russian-Michigan bloc.
The alliance between the Russian-led federations and the Michigan left wingers was an unholy affair. While they both condemned the Conference majority as centrists, the Russian federationists and the Michiganers had least in common, politically and temperamentally, of all the groups within the left wing. The Michigan left wingers, as we have seen, were opposed to the theory of mass action which was the political pride and joy of the Russians and of the left wing majority. They also had a much more modest – and accurate – appraisal of the receptivity of the American working class at the time to revolutionary agitation. The Russian Federation, on the other hand, was the most politically extreme tendency in the left wing under the delusion that it was the American counterpart of the Russian CP. These two tendencies were held together in their assaults on the left wing majority by their determination to split the Socialist Party. Once this had been accomplished and a Communist Party organized, the frail basis of their collaboration dissolved and the Michigan socialists split away from the Russian Federation-dominated CP to form the Proletarian Party.
The attacks of the Russian-Michigan bloc were not without effect. The Russians posing as the most authoritative representatives of Russian bolshevism surrounded themselves with an air of revolutionary glamour which, in a few months, was to prove irresistible to a majority of the left wing’s National Council. On July 26–27 at a conference initiated by the Russian-Michigan bloc (NOC) a “compromise” was worked out with the National Council which, in effect, was a submission of the Council to the NOC. A joint declaration was issued which called for the organization of a new party on September 1, but still left the door open for participating in the Socialist Party convention. Shortly thereafter the door was closed and all talk by this new left wing alliance of attending the convention was dropped.
This reversal of the decision of the National Left Wing at its founding conference by its National Council was politically wrong and undemocratic. The National Council was elected as an administrative body to carry out the decision of that conference to make a determined effort to win the Socialist Party for communism which it had no right to countermand.
As late as August 2, the Revolutionary Age ran articles advocating the position taken by the left-wing majority at its June conference. More than a week later, less than two weeks before the SP convention, this influential left-wing paper somersaulted and became a spokesman for the Russian-Michigan view. Fraina, the paper’s editor, who had argued with convincing dexterity for attending the convention now denounced his earlier views as though he had never held them. When the Revolutionary Age capitulated to the Russian-Michigan bloc, John Reed, Benjamin Gitlow and Eadmonn MacAlpine resigned from the paper’s staff on August 23, accusing Fraina of unscrupulously abandoning his views in order to ingratiate himself with the Russian Federation.
Thus the left-wing majority was reduced to a minority. But it still had a substantial number of left-wing socialists and a majority of the left wing’s English-speaking supporters who still aimed at making a fight for their views at the SP convention on August 31.
Early in August the National Organizing Committee issued a call together with the National Council (in violation of the June Conference decision) for the formation of a Communist Party in Chicago on September 1st – one day later and in the same city as the SP convention. The call declared that “Those who realize that the capturing of the Socialist Party as such is but an empty victory will not hesitate to respond to this call and leave the ‘Right’ and ‘Center’ to sink together with their leaders.” The “Center,” i.e., the left wingers who remained loyal to the plan of the June Conference to capture the SP, were in a hopeless position. They could not possibly overwhelm the right wing at the convention. But the attempt was made. Their strategy was to appear at the SP assemblage and demand of the convention that its first order of business be the question of the legality of the expulsions and suspensions which deprived the left wing of so many voting delegates. The contested left wing delegates attempted to take their seats as the contention was convened. With the aid of the police, summoned by SP leaders, the unrecognized left wing delegates were removed from their seats. Despite this, the left wing caucus decided that it would not as yet bolt the convention. A move was made by left delegates to take up the question of contested seats. The right wing made the empty gesture of offering to seat all contested delegates except those from Ohio and a number from New York whose cases would be reviewed later on by a committee headed by Jacob Panken. As this would still give the right a majority the left withdrew from the convention and met to organize the Communist Labor Party. Chicago became the site of three radical conventions – the Socialist Party, the Communist Party and the Communist Labor Party. It was the beginning of the protracted decline of the American socialist movement.
The failure of the left wing to make a unified effort to win the name and prestige and machinery of the Socialist Party was a calamity for the early Communist movement. It was typical of the hopeless sectarianism of this left wing that it could not work toward this objective intelligently and responsibly. It wasn’t poor tactics or poor organizational leadership which was at fault – though both were the case. The problem was ideological. The politics of the left wing were such that its supporters could not regard the Socialist Party as anything more than a sinking vessel worthy only of being scuttled. The left wing conducted a political campaign against the SP and its leadership which often bordered on vilification. It exaggerated the failings, hesitations and misdemeanors of the party in a political manner and technique that could only be reserved for the parties of European social democracy but not for the Socialist Party of America. The Socialist Party did falter in its anti-war stand as we have shown, but it never repudiated the St. Louis resolution and never rallied workers to the armies of imperialism as did the major socialist parties in Europe. For its stand, party leaders here were hounded, persecuted and jailed by the government while leaders of European socialism were rewarded with ministerial posts for their supineness. In Germany, social democracy crushed the revolution of 1919 while in the United States the SP defended the Spartacists and welcomed the revolutionary upheavals of 1919. Despite all this, the left wing coupled the Socialist Party of America with the parties of counter-revolution and its leaders were dubbed “Noskes,” “Scheidemanns” and “Kerenskys.” Instead of a reasoned and forceful criticism of the leadership, the left wing, moved by its revolutionary optimism, engaged in a frontal assault on the party which contributed to its disengagement from militants inside the Socialist Party and from the labor movement as a whole. Thousands of the best party workers were understandably repelled by the tactics of the left wing. In describing the procedures of the SP convention of 1919, for example, William Bross Lloyd, a charter member of the Communist Labor Party made some parting remarks about the SP which summed up the distorted image the left wing presented of that party. (Lloyd’s remarks were inspired by the screening of delegates to the SP convention by a special committee which interviewed all delegates to weed out those from suspended and expelled sections. The recognized delegates were given a special card. The color of the card was white.) Lloyd wrote:
The card was white, historically symbolic of the work of Finland’s White Guards and her bloody fields and streets, or Berlin’s streets red with workers’ blood spilled by our “comrades” Scheidemann, Ebert and Noske; symbolically prophetic of the part for which the Socialist Party of America has cast itself.
In the same article Lloyd referred to “‘Comrade’ ‘Seymour Stedman Noske’” and declared that the Socialist Party would be “financed by capitalism.”
The methods employed by the party leadership to secure its control at the convention were no less revolting than its conduct during the entire fight with the left wing. But nothing done before or during 1919 justified this amalgam of white cards, White Guards and the SP. In fact the resolutions adopted by the SP at this split convention mark the revolutionary high point in the life of the Socialist Party. In its Manifesto the convention “unreservedly” rejected “the policy of those Socialists who supported their belligerent capitalist governments on the plea of ‘National Defense’ – during the war and the party went on record with a pledge of “solidarity with the revolutionary workers of Russia.” And if the party leadership was opposed to unqualified support of the Third International, the overwhelming majority of the party revealed their support of the Comintern in a referendum vote on the question of international affiliation. These were not the statements or actions of a party preparing to drown the American revolution in workers’ blood. The outburst by Lloyd was more than the product of a post splitconvention fever. It was in the tradition of left wing discussion of party program and party personnel for the previous six months.
The thoughtless abandon with which the left wing castigated its opponents in the party grew out of its expectation of an approaching revolution in the United States. Those in the party who did not make similar prophecies and adapt themselves accordingly were not only blind fools but against the revolution and in the camp of “Sausage Socialism.”
What would have happened, we must ask ourselves, if the left wing modulated its voice? If in a unified and considered manner it took the party to task for its confusions and hesitations and directed its energies toward winning the Socialist Party to communism at its 1919 convention? The answer is speculative, of course, but not without its lessons for the future. The probability is that they could have succeeded. The left wing would have been even stronger numerically, it could have won the support of many old-time socialists, and it may have even won over sections of the moderate leadership. With a realistic program and a reasonable factional strategy its political and moral position in the organization could have been so strong that, despite expulsions and suspensions, the party might have been won by the left. Instead, the entire socialist movement was set back by the chosen course.
On August 31, 1919, there was one socialist organization (we discount the SLP); a few days later there were three. And in each of the three parties disunity reigned supreme. In the SP there remained a strong left wing which was to split away on several occasions in the next two years. In the Communist Party convention there was dissension from the start between the English-speaking members and the bulk of the Russian-led federations over what attitude to take toward its simultaneously organized rival, the Communist Labor Party. The former group, led by those members of the National Council which violated the decisions of its parent body, the Left Wing June Conference, sought unity with the “Centrists” now in the Communist Labor Party. But the Russians were prepared to go it alone and opposed unity negotiations with the CLP on an equal footing. The Russians prevailed, at first, as they were in a position to claim the leadership of 35,000 foreign language communists out of a total membership of 58,000. (Both figures are unquestionably exaggerated although the ratio between foreign and English speaking book members is probably accurate.) This convention had its political problems, too. Differences between the Michigan Communists and the majority of former SP left wingers came to the surface. Two political manifestos were contested, with the Michigan position presented by Dennis Batt, firmly repudiated. The two most important posts in the CP went to Charles Ruthenberg (who flitted between the two communist conventions) elected National Secretary and Fraina (until a month earlier associated with those who formed the CLP), was chosen International Secretary.
The convention of the Communist Labor Party did not fare much better. It was not a homogeneous affair and its political platform presented by John Reed ran into considerable opposition, winning by a 2–1 vote. The CLP claimed approximately 20,000 members, a figure no less inflated than that of the CP. Alexander Wagenknecht was elected Executive Secretary and John Reed picked as International Secretary.
Neither Communist convention was smoothly run, although the CP conclave had much more the air of a machine organized affair. Delegates made the rounds of the three conventions unsure of their own allegiances and often without any mandate from the rank and file. One day Charles Ruthenberg was introducing a resolution at the CLP convention and several days later he was elected to the highest post in the CP! In principle, the political programs adopted by the two conventions were essentially the same. All the sectarian traits of the left wing reached their climax in both conventions’ documents. There were differences between the two organizations, though, which would be obscured if we judged them only by their common errors. The CP manifesto was particularly harsh in its tone, abounding in cliches and pseudo-revolutionary “daring,” while the CLP document, in principle the same, was softer in language and less addicted to jargon. They were literary differences of political importance.
The political dialect of the Communist Party, led by the Russian Language Federation, revealed a party much further removed from the American political scene. The Communist Labor Party, on the other hand, had a leadership and following which was more closely attuned to American conditions and this was reflected in the idiom of its declaration and proven in the subsequent history of both organizations.
 
Immediate Causes of Communist Decline
THE COMMUNIST MOVEMENT in this country was cursed at birth with a “crisis in leadership.” Both the CP and CLP were led by individuals only a few of whom had the necessary experience in the American working class to lead such ambitious movements; and a large number of whom seemed as much given to intrigues, maneuvers and manipulations as to socialist idealism. It was, also, a socially heterogeneous leadership and one that had not been cemented by extensive personal collaboration. Among the leaders of the CLP, for example, were John Reed, a graduate of Harvard, recently won to the cause of revolutionary socialism, a brilliant journalist and courageous idealist but not really equipped to lead a communist movement; Jim Larkin who arrived here in 1915 from Ireland as unofficial emissary of the Irish Republican movement, jailed in 1920 and deported to his native land a few years later; William Bross Lloyd, scion of a millionaire family whose revolutionary career was short-lived; Louis Boudin who never survived the CLP founding convention; Ludwig Lore, one of the most gifted early communists with long experience in the socialist movement, expelled from the communist movement six years after its inception. The leadership of the CP was no more cohesive or durable in its formative years than the CLP. Louis Fraina, the party theorist, lasted two years in the party before he disappeared from the Communist movement with an enormous sum of Russian communist funds; Charles Ruthenberg, an “organizational man,” whose reputed organizational talent could not mean much given his political line and the organizational policies pursued by the CP under his leadership; Isaac Ferguson dropped Mass Action when released from jail to take up a more sedate profession as a lawyer writing briefs instead of manifestos; Dennis Batt and John Keracher called it quits after six months as CP leaders and left with their followers to found the Proletarian Party.
With this lack of a cohesive, continuous leadership, the communist movement operated from the outset under a serious handicap. If the leadership of the movement was unstable, it was no less true of the bulk of the rank and file. The membership of the Russian Federation in particular was not one which could resist government terror and the demoralizing fact that the European revolution was ebbing. And it could not be impervious to the internecine warfare the CP leaders from the Russian Federation waged against others in their own party, and the rivalry between the CP and CLP which had no basis in principle. The Russian Federation toward the end of 1919 claimed around 10,000 members. Even if this figure is highly exaggerated, it had a substantial membership. But just three years later the Workers Party [1] claimed less than 700 members in its Russian-language section. Apart from government repression, the Russian born worker communists in 1919 lacked the political education to withstand the reaction in the United States and in Europe. What was true of the Russians was also true of thousands of other left wingers who had been recently recruited to the socialist movement via the left wing of the Socialist Party. They left in droves when the promised “spontaneous” revolt of the American working class failed to materialize. It is interesting to note in this connection that the Communist Party in 1923 was composed in its majority of those foreign-language socialists who went over to the communist movement from the Socialist Party in splits subsequent to 1919. The Finnish Federation, for example, was accredited with nearly 6,500 of the 12,400 members the Workers Party claimed in 1922. But the Finnish Federation, with a long history in the socialist movement, refused to leave the SP with the left wing in 1919. It was composed of more politically educated workers who had been active in the American labor movement and were, consequently, highly critical of the sectarianism of the 1919 left wing.
 
TOMES HAVE BEEN WRITTEN on the exceptional economic and political strength of American capitalism as the root cause for the inability of socialism to establish itself as a significant, independently organized force. As an explanation for the minuscular size of the present socialist movement this theory is beyond debate. No reasonable person could deny that under American capitalism today the effect of the relatively high living standards of the American working class has been to keep it in a politically dependent temper.
Those Marx-slayers, bourgeois and ex-radical historians, who are so fond of dwelling on the economic power of American capitalism, not only project this strength as a permanent characteristic which dooms socialism as an archaic, historically irrelevant utopian ideal and a living refutation of the Marxist concept of the class struggle, but generalize back into the past. To give the present strength of capitalism an appearance of permanence, a certain glamour and mythical power is attributed to its history designed to prove that socialism in this country was always engaged in a predetermined futile siege of the impregnable fortress of American capitalism. We would be the last to deny that even in the early history of the American labor movement socialists were limited, when compared to their European comrades, by the enormous rise in American productivity as a result of which the working class, not without struggling for it, was able to benefit. But this was not the fundamental social-economic reason for the decline of socialism shortly after the first war. In 1912, when the economic muscles of capitalism were bulging, new industries and new fortunes springing up throughout the nation, one out of every fifteen voters cast their ballot for the Socialist Party. And seven years later there were several hundred thousand workers in the socialist movement and in syndicalist and socialist conscious unions. But by 1921, the IWW was a declining organization, the Socialist and Communist parties reduced to large sects and the labor movement as a whole was on the defensive.
There was certainly nothing dynamic about the severe depression of 1920–22, the two years which witnessed the virtual collapse of the once proud and feared socialist movement in this country. Workers weren’t blinded to the appeals of socialism in those years because they were getting bigger slices of that famous economic “pie.”
There were, in this writer’s opinion, four related reasons for the decline of socialism in the decade of the twenties: government repression, the defeat of the European revolution, the rise of Stalinism and growing prosperity at home. But what was the weight and relation to one another of these factors? Did the revolution in Europe fail because of the objective strength of American capitalism? Obviously not. But what about the converse of this proposition? How was the stability of American capitalism affected by the defeat of socialism in Europe and the degeneration of the Soviet Union? The answer to this should be clear to everyone. The ability of the American bourgeoisie to entrench itself firmly in the twenties and to cut the ground from under a socialist movement was predicated on the defeat of the European revolution. Had socialism been victorious overseas not even Daniel Bell would have been able to write today of the dynamic genius of American capitalism. Exactly how the course of American history would have changed is impossible to determine but it is a certainty that the American movement would have grown enormously. The U.S. was the only nation to emerge victorious out of the war and this combined with the narrow triumph of European capitalism over the working class, permitted the American bourgeoisie with all its given advantages of geography, natural resources, labor supply, etc., to attain its national and internationally dominant position.
The correct causal sequence – socialism defeated in Europe and capitalism victorious at home – is not only missed by most writers on the subject of American socialism, it is practically ignored. How could it be otherwise for either a crooked Gitlow or a scholarly Bell? They assign themselves the same task, performed in different ways of showing how romantic or useless an expenditure of energy it has always been to fight for socialism in the United States. And history has lessons for the present and future which they prefer to overlook. If the economic superiority of capitalism was a necessary but not sufficient cause for the defeats of socialism here, if it required the defeat of the European working class and the rise of Stalinism for American capitalism to prove itself in the twenties, then what merit is there to the theory which asserts the future stability of U.S. capitalism and the alleged failure of Marxism by way of production and income figures. America’s post World War I crisis was resolved fundamentally by European events, its ability to pull out of the depression of the thirties was made possible by an international crisis – the Second World War and its political preliminaries, and the fate of American capitalism today is no less contingent on international developments, faced now with the impossible task of insuring a favorable world wide political and economic position.
 
THE AMERICAN BOURGEOISIE understood the threat to its security stemming from the European revolution. And it reacted in the only way it knew how: repression and terror.
Mass persecution of non-conformists, however, predated the Bolshevik revolution. Immediately before and during U.S. participation in the war, wholesale arrests took place and anti-radical mob violence was encouraged. Through the Espionage Act the socialist press was largely put out of commission by Post Office censorship. From April 6, 1917, to November 11, 1918, there were nearly 5,000 prosecutions, with 1,500 jail sentences handed out in civil liberties cases. Five leading members of the SP were tried and convicted in February 1918 of conspiracy to create mutiny. And in Chicago, 101 members of the IWW were found guilty of interfering with the war effort with sentences handed out up to twenty years and fines levied totaling $2,620,000. Bill Haywood was kept in jail for almost a year before his $25,000 bail was accepted. Debs was arrested in June 1918 and sent to jail 10 months later.
Serious as the anti-socialist campaign was during the war it did not match the violence of the bourgeoisie immediately before, during and after the European revolution reached its crest. City and State sedition and criminal syndicalist laws were added to the federal Espionage Act as basis for arrests and convictions. And added to the local mobs and patriotic societies during the war were the activities of the American Legion and the reviving Ku Klux Klan. The weight of the intensified reaction was now heavily concentrated on the IWW and the communist movement. Benjamin Gitlow, Harry Winitsky, secretary of the N.Y. CP, James Larkin, Isaac Ferguson and Charles Ruthenberg were all convicted and jailed for their roles as Communist leaders. In 1920 the Communist movement, particularly its Communist Party wing, was virtually driven underground by the government. Deportations were added to war-time repressive techniques. In the two years following the war about 600 were deported as “anarchists.” In the raids organized by Attorney General Palmer in January, 1920, thousands were arrested with and without warrants, and Secretary of Labor Wilson, ruled the Communist Party an illegal organization.
Thus, the concrete contribution of American capitalism toward overcoming socialism, and all radicalism, immediately after the first world war was not economic largesse or political democracy. It was repression.
* * *
Footnote
1. The Workers Party was the broader, legal organization established by the underground communist movement in 1922.
 




The workers of Csepel, the miners of Borsod; the proletarians, the students, the intellectuals; the oppressed of the entire Hungarian nation have written a chapter in the history of man’s struggle for freedom no less inspiring than the courage and nobility of any revolutionary struggle in modern times.
It was in 1945 that the Russian army, with the blessings of the Potsdam Agreement, saddled the Hungarian people with an army of occupation. There followed a decade of unsurpassed national oppression ” beatings, deportations, murders, political suppression. For the young it was the beginning of a lifetime of growing disillusionment and sorrow; for the old it was to be ten long years of poverty and terror; for the Hungarian nation there began an era of national humiliation, of being reduced to the level of a vast national concentration camp. These were the well springs of the Hungarian Revolution which aspired to two related objectives: national independence, and political and social democracy. They were also the background of a political catharsis which moved a small nation of nine million from fear to heroism, to pit only its will and small arms against one of the most mighty military machines in the world. And in that struggle the Hungarian people who have been neither subdued in spirit nor disrupted in its unity have proven to all who wish to see, the vulnerability of the Russian imperialist oppressor. And the lesson of these newly exposed weaknesses cannot be lost on other oppressed nationalities in the Russian orbit or among the subjugated millions in Russia itself.
When one considers the facts of the Hungarian revolution and understands its idealism and revolutionary purity, how enormous and monstrous becomes the Stalinist sponsored canard that the revolution was inspired by “fascists,” by “clerical reactionaries,” by “Horthyite officers.” Khruschev and Bulganin would have us believe that they were forced to protect the Hungarian working class from a “fascist counterrevolution” by slaughtering tens of thousands of Hungarian workers and youth, including members of the Hungarian Communist Party. But with all the accusations of “fascism” hurled at the Hungarian people, the Kremlin dictators have not produced a single shred of evidence to support their charges. The slander is so preposterous that the Russian Politburo , masters in the bizarre art of frame-up trials and forced confessions, have not been able to raise the curtain on one such staged production in Hungary. The charge is so far out of line with the reality that a little more time must pass before a well-rehearsed macabre and humorless grand guignol could be concocted. Even then such trials might not be held. For, unlike the Moscow Trials, who would believe them or defend them?
 
Did the Masses Fight For Capitalism?
TO DEPOSE STALINISM means more than the elimination of a terrorist Party from governmental authority; it means the destruction of a social system. Stalinism – or bureaucratic collectivism – is a class society in which the means of production have been nationalized and democracy extirpated; where the economy is planned and run by a despotic centralized state which seeks to perpetuate itself in the only manner it can – through violent repression and exploitation and with a monolithic self-discipline; and for the special benefit of a small minority of the population – plant managers, officers, state functionaries and, on top of the bureaucratic pyramid, the hierarch of the ruling Communist Party. The social power of this class, then, resides in its “ownership,” not of private property, but of the State which is the regulator of the entire economy and determinant of all social and political policies. Thus, a movement which succeeds in destroying the political power of bureaucratic collectivism destroys the entire system.
But what would replace the totalitarian order? What would be the new relationship of class forces? Would the industrial bourgeoisie be able to reassert itself? Would the exiled large landowners be permitted to resume their disrupted lives as parasites living off the rents and profits extracted from the peasantry? In our opinion, all this is impossible.
To those who insist, despite all evidence to the contrary, that the Hungarian revolution was led or initiated by forces bent on the restoration of the powers, privileges and economic wealth of the pre-Stalinist bourgeoisie, we suggest that they consider the following questions. Where in Hungary resides the moral, physical and social basis for a possible bourgeois restoration? Or, to break the question down further, who would approve of and ght for a return of bourgeois politicians to political power? What would be the mechanics whereby nationalized industries are divided among bourgeois elements? Who is left of the old bourgeoisie to receive such bounties? How would the alleged private capitalists sponsoring the revolution divide or operate industries and factories never owned by capitalists but organized by the state?
An objective examination of these questions will show that the statements of old Hungarian bourgeois and peasant politicians “in favor of socialism” not only reflect the anti-capitalist sentiments of the Hungarian masses, but are an admission that there is no social basis for a capitalist revival in Hungary. The pattern of economic development in Eastern Europe between the two world wars, the events of the Second World War, the fate of capitalism and capitalists during a decade of Stalinist rule have all served to render virtually impossible the restoration to power of a Hungarian bourgeoisie. [1]
In Hungary, as with most of Eastern Europe, capitalism never achieved the stability of capitalism in Western Europe or the United States. Because of the weakness of the Eastern European bourgeoisie, the entire area was easily penetrated by foreign capital. Before the war virtually all key positions in industry, transport and banking in Eastern Europe were foreign controlled. The main exception was Czechoslovakia. In order to protect their economies from totally succumbing to preying foreign capital, important areas of the economy were nationalized. Nationalization was to supply the economic and political counterweight to foreign exploitation and was required to develop industries which neither foreign capital nor native capitalists found sufficiently lucrative. The specific social weight of native capitalists was thereby weakened in Eastern Europe, as they were squeezed by the two jaws of an economic vise: foreign capital and nationalization.
With the German occupation during the war new blows were struck. The Germans confiscated at once all capital controlled by Jews as well as the considerable properties of Allied capitalists. In Czechoslovakia, for example, almost 60 per cent of industry and nearly 100 per cent of banking and insurance were in German hands.
In Hungary – whose status was different from Czechoslovakia in that it was an ally of Germany – German capital and the German state made enormous inroads in its economy. German investments there were officially estimated in 1944 at 692 million dollars, and unofficially totaled at twice that figure. About a third of all Hungarian industry was in German hands and German capital in Hungary was valued at approximately one fourth of the total Hungarian national wealth, excluding land and buildings.
With the defeat of the German armies the power of capitalism in Hungary and all Eastern Europe was reduced to a minimum. In a number of countries such as Poland and Czechoslovakia, which had been occupied by the Germans, vast segments of their industry, left ownerless after the war, had to be statified to avoid a totally anarchic condition. Other industries which had been in operation during the German occupation, but were owned by Nazi collaborators, were also taken over by the state. All parties and virtually the entire population in these countries, including the “patriotic bourgeoisie,” favored this expropriation of property held by bourgeois Nazi-collaborators. Similarly, while the Communist parties were the outstanding proponents of nationalization, all important political parties stood for some degree of statification. What opposition was felt in bourgeois circles to the nationalization policy was considerably muted by their fear of the Stalinists and its popularity among the masses.
The decimation of the bourgeoisie in Hungary was no less complete than in Poland and Czechoslovakia though its demise followed a different path. Hungary was an ally of Germany in the war. It was not a German occupied nation. This became the legal pretext for the Russians to occupy Hungary as conquerors. As conquerors the Russians did not initially press nationalization on the Hungarian nation. For three years it preferred outright Russian seizure of industry, either through dismantling and looting, reparations, or in the form of Russian ownership of the country’s assets. However, with the successful “salami tactics” of the Hungarian Communist Party and its accession to undisputed control of Hungarian affairs made possible by Russian bayonets, the Kremlin withdrew its direct control of Hungarian economic life in favor of nationalization. Industries controlled by the occupiers were now run by its puppet government. In preparation for this nationalization, and subsequent to it, the Russians and their Hungarian hirelings systematically liquidated what was left of Hungarian capitalism. And in Hungary, as elsewhere, “liquidation of capitalism” meant more than expropriation. It was as often as not a euphemism for liquidation of life itself. Of those who escaped death, some managed to emigrate, others successfully integrated themselves into the Stalinist apparatus and some managed to survive, maintaining an obscure and marginal existence.
How, then, can one speak of the possibility of “capitalist restoration” in Hungary? But let us suppose for the moment that the revolution was led by restorationists. Let us also imagine that this restorationist revolution had succeeded. How would the victorious capitalists proceed to restore what they consider their due? How would they apportion the industrial wealth and resources of the nation? Who would receive factory “a” which had been organized by French capital before the war, or factory “b” constructed by Germans during the war, or factory “c” built under Stalinist auspices after the war, or factory “d” which actually belonged to a Hungarian industrialist before the war and who has long since perished of old age or in the war or during the post war Kremlin-style “liquidation of capitalism” How would our imaginary restorationists settle this rather annoying problem. Not one of them has a legitimate legal claim to either factory “a” “b” “c” or “d” How to resolve it? Draw lots? Consult the UN? It sounds and is facetious only because after fifteen years of war and Stalinism the mechanics of restoring power to native Hungarian capitalists presents an insuperable problem. But in order for this insoluble difficulty to become even a potential one, we would first have to witness the miracle of Hungarian capitalists rising from the dead to form the component parts of this much talked of restorationist bourgeoisie.
By capitalism, it may be argued, we have only been discussing industrial and financial magnates. But what are the possibilities of the return of the large landowning aristocracy to its former status?
While the majority of the population certainly approves the continued nationalization of large-scale industry and commerce, it is just as clear that many revolutionists and, undoubtedly, a majority of the peasants favor private ownership of the land. The Kolkhoz system is hated throughout the Stalinist world by the peasants who rightly regard the Stalinist collectives as a system of brutal bureaucratic exploitation. Had the Hungarian revolution succeeded, then, it would in all likelihood have meant the breakup of enforced collectives and the distribution of the land to individual peasant proprietors. There is nothing in this to disquiet socialists. On the contrary, the cry of land to the peasants has a progressive significance under Stalinism, just as it does in those areas of the world where land tenure still takes feudal forms and where there exists a reactionary landlord class which robs and exploits the peasantry.
The destruction of the Kolkhoz system in Hungary, could not possibly mean the restoration of the land to remnants of the old land owning classes. How could it? The peasants are opposed to the present collectivization because they want the land for themselves, not because they want to return it to their former landowners and revert to conditions of semi-feudal servitude.
That the Hungarian peasants will not tolerate a return of the landed aristocracy is a fact and not conjecture is shown in every act and statement made by revolutionary councils in rural areas and voiced by authoritative representatives of former Peasant and Small Landholders parties. Bela Kovacs, brought back to join the Nagy government, explained at a meeting of the reconstituted Smallholders Party at Pecs on October 31:
The Party has full rights to reassemble, but the question is whether on reconstitution the Party will proclaim the old ideas again. No one must dream of going back to the world of counts, bankers and capitalists: that world is over once and for all.
On November 3, Ferenc Farkas, national secretary of the National Peasant Party, reorganized under the name Petofi Party, made a speech listing the views on which the Nagy coalition government was “unanimous.” The list was headed by:
The government will retain from the Socialist achievements and results everything which can be, and must be, used in a free, democratic and Socialist country, in accordance with the wishes of the people.
These views coming from spokesmen of former agrarian-based parties can hardly be confused with any alleged conspiracy to restore the old days of parasitic landlordism. Nor, by any stretch of the most undisciplined imagination can one presume that the support given by all peasants to Hungary’s embattled workers, supplying them with free food deliveries and promising to continue such aid for the duration of their strike, was done in the hope that a victory of the Workers Councils would give them the privilege of being exploited by the Esterhazys once again. The opposition of these Workers Councils to a return of the large landed gentry was known to all in and out of Hungary; an opposition shared by peasant and worker alike. That this opposition to the old landlords reflects a steadfast mood of the peasants was evidenced in a statement issued on January 6th by Ferenc Nagy, an exiled rightist leader of the Landholders Party and former Premier, which denounced a committee of old emigre Hungarians organized in the United States in 1948. Ferenc Nagy repudiated this committee, which he, himself, had helped to form, as a reactionary body “hoping to restore the Horthy regime or the Hapsburg monarchy in Hungary.” While renouncing the old committee Ferenc Nagy sought to participate in the Revolutionary Hungarian Council now being organized in France by representatives of the political parties which supported the October–November revolution.
Ferenc Nagy understands that the Hungarian peasants, who formed the mass base of his party, want no part of the old order. His action – regardless of motive – is an index of the moods of the Hungarian people and gives the lie to Stalinists and to those habitual apologists for the Kremlin who would have us believe that a vast army of emigre landlords is converging on Hungary’s frontiers, champing at the bit, as they await a successful revolution which will install them once again in their manors and castles.
 
The Program of the Revolution
The Hungarian Revolution was animated by an irrepressible urge for national independence and political democracy. But to appreciate the full significance of the revolution it is necessary to underline the fact that its tenacity, organization and consciousness was provided, in the main, by the Hungarian working class, the backbone of the revolution.
As a background to the military struggle, the workers organized a general strike, which became perhaps the longest general strike in history. Workers Councils sprang up everywhere. The revolutionary forces triumphed in all the industrial centers of Hungary; Gyor, Miskolc, Dunapentele, Pecs. Said a UP dispatch during the early days of the revolution: “The rebels appeared strongest in the great industrial section of Borsod,” which is the center of some of the most important steel plants and coal mines in the country. The major organized forces in the country in the October 23rd to November 4th period consisted of workers” organizations which assumed the positions of spokesmen for the revolution. Moreover, after the second Russian attack on November 4, as a result of which the Nagy government was deposed and replaced by the quisling Kadar regime, the working class organizations remained the main source of opposition.
Acknowledging the primacy of the working class in the Revolution moves one a long way toward an answer to the question: what was the ideology of the revolution? We are dealing here, it must be remembered, with European workers, among whom militant supporters of capitalism are rare creatures. What is more, we are discussing the one country in the world aside from Russia which had a Soviet government for at least a short period after World War I; a government Socialists and Communist formed jointly in 1919 that enjoyed the support of the working class, whether or not it had the support of a majority of the country as a whole. These socialist traditions were not dissipated and could not be wholly repressed in the reaction which followed the defeat of the 1919 revolution. During the hard long years of Horthyite rule, the Social Democratic Party, seriously handicapped by its semi-legal status, continued to exert considerable influence among workers, and even the smaller Communist Party maintained a significant working class following. In 1945, the Social Democratic and Communist Parties were backed by the overwhelming majority of workers.
The manifestos, demands and programs developed by the Workers Councils in the recent revolution are eloquent testimony to the strength of these socialist traditions. For the revolution was spontaneous in the sense that there was no well organized underground network working out details of revolutionary program and organization. But, while the forms of revolution sprang up almost overnight, they were readily filled with the ideological content of socialism, supplied by the workers and intellectuals whose traditions survived, not only the Horthyite terror, but ten years of Russian directed dictatorship.
On October 24, the Workers Council of the Borsod region called for a government in “the spirit of Bela Kun and Laszlo Rajk.” [2]
On October 28, the Workers Committee of Gyor declared: “We do not wish to return to the old capitalist system. He want an independent and socialist Hungary.” Lugosy Gora, a mechanic and member of the Communist Party, who was elected president of the Council of Magyarovar, informed reporters that he was against the reactionary proposition of a government of emigres and explained that he was for an end to class distinctions. The Austrian socialist, Peter Strasser, who had participated in the deliberations of the Sopron Committee for National Liberation, stated that “they are absolutely opposed to the restoration of the old regime of Horthy” and wanted socialism. The Revolutionary Committee of Gyor declared that it opposed “the formation of a counter-revolutionary government which would furnish a juridical basis for foreign intervention and the transformation of our country into a second Korea.
On October 25, a manifesto read over Radio Miskolc, which was in revolutionary hands, explained.
We have had enough of this autocracy of certain leaders. We too want socialism, but according to our own special Hungarian conditions, reflecting the interests of the Hungarian working class and the Hungarian nation, and our most sacred national sentiments.
Three days later, this same radio station announced:
In the course of our several days fight for freedom the joint demands of the entire country are slowly beginning to take shape. Therefore, we workers, students and armed forces under the leadership of the workers council and student parliament of Miskol submit the following proposal:

1. We demand a new provisional government, one truly democratic, sovereign and independent, fighting for a free and Socialist Hungary, excluding all ministers who served in the Rakosi regime.

On October 30, the revolutionary Radio Szombathely broadcast the demands of the National Committee of County Vas:
We ... declare that we want a free, independent, democratic and Socialist Hungary headed by the government of Imre Nagy.
The broadcast declared these to be “the uniform demands of the population.” On the same day Radio Miskolc beamed appeals to the people of other satellites:
Slovaks, Rumanians and Serbians, blood is flowing from our wounds and you are silent! We are fighting for liberty and you call us fascists. Rakosi’s colleagues, who were not Hungarians, but enemies of our country, said the same thing ... We see that you too are groaning under the yoke we wish to throw off; now foreign interests want to incite you against us. We have every confidence that you will not believe their lies ... We have proposed a Socialist State form which will guarantee the free development of our people and stop the clash between East and West. We are fighting for you, too, for peace, for Socialist truth, for the guarantee of the free development of our peoples. Help us in our fight.
During all the days it was in revolutionary hands, this radio station manifested a high degree of internationalist consciousness, addressing appeals to other peoples in Eastern Europe, Rumanians, Poles, Czechs and Slovaks. In one broadcast it declared:
We do not want bourgeois parties, but Social Democratic parties, parties which will never again oppose the demands of our people ... We believe that you also are thinking along these lines and do not believe the calumnies of the Czechoslovak radio.
On November 12, the Workers Councils of the 11th District of Budapest, where military resistance continued to the very end, adopted a resolution whose first point stated:
We wish to emphasize that the revolutionary working class considers the factories and the land the property of the working people.
On November 2, Radio Kossuth reported the demands made by a delegation of 28 members of the Workers Council of Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen County to Imre Nagy and Zoltan Tildy, whom they visited in Budapest. Among them:
We will not return the land to the landlords, nor the factories to the capitalists, nor the mines to the mining barons, nor the Army command to the Horthyist generals.
Subsequent developments showed that the Councils did not intend to dissolve of their own volition after the triumph of the revolution. They conceived themselves to be permanent bodies of working class rule in the factories, and desired to play a distinctive political and social role in Hungary’s future. In so doing, they underlined their similarity to the initial objectives of the workers councils (Soviets) in the Russian Revolution of November 1917.
On November 7, Russian military forces called upon the revolutionary military forces in Dunapentele to lay down their arms. In reply, the Military Command and the National Committee of Dunapentele, declared:
Dunapentele is the foremost Socialist town in Hungary. The majority of its residents are workers and power is in their hands ... The workers will defend the town from Fascist excesses ... but also from Soviet troops ... There are no counter-revolutionaries in the town ...
A section of the revolutionaries, mainly former Communist Party members, consciously thought of themselves as “Communists,” as “Marxist-Leninists.” They were in control of Radio Rajk whose broadcasts gave every indication of their socialist and “Bolshevik” ideology. On November 10:
Comrades, now you can see ... that it is impossible for any kind of “proconsul,” even if called a government, to serve the interests of the Hungarian nation under Russian imperialism. There is only one course-to shake off the Russian terror regime or die.
We Hungarian Communists, the faithful followers of Rajk, will do our utmost to shake off the Russian yoke ...
The Socialist heart of the Hungarian Revolution did not beat for the workers” organizations alone. Youth and student revolutionary bodies and committees of intellectuals which mushroomed during the revolution showed that they, too, were for socialism. The nine-point program adopted by the Revolutionary Committee of Hungarian Intellectuals on October 29, listed as its fifth point: “All of the factories and the mines are the property of the workers.” The appeal of the Revolutionary University Students Committee declared on October 31:
We want neither Stalinism nor capitalism. We want a truly democratic and truly Socialist Hungary, completely independent from any other country.
And on November 12, a proclamation of the Armed Revolutionary Youth declared: “For a neutral, independent, democratic and Socialist Hungary!
 
Stalinism – A Source of Revolution
Where did the Hungarian working class receive the political education indicated in every move it made? We have already mentioned the socialist traditions of the Hungarian workers and intellectuals. But that is, admittedly, only a partial explanation; it does not satisfactorily explain the form and sophistication of the Workers Councils, their phenomenal political acumen, their revolutionary parlance. An added factor, we believe, is Stalinism, itself, as a special type school of socialist learning.
All totalitarian movements seek a mass base, a popular force which will help carry them to power and from which they can draw a minimum of continued support once power is achieved. The fascist seeks this base in the discontented middle class and among the most backward sections of the population; but the Stalinist movement by its very nature tries to build its base among the working class and other advanced sections of the population. Even where Stalinism has already come to power, and, even where it has come to power on Russian bayonets, as is the case in Hungary, it must continue to play for some support from its own working class, from its youth and intellectuals. Fascism, unlike Stalinism makes little pretense at being an internationalist movement, it does not feel compelled to present a refined ideology but is content to develop a limited social program combined with a program of action which appeals to the most base and ignoble prejudices of middle class and lumpen elements. Stalinism, on the other hand, appealing to workers and intellectuals, could never make any headway among them without dressing itself in the garb of socialist internationalism. It poses as the standard bearer of socialism, of Marxism, of Leninism. It presents an ideology. It lays claim to all that is glorious in past struggles for freedom. It adopts the American revolution, the Paris Commune and the Russian Revolution as part of its social genealogy. But in order to maintain its pose as an international movement of socialist thought and action it must “educate.” And this it does in a certain narrow, restricted and selective sense. It actually provides an emasculated Marxist education. Some socialist books are censored (others are prohibited), Lenin’s writings are selected with caution and misinterpreted with perverse abandon – but they are presented, along with unimpaired Marxist literature.
Stalinist “socialist educators” are aware of the great danger to its system inhering in even a warped version of socialist theory and history. But for all its consequent attempts to denude the Socialist classics – which are read – the basic ideas of socialism break through the curtain of lies, even if only diffusedly. In reading Marxist literature a serious student, a perceptive worker or a searching intellectual will not fail to recognize the similarities between their own conditions of life and the oppressive circumstances which moved socialists to participate in and sometimes to lead great liberating struggles of the past.
Stalinism claims as its heritage the Russian Revolution of November 1917, but as with almost all else, it tries to subvert the essential truth of the revolution. Facts, names, dates, policies, objectives are omitted or distorted. Despite this, it is difficult for Stalinist propagandists totally to obscure the spirit of the Russian Revolution. Many Hungarian workers and students who were undergoing indoctrination courses one evening and fighting Russian tanks the next morning learned their lessons of the Russian Revolution well. The following appeal to Russian soldiers broadcast over Budapest’s Radio Kossuth on November 7, is a remarkable illustration of just how well the workers understood the Russian Revolution:
Soldiers!
Your state was created at the cost of bloody fighting so that you could have freedom. Today is the thirty-ninth anniversary of that revolution. Why do you want to crush our liberty? You can see that it is not factory proprietors, not landowners, and not the bourgeoisie who have taken up arms against you, but the Hungarian people, who are fighting desperately for the same rights you fought for in 1917.
Stalinist education can facilitate the conscious expression of such deadly parallels – deadly, that is, for Stalinism.
Stalinism not only aids in this fashion the ideological arming of the democratic revolution; it also teaches methods and principles of political organization. It emphasizes the historic role of the working class in political and social struggles, it correctly points to the need of worker, peasant and student solidarity against the common foe. (Of course, the Stalinist instructor means only one thing by “common foe” – its own foes; but the lesson is not wasted.) It lays heavy stress on the necessity of organization for achieving political objectives.
Thousands of Hungarian workers and students listened to their tutors for years, and even read the texts. They learned their lessons perfectly. For the “strategy and tactics” and the organizational techniques of the Hungarian peoples” revolution were above reproach from a socialist viewpoint. The students, lectured at interminably about the importance of the working class, acted accordingly. One of the first efforts of Budapest University students to implement their demands formulated on October 24, was to send delegations to the factories to explain their program and propose coordinated activity. And the organization of Workers Councils, which followed so closely the form and character of the Russian Soviets of 1917 suggests that propaganda on the Russian Revolution and the united front of the working class was not in vain.
In these and other ways, Stalinist education, designed to seek a base among the working class, suggests the organizational weapons and ideological armaments of a democratic and socialist opposition.
The Hungarian people have taken advantage of another aspect of Stalinist totalitarianism. Stalinist regimes are under the compulsion to organize the masses. They create a multitude of organizations for purposes of indoctrination and to maintain their control over and check on the people. There are student groups, youth circles, unions for the workers, special associations for intellectuals, leagues for women, study circles for peasants, etc. And there are branches of Communist workers directly affiliated to the ruling Communist Party. The organizations obviously vary in composition, inclusiveness and degree of authority. But they have this in common: they are all sponsored or authorized by the Communist party ” and they are the only organizations permitted to function.
This compulsion of Stalinism to organize the masses in order to paralyze them, has an internal defect. It provides the people with innumerable organizations in which they can assemble and which can become centers of opposition. That is what happened in Hungary where not only government sponsored, broad organizations of workers, students and intellectuals gave the revolution its initial organized character, but where they were joined in revolt by whole branches and districts of the Communist Party itself. The masses who were either obligated to join State organizations or who voluntarily entered them learned to use the only channels open to them as a means of expressing their own democratic aspirations. [3]
The level on which Communist means of oppression are turned into instruments of revolution vary greatly. Some organizations are, undoubtedly, consciously penetrated by democratic elements seeking a base of political operation. Other, initially acquiescent segments of the population, learn to adapt state sponsored organizations to their own needs as their opposition to the regime grows. In the Communist Party, itself, workers who voluntarily joined it out of misguided idealism, learning through their own experience the anti-socialist character of their Party leaders, but still convinced of the need for a militant socialist party, attempt to turn the Party into an instrument of anti-Stalinist revolution. Classic examples of the latter can be found in the broadcasts of Radio Rajk. In its message of November 6:
Comrades, join the pseudo-Communist Party of Janos Kadar immediately, possibly in leading positions, and do your best to make a truly Communist Party of it. However long and hard this task may be, turn it into a Hungarian Communist Party ... But despite all disgust and abhorrence, we true Hungarian Communists must stay in the Party of the infamous and treacherous Janos Kadar who, under the false banner of Communism, will continue to serve as Rakosi’s successor, Russian imperialism, and who accepted this assignment from those hands, dripping with blood, which carried out history’s vilest massacre in Hungary ...
And on November 7:
Comrades, let us preserve the fighting spirit of Marxism-Leninism, let us continue to fight within the framework of our betrayed and outraged Party for the independence of the Socialist Hungarian nation.
 
The Achievements of the Revolution
ON NOVEMBER 4TH, when victory seemed so close, the Hungarian revolution was submerged in a sea of blood. And Hungary, today, remains a land of incalculable suffering, the misery of its oppressed population compounded by the anguish of death, by torn cities and broken lives, by cold, hunger and new persecutions, by bitterness and frustration. But the Hungarian people show no signs of regret that they struck a mighty blow for freedom. They remain resourceful and defiant. They know that their revolution was not “premature.” That knowledge, unfortunately, is not shared by all in the so-called civilized world. The word, “premature,” or its equivalent, has become the favorite adjective applied to the Hungarian Revolution by those who have misgivings over any revolutionary struggle by the masses against Stalinism (this category extends from the State Department on one side to Deutscherites on the other), and by others who are blinded to the tremendous tangible accomplishments of the Hungarians” “premature” revolution.
The Hungarian people achieved nothing less than striking the death blow to Stalinism as a world system.
The first visible crack in Stalinism was in the Titoist defection 8 years ago; similar disintegrative tendencies operating within satellites were further revealed by the murder of Rajk and Kostov and the imprisonment of Gomulka. The myth of Stalinist invulnerability received a rude shock with the Berlin uprising of June 1953. It was further weakened by the “revelations” of the Twentieth Congress, the Poznan Revolt and the recent Polish revolution.
But the Hungarian Revolution has wrought unprecedented havoc on the power of world Stalinism. In the West it is cutting wide swaths into Communist Parties. Not even the “revelations” of the Twentieth Congress spelled such direct and immediate disaster for them.
In Italy, the Hungarian Revolution has enlarged the gulf between the Nenni-led Socialist Party and the CP. The Confederation of Labor, Italy’s most powerful union movement, dominated by the Communist Party, rebuked the Russians for their use of troops in Hungary and decried “undemocratic methods of government.” [4] The effect in the shops was no less dramatic. Shop steward elections recently held in a number of plants have been marked by hitherto unknown defeats for the Communists. Eugenio Reale, Italian Senator and one of the best known figures in the CP sent in his resignation along with his condemnation of Russian aggression. (After receiving his resignation, the CP decided not to honor it and expelled him instead.) A large number of Communist mayors, deputies, senators endorsed Reale’s sentiments. Party branches passed resolutions supporting the Hungarian people. Vasco Pratolini, one of the Italian Party’s leading writers in breaking from the CP wrote an article which Unità refused to publish where he “condemn[s] the Soviet aggression wholeheartedly and without any reserve whatever.” His attitude was seconded by hundreds of other Italian intellectuals in or close to the Party.
In France, reputed to have the most die-hard of western Communist parties, the toll has been heavy among intellectuals in the Party and on its fringe. The most publicized defection is that of Jean Paul Sartre, but, as in Italy, denunciations of the Russians and the French Communist Party have been made by literally hundreds of intellectuals. While significant proletarian sections of the Party have not as yet left [5], the CP has obviously suffered the alienation of many in its ranks. Strong evidence of this was the Party’s dismal failure to rally more than a few thousand in a counter-demonstration following the burning of CP headquarters by Parisian demonstrators.
In England, the Communist Party has been badly shaken. One-fourth of the staff of the London Daily Worker left the paper. Important Communist trade union leaders, intellectuals and rank and filers have pulled out of the Party.
In the United States, the Hungarian Revolution has pulled a shroud over any movement in the United States which does not take a clear cut position of opposition to Russian totalitarianism. In the past, the Communist Party was able to rally support for almost any Kremlin sponsored iniquity. Whether it was GPU directed murders in Spain, the infamous Russian purges in the Thirties or the Stalin-Hitler Pact, the Communist Party could always depend on the support of thousands in its ranks. And on the outside, there were always the reliable “progressives” ranging from Beverly Hills society lights to genuine labor leaders. Today, the American CP can rally no one.
What is no less significant is that the Kremlin is finding it equally difficult to rally the American CP as it once could.
The impact of the Hungarian revolt on the fate of Kremlin rule in the satellites is already a matter of historical record. In Hungary, it is now clear, the Russians won a Pyrrhic victory as the Revolution’s reverberations have transmitted powerful tremors throughout the Russian empire and more than an echo remains in Hungary. There is “unrest” among students in East Germany, demonstrations by the Hungarian minority in Transylvania, student protest in Rumania; and in Poland, the Gomulka regime which tries to meet some demands of the masses at the same time that it attempts to conciliate the Kremlin and maintain its own bureaucratic rule, cannot indefinitely check the passions of the Polish people whose every public act shows that it seeks not merely a “limited” Russian occupation, or a “limited” authoritarian regime, but is bent on struggling for complete independence and freedom.
The impact of the Hungarian Revolution is also felt in the citadel of the Empire ” Russia. The Revolution proved that Russian troops forced to act as storm troopers of imperialism are not dependable. Whole divisions of the original army of occupation had to be replaced by more “reliable” troops. But caution dictated that even replacements be deceived as to their military mission, many of them being led to believe that they were going to fight American “fascists” or defend the Suez Canal from British-French imperialism. Defections from the Russian Army were reported; not only among the original occupying soldiers and officers, but from the new, presumably more trustworthy troops.
The Kremlin cannot trust its own troops recruited from the young workers and peasants to crush revolution in Eastern Europe. And it is small wonder. For the anti-Kremlin resentment that has accumulated in ten years of totalitarian rule in Eastern Europe has its parallel in the accumulated hatred born of a quarter-century of oppression that the Russians feel toward their own regime. Even the question of national independence, a key factor in the Hungarian Revolution, finds its counterpart in Russia. The “Soviet Union” includes 140 different national and ethnic groups comprising approximately 50 percent of its population, all of whom are subjected to various degrees of oppression. The initial popularity of the Nazi invaders among some of the oppressed minorities in Russia, the destruction by the Kremlin ” through deportation and genocide ” of several national minorities, the revelation by Khrushchev that Stalin (was it only Stalin?) was threatening the destruction of Russia’s largest minority ” the Ukrainians, the organization during and after the war of a mass national resistance movement which fought both German and Russian imperialism, each in its own way reveals that the national question operates as a disintegrative force, not only in Stalinist colonies, but in Russia itself.
Despite all stories in the Russian press of “fascist counter-revolution” in Hungary, the Russian people cannot be quarantined from the truth. Through reports from returning soldiers, by their instincts and experience which leads them to disentangle and translate Russian newspapers, the events in Hungary can only increase the Russian people’s hatred of the regime and inspire it with a new measure of strength and self-confidence. Manifestation of Hungarian inspired acts of defiance by Russian workers and students have already been reported.
These, then, are the success of the Hungarian Revolution which some analysts are now prepared to discount as “premature.”
Two other concrete achievements must be noted. First, by discrediting Stalinism in the eyes of the entire world working class, it thereby helps to eliminate a serious obstacle in Europe and in the United States to the resurgence of a socialist movement. Second, by encouraging revolutionary discontent in the Stalinist controlled world, it has reduced the danger of war. The Kremlin must begin to move more cautiously. It knows that it cannot risk a war when its own base is seething.
 
THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE Hungarian Revolution does not even end here. Events in Hungary and Poland have contributed to the clarification of political and theoretical problems, each one of which has its own political significance.
One myth which the Revolution has relegated to the status of a political curio is the conception of Stalinism as an internally indestructible force. A founder of this school, the discredited James Burnham, has devoted all his talents and much of his time to elaborating his views to his readers and to the State Department. The world is divided into two camps for Burnham – the American and the Russian. The latter cannot be overthrown by the peoples it holds in captivity. Since Stalinism is not only internally indestructible, but of necessity expansionist, the only means open for the West to defend itself is through a series of provocative, military adventures. That the specific acts he suggested in his writings would be climaxed inevitably by a global war is nothing that would faze a man like Burnham. He is not one to run away from a deduction. “If ‘a’ then ‘b’” is the law of logic to which he once dedicated a book.
But Burnham’s neat little package has been shaken by every major development inside the Russian empire for the past 10 years and altogether exploded with the first Molotov cocktail thrown at a Russian tank in a Budapest street. To the extent that the Hungarian Revolution has undercut the ideological moorings of such war-mongering elements as Burnham in the United States, it has made another contribution to peace.
Burnham’s logic was reinforced by the theories of totalitarianism advanced by Hannah Arendt which struck a responsive chord among many ex-radicals and one-time socialists who saw Stalinism as the invincible wave of the future. In Arendt’s view, under totalitarianism, the divisions of non-totalitarian society into antagonistic social classes with their clashing interests, come to an end. History is thrown into reverse with all the motor forces of social change inherent in a democratic society grinding to a halt. Instead of class struggle, we have a structureless mass of people, atomized, declassed and irrationally manipulated by the totalitarian power into a hopeless depression or a dispirited conformism.
Again, in the Hungarian and Polish revolutions Arendt’s pessimism has met the same end as Burnham’s logical militarism.
If the Hungarian-Polish events have reduced Arendt’s pessimism to a curious incongruity, what have they done for the prognostications of Isaac Deutscher?
In an article written shortly before the Hungarian and Polish Revolutions in Partisan Review (Fall 1946), Deutscher summarized his views. It is recommended reading for all who want to know where he stands.
Deutscher is an optimist – a bureaucratic optimist. Change can take place in Russia, Deutscher claims, unlike the pessimists. Indeed, it is taking place. And it is all for the good. But it is the change of a self-reforming bureaucracy which should not be disturbed in its progressive evolution. Where capitalism needs to be overthrown by the working class, the Kremlin rulers (class? caste? bureaucracy? – it is not clear in Deutscher) are themselves the agents of progressive economic and political reform. Stalinism arose as a brutal dictatorship, out of the backwardness of the Russian economy. The dictatorship, however, fulfilled an economic and social function. It industrialized the nation. By increasing economic wealth it tends to destroy itself.
“By fostering Russia’s industrialization and modernization Stalinism has with its own hands uprooted itself and prepared its ‘withering away’.”
For Deutscher, the relaxation which followed Stalin’s death and culminated in the Twentieth Congress was not the product of class struggle. It was not the attempt of a desperate and unstable regime to ward off the hostility of the masses who saw in the death of Stalin and the consequent dislocation of the bureaucracy, a crack in the monolithic wall through which they might pour with all the fury of a flood. Not at all. The Twentieth Congress marked a new era in the bureaucracy’s supervision of its own dissolution as a ruling dictatorial power.
The bureaucracy, which under Stalin was creating the conditions for democracy, is now beginning to move toward that goal with an implied new consciousness. It now begins to introduce, gradually, slowly, even unwillingly (to make a concession to anti-Soviet elements), the methods and institutions of political democracy.
The autocratic system of government, bequeathed by Stalin is shattered. The backbone of the M.V.D., the political police is broken. (!) The univers concentrationnaire is dissolving. Stalinist monolithic uniformity is slowly, painfully, yet unmistakably beginning to give way to a certain diversity of outlook. If the ‘liberal trend’ is defined as a radical lessening of governmental coercion and a striving for government by consent then this trend has been obviously and even conspicuously at work in Soviet society. (Emphasis added)
Deutscher moves accordingly. As the bureaucracy gradually introduces democracy – which is the beginning of the realization of the socialist dream in Russia – Deutscher degenerates from an “objective Historian” to a calm apologist for the dictatorship. And like all apologists he falsifies and distorts events and tries to force contradictory evidence into his preconceived patterns. This is most glaring in the case of the Hungarian Revolution wherein Deutscher, in a recent Reporter article, finds, not only understandable grievances among the people (he is always prepared to sympathize with the masses) but “elements of counter-revolution” as well. Who or what these “elements” are Deutscher never tells us. He cannot. But he has to locate them there, otherwise it will not jibe with his theory. If the Russian action in Hungary is decisive proof that, fundamentally, Khruschevism remains rigid in its determination to crush any move by the people for freedom, then it fails to correspond to Deutscher’s view of a new enlightenment moving the Russian regime in its objective striving for “government by consent.” All one has to do is to find a little “counter-revolution” or elements of it in Hungary and things are put to right. Without this fictional counter-revolutionary force operating in Hungary, how would Deutscher make the following analysis (written just before the Hungarian revolt) consistent with the Hungarian’s hatred of the regime:
The Soviet worker has begun to ‘finance’ in all earnestness the industrialization of the underdeveloped Communist countries; and he finances it out of the resources which might otherwise have been used to raise his own standard of living ... Here indeed two aspects of de-Stalinization – Russian domestic reform and reform in Russia’s relationship with the entire Soviet bloc – can be seen in actual conflict with each other
Where can one find a more glamorized and more falsified version of Russia’s relation to her satellites? And, note carefully, it is not the Russian government which finances Eastern Europe’s but the “soviet workers.” And this magnanimous display of Soviet solidarity is done in a spirit of socialist self-sacrifice – for if the “Soviet workers” were not pouring billions into Eastern Europe to build socialism there, then the bureaucracy would be able to advance even further its own economy, which, in turn, would mean that the bureaucracy could open the faucet of democracy a little wider. (One might say that for Deutscher the whole problem of democracy in Russia is a matter of high finance.)
Apparently the Hungarian worker didn’t appreciate the fraternal, self-denial of “the Soviet worker.” He saw and experienced in the Russian occupation, not an aid to the government’s economy or his social well being, but the imposition of political terror and economic exploitation in the interests of a foreign power and its puppet native ruling class.
If only the Hungarians showed a little more patience. If only they weren’t so susceptible to “counter-revolutionary elements.” If only they waited until the rulers in the Kremlin, observing a statistical upswing of Russia’s economy might have felt the time propitious for a little more democracy. As it was the Hungarians proved incapable of showing the patience and understanding peculiar to Deutscher.
The Hungarian workers did not understand that:
With public ownership of the means of production firmly established with the consolidation and expansion of planned economy, and – last but not least – with the traditions of a socialist revolution alive in the minds of its people, the Soviet Union breaks with Stalinism, in order to resume its advance toward equality and socialist democracy. (Emphasis Added)
Nor would they believe that:
Circumstances have forced Malenkov and Khruschev to act up to a point as the executors of Trotsky’s political testament. The wonder is not that they act these roles awkwardly, badly, and even monstrously badly, but that they act them them at all!
Up to what “point” Malenkov and Khruschev will execute Trotsky’s testament – as they did his body – is not discussed by Deutscher. It is a nice safety valve, however, for the uncertain future.
Deutscher has much in common with Hannah Arendt and other theorists of the invincible power of totalitarianism: A distrust of the masses. Arendt did not believe that the working class was capable of revolutionary action. Neither does Deutscher. Democracy, for him, is desirable, even necessary, but the working class is not capable of using it effectively. It must be doled out piecemeal by a benevolent dictatorship which replaces the working class as the harbinger of socialism in Russia and in Eastern Europe.
 
WHERE ARENDT VOICES hopelessness and Deutscher implies acquiescence to a benevolent self-reforming dictatorship the Hungarian working class acted on the basis of self-reliance. Its instinct, its traditions, its education taught it that no faith can be placed in the empty promises of the totalitarian enemy. It understood that the extent to which the Twentieth Congress relaxed the dictatorship at home and abroad was in the first place, a recognition of the strength and determination of the people’s hatred and opposition to the regime. Secondly, the “liberalization” was an effort of the Politbureau to avoid the disastrous self-cannibalism of life under the supreme authority of Stalin. But the reform has limits. History offers no example of an exploitative class committing suicide not even to justify the conceptions of Deutscher. And for the Russian ruling class to sponsor deep and wide democratic reforms, to transfer political power from its hands to those of the masses – hesitantly, of course, as Deutscher would note – means it self-liquidation.
If the Kremlin is moving toward “government by consent” why does it do it slowly? Why not all at once? If Russia – whose productive capacity is greater than any other country in the world excepting the United States – needs to increase its industrial potential and labor productivity what prevents the Politbureau from initiating a thorough extension of democracy right now? Would Russia revert to capitalism if democracy were won – or given? Obviously not. Would democracy in Russia strengthen the economy or weaken it, make it move efficient or less efficient, eliminate bureaucracy in planning or add to it? Certainly the former on all three counts, unless one could establish that the people are too stupid to rule and to plan. Would a democratic Russia be more stable internally than Russia governed by a narrow section of the population? That is clearly the case. Would a democratic Russia, liberating the satellite countries of its present foreign rule, win or alienate the peoples of Eastern Europe? The answer is too apparent. If the Khruschev regime were to follow the democratic course implied by these questions would they be set upon by the people and punished for the “crimes of Stalin”? That seems hardly possible. Why then doesn’t it pursue such a policy, here and now, not in some Deutscher or Khruschev promised future. We have already answered the question but it merits repetition. Democracy is not dependent on Khruschev’s whims or Deutscher’s economic determinism. Russia is dominated by a totalitarian class which will tolerate so much – and no more. It is a conscious class, a purposeful class, not a group whirling toward democracy on the high-blown and full winded abstractions of Deutscher.
 
CAPITALISM, TODAY, IS A reactionary social order. But it evolved slowly and painfully out of a stagnant feudal society. It has in the past a progressive historical function to perform for which no other social formation could substitute. The working class, born under capitalism, necessary for it and in conflict with it has inherited the responsibility of leading in a continuing struggle to constructively release the full, creative genius of man. Hungary has shown that this reliance socialists place in the working class is not misplaced.
Capitalism has no future, but it had a past. The working class has had only brief moments of fulfillment but it remains with a future. Bureaucratic Collectivism on the other hand, was born as a pestilence, a reactionary monstrosity rising out of the defeats of the working class and the decay of capitalism. Its life has been violent but it will also be brief. Whoever doubts that, need only look at the Hungarian Revolution.
* * *
Footnotes
1. The imposition of an artificially created bourgeoisie in Hungary by Western imperialism in the event of a war is a theoretical possibility. But to introduce this remote possibility in a discussion of Hungary today might prove more disorienting than enlightening.
2. All the material in the following pages on the programs of the Workers Councils, speeches by political leaders and broadcasts over radio stations under revolutionary control has appeared in various newspapers and periodicals. Quotations from the programs of various Workers Councils and by their spokesmen are from the November 2 and 9 issues of La Verité, French Trotskyist newspaper. Quotations from revolutionary radio broadcasts are from the booklet, The Revolt in Hungary: A Documentary Chronology of the Facts, which is an extremely useful compendium of texts of radio broadcasts in Hungary from October 23 to November 4, published by the Free Europe Committee. Other quotations are from the British Bevanite paper Tribune for November 23rd.
3. In the March 9, 1953, issue of Labor Action George Benda has an interesting account of this process in Czechoslovakia where workers used the state-controlled “unions” to further their own interests.
4. In the December 17, 1956 issue of the New Leader, Daniel Bell presents a long, partial listing of the mounting number of Communists defecting from the CPs following the Hungarian Revolution.
5. Bell offers an interesting explanation for the surface appearance of unity in the ranks and in the leading core of the French CP. In other European countries there is a ready made place for defecting Communists to go. In England there is the Labor Party and its Bevanite wing: in Italy there is the Socialist Party, led by Nenni (and the smaller Independent Socialist Union which Bell doesn’t mention). In France dissatisfied Communists feel that they have no other home. The Socialist Party there is ineffective and is led by Premier Guy Mollett whose colonial policies have earned contempt for him among Communist workers and intellectuals, and has tainted his party in their eyes.
 




McCarthyism has become the political issue of the day in America. Even the most cynical sophisticate who reflects for a moment on such a grotesque fact cannot fail to be amazed at this degradation of political life in the United States. The newspaper accounts of the present conflict of McCarthy-Cohn versus the U.S. Army has the quality of parody. An alleged Communist dentist drafted into the army, who, at most, could have kept the Kremlin well-informed on the national state of G.I. cavities becomes a cause célèbre, the basis for McCarthy’s usual accusation, this time directed at the army, of “coddling Communists.” The senator’s wild accusation is then “substantiated” by the sensational exposure of another allegedly dangerous and coddled Communist in the Pentagon, this time a 60 dollar-a-week “code-clerk,” who, it is now apparent, knew as little about codes as she does of communism, the Communist Party or why she was supoenaed.
The skit-like quality of McCarthyism is by no means monopolized by McCarthy. The former conservative president of Harvard, Dr. James Conant, upon his appointment as American High Commissioner to Germany, was opposed by Senator Mundt because, “he is too bookish a fellow.” As Stuart Chase sardonically noted in a recent letter to the New York Times, “Anyone who can read” can be made an object of suspicion. These McCarthyist techniques and accusations are not limited to the political arena. McCarthyism has spread from Washington like a plague of insects carrying a noxious disease, penetrating every area of social and cultural life. Recently two teachers were fired for having the audacity to read in class belle-lettristic essays by D.H. Lawrence. The principal remarked that it was a disgrace and that Lawrence was probably a Communist.
The arts have been victimized no less than our educational institutions. Recently a 2,300-year-old play by the Greek playwright, Aristophanes, The Ecclesiazusae was sharply cut in its performance for fear that the censored lines were too pro-communistic.
These, of course, are but a minute sampling of atrocities committed in this flowering age of McCarthyism. What removes them from the stage of pure burlesque is not only the criminal injustices perpetrated against personal victims and artistic sensibilities, but that they are symptomatic of substantial changes taking place in the American political system. They are the indices of a falling barometer.
How is it possible for the shift in American politics to assume such unprecedently crude, clumsy and universal manifestations? This is the question which disturbs American liberals and confounds Europeans.
McCarthyism is a peculiarly American phenomenon. It is the warped product of the growing disproportion between the capacities of American capitalism and the momentous problems which confront it. It is not the inevitably begotten fruit of capitalism in the abstract but is revealed by its specific features as the natural product of American capitalism. We doubt that any European bourgeois class would emulate the methods and techniques of McCarthyism under similar circumstances. It is not a matter of the superior morality or virtue of European capitalism; its history is bloody; the actions of French imperialism in Indo-China and North Africa, the brutality of British imperialism in Kenya, the memory of nazism embraced by the German bourgeoisie and fascism in Italy unmasks their affected moral indignation. The European bourgeoisie is perturbed by the fact that they, too, are being victimized by American McCarthyism; and they are confounded by what appears to them as its needless elements of irrationality, grossness and stupidity.
The perplexity of European critics of McCarthyism stems from their failure to understand that every reaction assumes specific forms reflecting the character, background and psychology of its ruling class. The fascist reactions in Germany and Italy for example, while fundamentally identical, assumed different forms in each country. The racism and anti-Semitism most peculiar to German fascism were, in a sense, not an essential part of fascism but a reflection of the training, history and temperament of German capitalism. We cannot compare McCarthyism with fascism as parallel reactions; our comparison with fascism is merely designed to illustrate that while a reaction in post war America would have been propelled by any type of bourgeoisie, the level on which this reaction manifests itself reflects the special development of American capitalism.
In the United States capitalism came into its own relatively recently; its industrial revolution is less than a century old. America has no pre-capitalist history as is the case with Europe. It had no Old Order to combat, not only physically but intellectually. Feudalism was already a thing of the past when capitalism was consolidated here. It didn’t have to depend as much on its wits, it did not need to develop trained diplomats and felt no compelling need for men of learning to represent it in struggle against competing capitalisms or the Old Order. In short what America developed were many politicians but few statesmen. Capitalism here grew rich on its native resources, relatively independent of European capitalism and divorced from the refinements of European culture. It became a hard-headed class of practical men, pre-occupied with compounding their wealth, distrustful of “bookish fellows” or anything smacking of intellectuality.
The European bourgeoisie, given its heritage, achieved varying degrees of sophistication, unknown to modern American capitalism. Europe developed a certain tradition of literate statesmen while the United States has specialized in the manufacture of a special breed of web-footed politicians. Whatever fine traditions existed in the early period of post-colonial American capitalism have long since been lost.
 
The current administration is a clinical example of the backwardness of American politics; McCarthyism is is its sick offspring. In what other age could one find an administration so totally lacking in subtlety and sophistication? In what other period have the forces of pedestrianism and philistinism established such a tight stranglehold on official political life? In what other administration can we fail to find an interesting personality?
In the president’s chair sits a smiling, bumbling trout fisherman and golfer whose favorite reading material, he genially informs us, are cowboy stories. In the vice-presidency is a miserable huckster, a cheap publicity salesman whose pose as a modem Clay is marred only by the fact that he can neither think, write nor speak with the intelligence of the great compromiser. His recent speech, supposedly a rebuke to McCarthy, but more like a gentle pat, is required reading for any person willing to inflict upon himself a study of platitudes in American political life. Note the following passage from the speech by this “anti”-McCarthy McCarthyist, the vice-president of a nation of 160 millions and the international trouble-shooter of the most powerful nation in the world. It is the only passage that resembles a rebuke to McCarthy, and should be read for its typical richness of thought, imagery and prose style:
Now I can imagine that some of you who are listening will say “well, why all of this hullabaloo about being fair when you’re dealing with a gang of traitors?”
As a matter of fact I’ve heard people say, “After all, they’re a bunch of rats. What we ought to do is to go out and shoot ’em.” Well, I’ll agree they’re a bunch of rats, but just remember this. When you go out to shoot rats, you have to shoot straight, because when you shoot wildly it not only means that the rat may get away more easily, you make it easier on the rat.
But you might hit someone else who’s trying to shoot rats too. And so we’ve go to be fair.
On the nation’s top advisory council, the exalted cabinet, sit some of America’s most noted nonentities. It is truly the Executive Committee of American Babbitry: a collection of business men who were no less convinced than their golfing president that what the nation needed was an added touch of good-old American business techniques applied to national and international affairs. Many of them have already retired from politics, and returned to the business of making money. And what of the American legislature which has become a circus of and a haven for stumpers, sheriffs, narrow and malicious inquisitors? Does this Congress have any rival for plain old fashioned dullness and obtuseness? And on every level of local and national politics charges are exchanged – and substantiated – by the two parties against each other of graft and corruption.
This primitivism of a type which has no parallel in European politics provides the necessary bacteriological culture in which McCarthyism can fester.
 
Whether the Ides of March have cast their baleful spell upon McCarthy or not, McCarthyism will remain firmly implanted in American bourgeois life. In this fact lies the weakness of the term. For McCarthyism represents no thought out social philosophy of a particular senator from Wisconsin, but can best be understood in its broadest sense as the excesses of the post-war reaction. This reaction preceded McCarthy and will continue should he be eclipsed; it was induced by the fear, panic and paralysis of the bourgeoisie in the face of Stalinist expansionism, already assuming dangerous proportions under the Truman administration. It was during the Fair Deal reign that the foundation of what is popularly known today as McCarthyism was solidly established. The loyalty oaths, the subversive lists, Congressional inquisitions, Executive Order Number 9835, all familiar activities of the Truman administration, planted the seeds of the now lush political jungle in America in which McCarthyite cavemen conduct their barbarous, and sometimes cannibalistic rites. It was under the Truman administration that the character of the present Supreme Court was finally shaped with the selection of four political backwoodsmen to the nation’s highest judicial body; men who have used every shabby argument to keep the offensive against democratic liberties free of legal and constitutional booby traps. It was under the Truman administration that the whole political atmosphere in this country became poisonous and intellectually asphyxiating with but the feeblest protest from left-wing Democrats and the approval of the Democratic Party as a whole. It was Truman who suggested personally and publicly, that neighbor spy on neighbor, reporting suspicions to the FBI. It was under the Truman administration that the denial of the right of a member of the Communist Party to teach became an accepted doctrine of Democrat and Republican alike. These activities of the Fair Dealers were carried out with hesitation and even with reluctance. Let us give the devil his due, even when it is so little. But conscience could not compete with what seemed in their eyes political expediency; with what liberals thought was a necessary liberal compromise with their abstract democratic values. However, our analysis while taking their conscience into account, gives prime importance to the cold fact that their concessions and capitulations mark the first phase of McCarthyism in America.
This first phase provided McCarthy with the political tenor and precedent from which he could proceed with the wisdom, cunning and logic of a shrewd and brutal politician.
This poisoned atmosphere was to the arch reactionaries as oxygen to life. It gave hope and courage to elements in the antediluvian political spectrum ranging from the American Legion and the Grant Wood Ladies to the professional race-baiters and fascists; the semi-repressed xenophobes of the mid-West were revived by the foul air, America Firsters and ex-Bundists felt their oats once again, the Texas oil millionaires whose wealth is in direct proportion to their ignorance became the social and financial benefactors of the scum of American society. These are the cadres of the current phase of McCarthyism carrying through with inexorable logic the aforementioned policies of Truman, and, tragically, winning wide popular support through demagogic passion and vigor.
 
McCarthyism as it now exists cannot be defined with a single phrase. It has no organization which it can call its own, but is a force which operates within and outside of both major parties. It has nothing which can properly be called an ideology. McCarthyism is a reaction which is more easily recognized by its specific acts and techniques. Nevertheless, for all its lack of formal organization and programmatic detail, McCarthyism is a social reaction with sufficiently visible characteristics and effects to mark it as something unique in American politics.
We have already mentioned in passing one fundamentally different characteristic of McCarthyism as compared to previous reactions: its durability. Its impact has been made on every phase of political and social life in America and those conditions, primarily international, which facilitated the growth of McCarthyism show no signs of soon disappearing or even receding. McCarthyism is fated to remain as a symmetrical political parallel to the permanent war economy.
The beginning of the cold war signified the beginning of the end of the traditional bourgeois democratic values as we knew them in the Thirties. This does not mean by any stretch of the imagination that we are on the brink of fascism or that totalitarianism is imminent or that McCarthyism has no limits beyond which it cannot successfully trespass in this period. It is simply a recognition of the more than quantitative difference between the era of hard won rights the American people enjoyed in the Thirties and the wretched state of political freedoms today. It is the American form of retrogression, a reflex to the last imperialist war and its aftermath – the cold war and the sweep of Stalinism over half of Europe and Asia. In Europe retrogression was manifested in the loss of national dignity, increasingly enforced dependence on the United States and political stagnation. McCarthyism’s corrupting impact on democratic rights is America’s throwback and no less revealing of the futility of bourgeois opposition to Stalinism.
A victory of the Democratic Party in the coming Congressional elections would, at best, tend to level off the present McCarthyite reaction, but reasonable people, above all, among the Democrats, cannot foresee in a Democratic victory a return to anything resembling the bourgeois liberalism of the Thirties.
The whole political scene in the United States has so pronouncedly changed that even our terminology has been affected by it. Individuals and groups are referred to as “liberals” or “standard-bearers of liberalism” who just two short decades ago would have been considered conservative by early New Deal liberal standards. There is hardly a single prominent individual or group in the top echelons of either wing of either party who advocates a return to the relative freedom of this earlier period. One of the few exceptions, perhaps, is Senator Lehman but even he, the most outspoken and for a while the only opponent of rabid McCarthyism on the Senate floor, saw fit to vote with all other Democrats (except Fulbright) in favor of granting McCarthy the funds necessary for the perpetuation of his committee on the ground that he agreed in principle with the right of Congress to organize such investigations.
The method employed by the Democrats in their defense against the more fantastic of McCarthy’s charges has been me-tooism. Adlai Stevenson, now a liberal by our shift in values, but actually a conservative thinker, has proudly pointed out that it was under the Truman administration that loyalty oaths, subversive lists, government purges and the use of the Smith Act were initiated. This is presumably a “liberal” defense of a “liberal” regime by a “liberal” intellectual politician.
It is taken for granted among the Fair Dealers that at least for the duration of the cold war the democratic liberties which have been abandoned one after the other will continue to remain things of the past. It is interesting to note how the thinking of liberals has been so corrupted in the present period that the argumentation they offered in opposition to the Bricker Amendment was replete with anti-democratic overtones. They elevated the presidency to a point almost beyond the reach of Congress, a move dictated not by liberal conscience but, once again, by political expediency. Paradoxically enough, the proponents of the Bricker Amendment (an expression of McCarthyism in foreign affairs, thoroughly reactionary in its motives, objectives and would-be effects) proved capable of marshalling liberal arguments against the conservative arguments of their liberal opponents. More recently the behavior of the liberals in the McCarthy-Cohn-Schine-Army fracas reveals the fragility of their liberal values. Again, in the interests of political expediency they have resorted to an absolutely shameless defense of the military as a virtually untouchable caste, whose inviolability is not to be trespassed upon by popularly elected legislators, thus diluting their liberal appeal and at the same time weakening the struggle against McCarthy.
The conduct of the liberals on these two issues is a measure of their bankruptcy. McCarthyism has committed one outrage after another against liberal ideas, liberal institutions and liberal people and all that the liberals could do was seek cover or apologize, with but rare voices of principled liberal protest. The liberal world has rallied on only two occasions – not in defense of liberalism but in defense of the principle of the independence of the executive from the legislative powers, and the rights of the military!
 
At no other time in American history could one living in a retrograde era fail to see some hope for a dissipation of the reactionary mood and a democratic revival, even within the framework of capitalist governments. That the best that can be hoped for today under either a Democratic or Republican administration is a relaxation of the reaction, and possibly an attempt to restrain McCarthy is related to another distinctive feature of McCarthyism. Reactionary movements and moods in the United States in the past have been, for the most part, a product of internal conflict. Economic crises and acute class struggles provided their impulse. These elements are totally absent as causal factors in the rise of McCarthy and McCarthyism. McCarthyism was already flourishing when family income and employment were at the highest level in history, and the labor movement was not engaged in any militant class struggle activities which would sound the alarm for industrialists or politicians. It would be futile to seek primary reasons for the growth of McCarthyism strictly in internal political problems. McCarthyism was essentially generated by the fear of international Stalinism and thrived upon revelations of espionage. With or without McCarthy this movement has become the pathetic answer of the American bourgeoisie to Stalinism. Every victory of Stalinism has been accompanied by a McCarthyite advance, and every advance of McCarthyism facilitates further victories of Stalinism.
There is a third distinctive aspect of McCarthyism and one which bodes perhaps the greatest ill. For the first time we have a powerful force which operates within the framework of bourgeois democracy, yet in defiance of and against it. McCarthyism has achieved sufficient power in and outside of government to attack and at times devitalize institutions of government and state. Not only are Stalinists and non-conformists threatened and persecuted, but some of the most honored bourgeois personalities, liberal and conservative, have been victimized. The epithets “traitor,” “spy” and “conspirator” are hurled not only at alleged members of the Communist Party but also at the Democratic Party and the former president of the United States. In one instance after another we have seen how the State Department, the Voice of America, the United States Information Service, the American Occupation authorities in Europe have been demoralized by fantastic accusations. These accusations by McCarthy have proven to be more than just rhetoric, but have been acted upon by Congressional committees with only occasional token resistance by what may charitably be referred to as the more responsible heads of the administration.
It was McCarthy who popularized the new language of abuse. But his reduction of “Truman-Acheson” to an epithet has been taken over lock, stock and barrel without so much as a credit line by the Republican administration. Official spokesmen for the Republican Party now see fit to make public references to the previous administration in terms which just two years earlier would have been considered a trade mark of the junior senator from Wisconsin. These attacks, the denigration and sabotage of past and present government agencies, tolerated and sometimes fostered by the administration, identifies the McCarthyite reaction as one which is qualitatively different from reactionary movements in the past.
The unique features of McCarthyism can be summed up in a comparison with the reaction following World War I. At that time the Palmer raids, the activities of the Lusk Committee in New York, and the wholesale arrests, prosecutions and deportations carried out by local and federal agencies were a hysterical outburst by a bourgeoisie made newly aware of its role as a world power and terrified by the very real prospect of a European socialist revolution. This fear of international socialism – similar in effect to the present fear of international Stalinism – was aggravated by the rapid decline in living standards and the growing militancy of the labor movement. The bourgeoisie reacted with a violence then much greater than is the case today but one which did not outlast the decline of the European revolution, the disembowelment of the IWW and the Communist Party and the economic upswing of the early twenties. McCarthyism is different in that it is fed by an increasingly powerful world Stalinist force which shows no signs of abating its drive for world supremacy. It developed at a time when there was neither depression nor general strikes, and it victimizes more than Wobblies or Communists – it attacks the institutions of bourgeois democracy.
 
In discussing McCarthyism one must be careful to avoid the pitfall of characterizing this movement in the same terms which might be applied to a few of its more notorious spokesmen and supporters. Most pointedly, a distinction must be made between the man, McCarthy, and the movement named in his dubious honor. McCarthy may with justice be referred to as America’s totalitarian personality. He is brutal, ruthless, intolerant, demagogic, a conscientious liar, ego driven, power hungry, vigorous and a cunning political barbarian. He has, in more moderate words, all the pathological and political equipment of a totalitarian fascist type. This does not concern us at the moment. Of paramount importance is to recognize that McCarthyism, though it is a new phenomenon, cannot be equated to fascism nor does it present the nation with any imminent threat of fascism.
To maintain that McCarthyism in its present phase is the instrumentality of fascism is to impute to it characteristics it does not possess. It would imply, above all, that it is a well organized and integrated movement. It is not. McCarthyism has no recognized press of its own, no rounded ideology, no party of its own, no tight internal discipline, no acknowledged and consciously organized leadership. It continues to function within the framework of both parties, whereas every powerful fascist movement we know of has been conceived outside the framework of traditional bourgeois democratic parties.
Of greater import is the absence of those social conditions which have been proved essential to the rise of a powerful fascist movement. Fascism, as we know it, comes to power in periods of irreconcilable class conflicts and economic disintegration. The bourgeoisie does not turn to the mailed fist because of intellectual conviction or boredom with bourgeois parliamentarianism. It resorts to fascism out of necessity – when its life is menaced by its native working-class and its economic functioning is paralyzed.
Fascism, by definition, presupposes the ruthless suppression of the working-class, not only as a contender for power, but as an independent political force. But fascism, again by definition, imposes restrictions on the rights of individual capitalists, limiting their area of political and economic maneuverability. The bourgeois sacrifices in the interests of the bourgeoisie, placing power in the hands of a totalitarian elite, under which he may writhe, but seeing in it the only means of personal and class salvation.
We need not go beyond this elementary definition of fascism and its origins to rule it out as a possible evolvement from McCarthyism in the coming period. The American bourgeoisie can find neither reason nor need today to crush the American labor movement as an independent class force. On the other hand the labor movement, fifteen million strong, for all its apathy and class collaboration- ism is anything but an easily crushable force.
While we fail to see wherein McCarthyism can be equated to fascism we would be guilty of an ostrich-like self-deception not to recognize the seeds of an authoritarian movement in it. More than that, we should not exclude the long range possibility of this authoritarian movement coming to power, either through a successful struggle for control of the Republican Party or, failing that, through a consolidation of the forces of total McCarthyism in some new alignment of political parties and groups, the precise nature of which is impossible to foresee. This authoritarian government would not necessarily destroy every vestige of opposition political functioning as is the case with fascism. It would not necessarily be compelled to conduct a struggle for survival with the labor movement; it might instead attempt to neutralize it, partly through threats and in part by persuading the labor movement to accommodate itself. Such an authoritarian regime might liquidate the Communist Party without the total terror of fascism, it might eliminate any bi-partisanship in national or foreign affairs without eliminating all other parties, it might attempt to assert its authority over all cultural and social institutions without attempting to incorporate them fully into the state. It would be a repressive government, but not one of total terror.
 
Senator McCarthy who represents the most conscious, outspoken and extremist type of McCarthyism, must be given credit for understanding that the limitations of McCarthyism today can be countered or turned to his advantage tomorrow. These boundaries are set by the following; one, as we have already mentioned, is the lack of a social program, and, second, is the current economic recession with no big upswing in sight.
Until recently McCarthy’s political pulse has been kept throbbing almost exclusively by the existence of Stalinism. The World Conspiracy of Communism Operating in the United States provided McCarthy with his enormous successes. The fact that his inquisitions proved nothing, exposed nobody, revealed no hitherto unknown espionage rings, is beside the point. His supporters were cleverly kept under the impression that McCarthy was single-handedly slaying the red dragon which threatened their way of life.
The recession is putting an end to the illusion that McCarthy is saving the Republic from chaos. The senator is no less active than last year in his witchhunting, the “Truman-Acheson gang” has been replaced by Eisenhower-Dulles, leaders of McCarthy’s own party; thus the “Red Menace” from within is obviously diminished, and, yet, despite all these “achievements” the average American feels immeasurably less secure this year than last.
Nothing is as sobering to the marginal man as having his margin narrowed down. The sound and fury of McCarthy begin to signify to numbers of his supporters exactly what Shakespeare said: Nothing. If the electoral success of the Republican Party and McCarthy’s free-swinging mace could not somehow keep the high living standard intact then suspicions are naturally aroused: first about the Republicans, second, about McCarthy’s activities. A man waiting on line for an unemployment insurance check is likely to get a little annoyed at another man who makes his fame and fortune by running around with the scalp of an army dentist.
McCarthy may well be no less aware of this limit to McCarthy and McCarthyism in its present form than we are. But he also understands that this economic factor which tends to stall McCarthyism – it can only be stalled, not repudiated, under either party given present conditions – can become the source of added strength for himself. What he requires is the broad social program as yet absent: McCarthy needs to develop views, not only on the menace of Communism, but on the very real and immediate problems which are hitting at the American budget. That McCarthy is toying with the idea of branching out is apparent from his provocative remarks directed at Secretary of Agriculture Benson in the middle of March. McCarthy criticized the secretary’s farm program, declaring himself in favor of no less than 100 per cent farm parity and warning the secretary that he has a bone to pick with him. The senator’s sudden interest in the plight of the farmers is motivated, (1) by his concern with the recall-McCarthy petition campaign now being waged in Wisconsin, a farm state; and (2) reflects a more general need to sustain his popularity by participating in genuine national political problems in such manner as to sustain and increase his prestige and power.
 
Our observation that McCarthy has not developed a social program needs some modification. In the realm of world politics McCarthy has achieved something which with some imagination might be called a foreign “program.” The essence of this program can be summed up in a single phrase: denounce Europe. It is an attitude which is neither responsible nor original but it is effective for a demagogue who wishes to maintain and enlarge his appeal among political illiterates. In the past two years the specific planks of this program have more or less crystallized: neither recognition nor trade with China or other Stalinist countries under any conditions, and eternal enmity toward European nations casting a covetous glance at the potential market behind the Iron Curtain. For England, particularly, which already carries on an insignificant trade with China, McCarthy’s anger knows no bounds. He proposes to cut the British off from any assistance as long as this trade continues; a proposal designed to please large numbers of Anglophobes in this country.
St. Joe of Appleton is not to be denied his red dragons or treacherous knights. Those he cannot find he manufactures out of papier-maché and tears to shreds with his poison-tipped lance which is now poised against Europe for all its treacherous and perfidious “dealings” with China, Russia and her satellites. This Europophobia is a natural by-product of his ferocious attacks on the Democratic Party as a party of “internationalists” and traitors. As long as McCarthy referred to the internationalist Democratic Party “betrayers” who sold out to Stalin at Yalta, Teheran and Potsdam he did not have too much to fear. But to transfer his criticisms of past performance to the tactic of denouncing, if not abandoning, America’s allies in Europe at present would bring McCarthy into conflict with the most powerful sections of the American bourgeoisie. For all its backwardness, the American ruling class knows one thing: America is in mortal combat with Stalinism and she cannot “go it alone.” If Europe and Asia – including their markets and sources of raw material – are abandoned to Stalinism then the effective capitalist world becomes an American island, which, for all its strength, could not maintain its position.
In the Indo-Chinese situation McCarthy is in a potentially powerful position. If France makes a deal with Russia – one which could only improve the Stalinist position in Indo-China – at the forthcoming Geneva Conference, then McCarthy’s Europophobia will be heightened and appear justified. His attack on the foreign policy of the Eisenhower administration would become clearer and more blatant, winning a wide sympathetic audience among the voting population. If France does not make concessions on Indo-China then it is all the more probable that American combat troops will be sent to Indo-China on a large scale. This would be a war toward which the American people would be even more hostile than was the case in the Korean “police action.” McCarthy might not attack the preparations for this new military venture; he might even urge its extension to include the atomic bombing of China. No one can predict what McCarthy would do before possible American participation in Indo-China; it cannot be excluded that in an effort to increase his popular support he would adopt an isolationist line during the preparatory stages of military intervention. It is safe to predict, though, that if large American forces are sent to Indo-China McCarthy will blow his demagogic tune as American troops either meet reverses or the war becomes a prolonged and costly experience.
On the Indo-China question bipartisanship is getting a new lease on life. The Democratic Party has been begging for the opportunity to “educate” the American people to the importance of seeing Dulles’ “united action” against the Stalinists through to the end. Any attempt by McCarthy to sabotage this united front of both parties either before or during American participation in the war would meet strong opposition from American capitalism as a whole and would force McCarthy to collide with the Republican Party including some of its most reactionary, McCarthyist elements. However, by appealing to the American people’s natural isolationism McCarthy might be able to retain his influence even in the Republican Party, and could extend it outside the confines of party organization.
 
While McCarthy may develop a social program it would not necessarily presage a break with the Republican Party. On the contrary, there is no reason to believe that he is at all interested in organizationally splitting his party. Despite McCarthy’s power as an individual he would be a man without a future if he were now to foster a formal break. It is no accident that McCarthy has conspicuously avoided any obvious identification with reactionary and fascist organizations of the lunatic fringe. He has no direct public contact with men like Gerald Smith or organizations such as the KKK. McCarthy is too clever a politician to acknowledge support from these discredited types. Without pretending to a clinical analysis of the senator’s psyche – though a fit subject for such study – politics dictates that on this question the following must be the uppermost consideration in his mind:
McCarthy’s career was made in the Republican Party. Since his election to the Senate in 1946, the junior senator from Wisconsin has become one of the most powerful members of Congress, and one of the most influential men in American politics. He is certainly one of the most feared. All this was accomplished in less than a decade in the Republican Party. According to an article by William S. White (Look magazine, June 16, 1953), McCarthy’s power has been influential if not decisive in the election of eight to ten Republican senators. This represents almost one-fourth of Republican power in the upper chamber.
If McCarthy has achieved all this why should he break from the party to which he owes so much? It is not a question of gratitude, of course, but politics: McCarthy’s fame does not rest on any sense of loyalty (witness his clever antics in preparing to scuttle his protégé and adulator, Roy Cohn). McCarthy still needs the Republican Party, which offers him even more than he has already received.
McCarthy’s need for the Republican Party is a reciprocal relationship. The Republican Party needs McCarthy. Its leaders are “practical politicians” first and men of principle last. They are well aware of the effectiveness of McCarthy’s techniques for winning votes from the Democrats without soiling their own hands. McCarthy’s personal intervention in the last Senatorial elections in Maryland produced one of the filthiest campaigns in political history. But the result was that Millard Tydings, an extremely conservative Democrat who could not be purged by Roosevelt and Truman, was defeated by McCarthy’s candidate. Such services are appreciated by the Republican leadership.
McCarthy is not one to perform yeoman’s work without rewards. He knows that the Republican Party needs his services and his price is a free hand in his investigating activities and the approbation of Republican leaders in his bizarre mud-slinging campaigns against all opponents. Some Republicans may consider this price high but it has been given and McCarthy knows that it will be continued through the coming elections, at least.
Above all, McCarthy has no legitimate political basis for a break with the Republican Party. There may be a great deal of antipathy between the arrogant senator and some of his Republican colleagues but the gap is by no means wide between McCarthyism and the Republican Party. One must not mistake the pique with and fear of McCarthy by some Republicans as indicative of fundamental differences. The Republican Party is gradually becoming the party of McCarthyism, so much so that the Republican President, representing what might generously be called the “liberal” wing of the party, is frequently a minority leader in his own organization, with the Democrats coming to his rescue time and again: witness the vote on the Bricker amendment, on which the President was deserted by his Majority Leader, Knowland, along with the bulk of Republican congressmen. The advent of McCarthyism in the Republican Party does not necessarily mean the ultimate arrival of McCarthy, but it certainly does provide him today with a much better field of operations than anything he could organize independently.
McCarthy over-reached himself in his attack on the army. It was bad timing from a man who is, after all, ahead of his times. His public stock has dropped considerably – though not as much as the press makes out – and he frightened even his warmest supporters. It will take considerable time for McCarthy to recoup his losses. If only for this mistake a split with the party in which he takes the initiative is out of the question. If McCarthy is to split with the party he will choose the propitious moment when following some particularly dramatic event he feels capable of riding a tremendous wave of mass discontent.
For the moment, then, a split in the Republican Party is not in sight. McCarthy’s increasingly obvious tactic is to wear down any resistance to total McCarthyism inside the organization and to discredit the Eisenhower and Dulles “internationalists” in preparation for a bid for party power at the convention two years hence. The well-informed columnists for the Herald Tribune, Joseph and Stewart Alsop, detail in their March 5th column the feverish efforts of McCarthy’s fact-finders, collecting documentary proof of Eisenhower’s “coddling” of Communists from the period during the war, through his command in occupied Germany and up to the present.
 
The role of the labor movement vis-à-vis McCarthyism has been nothing short of disgraceful. With the exception of occasional speeches and articles, the leaders of organized labor are remarkable only for their do-nothing-ism. They have made virtually no attempt to actually mobilize the working class against McCarthyism or McCarthy. For a local union to pass an anti-McCarthyist resolution is an occasion for headlines. It is almost as if a truce existed between McCarthy and the labor leadership. McCarthy has shrewdly refrained from attacking the non-Stalinist labor movement as such; the labor leadership in return has placed narrow limits on their anti-McCarthy activities. Yet the labor leadership must be given credit for understanding that the end-all of McCarthy’s activities can only be an attack on the free labor movement. The existence of democratic institutions is a necessary element for a free labor movement and a free trade union organization is ultimately intolerable to authoritarian movements.
How is it possible, then, for the labor leaders to behave in so cowardly a fashion? They no doubt claim they would like to mobilize the workers against McCarthy but that the workers, themselves, do not feel particularly outraged by McCarthy’s activities. To the extent that this is true, it is a sad commentary, indeed, on the type of leadership with which the American working class is saddled. How is it possible that after 70 years of the AFL and 20 years of the CIO, the working class has not been sufficiently educated by its leadership to the minimum extent of recognizing and being willing to fight against one of its most deadly enemies today? For this political backwardness of the American working class, the labor leadership must accept its share of responsibility. It has failed to bring the working class into the political arena as an independent political force, aware of its own social needs and interests.
In some cases the labor leadership has not only failed to take a serious offensive against McCarthy or McCarthyism, but has tried to utilize the activities of McCarthy to its own benefit. In the case of the Schenectady G.E. Local 301, formerly of the Stalinist dominated United Electrical Workers, the role of the International Union of Electrical Workers, CIO, has been to take “advantage” of the activities of McCarthy, not to fight them in any principled and honorable fashion. At a time when McCarthy was busily engaged in attacking Local 301 of the U.E., submitting its members to all the abusive treatment which has made him notorious, forcing men out of their jobs because of their alleged political views, the CIO rival of the U.E. was busily engaged in jockeying for leadership of the 20,000 General Electric workers. Instead of waging an all-out attack on McCarthy’s tactics, instead of defending the elementary right of a Communist or alleged Communist worker to earn his livelihood the I.U.E. played on the fears and prejudices aroused by McCarthy’s invasion of Schenectady to consolidate its own power and oust the U.E. in a manner which was at best questionable.
Fundamentally, the union leadership is restricted in any fight against McCarthy by its lack of a dynamic, social program. It remains tied to bourgeois politics. It is deeply committed to the Democratic Party, above all to the Fair Deal wing which, when in power, created the acts, the precedents and the mood which fertilized the soil in which McCarthyism and McCarthy could grow like a rank and stultifying bed of weeds.
But for all the political infirmity of the American labor movement it is the only force today which is potentially capable of leading a major struggle against McCarthyism. The truce between McCarthy and the labor movement is tenuous and cannot be maintained permanently if the latter is to preserve its freedom of organization and movement.
McCarthyism has given an urgent note to the need of an independent labor party. Before the war socialists proposed the political organization of the working class in its own party as an offensive class struggle activity. Today, the need for a labor party is made more pressing by its additional importance as a defensive move against the inevitable encroachments of McCarthyism on the free trade union movement. Should the labor leadership fail to educate its rank and file, fail to respond to the need for building a party of labor, but, instead, cower before McCarthy, compromise with McCarthyism and sink deeper into the Democratic Party, then democracy will have been dealt a foul blow. This is not our ultimatum but one presented by the reality of the political character of the permanent war economy.
 

us Jacobson: Socialism and Thermonuclear War (Spring 1962)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Socialism and Thermonuclear War
(Spring 1962)

First Published in New Politics, Spring 1962.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup by Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

WHAT SOCIALISTS HAVE to offer today by way of peaceful solutions to the Cold War impasse depends on what one means by socialism. The term has become so abused that definitions are called for in a symposium on socialism and thermonuclear war.
Socialism, as I understand it, is a revolutionary philosophy of opposition and democratic affirmation. It resists the rule of oppressive minority classes and places no trust in their self-redemptive evolution. Economic dislocations and inequities and the frustration of human creative impulses are seen as endemic to these class societies; and unjust wars are viewed as a proclivity of noxious social systems.
Socialism places its hope in the ability of the mass of people to reach high levels of political consciousness and to substitute its rule for the authority of a propertied or dictatorial class.
As democratic affirmation, socialism offers as its fundamental contribution to the cause of peace a society with constantly expanding perimeters of political and social democracy. Obvious enough, but it tends to elude socialists at times. Applied more concretely, however, to the American peace movement, socialism implies a special commitment to the idea of democracy. A peace movement need not have well defined political principles to be effective, but it must, at a minimum, adhere to the broad concept of political freedom.
As revolutionary opposition, socialism suggests resistance to both sides in the Cold War. Spelled out a bit, this means:
Against Testing and For the Unilateral Initiative in Disarmament, It is unfortunate that so much discussion in radical circles centers around total unilateral disarmament, a proposal that is unreal and difficult to defend. Actually, only a few raise this demand, even in the pacifist movement.
A demand that is real and if achieved might serve to relax Cold War tensions, is that this government, unilaterally, undertake the initiative in disarmament. A first step in this direction would be the unilateral commitment to cease all testing.
That I do not propose that the United States unilaterally junk its nuclear armaments does not mean that I am for deterrents any more than left wing socialists in less complicated periods, who did not demand of their respective governments that they scrap their armies and navies, meant that they were for an armaments program.
A further move would be for the government unilaterally to dismantle a portion of its nuclear equipment. (There would still be enough kill, over-kill and over-over-kill left to satisfy the goriest of deterrent dispositions.)
The positive effects that such moves could have for peace should not be underestimated. This is primarily a political approach, one that could undercut Communism’s popular appeal. But it requires a minimum of political imagination that we are not likely to find in American governing institutions or political parties.
Opposition to Civil Defense Programs. Civil defense is illusory and the bomb shelter program is, above all, dangerous. It is self defeating in that its consequences would be the intensification of the arms race, bigger bombs and in the event of war a devastation of such vast proportions that all terrestrial life might be consumed by fire or destroyed by radiation. What is no less – an objection is that to submit to the idea of a bomb shelter program – even a “good” one – means to accommodate oneself to the idea of nuclear war, to deterrent politics and, conversely, to abandon the struggle for peace and against the war makers at home.
Opposition to NATO. No socialist can afford to equivocate in his opposition to NATO. This American controlled nuclear army is an integral part of American capitalism’s increasingly aggressive nuclear strategy. As a means of defending Europe from Russian nuclear aggression it is point less; it makes the European continent an immediate nuclear target in the event of war; it includes perfidious Portugal and involves obligations to fascist Spain (which is not formally a member of NATO but provides it with military bases); it is a threat to the integrity of countries in and out of the Pact; it provides the Communists with an excellent propaganda target; it interferes with the possible evolution of a united Europe which could serve as a needed neutral barrier between the two war camps.
Opposition to the two war camps does not, in my opinion, carry with it any dogmatic refusal to see a limited merit in negotiations, summitry, disarmament conferences, etc. More important, socialists need to take a more positive attitude toward the United Nations as against the militant, and justifiable, opposition of socialists in earlier days to the League of Nations. The UN can provide at least temporary compromises in many specific areas of conflict that might otherwise erupt into total war. And the United Nations also offers the means for neutralist and unaligned nations to coalesce into a more effective counterweight to the two imperialist camps.
Socialism, as opposition to the two war camps, is not fed by theoretical considerations alone. It is confirmed by the experiences of two wars and reinforced by the unique character of the Cold War. It is with such questions that I am primarily concerned in the rest of this article.
 
I.
IN 1914, RIGHT WING FRENCH socialists rallied to the Tricolor to stamp out the militarism of the Hohenzollerns – necessary, they said, for the victory of European socialism. Right Wing German Social Democrats preferred a Kaiser-led industrial nation to a Czarist-led semi-feudal despotism and they goosestepped to their death with Marx’s earlier call for a German crusade against the Romanoffs inscribed on their banner.
As it turned out, the Kaiser was overthrown, but not by the French socialists; the Czar fell, but not at the hands of German “Marxists.” Instead, the glorious strains of the Marseillaise and the imperious tones of Deutschland Über Alles were subdued by the realities of a four year long war with its toll of 12 million dead. The rewards the living inherited from the dead: a twenty year interregnum, between Versailles and the Blitzkrieg; highlighted by Entente efforts to destroy the Russian Revolution, imperialist penetration of the Ruhr, mass unemployment in Europe, a crippling economic crisis in the United States, the rise of Hitlerism and the consolidation of Stalinist counterrevolution.
In World War II the tragedy was repeated as the world socialist movement rallied to the war of “democracy against fascism,” Many pro-war socialists in the second war conceded that pro-war socialism was wrong during the first war. But that war was different, it was argued. And much. of what they said was true. In 1914-1918 there was, indeed, little to choose from. One would be hard put to prove that had Wilhelm dictated the peace to Clemenceau the world would have been a sorrier place to live in. There was no similar balance of evil in the Second World War. Had the Blitzkrieg achieved its objectives, Europe would have been subjected to forms of savagery that only Hitlerite or Communist societies seem capable of inflicting. However, the small pockets of socialists who remained in political opposition during the last war did not base their opposition on any false equation of the Allied forces to the Nazis, or deny that it would make a difference who won. Instead, socialist opposition reflected a profound disbelief that capitalist governments – in alliance with a Stalinist system not a whit less brutal than Hitlerism – could produce a victory that would bring either peace or freedom. The war, it had to be said, was not a war for democracy, the peace would be neither stable nor democratic. Socialists could rightly give no political endorsement to the “lesser evil” and were obliged to resist all efforts to subordinate the interests of the people – the no-strike pledge, for example – in the name of a united war effort.
Seventeen years have passed since the second crusade concluded with a peace signed in Potsdam no less cynical than the one signed in Versailles, and with another peace treaty sealed by the fiendish blasts in Nagasaki and Hiroshima. (Is Truman any less a war criminal than those who faced the Nuremberg tribunal?)
Among the rewards of both V-Days –
The Cold War began before the shooting war ended, and erupted in the bloody Korean conflict.


Nearly 40 per cent of the world’s population is now under direct totalitarian control.
 
The West remains reactionary and inept, even with the leadership of the liberal politician, Kennedy, who extends his New Frontier to the Bay of Pigs with the blessings of liberal statesman Adlai Stevenson (a fact that seems to carry less weight with liberal intellectuals than Stevenson’s ability to quote from F. Scott Fitzgerald).
 
Many newly emerged and neutralist nations are compromising them selves as their ruling elites, gravitate toward the totalitarian camp in world affairs and to authoritarianism at home in the absence of a dynamic, democratic counterpull in the West.
 
The socialist movement today is confused and disorganized. It does not understand the nature of Communism; in it, apologias for Communism abound along with parallel distortions of the democratic and humanist content of socialism. This is, in large measure, the responsibility of socialists who supported the war and either toned down their opposition to Stalinism, at best, or benignly embraced the big Russian bear, at worst.
 
As topping to these fruits of “victory,” the human race is now threatened with annihilation by all the victors in the war for democracy.
 


IF REASON PREVAILED, this aftermath to World War II would inspire some soul-searching, loss of equanimity, embarrassment or similar human reaction among those socialists who contemptuously dismissed their anti-war opponents; at the very least, some hesitation before taking up the intellectual cudgels in the name of Western democracies and once again trying to overwhelm radicals who do not share their enthusiasms. Apparently, human nature is as perverse as politics is illogical; for the same style, the same rationalizations and often the same voices are again raised to rally support for the democratic capitalist war camp against the totalitarian enemy.
Take the case of Sidney Hook, the most effective exponent in radical circles of pro-war socialism in the last war who writes without perturbation about the justice of his position then and the need to rally to the West today.
In a recent article in Partisan Review, Hook – who interests us only as a prototype of a school of thought – presents a more explicit picture of his own. ideas on the Cold War. It is worth some examination.
It is Hook’s wont to hurl logical thunderbolts at artificially created targets. He writes, for example, that “it is the sheerest dogmatism to predict that all life and civilization will be destroyed” in a nuclear war. Actually, few “predict” that “all life and civilization” will be destroyed. But so much life will be destroyed that it raises the spectre of annihilation; and civilization will be disfigured, possibly obliterated. In Cold War dialect, he continues with broadsides against “the assorted groups of pacifists, unilateralists and indifferentists [!] who are so intent on peace that they would sacrifice our freedom for it” and follows through with vulgarities such as the admonition to opponents to “cease the macabre death mongering which exaggerates all dangers beyond measure.” (“Death mongering”! A fine contribution to the Cold War vocabulary.)
There is political method to minimizing the effects of nuclear war; it is ideological softening for its possible occurrence. As Hook notes in one ominous euphemism: “... mankind has often paid a heavy cost in defence of freedom.”
But what if the defense of freedom heralds the end of civilization? Then the operational consequences, to borrow a phrase, of supporting the “lesser evil” in a nuclear war, is hardly distinguishable from supporting either the greater evil or neither side. The easiest way out of the dilemma is simply to pooh-pooh those who foresee unimaginable destruction as “sheerest dogmatists” and “death mongerers.” That way, nuclear deterrent socialists can evade the responsibility of thinking through the special and unique problems raised by the new technology of nuclear weapons.
In the opening sentence of this Western clarion call, Hook tells what the Cold War is, and is not, all about: “What is at stake in the cold war is not free enterprise but human freedom ... the same cluster of freedoms which the West defended against Hitler.” The assertion that what is at stake “is not free enterprise” can only provide either the extreme of mirth or panic among Hook’s devotees in the State Department. Of course free enterprise is at stake. As for “human freedom,” that and more is certainly at stake; but the question remains whether it can best be defended by supporting either side in the Cold War.
Hook, of course, believes that defense of human freedom means defense of the West and to reinforce the virtue of his side, he writes that “in almost every respect, the state of freedom and public welfare today in the West is far healthier than when we resisted Hitler.” Here, the issue is begged, for even if the state of the Western world is more agreeable than twenty years ago-and this needs qualifying – the real problem resides in the fact that this so-called free world’s domain of political influence is rapidly shrinking and the Communists’ expanding.
Hook’s passion for the West blinds him when he writes:
It is sometimes said that the West is fearful of disarming not so much because it distrusts Soviet bona fides but because it shrinks from peaceful competition on. the ideological, economic and social plane. I can find no warrant for this statement. Why should we fear such competition? (Emphasis mine.)
Here, reality is totally by-passed; the character of the Cold War completely missed. Someone should inform Hook that “we” do fear ideological competition with the Russians because “we” are losing it And the warrants for this statement are everywhere – in the events in Indonesia, Indochina, Cuba, India, and most of the newly emerging nations of Africa – among millions of people in all the continents who have repudiated the West arid either favor or tolerate the Communist East, The ideological successes of Communism are yet more pervasive than this, manifested in a widespread mood and politics, that can be defined as neo-Stalinoidism.
Despite Russia’s totalitarian structure, her empire, the Hungarian suppression, Berlin brinkmanship, unilateral resumption of atmospheric testing, the Kremlin overcomes temporary reverses and its popularity continues. Its successes are not due solely to its achievements or propaganda skill; they relate no less to the nature of the enemy. The Kremlin finds it relatively easy to project its false counter image as a progressive, socialist alternative to the decadent, unimaginative, capitalist, imperialist West. In this sense, Hook notwithstanding, the Kremlin needs the West as a lever to advance its own imperialist designs.
It should be added that in the sense that the Kremlin needs the West, apologists for Russia need men like Sidney Hook for opponents. They would have a field day in vague liberal and non-conformist circles if. all they had to contend with were the nuclear-deterrent socialists.
 
II.
THE FREEDOMS THAT DO EXIST here are indeed precious, and the West is certainly preferable to the East. Precisely for these reasons it is impermissible for socialists to defend a West that cannot defend either itself or its freedom in ideological and political competition with totalitarianism.
Since the end of the war we have had a moderate Democrat in the While House, followed by a liberal Republican and now a liberal Democratic President. Under all three, we have seen foreign policies that are reactionary, dishonest, hypocritical, imperialist: brinkmanship, support to dictators, bigger bombs, nuclear threats, a war in Korea, several troop landings in Asia, a sponsored invasion in Cuba. Even with the Alliance for Progress, capitalism cannot execute its beneficence with dispatch or without political and economic stipulations.
Of the three administrations, the present is the most dangerous from the point of view of global peace. Consider some of the accomplishments of the Kennedy administration, surrounded as the President is with authors, poets, lecturers, theoreticians – some of the best brains in the country, I am told.
The Cuban invasion. This imperialist crime, conceived under Eisenhower but consummated by Kennedy, only served to disorganize the forces of democratic resistance to Castro and provided a propaganda bonanza to the Kremlin.
With the Cuban disaster still fresh in everyone’s mind, Kennedy turned his attention to Laos, Here, the administration was all set to intervene directly with American troops in Laotian jungles to defend a corrupt ally from the Russian backed, Communist-led Pathet Lao guerrillas. And, as recently revealed, Kennedy was – prepared to make this move although he knew it might very well bring on a nuclear war.
In Vietnam the corrupt Ngo Dinh Diem regime, which would never survive a free election, is propped up militarily by an American government whose policies have succeeded only in driving native neutralist forces toward the Communist camp. The Communist Viet Cong, fighting American trained and equipped troops, may well find themselves fighting specially trained GIs: Kennedy has personally spurred the program for training thousands of troops in this country in guerrilla and jungle warfare. Thus the anomaly of American troops training here – thousands are already in Vietnam – in preparation for armed intervention in distant lands to fight in defense of hated dictatorships against “subversive” Communist troops recruited from among the native population. This, some nuclear deterrent socialists tell us is part of the struggle, not for free enterprise but for the defense of human freedom.
Where nuclear strategy and disarmament are concerned, Eisenhower at least gave a verbal commitment that the US would never be the first to drop the bomb. And it is possible that he meant it. Kennedy has reversed this policy and made it clear that the United States is prepared to use the bomb first. “In some circumstances,” Kennedy told reporter Stewart Alsop, “we might have to take the initiative [in dropping the Bomb]”. In the same vein: “in some circumstances we must be prepared to use the nuclear weapon at the start, come what may.”
What happens to nuclear deterrent socialism’s enthusiasm for the West now that nuclear weapons as a deterrent strategy has grafted onto it the threat – “in some circumstances” – of nuclear aggression?
Both camps propose world nuclear disarmament. But each has a pretext for not moving in that direction. The Americans insist upon inspection teams to guarantee against weapons’ testing in violation of a disarmament treaty. The Russians reply that this is only a trick to get spies into Russia and, anyway, inspection teams are not necessary since there are now devices which can detect atmospheric explosions, even smaller underground blasts. The evidence mounts that the Russians are right about the superfluousness of inspection teams. And they are right when they cite this as evidence that the United States does not really want disarmament. America would rather rely on its nuclear striking power and the threat of nuclear aggression to achieve political objectives.
Of course, the Russians fear disarmament, too. The Kremlin feels less threatened, in fact, by inspection than loss of its big bombs. The Geneva conference provides the rare spectacle of Russians and Americans voting together to defeat the neutral nations’ proposals that both Great Powers agree to a prohibition of launching nuclear weapons into space. Geneva is for manoeuvring, not disarming.
 
THE SOLUTION TO AMERICA’S reactionary foreign policy transcends electing either a Republican or Democratic administration with a better foreign policy. Most of Ike’s babbits have been, removed from Washington; bright young liberal professors and sophisticates have taken their place – and the change has been for the worse. Nevertheless, there are socialists, who do not share Hook’s chauvinism but still identify with the West in the absence of a viable socialist camp. It is possible, they say, that a genuinely liberal, although capitalist, administration could come up with a democratic and appealing response to the totalitarian threat. But the evidence is already in, sampled above, that the limits to what a brainier President, scholarly advisors, energetic and clever diplomats can do are set by the system to which they are committed. Capitalist policies can vary, of course, some may be better than others, but the degree of flexibility of capitalist politics in the Cold War is established by the nature of the beast that is being defended. Not only does Capitalism as an abstract economic and social system delimit its democratic anti-totalitarian potential, but American capitalism is singularly handicapped given its distinctive historical origins and evolution which has made of it a uniquely primitive, narrow, unthinking, violent class.
What is called for in Washington is an administration that consistently fights against all forms of imperialism; that shows respect for the rights of other people; that promotes democratic movements abroad and sets the democratic example at home; that is capable of making an effective political appeal to the oppressed peoples behind the Iron Curtain; that is really for a unified Germany and prepared to disengage its troops in Western Europe; that is ready to give assistance without strings attached to underdeveloped countries.
To believe that an American capitalist government – even a good Democratic one-is capable of such a course is the height of self-deception.
What is more, an effective political war against totalitarianism – in Asia, Africa and for the peoples under Kremlin rule – has as its precondition the positing of an alternative to capitalism. This is not theory but a fact proven by the trend in newly emerging nations and by the direction of the Hungarian revolution. No matter how sophisticated a capitalist administration in Washington, it is hardly going to champion social alternatives to capitalism, i.e., to itself, in the interest of a democratic political war against Communism. That is why the needs of peace and freedom and practical politics requires socialists to clearly separate themselves from the framework of capitalist politics and contribute their energies to the realization of a democratic Third Camp, opposed to the camps of capitalism and Communism.
 
III.
LEFT WING SOCIALISTS CAN NO longer afford to dismiss pacifism as a “utopian tendency” that “sows illusions” and is therefore “socially reactionary.” In the US the recent growth of the pacifist and the broader peace movement (the two are not synonymous) calls for a positive response on the part of socialists. (In Europe, there are large socialist movements, and for all their flabbiness and compromises, they do have the possibility of emerging as significant socialist-peace movements. In the United States, by contrast, there is no socialist movement while a large peace movement is evolving and organized pacifist groups accrue strength.) No less important is that pacifism is made relevant by the new nuclear technology which makes war unthinkable.
A positive response does not mean relinquishing socialist criticisms; a movement that is just for “peace” is inadequate. In a sense it is even more Utopian today than, say, forty years ago. The reason for this resides in the different character of international rivalries today compared to the earlier period.
During the early part of the century, international alliances were fluid. A year before the outbreak of World War I one could not predict with certainty on which side of the trenches in the impending war all the great powers would be aligned. This element of uncertainty is alien to the Cold War. For all the maneuvering within each bloc, we know in advance which great powers will be on which side in the event of war. Also, in World War I, to a lesser extent in World War II, the warring nations were relatively secure as social and national entities regardless of the outcome. This time the vanquished will belong to the victor, the East will swallow the West or the West absorb the East – assuming that anything is left of either. The reason for this is that the struggle is between two competing and irreconcilable social systems; if you will, it is a class struggle, no mere contest between cynical politicians with insatiable imperialist appetites. Summitry can relieve Cold War tensions but never free the world of the special anxieties and threat of war as long as capitalism and Communism remain.
Recognition of this new, permanent character of international rivalries must be a starting point for any movement dedicated to peace and freedom. It is at the starting point, unfortunately, that pacifism reveals its inner weaknesses, For, in the main, the pacifist solution emanates from moral absolutes at the expense of probing in any depth the nature of the Cold War. It is a, Western phenomenon that responds too exclusively to the imperialism visible to it in the West, failing to assess properly the fact that in the East pacifists would be treated as criminals. It is a terrible tribute to the ideological force of Communism to admit, therefore, that where Russia is concerned whole sections of the pacifist movement have been neutralized. From this neutrality many individual pacifists, in violation of their own moral precepts, become victims of the ideological pressures of the Cold War and shift into a school of apologetics for Communist foreign policy. The process does not always end with rationalizations for Russian strategy and lopsided presentations of American culpability; Communism as a social system begins to look more acceptable, even appealing, to some. The ultimate absurdity of this devolution can be seen when one wing of American pacifism – morally opposed to all forms, of force and violence – becomes militant Fidelista and abuses other radicals and pacifists who resent this posture, describing them, in Stalinist fashion, as supporters of American imperialism.
 
IV.
ONE MAJOR MISCONCEPTION about Russia which disorients many pacifists and radicals (non-radicals, too) needs to be dealt with briefly. This is the all too common view that as Russia liberalizes internally, its foreign policy grows more flexible, the Kremlin’s new rulers become more susceptible to reason, willing to negotiate differences, to compromise and, most generally, shed themselves of the aggressive methods and imperialist ambitions of Stalin.
The theory is wrong from beginning to end. The reforms in Russia are real and welcome; but they must also he understood. The reforms are not only consistent with imperialism but further impel economic and political penetration of areas of which Stalin never even heard.
The Communist ruling class in Russia did not spring full blown from Stalin’s brow. It had neither a history nor a clear initial purpose. But the early Stalinist cadres understood that to consolidate their power in the Communist Party they had to dispose of active and potential opponents at home. And to establish their economic base, they had to industrialize Russia the only way they could – through force and terror. Both tasks required Russia’s peaceful co-existence with the rest of the world. Stalin could not carry on a war on two fronts: against the people at home and against capitalism abroad. That was the real meaning of Stalin’s theory of “socialism in one country” and that is why it was Stalin, not Khrushchev, who first promoted the phrase “co-existence with capitalism” (Stalin wrote a booklet called Peaceful Coexistence) and applied that policy even in a period when the term was not in fashion.
Stalin’s ruthlessness was matched by his xenophobia; his concern was Russia and to consolidate Party and state hierarchies over which he would rule supreme, he was prepared to make concessions to foreign capitalist powers that Khrushchev would not dream of making today.
Stalin ordered the French Communist Party to vote for war credits to help secure a treaty with French imperialism. He ordered the American Communist Party to extend its “hand of friendship to J.P. Morgan” to advance Russian-American friendship. Earlier, he averted revolutionary situations from coming to a head in Germany and China to keep other centers of world Communism from developing and to maintain the peaceful status quo he needed for building “socialism in one country.” He held the Communist Party in check on the eve of Hitler’s rise to power; better Hitler than a revolutionary upset to Europe’s peace. Seven years later he sought salvation via his infamous pact with Hitler.
This was Stalin’s policy of peaceful co-existence until the war. After the war Russia descended upon the world scene like a poisonous vapor, driven by the winds of new political and economic ambitions. Through systematic plundering of its possessions in East Europe, Russia’s economy was rebuilt. A detente followed Stalin’s death with the ascension of Matenkov. With the rise of Khrushchev and the subsequent de-Stalinization, Russian imperialism took on new vigor. The ruling class not only continued to guard the initial foreign conquests made under Stalin (with the generous assists from Churchill and Roosevelt) but accelerated the drive to penetrate politically the colonial and semi-colonial world. It needed to expand its spheres of influence to satisfy the new needs of the economy, to raise the living standards of the Russian people, to increase the economic, political and moral well-being of the ruling class as a whole; and Khrushchev, particularly, needed victories outside of Russia to increase the power of the Party apparatus, and sustain his authority in it.
Reforms in Russia, then, did not reduce Russia’s imperialist appetites; they whetted them. Khrushchev’s diplomatic style, of course, is different from Stalin’s; it is also more effective. At any rate, imperialism is less a matter of style than the direct or indirect subordination of the interests of weaker peoples to stronger nations.
Where, concretely, are the signs that Khrushchev the “reformer” is less imperialistic than Stalin, the oriental despot? Khrushchev has abandoned none of Russia’s possessions, and has not the slightest intention of doing so. Hungary made that quite clear. And his imperial visions extend to continents never explored by Stalin.
Other evidence of the new, intensive and dynamic form of Russian imperialism today is the manner in which the Kremlin is economically integrating and incorporating East Europe through the instrumentality of COMECON [1], a dead letter under Stalin but most alive today. It is an extraordinarily interesting and important development. It tells us much about Russia as an imperialist power, what Khrushchev means by peaceful co-existence and the limits of reform. It is a pity that those who seek – with the best of motives – their own form of personal political co-existence with the totalitarian monolith seldom concern themselves with such details.
 
THE NOTION THAT RUSSIA is not a dynamically driven, pugnacious, imperialist society is often invested in a reactionary version of “co-existence” that has never been made more explicity, to my knowledge, then in Erich Fromm’s book, May Man Prevail? Fromm writes:
What, then, is the realistic basis for an American-Russian understanding? Actually, the answer is eminently simple. The basis is the mutual recognition of the status quo, the mutual agreement not to change the existing balance of power between the two blocs. (Emphasis in the original.)
The answer may be eminently simple; it is certainly unreal and blessedly so.
What Fromm proposes is a chemically pure imperialist solution: in effect, representatives of the two war camps sit around the table fingering an enormous globe and saying to one another: this part for you, this for me.
But what about the people? They might prefer to be on a side other than the one to which they have been assigned, or, hopefully, on neither side.
The cynicism of this plan is more apparent in relation to the Russian camp than for the West. Russia has a vast empire in East Germany, East Europe, the Balkans and Baltics, whose peoples yearn for release from the totalitarian oppressor. With this plan they are doomed. But their national aspirations have been intensified by the reforms in Russia and in the satellites. What is Fromm’s solution, given his scheme, for another Hungary or Poland that makes a break for freedom? The answer is inescapable, though it is not made this explicit; suppression, as in 1956, for the greater good of maintaining the status quo.
We might also ask how the neutral nations would fare? Are they obliged to give up their neutrality – by force if necessary – in this operation? And if they are to be permitted their freedom of action what happens to the status quo if they express a preference for one camp as against the other or grow more militant in their neutrality, more competitive, economically and politically, with either of the frozen spheres?
What is ironical about this proposal is that it denies the real hope for peace coming from the East. That hope is not in Khrushchev’s reforms but in the enormous discontent brewing in the empire, released, paradoxically, by the de-Stalinization. This discontent in the Communist world from below, and the schism in the Communist world from above, each in its own way, opens up the possibility of the internal collapse of totalitarianism. It is such developments which should give us heart and need our encouragement – not imperialist panaceas which condemn mankind to either Communism or capitalism.
 
WHATEVER THE DIFFERENCES among socialists in the first and second World Wars, they shared the assumption that socialism could influence the course of the war and the war affect the future of socialism. A similar brief cannot be made for the relevance of socialism during all-out nuclear war. Whoever survives the holocaust will be confronted with problems of physical existence and social organization on such primitive levels that discussion of a postwar possibility for socialism strikes this writer as absurd on the face of it.
But if socialism is to be relevant today it must present a policy for peace and freedom. Peaceful solutions can be offered short of freedom but they can not be socialist solutions (nor do I believe they can assure peace) because socialism is freedom and a policy which denies freedom, denies socialism.

Footnote
1. Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, organized by Stalin in 1949 to help, presumably, the economies of Russia and her satellites.
 






Julius Jacobson has long been active in the American socialist movement, starting with the Young People’s Socialist League (then part of the Fourth International), and graduating through and with the Workers’ Party to the Independent Socialist League. He is now a member of the Socialist Party. He was founding editor of Anvil, a student magazine, managing editor of The New International, a marxist review, from 1952 to 1958, and is a key figure in the forthcoming journal New Politics. He acted as assistant author to Irving Howe and Lewis Coser in The American Communist Party (1957).





America – The Classless Society! – that is an old tune with new lyrics written by a fashionable school of American sociologists intent on proving socialism an alien dogma with less of a future than it has of a past.
Socialism, the versifiers tell, may be relevant to Europe where there are rigid class lines. The United States, however, is happily freed from the malediction of class conflict. Here, we have only to contend with diverse ‘occupation groups’, ‘interest groups’, ‘income groups’ and similar euphemistically labelled categories. To prove that the blessing of classlessness really exists there are innumerable stanzas heavily weighted with statistics, charts, graphs and assorted sociological hieroglyphics based on questionnaires filled out by intoxicated young couples at marriage bureaus, public opinion polls taken in allegedly ‘average’ American communities, etc.
Now, if there are no real classes, i.e. no real proletariat and no real bourgeoisie, there can be no class conflict. It follows with no less implacable logic that if there are no real classes and no class conflicts there can be no class consciousness.
The logical sequence does not end here but is capped with the following crusher: There can be no room in America for any movement, which identifies with one or another of two non-existent classes engaged in a non-existent struggle; ergo, socialism, a movement based upon an identification with the working class (non-existent) is, in its very nature, utterly utopian and alien to American life.
As with folk songs in general, the ballad of American classlessness finds its inspiration in reality if one goes back to certain areas in the post-colonial America, say, backwoods Tennessee in the early 1800’s, where class divisions were indistinct and fluid. We will even admit that in the latter half of the nineteenth century there was a degree of social mobility unknown to Europe. But any resemblance between the ballad and reality ended at least fifty years ago. Instead, the United States, today, is divided into economic, and conflicting, classes as firm and as hereditary in character as any in Europe. One need only look to see a bourgeois class; one which operates with a degree of economic self-interest often too painfully crude for its European counterparts to abide.
On the other side, if one adds the millions of permanent wage-earners in transportation, commerce and service to the millions of a more strictly defined industrial proletariat, the total comes to an economic class of workers more numerous, absolutely and relatively, than any to be found in Europe. It is a real working class, unfortunately lacking a political consciousness, with a sufficient instinctual awareness of its special economic character and needs to lead 16 million workers into the trade union movement.
When 55 percent of the people own but 6 percent of the nation’s wealth and the average annual income of half of America’s taxpayers is a paltry 2,000 dollars; and when, on the other end of the social spectrum, 1.6 percent of the people own approximately one-third of the nation’s wealth; and, in addition, when the trend in the past ten years has been for fewer persons to own a larger portion of that famous ‘economic pie’ – we cannot help but lose patience with those who tell us that socialism failed in the past and will fare worse in the future because an economically egalitarian and mobile society has deemed it so. A man making 2,000 dollars a year may or may not be in the same ‘occupation group’ as the man making 20,000; we are certain he is not in the same class. [1]
To prove socialism irrelevant, there is a companion piece to the above reasoning, built largely on the same logical sequence. This time: since there are neither real economic classes, nor real class struggles nor real class consciousness, it follows that all talk of a class government in the United States is the figment of a radical imagination. Instead, as befits a welfare society, government is the great impersonal arbiter adjudicating differences among income and occupational groups and reflective of the pressures of political parties, labour unions, business interests, etc.
There is a kernel of truth to this – but it is a meagre kernel for the diet it is supposed to supply. Presumably, the sociologists suppose that socialists believe bourgeois governments to be groups of malevolent men, impervious to national needs and as immutably opposed to welfare legislation as they are deaf to all demands of the labour movement. What the sociologists are either ignorant of, or indifferent to, is the Marxist view that the social power of the bourgeoisie does not reside in its direct manipulation of governmental institutions but is established by its private ownership and control of the means of production in a given market economy. Government is bourgeois insofar as it defends this power. Within this boundary, an unlimited number of circumstances could prompt a bourgeois government to make concessions to workers, sacrifice bourgeois privileges, control abuses and even make inroads on the autonomy of bourgeois property rights. Indeed, the Roosevelt administration was a classic example. Its welfare legislation and attack on the excesses of the ‘economic royalists’ was part of a larger design executed by astute politicians adjusting the long range interests of the ruling class to the pressures and threats surrounding capitalism in the depression thirties.
That socialists understand the complexities involved in the interaction of economic and political power is all too rapidly overlooked by sociologists who prefer to attribute simple-minded views to authoritative socialist figures. It is a convenient oversight. By caricaturing socialist thought and then arming themselves with their own cartoons, they can best present their case that socialism, unprepared for the realities of an evolving welfare society, is sentenced by history to a superfluous, sectarian existence.
What socialists do deny is that government can be equally sensitive and receptive to the interests and needs of all classes – or all ‘occupational groups’ we should say. That was not true of the Roosevelt administration and is less true today. On the contrary, since the end of the war, collusion between capital and government has been increasingly blatant. For example, there is the collusion between the Eisenhower administration and the private Business Advisory Council (BAG), whose 160 members include America’s wealthiest and most influential capitalists. It meets only several times yearly, but to its sessions there come the President, the Vice-President and Cabinet members to discuss and sometimes decide government policy and personnel. Shortly after one meeting of President Eisenhower and the BAG – held near the president’s favorite golf course in Augusta, Georgia – three of America’s top industrialists were appointed to Cabinet posts: Charles Wilson, head of General Motors, became Secretary of Defense; banker George Humphrey was fittingly chosen Secretary of the Treasury; textile magnate Robert Stevens became Secretary of the Army. All three, need it be added, were active in the inner councils of the Business Advisory Council.
We have yet to hear of Eisenhower (or, now indeed, Kennedy – eds.) closeting himself with labor leaders followed by a mass appointment of cabinet members from their numbers. Nor, for that matter, do we remember that alleged paragon of the welfare society, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, staffing his cabinet with representatives of America’s largest ‘occupational category’ – the working class.
Presenting welfare legislation as the insuperable obstacle to socialist growth has its fatal flaw in the assumption that it is a uniquely American characteristic. European governments, however, also arbitrate, negotiate and respond to conflicting social pressures; and they have also legislated social welfare programs. England, for example, is far more the welfare state than is the United States. Yet, who would be so brash as to say that British socialism, which in the last elections commanded 40 percent of the vote, is irrelevant to political life in England? And if welfarism has not reduced British socialism to a sect, how do pension plans and minimum wage laws permanently exile American socialists to a life of curious political outcasts?
Perhaps the most distinguished sociologist-critic of American socialism is Professor Daniel Bell. In The Failure of American Socialism, he summarizes his case in this way:
It is my argument that the failure of the socialist movement in the United States was rooted in its inability to resolve a basic dilemma of ethics and politics: the socialist movement, by the way in which it stated its goals, and by the way in which it rejected the capitalist order as a whole, could not relate itself to the specific problems of social action in the here and now, give-and-take political world. In sum: it was trapped by the unhappy problem of living in but not of this world; it could only act, and then inadequately, as the moral, but not political man in immoral society. It could never resolve, but only straddle, the basic issue of either accepting capitalist society and seeking to transform it from within, as the labor movement did, or of becoming the sworn enemy of that society, like the Communists.
That this argument should have gained wide currency is a sorry commentary on the intellectual state of the nation.
In the first place there is the unhappy cliché – and Bell’s central thought – that American socialism was ‘trapped by the unhappy problem of living in but not of the world’. Trapped or not, unhappy or not, one thing is certain: Bell, in summarizing his case, presents us with as neat an example of a tautology as one can find in any textbook on elementary logic. Of course socialism lives in but is not of this world! Socialism, by definition, is a movement which lives in this (capitalist) world but is not and cannot be of this (capitalist) world. And it is this world, we assume, he is talking about. To say that this creates problems adds nothing, therefore, to our knowledge or understanding of the problems of the limits and possibilities of their resolution.
One way in which the problem of living in but not of this world (or, more pontifically, ‘the basic dilemma of ethics and politics’) can be resolved, is to abandon socialism, or, as Bell more delicately suggests, socialists could ‘start accepting capitalist society and seeking to transform it from within, as the labor movement did ...’ But it should take more than a tautology to persuade one to scuttle socialism. First it must be explained why socialism is not the same failure in Europe. And where it has failed in Europe it has been a quite different kind of failure. Did German socialism fail to stop Hitler because it lived in but not of the world of German capitalism? Did Russian socialists succeed in overthrowing autocracy because they were of the world of either Czar Nicholas or Professor Bell? etc. etc.
 
II
The frivolous treatment accorded American socialism is poor consolation for the paradox that in the land with the world’s largest class of proletarians, the political movement which most consciously identifies with the working class is looked upon by this class as a kind of alien oddity – when it is looked upon at all: announce to the average American workingman that you are a socialist and the response will likely run the narrow gamut from no response to bemusement to hostility.
Correspondingly, there is the painful truth that after a century of socialist organizations in the United States there is no real socialist movement here. There are, of course, socialist groups but they are not movements or parties as commonly understood, i.e., they are small in membership, without influence in the political life of the nation as a whole, operate only on the fringes of a few of the more progressive trade unions and are not as yet deeply involved in the recent and potentially explosive civil rights movement. All told, there are three socialist parties in the United States: the Socialist Labor Party, the Socialist Workers Party and the Socialist Party (SP-SDF).
The Socialist Labor Party has removed itself from the real world – leading a sectarian life of apocalyptic faith that must make most monastic orders appear worldly by comparison. For the SLP, all political problems came to an end with Daniel De Leon’s answers written 40-70 years ago.
Then there is the Trotskyist Socialist Workers’ Party, which has few workers and is certainly not a party. It has also managed to relieve Trotskyism of the revolutionary passion and profound insight with which Trotsky examined and fought totalitarian Communism. Instead, it has held on to a few of Trotsky’s phrases and has drawn his unfortunate concept of Russia as a ‘degenerated workers’ state’ to brutal and somewhat perverse conclusions.
Finally, there is the Socialist Party. It would be pleasant in a review of American socialism to report to European comrades that at least the Socialist Party, a recognized affiliate of the Socialist International and the best known of socialist groups, is faced with the realistic possibility of becoming, in the next year or two, a party in the true sense – with members numbering in the thousands, with an important and widely circulating press, sufficiently strong to participate in elections as an independent force and healthy enough to make itself felt in the trade unions and in the civil rights movement.
Unfortunately, a large Socialist Party remains more a long range aspiration than an immediate realistic possibility. Recently, the Socialist Party merged with the Independent Socialist League [2] and it had been hoped that the force of the merger coming upon the wide disaffection of rank-and-file Communists for their party after the Hungarian events and coinciding with high points in the civil rights struggle in the South would permit a far more rapid expansion of the Socialist Party than has actually been the case. The fusion did have salutary effects but the party remains without a press (except for the sporadically appearing and inadequate quarterly) [3], a gap in its operations which it is now trying to close; its membership has increased only by a few hundred; and its general level of functioning, though improved, is far from what it should be even for a party of its small size.
But it was not always so. At one time, approximately midway in its hundred year history, American socialism was robust and seemed full of promise. Fifty years ago the Socialist Party had well over one hundred thousand members (some figures go as high as 125,000). In little more than a decade after the Party had been founded (1901) it had 13 daily newspapers in English and foreign languages. There were close to 300 weeklies, at least a dozen monthly journals. One paper, the Appeal to Reason, reached a circulation of 500,000, mainly in the Middle West. By 1912, there were 1,000 public officials who were members of the party, and in that year the party received 6 percent of the total vote in the national elections. That the two major bourgeois parties added progressive planks to their program was, in part, a tribute to the growing appeal of socialism; and a third middle-class party – the Progressive Party, which put up Teddy Roosevelt as its presidential candidate in 1912 – was partially generated by a desire to blunt the Socialist Party’s growing appeal among workers and farmers. Within the trade union movement, socialists were in the leadership of many of the largest unions and in strong positions in others. At the 1912 convention of the American Federation of Labor a socialist challenged Gompers for presidency of the Federation and received one-third of the delegates’ votes. In the 1912 presidential election, the party’s candidate, Eugene V. Debs, received a million votes.
* * *
What accounts for the precipitous decline of this once promising socialist movement? The question is a decisive one for American socialists and of great importance for European comrades.
It can be assumed that one reason has been the needless mistakes of the movement itself. But it is no less obvious that neither human fallibility nor incorrect programs by themselves could account for the damage. I believe that the weakness of American socialism can be traced to its inability to overcome the obstacles placed in its path by the unique circumstances of American history.
* * *
In general, the growth of the factory system and the creation of a large and homogeneous class of propertyless workers provide the essential framework for the emergence of the modern socialist movement. Here, it was not until the middle of the 19th century that there was any factory system to speak of, and it was not until 15 years after the Civil War – 100 years later than England – that the United States was caught up in the industrial revolution. Thus the physical basis for a modern socialist movement hardly existed until the 1850’s with the field of social and political reform before then largely pre-empted by Utopian sects and Fourierist, Icarian and Owenite colonies, as numerous as they were short-lived.
The possibilities, however, in the decades after 1850 remained theoretical. Too many natural obstacles remained. For one, the population from 1850 to the end of the century had increased from 25 to 75 million, primarily due to the influx of 17 million immigrants and in the first decade of the new century immigration reached its peak with more than one million new entrants in the year 1905 alone.
The early waves of European immigration came mainly from Germanic countries. From the 1880’s on, the bulk of immigrants was from Southern Europe. This meant a multi-lingual working class which made its economic organization difficult and its political radicalization more , so, since language barriers restricted communication and employers and politicians cynically exploited national prejudices to keep the working class internally divided.
Also, modern socialist ideas and organizations were introduced by immigrants. This, in itself, was no barrier to socialist development and certainly was not evidence, as some critics of American socialism claim, that socialism was a foreign importation, alien to American life. On the contrary, the high proportion of immigrants was a reflection of American society whose work force until the period of the first world war was largely foreign born. However, where it was necessary to focus on American conditions and problems the foreign born socialists seldom made an effort to learn English or otherwise compromise with their new environment. This self-isolation cannot be considered so much a ‘mistake’ as a product of American conditions: the predictable human failing of immigrant socialists, many of whom had gone through the heroic struggles of 1848-1850 in their native lands, finding it politically and psychologically impossible to adjust to the raw climate of American life.
Apart from its polyglot complexion there was the numerical weakness of the working class. Throughout the 19th century the major movements of social protest, from Jacksonianism to the Greenback and Populist movements, were dominated by agrarian elements. The working class was too small, dispersed, divided and inexperienced, to operate effectively as an independent national political entity, and where it was politically organized it frequently found itself in alliance with these agrarian movements, only to be overwhelmed by its allies, diverted from its own interests and fallen victim to the various panaceas proffered by small farmers.
Another natural obstacle was the famous American frontier. The vast expanse of easily accessible land to the West delimited the socialist potential. In the first place, it meant an impermanent working class: native or immigrant families dissatisfied with their lot in the cities could escape their depressing surroundings – unlike workers in Europe where land for the most part had been removed from the public domain or was beyond the economic reach of workers confined to the city slums. The comparative ease with which an American could shift from mechanic to farmer reduced both the effectiveness and area of socialist propaganda and proved an obstacle to trade unionism as well.
This social fluidity was not the only restraining influence of the frontier. There was also the drama of covered wagons crossing the American plains, of pioneers and cowboys living close to the soil, of sacrifices and nobility revealed in conflicts with natural and human adversaries, of the physical vastness and resources of the nation. All this was real enough, and when overladen with propagandistic fanfare, the frontier evolved into a romantic myth – and an emotional safety valve that helped win the people’s confidence in the American system.
The frontier inhibited the growth of class consciousness yet in a third way: it contributed to an occasional scarcity of labor in manufacturing centers and thereby served to keep the wages of urban workers relatively high.
It was, however, more than the frontier which permitted high living standards for American workers compared to Europeans. It was, most simply, that America was a land of enormous wealth, favored by geography, blessed with natural resources, immense in land area and enjoying all the economic advantages of late industrial development. Since all classes benefited – unequally to be sure – from her unique riches, the basic confidence the masses had in the system seemed confirmed.
* * *
As the 19th century drew to a close, much of what has been described above was in the process of change. The frontier was closing, with scarcity and speculation driving up the price of land. The working class, no longer able to look to cheap land in the West, was finding itself confined to cities which turned into teeming slums where workers competed for jobs in the mass production industries rapidly taking shape in the East. The brutality of rapid industrialization impinged on the consciousness of thousands of immigrants of the last decades of the 19th and the early years of the 20th century. America, to many, was now more a Gehenna than a New Jerusalem.
In the turbulence of the post Civil War era there arose the Knights of Labor, a peculiar combination of industrial unionism, social reform, militancy, conservatism and mystical rites in which socialists, anarchists, agrarian schemers, middle class reformers and crackpots fought one another for organizational supremacy. Opposed to strikes in theory, the Knights nevertheless led some of the most heroic struggles of the early American industrial working class. Though its membership neared the million mark, the Knights could not sustain itself. Factionalism, confusion and its multi-class character (workers, farmers and middle class) took their toll. But, in this writer’s estimate, even without these drawbacks and even if the Knights had been organized on a strictly working class basis, it could not have established itself as an industrial union in face of the massive opposition of American capitalism and the inexperience of a newly concentrating industrial working class.
If the changing relationship of forces still did not allow the emergence of mass industrial unionism, it at least permitted the growth of a more modest and narrow form of unionism – the craft unionism of the American Federation of Labor which was able to entrench itself more firmly among the less competitively threatened skilled workers.
Some of the factors which encouraged the growth of the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor helped provide the impetus for the impressive, if not spectacular, growth of the socialist movement described earlier.
* * *
The promise of the Socialist Party in this period was not fulfilled since it could not overcome the still operative restraints sketched above to which must be added still other basic causes if one is to understand the debilitation of American socialism:
Trade unionism was capable of overcoming the obstacles in its path because it was essentially a bread and butter movement appealing to the economic instincts of the working class and offered no fundamental challenge to the class organization of American life. The unions which took permanent hold did not require a membership with a keen political self-consciousness. Socialism is different. Revolutionary in objective, socialism requires the participation of large numbers of workers with a political grasp and sense of purpose more profound and selflessly motivated than the more narrowly oriented trade unionist. If socialism requires a working class membership whose sights go beyond the here and now, it also demands a leadership weighted with idealistic intellectuals who freely contribute their abilities toward building the intelligence of the movement. It is here that American socialism failed and this failure of intelligence has contributed as much as any other cause to the collapse of American socialism. This failure, however, is not accidental but is rooted in American history and tradition – or meagre history and lack of tradition.
In Europe, the social ancestry of farmer, industrial proletariat and capitalist can be traced back to serf, journeyman and medieval merchant. The transition from then to now represents a bridge in time that took centuries to cross in a passage that was not always clear or direct or consciously made.
The slowness and complexity accompanying the disintegration of feudal relations inflicted the penalty of centuries-long suffering on the masses but it also carried a reward for future generations in that the very subtlety and gradualness of European evolution contributed to the growth of a culture and tradition all but absent in American history. It is permissible, I believe, to make the generalization that all social classes in Europe, compared to the United States, have been aided in reaching a higher level of self-consciousness because they have emerged so slowly from antiquity through the middle ages to modern times. Thus, for a European equivalent of an Eisenhower to become
Prime. Minister or Premier of any major European power would be an anomaly, but for a man whose major talents are tied down to golf, fishing, cowboy stories and an infectious smile to become the Chief Executive of the world’s most powerful nation seems almost fitting and should surprise no one.
Similarly, the different histories and contrasting origins of the European and American working classes explain the continuance of socialism as a mass phenomenon in Europe and its marginal existence here. One need only recall that the French Jacquerie were battling the hated nobility at a time when primitive Indian tribes here inhabited a vast wilderness that no European would yet see for another 150 years; and European had barely set foot on these shores when Thomas Muenzer was leading the German peasants in a revolutionary war that was to prove so instructive and inspirational, more than 300 years later, to the communists and democrats of mid-19th century Germany.
Where similar movements did exist, the contrast between Europe and America is no less striking. There was a Puritan movement on both sides of the ocean. In England, Puritanism was a militant fusion of economics, politics and religion which tore away at the remaining fabric of the old feudal order. And within the movement there was the schism between Presbyterian and Independent: while Cromwell fought the Anglican Establishment, the Levellers, Anabaptists, Diggers and other left-wing Independents fought both Crown and Cromwell and for a brief moment their humane and egalitarian spirit triumphed. But if the premature communistic sects that grew within the Puritan movement could not triumph over their historic limitations, they were of tremendous force and moment and operated within a given context which permitted their ideas and experiences to survive their defeats.
In the United States, on the other hand, the Puritan movement did not affect the fate of a nation, it concerned the lives of a few thousand settlers. Here there was no feudal order to combat or omnipotent church to menace. Instead, transplanted from Europe, there was the Calvinist strain of Puritanism with all its narrow-minded prejudices and bigotry which were soon institutionalized in theoretically organized New England communities. Here, there was no Cromwell whose war against the Independents was balanced by his military campaign against a divine king. Instead, there was a John Cotton, leading Puritan intellectual, rationalizing physical torture as a justifiable punishment for those few Anabaptists, Seekers and Quakers who challenged the Calvinist theocracy. Here, there could be no John Lilburne challenging a Cromwell, only a Roger Williams – a man whose goodness of mind and spirit has left little visible impress on the American conscience today – fighting a losing battle against Puritan bigots.
* * *
Engels was convinced that the lack of a feudal past in America would bring socialism that much closer in the New World. That he was wrong is removed from debate by the all too evident facts. Not only did the absence of feudalism deprive the working class of traditions established by its precursors but it restricted the growth of political consciousness in yet another way.
In Europe – and in America too – the bourgeoisie did not establish its power on the basis of its victories. The European revolutionary wars of capitalism were fought and won over the bodies of serfs, yeomen, craftsmen and an already existing propertyless proletariat. But once the supremacy of the market had been established, the bourgeoisie cynically discarded the egalitarian slogans which it had reluctantly accepted in the wars against feudalism. The political freedom it sought to accompany the freedom of the market, it became clear, was intended for itself and not for the unruly and propertyless masses.
In Europe, then, to win the political liberties for which they had fought, the lower levels of society had to remain constantly alert and participate as an active political revolutionary force.
In the United States, on the other hand, there was no equivalent of the Parisian barricades of 1830 and nothing comparable to the revolutionary waves of 1848/50 if for no other reason than that many of the objectives of European revolutionaries had already become part of the American tradition by the middle of the 19th century. With relative ease the American people had won rights of free speech, press and above all, universal (or nearly so) white manhood suffrage.
That democracy was more easily come to in the United States is not a tribute to any democratic impulse of our Founding Fathers. On the contrary, many of them were ultra-conservative, some being monarchists and almost all of them contemptuous of the ‘mob’ and of democracy. Even many of the more liberal colonial leaders who remained loyal to the concept of a republican form of government made it clear that their republicanism was not to be confused with democratic institutions and government by popular consent. However, the overwhelming majority of the population consisted of yeomen and their families whose natural bent for democracy was intensified by the unique levelling psychology of the American frontier. This class found itself in alliance with urban workers on the one hand, and on the other, with the powerful class of southern plantation holders and Western large scale property holders in whose interest it was to extend voting rights to farmers and settlers. This pressure, from above and from below, for democracy, proved irresistible and reached its initial climax in the sweep of Andrew Jackson more than 125 years ago. In addition, the enormous potential wealth of the nation made it foolhardy for an economic aristocracy to endanger its future through an overly stubborn, violent resistance to the growth of democracy.
From the point of view of our discussion, the relatively easy advent of political democracy had its penalties as well as its obvious rewards: the manner and ease with which elementary democratic rights were achieved removed from the experience of the American working class their necessary participation as an independent, revolutionary political force.
* * *
The newness and success of the country, its geographic vastness, the bigness of its industry, the simplicity of early American life, the relative ease with which ruthlessness or ingenuity or a combination of both could win fortunes, all of these national characteristics produced a supra-class, national psychology according to which that mattered which produced immediate and tangible results. Theories were for visionaries or, to use the more current epithet, for eggheads.
For the American bourgeoisie there was something fitting about its narrow pragmatic spirit. A dog-eat-dog philosophy – called ‘Rugged Individualism’ – literally paid off as fortunes were made. But for the socialist movement, which could not escape its environment, the pragmatic spirit would serve to strip it of the gains made in the first decade and a half of the 20th century.
The crude pragmatism that infected the radical movement as it emerged at the turn of the century took two contrasting forms. On the one hand there was the dominant wing of the Socialist Party which made a fetish of immediate reforms, firmly convinced it was going to elect socialism into power. It was a kind of muckraking socialism given to superficial declarations about the evils of capitalism and the blessings of a reform here and another elected socialist official there. At the other extreme there was the revolutionary syndicalism that eschewed reform, elections and most other political action. It proposed to fight fire with fire and answer violence with violence, finding supporters mainly in the midwestern and mining regions of the country where life had few of the refinements of European metropolitan life and direct action seemed to have more meaning than the doctrinaire discussions of citified ideologues. It had more in common with the romantic strain of revolutionary syndicalism that existed outside the party, and eventually it expended itself in disastrous dual-union campaigns, above all in the exciting but nomadic, unreal and necessarily ill-fated adventure of the anti-political Industrial Workers of the World (more popularly known as the ‘Wobblies’).
By losing sight of its goal and focusing almost exclusively on the present – be it in a militant syndicalist or reformist way – and looking askance at ‘theorizing’, the movement lost perspective, could not cope with the realities of American life, with the end result that ‘practical’ politics often proved impractical and a growth deterrent.
Akin to its pragmatism, the socialist movement had insulated itself to both international events and the major questions confronting the European labour movement. In this, too, socialism reflected, in its own way, an American condition – a xenophobic society feeling mistakenly secure and superior in its isolation. Consequently, the socialist movement, with its intellectual primitiveness and insularity, was totally unprepared for two great events: World War I and the Russian Revolution.
It was the Russian Revolution which had the greater impact on American socialism. Into the Socialist Party there poured thousands of immigrants, swelling the membership rolls by 1919 to 120,000. These new recruits became the main – but not only – basis of a new left wing whose leadership proved to be as unscrupulous (with exceptions, of course) as it was blind to American conditions. It assumed the garb and manner of Russian Bolshevism in a land and among a working class that was ill prepared for it.
The tremendous post-war strike wave became, in its distorted vision, political demonstrations of workers striking out for state power. Slogans, ideas and forms of organization which made sense in Europe were recklessly adopted by American left wingers so that by the time it had organized itself in late 1919 as a Communist movement (actually two Communist parties were created by a faction-ridden left wing) its numbers were sharply reduced.
Handicapped by its own political inadequacies, by the opposition of a dedicated core of Communist Party activists, the Socialist Party could not take full advantage of the opportunities that did present themselves during the 30’s. The Communist Party could and did. It might not win as many votes as the Socialist Party on election day, but during the depression 30’s, the Communists built their party, they made significant inroads in the labor movement, they established their front organizations, their membership grew to around 100,000, they could fill Madison Square Garden for any number of special occasions. They could still win members away from the Socialist Party. And the Communists had something to offer that the socialists could not match: Russia. Russia was something huge and different and real. It was dynamic. It was anti-capitalist. It spoke in the name of all the humanitarian causes of the past. It had vast resources. What did the American socialists have to match this? They had arguments, of course, but they were not always clear or appealing and they were compromised by an ambivalence toward the same Russian that was as much its bane as was the American CP. In the late 40’s the appeal of the Communist Party grew, in spite of the Stalin-Hitler Pact, and American socialism was hardly a factor in its calculations.
Unless one realizes the extent to which Stalinism succeeded in the United States in carrying out its historic mission to destroy the organization and image of socialism, the present weakness of socialism cannot be understood. And, perhaps, what will not be understood is the special sensitivity and the wholly justifiable concern of many American socialists with Russian events.
* * *
It would be gross self-deception to deny that many of the historically imposed limitations upon American socialism remain with us and that new problems have been created:


The economic resources of American capitalism are more stupendous than ever and there is no reason to believe that any economic catastrophe will overtake it in the immediate future.
 
The living standards of the American workers are relatively high and their political level continues to be low.
 
Thanks to its lack of sophistication and the disastrous influence of Stalinism in the 30’s and 40’s, the American people identify Russia with socialism and condemn both.


The trade union leadership is politically conservative and, in this, it is an accurate reflection of the rank-and-file mentality. There is no longer even the militant rhetoric of the 30’s and the spirited language of a man like Walter Reuther, during and after the war, has given way to the hackneyed idiom of the modern ‘labor statesman’. Reuther, too, has recently made explicitly clear his view that socialism is just an obsolescent dogma where America is concerned. Socialism still suffers from its pragmatic affliction. The intellectual state of the movement is abysmal and from most surprising sources comes the wail of despair: ‘We mant a movement that works’. Every socialist naturally aims at success but when Success becomes a slogan and a battle cry, perspective and principles often succumb to futile schemes to strike political riches quickly. Sadly enough, this is the case with some of the most talented American socialists who, understandably tired of their sectarian existence, seek the key to success in a flirtation – certain to be unreciprocated – with liberal and labor leaders tied to the Democratic Party. The key will only open a Pandora’s Box.
* * *
The more liberal atmosphere in the country together with the tempo and direction of the civil rights movement does offer the realistic possibility that in the next period the Socialist Party’s membership will double. This is an even more likely prospect for its youth section. However, before the Party can evolve into a mass movement, the working class, through its economic organizations, will first have to break its organizational and political allegiance to bourgeois politics. And that break, it must be recognized, cannot be predicted for this year or next.
This writer then, is under no illusion about the prospects for a socialist awakening in the next year or two. On the other hand, there are changes in American life which endow socialism with a fundamental reality and relevance that was not the case at the time of its more successful beginnings:


Today, the working class is a comparatively homogeneous class: problems of ethnic and linguistic origin no longer plague it as they once did. It is also a permanent and stable class. There are no longer the population shifts from town to farm or town to town that once complicated the lives of union organizers and socialist agitators. The working class is no longer dispersed over a large number of small shops but heavily concentrated in massive industries. The social mobility that existed many years ago belongs now to history and the sociologists’ notebooks. The modern working class is a numerically imposing, perhaps majority, class. In any political alliance with farm organizations, its numerical and social weight would be so overwhelming as to preclude subordinating its own interests to agrarian panaceas.
 
At one time, liberal bourgeois experts on American labor denied the viability of industrial unionism as a form of labor organization with arguments similar to those offered by contemporary sociologists with regard to socialism.
 
Today, millions of workers, unskilled and semi-skilled, in basic and mass production industries, are organized in industrial unions that are here to stay. From the enfeebled organization of a few million embattled unionists a generation ago the welded strength of American unions has multiplied to a 16 million strong movement. Only the blind can fail to see that for all its faults, ranging from corruption to political conservatism, this tremendous, well organized class force has dramatic political possibilities.
 
Although harmful illusions about Russia survive among radical intellectuals, the restrictive influence of the Communist Party has been eliminated as an obstacle to socialism.


* * *
For all the weaknesses of the working class, and of the socialist movement, there is the element of realism and sobriety to socialism that is absent in much that its critics have to say. Take the learned men of history and sociology who speak so disdainfully of socialism’s past and contemptuously of its future. Socialism is irrelevant! It is utopian! But politics is concerned with alternatives and if socialism is a quixotic cause, what do they have to propose instead? In nine out of ten cases, it boils down to what we now have: an administration run by the corrupt Democratic Party and a White House staffed by Jack Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. What could be more utopian, absurd and irrelevant than this as even a beginning of a solution to America’s problems at home and her dilemma abroad?
By comparison, American socialists are eminently practical and realistic men.
January 1961

Footnotes
1. We are not denying class by income. However, the vast gap in income distribution evidences the existence and inequities of class structure. Nor does this writer pretend that there are no problems concerned with the definition of class. They do exist, but that is a subject for another discussion.
2. The Independent Socialist League, first organized as the Workers’ Party in 1940, under the leadership of Max Shachtman, had its origins in the splitting away of approximately half the membership of the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party. The Workers’ Party rejected the slogan of ‘unconditional support of the USSR’ and soon rejected the view of Russia as a ‘degenerated workers state’. During the forties and fifties, the Workers Party (later called the Independent Socialist League) deservedly earned the respect of many socialists and union militants for its contributions on the ‘Russian question’ as well as for its activity in, and evaluation of, the American labor movement. Its major publications were Labor Action and the New International.
3. Since this article was written the Socialist Party has founded a bi-weekly newspaper, New America. – Editors
 

us Jacobson: Isaac Deutscher - The Limits of Reform in Russia (September 1961)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
The Limits of Reform in Russia
(September 1961)

First Published: Soviet Communism and the Socialist Vision, as a two-part critical study of Deutscher by Julius Jacobson is reprinted in this volume, pp.86-162, September 1961.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

The many reforms in Russia since Stalin’s death provide a seeming basis in fact for an all-too-popular image-transformation of Russia from a demonic force under Stalin, to an acceptable society under Khrushchev. A system which, current clichés advise us, is “dynamic,” in “a state of ferment” and with “creative factors at work” organically evolving toward its historically determined liberal, democratic end. This view is not only projected by many who consider themselves radicals and socialists; it is far more popular than that. There is the case of George Kennan, a highly cultivated man of somewhat conservative tastes who, in an interview with Melvin Lasky (Encounter, March 1960), made the statement – astounding for a man of his background – that “in the main the goals and trends of Russian Communism lie along the same path as those of Western liberal-industrialism.”
(Perhaps it is this recently unearthed liberal dynamic which encourages Kennan, in the same interview, to dis-parage “as most doubtful in point of adequacy to the needs of the time ... the system of political parties and parliamentary institutions” known to the West and to advise us that “... for the endless varieties and gradations of normal [!] authoritarianism we in the West can afford to manifest a relaxed and even sympathetic toleration.” Added to the cynicism of the “sympathetic toleration” for “normal authoritarianism” is the confusion arising from Kennan’s promise that Russia, in the main, is moving onto the path of liberal-industrialism and the suggestion that the same country is settling down to a “normal” authoritarianism.)
Indeed, there have been many changes in Russia, and any balanced analysis of the meaning of the reforms, their im-plications and limits must mention, at least in summary fashion, what has prompted them and what areas of Russian life have been affected by them.
The labor discipline that was required for Communist Russia to industrialize in the 1930s – even when one discounts the excesses of Stalin – was an anachronism even before Stalin’s death in 1953. The continued growth of the economy no longer depended on a relentless intensification of labor, forced labor camps or the Stalin-directed transfer of millions from the countryside to cities. Labor had to be more efficient to be more productive and for this it was necessary to provide political and economic incentives via relaxation of terror and rising living standards.
For the sake of science and technology it was indispensable that the hundreds of thousands of scientists, technicians, professionals engaged in manual labor in slave labor camps be released (along with millions of others removed from the normal work force and engaged in unproductive labor).
Terror and slave labor were not only without the same economic and political rationale of the thirties, they were also liabilities for Russia’s new level of involvement in inter-national politics after World War II.
Another inspiration for the post-Stalin reforms that must not be underestimated was the thinly disguised fear in the Kremlin that the peoples’ hatred of Stalinism, unless mollified, might overwhelm a totalitarian system momentarily weakened by the loss of its main engineer.
Finally, and this must be underscored, the bureaucracy, for its own sake, wanted to relax. The bureaucrats wanted their class privileges and they wanted to live to enjoy them. This privilege of living was not certified so long as Stalin dominated the ruling Party. The Party Presidium had good reason to suspect that just before his death the “Great Mountain of Himalaya” was planning to bury some of his imminent pallbearers. Less certain was the identity of the victims ... a disquieting state of affairs!
The bureaucrats not only wanted a greater assurance of normal longevity, they wanted – and needed – a set of procedures in the Party and laws in the country to live by which were explicit, ameliorative and predictable in oper-ation to replace the Vyshinskyite “philosophy” of law that established the legal basis for the murderous and unpredictable whims of Stalin.
In a word, then, the bureaucracy sought to “normalize” its rule.
Almost immediately after Stalin’s death, reforms were effected. The slave labor system was sharply curtailed in the amnesties of 1953 and 1955. The pernicious Doctrine of Analogy and Confession as Queen of Proof were eliminated in the letter of Russian law. The power of internal security agencies and secret services used by Stalin was reduced.
Wages were raised, the work week shortened and added free social services provided for the workers. A rise in consumer goods production made pay increases more meaningful.
There has been a vast extension of free educational facilities. And in the cultural thaw of 1955-1956 creative talents could produce with a modicum of artistic integrity for the first time in over 20 years. The cultural atmosphere has tightened since then but remains many degrees above the Stalin freeze. It was still possible for Ilya Ehrenburg recently to write of Pasternak not approvingly, but with some compassion. Also, limited debates are now permitted on such topics as the meaning of life and socialist humanism.
Then there is the great overall change: the reduction of terror coupled with Communist efforts to win the approval of the masses.
 
THE REALITIES OF RUSSIAN LIFE
Before reviewing the theory of a self-democratising Russia, it is important to look first at the realities of Russian life for two reasons: first, to help correct the false image created by the superficialities of Stalinoid journalism and sightseers’ tidbits; second, the level of social, political and economic life in Russia today reveals something of the very definite limits to Russian reforms.
The most common misimpression is that Russia is in the process of political “democratization.” But lessening of terror and growth of democracy are separate propositions. To un-derstand this is essential to comprehending the nature of Russian society and the limits of the reforms. There was not a single democratic institution under Stalin. There is not a single democratic institution under Khrushchev: no right to organize a critical press; no right to organize political parties; no right to freedom of speech; no right to free elections. The denial of these rights is codified in many sections of Russian law. For example, in the statutes on “State Crimes,” Article 7, labelled “Anti-Soviet Agitation and Propaganda” outlaws:
Slanderous fabrication defaming the Soviet State and social system, or the dissemination, production or keeping the literature of such content for the same purpose.
Obviously, any organized movement of opposition to the Party line via a political party, press, publication, speech, etc., would be for the purpose of “slanderous fabrication defaming the Soviet State and social system,” punishable by imprisonment for up to seven years or exile and banishment for two to five years.
There were no trade unions under Stalin. There are no trade unions under Khrushchev. By trade unions, we mean the organization of working men in independent bodies which advance the interests of their members through the right to strike, to boycott, to pressure, to engage in political action. In Russia, there are institutions called trade unions with no internal democracy which exist as an integral part of the State. While the leaders of these misnamed trade unions handle workers’ grievances occasionally and administer in other respects to some of their needs, the main function of these Party-State adjuncts is to discipline the labor force and see to it that production goals are met. As Khrushchev put it:
Simple freedom of physical movement is still sharply curtailed in Russia. All citizens are required to carry internal passports and permission must be granted by the police before one can change his locality. Without this passport, a worker cannot get a job and, in certain key industries such as coal and armaments, management is required to take away workers’ passports in order that they be sealed to their jobs.
The campaign for “socialist legality” has eliminated some excesses of Stalinist terror; but socialist legality under Khrushchev remains a brutal hoax.
Despite improved living standards, the Russian people are worse off than almost any other people in a modern, industrial nation. Their pay is less, they eat less (during the first quarter of 1961 there was a 13% drop in meat processing) and they enjoy fewer comforts of life.
In the Seven Year Plan – which is to introduce Russia to the lower range of the higher stages of communism – the average wage of the Russian worker is to increase by a grand total of 26%: a rise from 78 to 99 rubles a month after five years. In dollars, from $86 to $109 per month by 1965. About $25 a week for the average worker! Even if the percentage increase is doubled, that would still leave the average weekly take home at about $30.
Much is made of the “free” social services provided for the Russian worker. There is something to this. Perhaps this adds the equivalent of another one-third to his paycheck (surely, a generous estimate). That still leaves him with a meager income by bourgeois standards, not to speak of the standards of a nation charging toward Communism. On the other hand, what needs to be emphasized no less is the worker pays through the nose for these “free” services via the in-famous “turnover tax” – a tax on consumer goods added to the normal price, which socialists have traditionally fought. In Russia, the government revenue from this tax, borne mainly by the poorer classes, came to approximately $35 billion in 1960. Some consumer foods are taxed as high as 50% of their normal selling price, Thus, a pair of men’s shoes in Moscow costs about 32.50 rubles ($36.00) or considerably more than a week’s pay. The same pair of shoes in New York costs about $10 and is of superior quality.
Other revealing prices: a dozen eggs – $2.33 (about $0.55 in New York); a pound of sugar – $0.45; a man’s overcoat – $166.50 (one that retails for about $40 in New York); a four-cylinder car – $2,775 (nearly three years pay for the average worker).
But there have been widely touted tax reforms in Russia! By 1965, the personal income tax is to be completely eliminated! This will mean a saving of about three-quarters of one ruble per week for the average Russian worker in a factory or an office! Peasants with income from private plots are not even granted this insignificant relief.
How many times have we heard that if wages are low and taxes high, at least the Russian worker lives virtually rent-free! What is often omitted, however, is that the working class lives virtually space-free, as well.
In 1960, there were approximately seven square yards of living space for each Russian worker. This provided one averaged-sized room for every three people. The average family had little more than one room with a kitchen shared by other families and a communal toilet.
By the end of 1965 – if the Seven Year Plan quota is met – there will be eight square yards of living space for each person. Assuming that this is oversubscribed heavily, it is still doubtful that the average Russian family will have much more than one-half the living space currently enjoyed by the average urban family in bourgeois America. And the average family in an industrial Russian city will not have much more living space than its parents had in 1917!
One of the worst outrages of the Stalin era was the mass persecution of the Jews. Stalin practiced a policy that hinted at racial genocide. That he killed thousands of Jews for being Jews is now denied by few outside the hard core of Communist party members.
In the present period Jews are not murdered by the regime en masse. That is certainly an improvement. But the false image of Russia as a self-reforming system blurs the view of a society in which anti-Semitism has been raised to a thinly veiled government policy. Russia, today, is the most anti-Semitic of any industrial nation.
On every internal passport, a Russian citizen must mark his nationality. A Georgian puts down “Georgian”; a Great Russian puts down “Russian”; but a Georgian Jew or a Great Russian Jew must mark down as his nationality – “Jew.”
This gross anti-Semitic act has its bitter irony: the Jew, forced to write “Jew” as his nationality, is deprived of all the cultural rights of a national people, as well as of a cultural and religious minority. There is no Yiddish theater, no Yiddish publishing house, no Yiddish national organization permitted.
(It appears that one Yiddish publication may be tolerated in the near future – this is hailed by some apologists as disproof of anti-Semitism.)
In the past several years, a rash of anti-Semitic stereotypes have appeared in the Russian press. We are told, for example, that rabbis “were active in spreading anti-Soviet slander and, with foaming mouths, called on the Jewish bourgeoisie to finance the intervention against the USSR.”
In the Ukrainian language, Radio Kirovograd ranted that Jewish ministers and circumcisers execute the rite of circumcision, which has a “strikingly nationalistic character” and accused religious Jewish leaders in Kirovograd of praying “only to the Golden Calf: how to collect more money from believers for their own needs and to pray for the militant spirit of the Israeli militarists. Thus praying, they call for the killing of all those who deny the Pentateuch – the Jewish prayerbook.”
Is it any wonder that against this background there have occurred desecrations of Jewish cemeteries and synagogues, that Jews have been beaten, even killed in this society reported on the path of “Western liberal-industrialism?” And is it surprising to learn that in a Moscow suburb a “Beat the Jew Committee” distributed a circular demanding that the “Jew be thrown out of commerce where he damages socialist property” and bemoans that “we rescued them from the Germans who treated them more wisely”?
I have acknowledged the cultural relaxation – the famous thaw – that has been effected in Russia. But after these reforms are acknowledged, what remains is a society most reactionary in its government restrictions on cultural free-dom and most primitive in cultural and intellectual thought generated. Where else but in Russia does one find as a typical party-encouraged attitude a denunciation of “Freudianism, [as] a typical product of bourgeois ideological reaction in the epoch of imperialism, [which has been] employed by bour-geois ideologists as a means of benumbing the masses in the interests of imperialism and as an ideological weapon in the struggle against Marxism.”
And in what other country can one find a parallel to Khrushchev’s following instructions on literary matters to a Central Committee Plenary session:
Among the writers in our country are individuals who say: How can there be Party guidance of literature? “We tell such people: Do you mean to say, ray dear fellow, that you do not recognize Party guidance? What is Party guidance? It is the will of millions of people, the will of millions of minds, the collective wisdom of millions. But one writer or another may sit at his country house, hatching a snivelling book, yet want it to be recognized as an expression of the sentiments of the people of our times, of all the people. Is that not a real cult of one’s own personality, which, you see, does not want to suffer the guidance of the Party, expressing the will of millions? And such a man with his con-trived book wants to rise above the Party, above the people. How many different kinds of people there are! This is, of course, a departure from the norm, a psychological phenomenon, so to speak, and such deviations evidently will take place with some individuals even under Communism.
The writer of a “snivelling book” in Khrushchev’s inspirational message on literary criticism was Pasternak. Pasternak was permitted to live, even after he wrote Doctor Zhivago. That is a reform compared to what would have occurred during the Stalin era. Pasternak’s punishment was meted out posthumously by Khrushchev with his vengeful sentencing of Mme. Olga Ivinskaya, Pasternak’s Larisa, and her daughter, Irina, to a prison labor camp for eight years and three years respectively. Such is the true measure of the limits of reform ... “sniveling” authors impinging on beloved and reforming tyrants.
 
KHRUSHCHEV’S BRAND OF TERRORISM
Under Stalin, bureaucratic purges and extorted confessions were endemic to the system. That remains the case under Khrushchev. In the earlier instance, bureaucrats were purged of life itself; since Stalin’s death – with a few deadly exceptions – the purges bureaucratically deprive bureaucrats of position, prestige and power – but not life.
Only someone totally blinded by Stalinophobia could dismiss the difference as unimportant. On the other hand, it usually takes a special kind of mentality to disregard or minimize the horror of a society where purges and confessions continue on a massive scale. And if the victims do not confess with the same degree of abjectness, this is not to say that the style and form of Russian confessions do not remain a distinct contribution to political psychopathology: Malenkov “could see with clarity [sic] my guilt and responsibility for the unsatisfactory state of affairs in agriculture.” Molotov realized that his “formulations [are] theoretically erroneous and politically harmful”; Pervukhin grew “profoundly aware of my guilt before the Party”; while that old war horse, Bulganin, was forced to confess with some of the old flavor:
What, then, is Molotov ...? Molotov is a person who has cut himself off from the life of the Soviet people and is totally [!] ignorant of both industry and agriculture. Kaganovich is an intriguer who proved himself capable of every sort of vileness... in 1957 I joined them, supported them and ... later shared with them all the anti-Party filth.
A society without a single democratic institution, without a free labor movement, with a populace ill-fed, ill-housed and ill-paid; with all the “normal” trappings of an abnormal society: anti-Semitism, cultural barbarism, large-scale purges, bizarre confessions and an antediluvian code of justice – all this remains in Russia after the reforms. Yet, it is this frightful society that has captured the imagination of many; looked upon by some as a socialist society, by others as kind of socialism, and by yet others as a society evolving toward liberalism or democracy or socialism.
What more distressing evidence can there be of the decline of radical culture and the loss of nerve and intelligence?
 
AN APOLOGIA FOR STALINISM
The new mood of toleration for the Kremlin has removed from unwarranted obscurity the names and works of such historians as Edward Carr and Isaac Deutscher. It is the latter, above all others, who was much maligned and misunderstood by those who misconstrued his distaste for the excesses of Stalinism as the emanations of a virulent anti-Sovietist. How wrong they were, many now realize. For it is Deutscher who has elaborated a grand historical apologia for Stalinism (and Stalinist terror) which now meshes with a growing Stalinoid mood.
According to Deutscher, Marxism was originally a body of thought that was rational, humane, democratic and alien to chauvinist prejudices. However, Marxism in its pure form failed; neither in Marx’s time nor after has there been a single successful proletarian revolution. This failure was not without its compensations. For, Deutscher writes, “Marxism has spread to the East; and by the efforts of the intelligentsia and a young and small working class it has conquered primitive peasant nations .... At the middle of this century Marxism has become in a sense displaced from the West and naturalized in Russia and China. Where it has survived as a mass movement in the West, in France and Italy, it has done so in its ‘Orientalized’ form: and it exists there as a broad reflex of the Russian metamorphosis of Marxism” (emphasis added),
What, more explicitly, is meant by Marxism’s “Orientalized” form? Deutscher obliges: “In the East, Marxism has absorbed the traditions of Tsardom and Greek Orthodoxy.” And, in a similar vein, “Stalinism represented the amalgamation of Western European Marxism with Russian barbarism.”
Moreover, Deutscher finds accompanying Orientalized Marxism a parallel to the primitive magic of tribal cults in the complex totem and taboos of Stalinism. Thus, Stalinism is not only Orientalized Marxism, it also “appears as the mongrel offspring of Marxism and primitive magic.”
It is not this writer’s purpose to conduct an extended polemic over such matters; that is reserved for another occasion. [1] But I must note my view that what Deutscher has conveniently concocted with his mongrelized-barbarized-orientalized-mysticized-metamorphized Marxism is a poisonous brew that is fatal for socialism.
To believe that socialism can be itself and its negation is not a paradox, which is a seeming contradiction; it is pure absurdity. It is one thing to say that Marxism is being touched, even influenced, by totalitarian methods or concepts; it is another thing to say that there is such a beast as “Autocratic Socialism” (to use Deutscher’s phrase) in which “autocratic” (or “barbaric” or “oriental”) is used to describe or define Marxian socialism.
Marxists believe that there was a liberal dynamic to capitalist industrialization. But its existence was not proved by abstract references to industrialization as a force generating democracy. The democratizing dynamic was established only after the concrete workings and class relations of capitalism were carefully examined; only after it was established that in the nature of capitalism, despite all its misgivings about democracy and for all its violence against revolutionary democratic movements, capitalism itself was obliged, from within, so to speak, to permit individual freedom and democratic institutions to a degree unthinkable under the old order. It was shown that there was no permanently irreconcilable conflict between capitalism and parliamentary democracy; capitalist parties and socialist parties could coexist up to a point; the growth of a legally and politically free working class was necessary for capitalism and its organization in free trade unions presented no direct fundamental challenge to the social rule of the bourgeoisie.
Because industrial growth impelled the formation of a large and homogeneous working class and an intelligentsia, and provided leisure, education, culture, etc., it multiplied the physical agents and conditions for further democratization within the widely permissive limits of capitalism.
Now, if it can be shown that a free working class, trade unions, antagonistic political parties, parliamentary democracy, free press, free speech, cultural freedom, etc., can co-exist within the limits of the Russian social system (even as these freedoms have a limited coexistence with most advanced capitalist nations today) the overwhelming probability is that the continued expansion of Russian industry will generate political freedom. But this has never been proven, for two related reasons: one, because it is impossible (in my opinion); two, it is far easier to be a prophet-apologist for Stalinism on the basis of broad, sweeping generalizations than to relate them to the realities of Russian class rule.
Nor is anything clarified by endlessly repeating the mystique of Russia as a Planned Economy with a Nationalized industry and therefore freed from the limitations placed on democracy by capitalism. It is a logical fallacy to suppose that because Russia is relieved of the liabilities of capitalism it is therefore possessed of a special sociological disposition favoring democratization.
Soviet apologists see the precondition for Russia’s democratization as the growth of the productive forces. As the link between Stalinism and socialist freedom they must be free from excessive external interference.
Should the exigencies of the cold war oblige the Kremlin to overinvest in heavy industry and in the means of destruction, then, it is possible, they inform us, that the whole process of de-Stalinization would be impeded, perhaps forced into reverse gear. An excessive military budget would only penal-ize consumer industries; this, in turn might exacerbate the dissatisfaction of the Russian people; and a dissatisfied populace might oblige the Kremlin to resort to more repres-sive measures.
In this manner, the Russian social system is exonerated in advance of basic responsibility for the failure of domestic reforms to move forward. Instead, it would be the fault of those outside of Russia who resist the Kremlin’s ambitions in West Berlin or protest the Russian “sphere of influence” in East Europe. This, of course, in the age-old argument of all apologists for imperialism who attribute retrogression in their favored land to its obligation to defend itself against alien subversion, or foreign imperialism. It is the counterpart of those who apologize for American imperialism in Cuba or Latin America as a purely defensive move against Communist aggression.
Given this self-contained system, the only way one could conclusively check the democratic potential of Russian industrialization abstracted from the real world of inter-national conflict would be for the Kremlin to eliminate the capitalist third of the world and absorb the uncommitted third. Then, we could really see if Russia, freed from the restraining influence of the cold war would evolve toward democratic socialism.
This is a test we can readily forego.
Let us look at one implication of any theory which makes a virtual law of the industrial-freedom relationship.
Under the guidance of the Fuehrer and his Nazi party (a party ridden with totems, taboos and primitive magic), Germany recorded industrial advances impossible under the old, weak, vacillating, internally divided Weimar Republic. Under the pressure of internal needs and external threats, its technology and science led the world, its unemployed were put to work, and a limited sort of economic rationalization was introduced. It is true that this economic progress was achieved by barbaric methods equalled only by Stalin’s superindustrialization during the same period. But historical necessity leaves little room for sentimental moralizing. Human rights and democracy come later.
The dynamism of the German economy was evidenced by Germany’s ability to fight the entire world almost single-handledly for four bloody years. That it was brought to its knees was no sign of weakness. (Had Germany been matched only with Russia during the war, Nazism’s social superiority would have been proved.) But what would have happened if the Nazis had conquered Europe? We have no illusions about the immediate political consequences. National boundaries would have been destroyed, millions murdered and terror would have beset an entire continent. Germany’s industrial expansion, however, would have been incalculable as it accumulated the wealth, the talent, the manpower and other resources of subjugated Europe.
But with the methods of terror, it could go so far and no further. Yet, the demands for continued expansion would be there, generated by the economic ambitions of German capitalists and the political ambitions of the Nazi party. Since neither the German bourgeoisie nor the Nazi party would have been prepared to pay the penalty of stagnation, they would have been obliged to eliminate, gradually, the grossest of their terroristic excesses and slowly, reluctantly, to move toward democracy.
Germany would have had to release her aircraft designers, unmuzzle her intellectuals and provide the working class with the incentive of freedom as a political investment to raise the productivity of labor. Thus, Nazism, with the weap-ons of barbarism, would have been the source of its own democratic negation. (Unless international tensions would have set back these democratic reforms.)
I know that some will answer this Nazi analog by saying that the German bourgeoisie (and all capitalism) could not possibly extend rights to the people that ran counter to the “rights” of the bourgeoisie to exploit the worker and produce goods for a profit on the market; and the Nazi party could not afford to extend political or social democracy to the masses since democracy ran counter to its ideology. The matter of ideology I will come to shortly. It is the first part of the answer that is interesting here, not because it is wrong but, on the contrary, so correct. Certainly, the limits to democracy under capitalism are set by the “rights” of the capitalists to exploit and to make a profit. But these are considerations of class and class relations which do not enter into the calculations of the apologists for Russia. The point of this analogy is that if one judges Nazism without any serious discussion of class relations, it is possible to build a rationale for Nazism similar to that of the Stalinist apologists.
 
THE MYTH OF STALINIST IDEOLOGY
Commonly added to the mystique of Industrialization and Planning is the myth of Stalinist ideology as a force impelling democratization.
Inherent in Communist ideology, so the argument goes, is commitment to freedom. Even during the worst years of Stalinist terror, when ideology was warped by “primitive magic,” Communism was obliged to speak of national inde-pendence, racial equality and the future classless society where all men will be brothers. It also placed on required reading lists many Marxist classics. This “ideal inherent in Stalinism,” Issac Deutscher wrote in his political biography of Stalin, “has remained the inspiration” in Russia, although the ideal was “given a grossly distorted expression” by Stalin.
If this “remained the inspiration” under Stalin, how much more inspiring it Is today! For, as economic advances have brought Russia beyond the point where terror is required, the idea of freedom inherent in Communist ideology takes on new and more powerful meaning. The masses, who do not have to be convinced of the value of freedom, are made even more conscious of its absence. They press for freedom, and the bureaucracy, with less reason to resist such pressures, and themselves under the “inspiration” of Communist ideology moves, slowly, gradually – sometimes reluctantly – to bring reality into conformity “with ideological commitment to freedom. There is also a more educated and confident intel-ligentsia in Russia, many of them young and uncompromised by personal responsibility for Stalin’s terror. They find posi-tions on all levels of government and industry. They, too, are “inspired” and encouraged by the relaxation and become a potent force for democratization.
There is something to be said for this popular thesis only as a “grossly distorted expression” of the truth.
Ideology is of tremendous moment In the Communist system. Its greater importance as compared to capitalism is rooted in the fact that Russia is ruled by a propertyless class whose authority is established by its political power. By contrast, the social power of capitalists resides in their private ownership of the means of production in a market economy. As long as government protects the sanctity of free enterprise, there is no absolutely compelling reason for capitalists to concern themselves with ideology. Doctrine can become a subject for pedants; politics for politicians.
In Russia, there is no such division between economics and politics. The means of production are owned by the State. And those who collectively control the State own the means of production. Where social power is thus politically determined, the ruling class rules directly, and the ruling agency – in Russia, the leadership of the Communist party – becomes in a most literal sense “the executive committee of the ruling class.’5 Clearly, politics for this “executive committee” implies the highest levels of political sophistication and class consciousness. This consciousness is invested in the complex and well-tended ideology with which the ruling class struggles against opponents, justifies its rule, gives itself purpose, fights for popular support outside and inside Russia.
This is not to say that the politics of the bureaucratic class is determined by its ideology. On the contrary, it is more con-cerned with power than consistent principles. But a class ideology does not require consistent principles. Indeed, a basic function of Communist ideology is to provide a broad, Jesuitical system to prove all contradictions to be nothing more than strategic shifts, or new responses to new situations, all of them consistent with the larger historical purpose of Communism and therefore consistent with each other. Thus, with its medieval casuistry called ideology, the contradiction between Popular Front and the Nazi-Soviet Pact becomes a logical sequence of strategic moves; totalitarianism becomes freedom, subjugated nations becomes People’s Democracies, and, as we shall see, the future classless society in Russia means the dictatorship of the Communist party, whose authority becomes even more absolute than in Stalin’s day.
This totalitarian class, and its ideology, did not arise out of the efforts of an indigenous, prerevolutionary force in Russia, contending for power with the armies and ideologies of socialism and Czarism. It arose gradually, without any clear perspective, out of the ranks and leadership of the Communist movement – a movement already festering in the early twenties – filling a vacuum created in that unhappy land by the inability of socialism to survive in isolation, and the impossibility of any other class to assume power. The Stalinist faction in the Bolshevik party – the Russian ruling class in embryo – to satisfy its own needs, to win support in and out of the Party, was obliged to speak in the name, and with the idiom, of socialism. It would do nothing else and nothing else would do. As it manipulated socialist language and concepts, it set the stage for transforming the Party, murdering its leaders and subverting everything that gives meaning to socialism.
(I should add here, just in passing, that when I speak of the Communists’ ideological manipulation of language, I do not mean that they do so out of purely evil and undirected motives. Ideology fulfils an indispensable moral and psycho-logical need for the bureaucracy. If the Russian leaders, even the most evil of them, were so many Iagos without a higher moral rationale, deceiving and manipulating for the pure joy of doing evil, we would not be discussing either a social system or an ideology, but a vast lunatic asylum.)
This writer, then, understands the historic roots of Com-munist ideology and why some (not all) of the socialist idiom has become a fixed ideological feature, and why it is obliged to bring to the public some (not all) books of some (not all) great socialist figures of the past.
But, after this is established – and exaggerated – what is there about these aspects of Communist ideology which gives them such force that the basic foundations of Communist class rule will gradually give way?
The answer might be given that “there are objective laws in Russia as in any society and these laws are more important than what this or that bureaucrat wants to do.”
To which one might well reply: what laws? I know of economic laws under capitalism which exist independently of the whim of this or that capitalist. However, as has been pointed out, those who rule in Russia make their own laws. Their rule predicates conscious direction of society and they know, not by blind instinct but through consciousness, that their special privileges and prestige as a class rests on their control of the State and that this control is secure only as long as they can prevent contenders from arising. Khrushchev knows this; so does Suslov; it is known to that drab, anti-Semitic Minister of Culture, Mme. E.A. Furtseva; it is known to Brezhnev, to Mikoyan, to all Party secretaries from Raions up to the Central Committee; it is known to the Communist heads of the so-called trade unions; it is known to the super-annuated Komsomol chieftains. It is known, as well, to the editors of Izvestia, Pravda and Party Life. They all know that the limits to reform are set in this conscious class resistance to democratic institutions. They know that political parties, free press, free unions and similarly alien institutions can come to Russia only over their dead bodies – figuratively speaking, of course.
 
PENETRATION OF SOCIALISM
Yet, there is a liberalizing force generated by the language and texts of freedom. But it is not the dynamic that is going to see the self-redemption or self-immolation of a “historically progressive” totalitarian class.
The basic ideas of socialism did break through the curtain of Communist ideological falsification even during the era of Stalinist terror. They penetrate with even greater force in periods of relaxation. As terror becomes more latent, the ruling class is compelled to reiy more on persuasion. It removes socialist books from the Index; it permits greater freedom of discussion of a wider range of subjects. It produces the “intellectual ferment” familiar to all. This may have made the masses hopeful at first. But the bureaucracy cannot possibly eliminate those glaring contradictions be-tween the realities of its rule and the promises suggested by the reforms, The working class will not be permitted to enjoy either leisure or freedom; students and intellectuals will grow increasingly aware of the difference between Marx’s promise of Communism as “the true resolution of the strife between existence and essence, between objectification and self-confirmation, between freedom and necessity, between the individual and the species” and the actuality of a one-Party system where the Party grows stronger and man remains the alienated object of class exploitation.
The dynamic of democratization, then, which inheres in Communism is to be found neither in its commitment to the socialist idiom, nor in its reforms. The dynamic resides only in the ability of these circumstances to educate, arouse and encourage the people to resolve the permanent contradiction between Communism and freedom in massive democratic struggles from below which aim not at reforming the ruling class but destroying it.
Any “ideal inherent” in Stalinism is but the “false consciousness” of a ruling class. A truer image of Communism can be found in the specific doctrines and general concepts inherent in a bastardized ideology that crosses some of the language and concepts of socialism with the strategic and fundamental social needs of a totalitarian class. It is not the ideal of racial equality or the brotherhood of man, but the theories of “socialism in one country,” “social fascism,” “Popular Frontism,” which truly inhere in Communism. More than such reactionary notions, tribal rites, hero-worship and cultism continue under Khrushchev, as they will continue under his heir. The magic potion is less heady today, but it is there, and in recent years the cultist brew has taken on more of the stench of Stalin’s day.
In addition to its inherent and unique antisocialist doctrines and “primitive magic” the true role, essence and measure of Communist ideology has been the corruption of the concepts and definitions which are at the very heart of socialism.
The Communist Manifesto states that the “first step in the workers’ revolution is to make the proletariat the ruling class, to establish democracy.” Stalinist ideology can neither ignore nor permit such formulations. Thus, according to the 1959 edition of the History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Russia today is a “socialist democracy ... which secures to all citizens genuine freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, meetings and demonstrations.” Here, the History recognizes that democracy does mean freedom of press, speech, meetings, demonstrations. But the decisive content of democracy is denied and thereby redefined by the asser-tion that democracy in practice is exemplified by what exists in Russia. This gross redefinition of democracy is one edge of a multi-bladed ideological knife thrust into the heart of the whole humanist ethic of socialism: the disjunction between freedom and socialism, between “political democracy” and “economic democracy.”
Such notions existed before Stalin, but it is Communism which, made them a central feature of an ideology, and pro-moted it throughout the world. How effective this campaign has been can be seen in all the pseudosophisticated jabberwocky of those who assume that Russia has a “socialist economy” with a “political dictatorship,” that it is a “workers’ state” and, in the same breath, that its working class is disfranchised. This loss of concern in the left wing world with the relevance of freedom to socialism implies surrendering the values of both.
Stalinist ideology was always concerned with the future. To be sure, it was not the socialist future envisioned in broad outlines by socialist theoreticians. Stalinism had to weave the totalitarian reality into the egalitarian vision. In Stalin’s day, this took the form of two grotesque theories: as the State moves toward the classless society, the class struggle becomes sharper; and, second, once in the classless phase, the State not only doesn’t wither away but becomes more oppressive. Ideological concern with the future is further heightened today under the impetus of a totalitarian regime trying to substitute persuasion for the naked use of a now latent terror. If only the peasants produce more, the workers meet quotas, everyone keeps his proper place and capitalism doesn’t upset the schedule, then in 1970, or thereabouts – when Ameri-can levels of production are reached – Russia will move into its higher Communist phase. (As though all that has to be done to reach Communist abundance is to match capitalist America’s production figures!) Khrushchev feels the need to discuss the future not only for the sake of economic incentives, or to win favor, or because Communism is imminent, it also relates to the most important sociological change in Russia – the role of the Communist party.
Since this change provides the clearest evidence of the limits to Russian reform, it is worth a brief review; after which we will see that these changes have inspired reversals of Marxist thought similar to those contributed by Stalin.
 
THE COMMUNIST PARTY
The Communist party under Stalin – and under Khrushchev – was a vast coordinating agency embracing individuals on various levels of authority: factory managers, technicians, scientists, army men, teachers, intellectuals and the host of officials associated with non-Party government agencies. However, within the Party structure there were not only government officials and the like, but the Party Specialists – the apparatus men who rose to prominence not by serving any special branch of government or economy but by serving the needs of the Party.
It was inevitable that within the Communist party conflicts would arise between the 3% which composed the Party machinery and other leading Party members prominent in government or military agencies. Army men, for example, who were Party members, had their own apparatus outside the Party. They developed narrower interests, thought more of combat training than of Party indoctrination. To a lesser degree, this was true of Party members who headed government ministries where they built private machines to which they had to cater, bringing them into conflict with professional Party functionaries. Certainly the ministers of various security agencies who had their own economic empires in slave labor camps and a powerful military apparatus under them, did not and could not have an identity of interests with the Party specialist.
It was a conflict between the Party machine, which must think in terms of power and be concerned with questions of ideology, foreign strategy, etc., and those whose loyalty to the Party competed with their own special interests as gov-ernment officials.
This conflict between ministers and functionaries in Stalin’s Party had its corollary in broader conflicts between the Party as a whole and non-Party technicians, managers and administrators. These conflicts which generated in-trigues, purges and inefficiency were essential for the rule of the personal dictator. Stalin remained on the peak of each hierarchy and through his unique position, he could play one force against another and thereby see to it that no hierarchy or individual in either the Party or the government could ever challenge his supreme authority as the final arbiter of all disputes.
To maintain a kind of equilibrium of power, subordinate to his own, Stalin consciously set about to weaken (not destroy) the primacy of Communist party organizations in various government ministries. For example, it was expressly stated in the Party rules in 1939, and repeated in 1952, that the Party organizations in local industrial enterprises were not to dictate policies in the event of disputes with local managers.
When Stalin died, he left no heirs. Without his decisive voice and with no other to replace it immediately, heads of Party and State openly spoke of “panic and disarray,” and within the Party the rivalry between apparatchiki and government ministers grew less restrained. This conflict has been resolved in the only way possible for the more viable functioning of a totalitarian system. The apparatchiki has become supreme in the Party, and the Party has become supreme in the country. And, once again, there is a personal dictator.
The Presidium of the Communist party after Stalin’s death consisted of ten full members and four candidate-mem-bers. Of these, only one was a Party specialist who held no ministerial post: Nikita Khrushchev. All but one of the others have been purged: Beria was executed and his Ministry of the Interior eventually subdivided and rendered powerless as a potential threat to the supremacy of the Party; Maienkov tried to build his machine in the government apparatus as Premier and he was purged. Bulganin, who took over Malenkov’s job, was purged, as were Pervukhin, the economic specialist, Kanganovich, Minister of Heavy Industry, Molotov, head of the Foreign Ministry, etc.
Of the original post-Stalin Presidium, only one minister, Mikoyan, remains. And between the Presidium as it stood in 1953 and today, there have been several turnovers with purges of governmental leaders a continual process until there has emerged, today, a Presidium of the Communist party on which only a minority have any leading ministerial posts. Evidence that this struggle broke out openly in the Party immediately after Stalin’s death was provided by the frame-up and execution of Beria. (He was accused of being in the pay of foreign imperialism during the civil war!)
Whatever motives others may have had in liquidating the head of the powerful Minister of Internal Affairs, the Party apparatus men feared this powerful Ministry as well as threats to the Party’s primacy.
Pravda announced immediately after his arrest:
The party organization must exercise regular and systematic surveillance over the work of all organizations and governmen-tal offices as well as the activity of all leading officials. In line with this, it is necessary to maintain systematic and continuous supervision over the activity of the organs of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This is not merely the right, but the direct duty of the party organization.
Khrushchev makes little pretense about his objection to leading Communists who have special allegiances outside of the Party sitting on the Presidium. In the case of Zhukov, for example, it was explained:
Zhukov pursued a line separating our armed forces from the Communist Party, of weakening the party organization and essentially of weakening the political organs in the Soviet Army. His work was clearly marked by a tendency to regard the Soviet Armed forces as his own domain.
The Party, which controls and directs the activity of all organi-zations and agencies, cannot leave the armed forces outside its field of vision. Leadership of them cannot be outside the control of the Party, of its Central Committee.
The idea that what we have in Russia is a managerial society or a managerial revolution was given the death, blow in 1957 in a series of economic changes pushed through by Khrushchev, In these changes, the state economic commission was emasculated and the country broken down into a large number of economic regions. This was advertised as designed to Increase the efficiency of industry by removing bureau-cratic control from the center and giving local managers an incentive to increase production. That might have been one purpose, but of no less significance, the economic “reforms” of 1957 were designed, to give the Party a better chance to supervise the work of the managers and technicians. By giving greater authority to local economic bodies, it became easier for local bodies of the centralized Communist party to oversee directly and supervise production schedules and the behavior of economic managers. As explained in an editorial in Pravda:
The reorganization of the management of the economy on the territorial principle will increase immeasurably the respon-sibility of the Party agencies in the republics, territories and regions for the development of production... the Party will guide efficiently and concretely industrial enterprises and construction projects.
The growing power of the Communist party is also evidenced, by the revival of Comrades Courts and the formation of People’s Guards. Hailed by many as “reforms,” they are no such thing. The “Comrades Courts are elected public agencies charged with actively contributing to the inculcation in citizens of a spirit of a Communist attitude toward labor and socialist property, and the observance of the rules of socialist behavior,” according to the Model Statutes on Comrades Courts. They are organized everywhere: in schools, enterprises, apartment houses, collectives. The court is selected at a general meeting of workers, students. These courts hear minor infractions of discipline and can pass light sentences on a worker found guilty of “poor quality work, allowing defective output or idle time resulting from a worker’s unconscientious attitude toward his duties,” “foul language,” “petty arrogance” or “leading a parasitic way of life.”
In March 1959, by joint Decree of the Communist Party and the Council of Ministers, the People’s Guard was organized. These are “voluntary detachments” – over 2,000,000 strong – recruited locally, ostensibly “to stop violations of public order and restraining violators mainly through persuasion and warning.” That one of the more popular methods of persuasion includes beatings with clubs, feet and fists is commonly reported even in the Russian press.
These kangaroo Comrades Courts and vigilante Guards have a number of purposes. Obviously, they are intended as counterbalances to the lessening of terror and to “persuade” the people that relaxation does not mean that they can depart from what the Kremlin calls the “everyday laws of Soviet life.” They have the related purpose of prying into and regulating the greater leisure time of the people since Stalin’s death. (Leisure is anathema to totalitarianism, and the Kremlin makes no secret about its anxieties that free time might seduce people into subversive thinking, leading a parasitic way of life, or departing in any way from acceptable Communist behavior.)
However, what basically motivates the formation of these two extremely important “public organizations” is the Party’s campaign to inject itself into every phase of Russian life – political, economic, social, cultural, juridical and personal. Neither the Comrades Courts nor the People’s Guards has its own national ministry; both are under the effective control of local units of the Communist party. Thus, the Party arrogates police and repressive powers formerly held by governmental agencies at the same time as it more closely supervises the people.
The Comrades Courts and People’s Guards are also further evidence that modern totalitarianism is not simply an authoritarian rule imposed above society but that it penetrates and sinks its roots into every nook and cranny of society. It not only extends and deepens its areas of supervision but requires the participation of wider and deeper strata of the people. Ultimately, like any great evil, it seeks to involve its victims – in this case, the personnel of the Comrades Courts and People’s Guards – in its own system of immorality and corruption.
 
THE RETURN TO ONE-MAN RULE
Parallel to the extension of Party power there has now emerged a personal dictator – Nikita Khrushchev.
The return to one-man rule – though obviously Khrushchev does not have, and will not have, the same power as Stalin – is not accidental. The idea and implications of collective leadership strike at the core of the totalitarian system.
Collective leadership implies the diffusion of power and diffusion of power among a committee of equals implies the organization of factions. If Khrushchev and Bulganin were equals, each would normally seek to bolster his power by currying favor among the lower echelons of the Party. And in the event of a dispute between equals, these factions would be contending for power. The factions, in turn, in order to strengthen their position, would seek support in non-Party institutions and might even turn to the masses for support. This would be catastrophic for the system.
These are the consequences of collective leadership. They are understood by the Kremlin leadership, which has the collective intelligence to understand that a supreme arbiter must be selected or win out in a power struggle confined to the highest circles of the Party.
Along with Khrushchev’s rise as personal dictator, go the cultist trappings reminiscent of his predecessor.
At the Twenty-first Party Congress, we learned from A.N. Nesmayev, President of the Academy of Science, that “the theses of Comrade Khrushchev’s report... point a clear road for biology.” (And this accolade only a few months after Khrushchev dismissed the editor of Russia’s leading botany publication for criticizing Lysenko!)
Minister of Defense, Marshal K. Malinovsky: “... thanks to the daily solicitude of the Communist Party, its Central Committee, and Nikita Khrushchev personally, our armed forces fully meet present day military requirements.” Malinovsky learned well the lesson of Zhukov’s fate.
And I cannot resist quoting the following sentence by P.N. Pospelov, Secretary of the Presidium:
We must say quite plainly, comrades, that in the great political, theorectical and organization work that has been carried out in all spheres by our Leninist Central Committee, beginning with the solution of the most complex and urgent international questions, the consistent struggle for the cause of peace, for the prevention of war, the solution of the most important question of the development of agriculture, the collective farm system, the reorganization of the management of industry and construction, and ending with the question of science, literature and arts, the question of enhancing links between school and life, the out-standing role belongs to the initiative, the rich political experience and tireless energy of Comrade Nikita Sergeycvich Khrushchev.
This, we are told, was followed by “stormy applause.” These samples of the new cult of the individual are two years old! Since then, the “applause” has become “stormier,” more “prolonged” and occurs at more frequent intervals.
What happens to Communist ideology in light of the growing power of the Party and the increasing concentration of power in the hands of one person? Political parties reflect class interest. How is it possible, then, for a ruling Party to become stronger as classes are dissolving with the State presumably, then, withering away? But these are not really such sticky questions for Party theoreticians. They resolve this dilemma with two ideological “thrusts.” The first is simply a matter of linguistics. The Communist party becomes a “public organization” that will exist only for the purpose of enforcing the everyday rules of Communist life – and see to it, naturally, that competing “public agencies” do not arise to challenge the prerogatives of the supreme “public agency.”
This is too disingenuous even for Communist theoreticians, so they go back to Stalin’s text to let us know that, after all, under special circumstances, the State might be obliged to exist under Communism.
Thus, Suslov, a reputed theoretician and member of the Party Presidium speaks:
Marxist-Leninist theory and historical experience have established that after the victory of the socialist revolution the state remains in existence not only under socialism but, in certain historic circumstances, under communism as well, if capitalism remains a threat to it.
In the same vein, Party historian M.V. Khuralmov also gives credit when credit is due:
He (Stalin) ... boldly posed the question of the insufficiency of the well-known formula of F. Engels about the withering away of the state, and gave a new formulation to the question of the possibility of preserving the state even under Communism, if the danger of attack from outside still exists.
The Russian Party’s new Draft Program talks of the “withering away of the state” and simultaneously asserts the need for the Party to “strengthen discipline, control the activities of all the elements of the administrative apparatus, check the execution of the decisions and laws of the Soviet state and heighten the responsibility of every official for the strict and timely implementation of these laws.”
Herein is the evidence from Communist ideology that the theoretical limit to reforms in Communist countries is set where freedom begins.
By way of summary and conclusions:


Reforms have considerably improved the overall conditions of life for the people. Russia, however, remains a totalitarian system in the most precise meaning of that term: a society where all power is in the hands of a single Party, where this Party must have a personal dictator at its head, where Party and dictator are removed from all popular control by the people (at the same time as they seek to es-tablish their authority among the people through coercion, persuasion and corruption with the assistance of “public agencies”), and where the Party has developed its own ideology reflecting and reinforcing its rule.
 
This ruling Party is not a political party as is commonly understood. It is the heart, brain and nervous system of a totalitarian ruling class. To the extent that this Party has substituted itself for other repressive, non-Party bureaucra-cies, there has been a tightening of Communism’s totalitarian fabric since Stalin’s death, along with the relaxation of terror.
 
There is nothing to justify viewing industrialization as though it were possessed of some mystical qualities, teleologically pulling a totalitarian society to its democratic destiny. Far more important than the alleged imperative of democratization in Russia’s planned economy is the totalitarian imperative inherent in the consciousness and ideology of a bureaucratic class whose economic rule is established by its political control of the State.
 
The Russian ruling class cannot move toward democracy. Neither can it revert to Stalinist terror – except as a means of suppressing overt revolutionary discontent. This dilemma is, indeed, an “internal contradiction.”


But it is inconceivable that the people, encouraged by the more relaxed atmosphere, will not take advantage of the re-forms and make their demands upon the regime for more of the same and eventually for some of what the regime cannot possibly give – political freedom.
Opposition is inevitable and there are already many signs among Russian workers, peasants, youth and intellectuals that totalitarian reform has generated discontent, not apathetic consent. We can expect to see this discontent grow, not only among these groups, but even among elements of the bureaucracy itself which, under the pressure of events and their own inner moral resources, will rise above their own class and weld their strength to that of the masses below.
It is only this discontented populace, acting in revolutionary concert, which can finally resolve the “inner contradiction” of Communism.
September 1961

Footnote
1. The note has not been included.
 




From Suez 1956 to Lebanon 1958. Just two years! Yet, in that brief period, the United States has run the political gamut from opposition to the British-French-Israeli adventure in Egypt to its own direct military intervention in the Middle East.
It is true that the landing of marines in Lebanon is not exactly the same as the Anglo-French military operations two years ago. Egypt was invaded whereas the Marines were invited in – by a government on its last legs. That does make a difference, we suppose. But it is not one that can make much of an impression on the Arab world. Despite legal and moral distinctions the Suez operation in 1956 and American intervention today have this much in common: both are attempts by foreign powers to impose by force their own military, economic and political ambitions on the Middle East; and both have the broad objective of stemming the tide of militant nationalism that is sweeping the Arab world.
Immediately after the Suez aggression it appeared that the strong moral tone taken in the Eisenhower administration’s repudiation of this imperialist adventure might presage a new effective policy; one that could recoup some of the prestige America lost when, following Nasser’s refusal to submit to Dulles’ clumsy attempt at economic blackmail, the State Department reneged on economic commitments (the Aswan dam) to Egypt.
This new note of moral indignation reached its highest pitch in January 1957 in Dulles’ response to sharp questioning from Democratic Senators who wanted to know why the U.S. appeared to be abandoning its British and French allies. Dulles, replied, in effect, that any hope of a successful Western policy in the Middle East was predicated upon our disassociation from all foreign imperialist overlords in the area. In his words:
Let me also say that if Western Europe were part of this plan [the Eisenhower Doctrine], then I can say to you that it would be absolutely doomed to failure from the beginning, because a plan for the Middle East of which certain of the most interested Western Europe nations are a part will not succeed ...
There was no consideration of that [making a joint declaration with the British and French] because I cannot think of anything which would more surely turn over the area to international communism than for us now to try to go in there hand-in-hand with the British and French.
And, then, the unkindest cut of all:
If I were an American boy who had to fight in the Middle East, I’d rather not have a British soldier on my right hand and a French soldier on my left.
But this stern, anti-imperialist remonstration, which sounded hollow to us at the time, was soon revealed as just part of the game of international diplomacy. The British-French campaign to de-nationalize the Suez Canal was too blatant. And its timing was outrageous, following on the heels of the Hungarian revolution. The Kremlin, unmasked by the Hungarian working class, was now able to camouflage a hideous spectacle by belligerently putting itself forward as the champion of democracy in the Middle East. Thus, the enormous propaganda capital in store for the West was all but lost by an irresponsible exhibition of 19th century imperialism.
Blatancy and poor timing. These were Dulles’ real grievances that brought on his distemper. No new policy or approach toward Arab nationalism followed his Senate testimony. On the contrary, the lapse into anti-imperialist rhetoric soon succumbed to the more genuine antinationalist idiom of the Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East. An “improvement” on the Truman Doctrine, the Eisenhower panacea made it clear that the United States would resist by force any Communist aggression in the Middle East. The Monroe Doctrine was stretched to cover the Mediterranean. What constitutes Communist aggression, of course, was left to the discretion of the Eisenhower “team.”
The new presidential Doctrine was little more than an ill-concealed threat to the Arab nationalist movement that its neutralist orientation, its reluctance to place itself in the Western camp, might be interpreted as a pro-Communist policy which might have to contend with economic, possibly military, retaliation from the West.
Predictably, the Eisenhower Doctrine boomeranged. Inadvertently, it stiffened Arab resistance to the West and made Nasser’s objective of a United Arab Republic of Egypt and Syria easier, and, by design, it promoted the rival-pro-Western Arab Union of Iraq and Jordan. Aside from operating as a disruptive force within the Arab world, the Doctrine provided an easy mark for the Kremlin propagandists. These were the tangible effects of the much touted Doctrine.
Any Arab leader who expressed even a mild interest in the $200 million offered to win acceptance of the Doctrine was risking his political future. Only two Arab countries accepted any part of the boodle – Lebanon and Jordan. In Jordan, King Hussein had to overthrow his country’s more or less democratically elected parliament and cabinet and establish a military dictatorship in order to do it; in Lebanon, the civil war has its source in President Chamoun’s support of the Doctrine. The Lebanese opposition viewed this support as a violation of the 1943 covenant which established Lebanon’s independence and provided for its renunciation of all foreign military and political alliances.
 
WHILE LEBANON SUPPORTED THE Doctrine, it was challenged, not only by a wide section of Lebanese opinion that cut across religious lines, but by Egyptian-Syrian propaganda, as well. The effectiveness of the Cairo and Damascus broadcasts provoked several bizarre twists to Washington’s Middle East policy. In the first place the State Department denied the right of the Syrians and Egyptians to propagandize the Lebanese. “The United Arab Republic is subverting the Lebanese regime,” was Dulles’ cry. And, as everyone knows, the State Department will not tolerate any subversion in the Middle East! Dulles has added some more weight to the White Man’s Burden: the United States, 5,000 miles from Lebanon, is to decide whether it is good or bad for the Lebanese to listen to other Arab broadcasts, and, more than that, whether the United Arab Republic has the right to agitate its Arab neighbors.
Not content to rest his case here, Dulles decided to pile nonesense on absurdity. The Russians, he told the world, were guilty of “indirect aggression.” What exactly is the meaning of this contribution to the jargon of international diplomacy is not entirely clear. Not even its author could be precise about his formulation. But one variant of “indirect aggression,” it seems is when country “a” (the Russians) propagandizes country “b” (the United Arab Republic) and country “b” relays this propaganda (subversion, of course) to the population of country “c” (Lebanon) then country “a” is the “indirect aggressor” against country “c.”
Aside from the special kind of madness that brings forth such an argument from a Secretary of State, how vulnerable the United States is made by the concept! For what is the term that one would give to country “x” (the United States) which broadcasts its propaganda (subversion, of course) directly to country “y” (Russia). Logically, that should then be labelled “direct aggression.” And, if the United States is justified in meeting “indirect aggression” by direct force, then what should the Russians do in face of the “direct aggression” (or, perhaps, “direct indirect aggression”) of Radio Free Europe? More than that, doesn’t the theory of “indirect aggression” lend more than just a bit of credence to the Kremlin charge that if it weren’t for the American Radio broadcasts inciting the Hungarian people there never would have been the “regrettable” revolution and the “regrettable” necessity of suppressing American inspired subversion with Russian force? After all, why should anyone believe that the revolutionary activity of the Arab masses is the creature of Russian propaganda while the revolutionary zeal of the Hungarian people was not a response to the stimuli of American radio subverters?
Despite Dulles’ interdiction violent propaganda attacks continued – from both directions accompanied by alleged plots and counterplots, tension mounted with the U.S. 6th Fleet cruising in Levantine waters and Russia threatening to attack Turkey in the event of a Syrian-Turkish conflict. By the middle of May the civil war broke out in Lebanon sparked by the assassination of an Opposition editor and the widespread apprehension that President Chamoun would use his majority in Parliament, based as it was upon an election whose honesty had been widely questioned, to change the Constitution and provide for his re-election. The issue was clear cut though: the Opposition wanted to change the pro-Western orientation of the Chamoun regime to one of neutrality in the Cold War and bring it closer in line with the dominant Arab sentiment in the area. The charge that the civil war was based on outside infiltration into Lebanon was laid to rest by two reports of the United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon which concluded that while there had been some movement across the border, as happens in any civil war, it was unimportant and the evidence to substantiate the charges was inconclusive.
The precarious balance in Lebanon and the Middle East continued until July 14 when King Feisal’s Iraqi dictatorship was overthrown by a brief revolution which, as all evidence since then showed, had the widespread support of the people.
With the fall of the Iraqi regime, the entire Western position in the Middle East was in virtual collapse. It would no longer be possible to build a core of pro-Western states to challenge Egyptian-Syrian influence, and pan-Arab sentiment under Nasser’s leadership might make a clean sweep.
To forestall this, U.S. and British troops moved into Lebanon and Jordan. For a time Washington was seriously contemplating a counter-revolution in Iraq, but could not find even a core around which to build a new regime since both King Feisal, the former Regent, and Prime Minister Nuri Said had been murdered. But had these men been spared there is no reason to believe that they could have rallied any popular support. Virtually the entire population of Baghdad turned out in the streets the day after the revolution to celebrate its success.
 
HAD THE UNITED STATES FOLLOWED through the logic of its Lebanese intervention it would not only have had to occupy Iraq but most of the Middle East as well. Dulles and Eisenhower could not see their way clear to doing this – at least, not now. Even the Wall Street Journal recognized that the policy of “creating our own little principalities in the Middle East and preparing to police them endlessly” had to be rejected. Further occupation in the Middle East would not only have been tremendously unpopular throughout the world but could have led to a war with Russia; the Kremlin might well have carried out its threat to overrun Iran as its answer to American military intervention in Iraq. This, in turn, might have meant the United States and Russia plunging off their brinks into the maelstrom of total global war.
The United States neither wants nor is prepared for war with Russia, today.
Looked at from the point of view of practical politics, sending American Marines to Lebanon can be judged nothing more than a horrible, mistaken adventure. What has Dulles accomplished? The Chamoun regime got no more than a stay of execution; the old regime was not restored in Iraq; the humpty-dumpty Hussein regime is still fated for an irreparable fall; Nasser has gained in prestige; the Kremlin has been given a propaganda gift which it has exploited to the full; and the United States can hardly hope to play the role that it occasionally entertained for itself – that of an understanding and disinterested anticolonial power ready to conciliate Arab nationalism.
But what is most damaging for American prestige and interests is that the mistaken adventure is turning into an utter rout with the recent accession to power of the new president, General Fouad Chehab. The marines who had been “invited” in by the pro- Western Chamoun regime are now confronted by a government with definite neutralist leanings, its new premier being Rashid Karami, a leader of the anti-Chamoun rebels. Thus the American troops, if they are to maintain the pose of defending a legitimate government, might find themselves policing the country for an anti-Western government whose troops would be hunting down pro-Western supporters of ex-President Chamoun; either that course – which is absurd on the face of it, or attempt to overthrow the new government if it continues to move in a neutralist direction – which is probably too crass, even for Dulles.
The only course that is open to Washington is an ignominious withdrawal of troops from Lebanon.
*
WHAT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR AMERICAN reversals in the Middle East? Why hasn’t the United States proved capable of developing some reasonable policy to prevent total disaster?
In the first place, it must be remembered that when we are dealing with the question of policy we are also considering the human element. The recent twists and turns of the State Department, its misadventures, its bewilderment when faced by the complexities of the modem world and its inability to present a policy that can at least give the appearance of holding together in some coherent fashion for the Middle East – or anywhere else – must take into account the personal quality of American policy-makers.
And men like Eisenhower and Dulles are clearly lacking in the capacity to develop conceptions which they then try to apply consistently, or if consistency proves impossible, to readjust intelligently. If ever there was a unity between style and content in politics it can be found in any one of the president’s elucidations of American foreign policy.
However, while incompetence is certainly one reason for the mess Washington has made of its foreign affairs, it would be unfair to attribute its failures solely, or even primarily, to the Eisenhower team’s lack of finesse and imagination. The administration’s ineptness is exceptional, but it is not unique. It does not operate in a total vacuum or in total darkness. On the contrary, Eisenhower is all too fully conscious of his class responsibility; his trouble is that he tries to fulfill this responsibility with a kind of primitive devotion and instinct.
This question of class rule and class responsibility, we believe, sets certain limits on the effectiveness of any policy designed by any administration which is obligated to defend American capitalist interests in the modern world. Adlai Stevenson is incomparably more cultivated than Eisenhower and Dean Acheson is infinitely more competent than Dulles, but there is every reason to doubt that even this team of Democratic heavyweights could have prevented the imminent disaster for the United States in the Islamic world. They might make a better show of it, but not too much more than that.
We already have had the experience of the Truman administration which had the benefit of the skillful talents of Dean Acheson as Secretary of State. The best this combination could do was the Truman Doctrine which sought to consolidate – or secure – American authority in the Middle East with the kind of ultimatums and threats made more explicit in the Eisenhower Doctrine. But, more than that, had the Democrats been in a position to carry out their policy at the time of the Suez crisis it would have led to a national, perhaps an international, calamity. At that time the most eminent and sophisticated Democratic personalities took the Eisenhower administration to task for deserting its European allies. The Democratic Party has always given priority to the North Atlantic alliance and it is most likely that they would have either supported or sympathetically tolerated the Anglo-French aggression against Egypt rather than antagonize their European allies and weaken NATO.
Dean Acheson, writing in the Reporter magazine shortly after the Suez crisis, gave a candid view of what American policy would have been had he and his Democratic co-thinkers been its architects:
The canal might have been left blocked by Nasser’s ships. This could give canal users like India a refreshing sense of realism. We might still start on freeing Europe from so much dependence on the canal by pipelines through non-Arab countries and by vigorous construction of large tankers. We might much more energetically hasten the day when, nuclear energy could replace a substantial portion of petroleum energy, if only on a standby basis.
There are other courses of action that might induce a more understanding and reasonable attitude in Colonel Nasser – courses of action which recall Winston Churchill’s admonition to the French, quoted from Thiers: “Think of it always; speak of it never.”
When by our own efforts our bargaining position had been improved, a broad and imaginative economic program for the area as a whole would both be and appear to be the generous act of one in a strong position, rather than an act of appeasement from weakness. (Italics added.)
Here, then, is the face of imperialist strategy without benefit of elegant rhetoric. England and France attempt to seize the Suez Canal by military force. The Egyptians retaliate by sinking ships to block the canal. We urge our European allies to leave the canal blocked. You see, “This could give canal users like India a refreshing sense of realism.” After giving neutralist India an object lesson in Achesonian Applied Democracy, we see to it that by one means or another (new pipelines, large tankers taking new routes, etc.) European dependence on the canal is bypassed. When, through economic pressure and “other courses of action” in line with Thiers’ cynical injunction, Nasser is brought to his knees, then the United States could offer a prostrated and cowed Middle East a “broad and imaginative economic program” which would “both be and appear to be the generous act of one in a strong position.”
Can anyone doubt that if this strategy advocated by the ideologue of so many American liberals had been transformed from a Reporter article to an active guide for State Department policy America’s prestige throughout the colonial world and in all uncommitted nations would have reached the vanishing point?
 
THE UNITED STATES HAS NO principled objection to national movements per se. That much is true. Washington was not distraught when India gained its freedom from England and it is no secret that the Tunisian nationalist movement – whose political orientation differs from Nasser-led nationalism-had not met with any special hostility from the State Department. In such instances America could afford to be liberal: national independence did not seem to conflict with America’s Cold War interests and sometimes opened up interesting commercial possibilities. But, nationalism in the Middle East! That is another matter. For the concrete forms and objectives that nationalism has taken in that area are regarded as a threat to America’s political, strategic and economic interests.
The economic conflict is a matter of oil. American capital is more heavily invested in Middle East oil than in any other field in any other part of the world. It is also the most profitably invested, as labor productivity in this fabulously rich area is roughly equivalent to that in the United States while wages doled out to the Arab oil workers are about one-tenth those paid to American workers. As the demand for oil appears to be unlimited a very high percentage of the profits gushing out of the wells is being reinvested. And the threat to the oil industry of the use of atomic power as a substitute source of energy in the future acts as a further incentive to develop the oil fields even more extensively today.
From its enormous profits, and inspired by the prospect of endless riches, American capital has served as a corruptive economic and political influence in the Middle East where administrators and monarchs have been bribed and bought.
The danger for private foreign capital from Arab nationalism is clear: it threatens to nationalize the oil fields. That would not only eliminate a most lucrative area to plunder, it could become a threat to the oil industry in the United States as well. The Middle East produces two-thirds of the world’s supply of oil. Bearing in mind the high productivity of labor and low labor costs, Arab governments could easily drop the price of oil on the world market to the alarm of their American competitors.
This drive of Arab nationalism for control of its own oil resources is not only a matter of prestige or propaganda. It follows from the peculiar character of most oil enriched Arab lands that any movement which seeks to raise the Arab masses out of the depths of poverty (and to instill in them a sense of national pride and personal dignity) must utilize the enormous revenues from the oil fields for more constructive purposes than fat dividends to foreign investors and bullet-proof Cadillacs for reigning sheikhs. Most Arab lands have highly efficient oil fields – but practically nothing else. Other industrial enterprises are primitive by comparison, much of the land is barren and what is under cultivation is usually unproductive. However, the revenues that would accrue to an Arab nation in control of its own fields could provide the money necessary for wider industrial development and, above all, for executing large irrigation projects without which all talk of land reforms and increased agricultural production is of limited meaning.
It is true that not all Arab countries rich with oil could productively invest in their own economies all the income derived from nationalized oil fields. This limit to productive internal investment limits the value of oil nationalization for a particular country; but it doesn’t eliminate the enormous immediate advantages. Moreover, where Iraq is rich in oil, Egypt is not. The surplus monies which Iraq could not productively use today in its own country could be used in Egypt for essential, vast water projects that it cannot finance. The well-being of the Egyptian economy, in turn, particularly its agriculture, could be of political and economic assistance to Iraq.
The American government – be it Eisenhower or Stevenson at the helm – cannot be indifferent to Arab nationalism’s inherent threat to American investment. It would be a crudity, however, to insist that the Marines have landed in Lebanon only to protect American capital. In addition to this concern the Americans can hardly afford to lose control of an elementoil – that is so vital to the economic and military needs of their European allies who are almost wholly dependent upon the Middle East for their supplies. There is no cause to believe that, today, the Arab world, if it controlled oil, would cut itself off from its Western market. Where else can its oil be sold? But there is no assurance, either, that tomorrow the Middle East will not find other markets or use such control of oil for political-retaliatory purposes against the West. The best way to avoid this danger is to frustrate the nationalist encroachment on Western capitalism’s private oil preserves.
 
TO EFFECTIVELY CONTROL ITS OIL reserves, to institute land reforms and further these reforms with income from oil, to develop its industries and to modernize and extend its educational facilities, the nationalist movement is brought into head on collision with pashas and sheikhs, with landowners and corrupt officials, with those bound by tradition and others bound to the bribes and munificent salaries paid by foreign oil companies. Thus, the nationalist offensive inevitably evolves into a revolutionary struggle on several fronts: against the foreign enemy, against the ruling bureaucracy and against outmoded social institutions. And political reality has proved that the nationalist movement cannot carry on this struggle for independence and reform if it is committed to the West in the Cold War. How could Arab nationalism fight against the pernicious influence of the British owned Iraq Petroleum Company and, simultaneously, declare itself politically committed to the West in the Cold War?
Once this nationalist movement took a definite neutralist direction, the United States was forced to adopt a harsh policy. Washington wants stability in the Middle East; but it also needs a political commitment. At one point the State Department hoped to promote stability in the Middle East above all, in Egypt, with land reform programs. (These land reforms were limited to promoting credit and cooperative marketing and the like; they were not designed to reform the basic inequities of ownership and income which related to the fundamental organization of Egyptian society.) Now the accent has changed. The quest for stability plus political commitment plus the need to protect oil investments has led Washington to seek out and support the most reactionary elements in the Middle East: the sheikhs, landlords, monarchs and lackeys who know that the advance of Arab nationalism is a threat to their political power and wealth. This is no longer a theory. It is proved by recent events in Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan.
Naturally, Washington feels compelled to clothe its Middle Eastern allies in democratic dress. Thus the nation and the entire world were recently treated to the spectacle of Washington propagandists mounting a democratic halo around a cadillac-loving absolute feudal monarch who was then paraded before the public as a staunch ally of democracy in the Middle East. That Ibn Saud, far from being a real live version of Rudolf Valentino, is the ruler of one of the most barbaric sheikdoms in the Arab world – where a thief can have his hand cut off, or a man’s head be placed on a chopping block for even lighter offenses – was of little importance; Saudi Arabia way – that is no longer certain – part of the pro-Western bloc and rich in oil which is all the credentials one now needs in the Middle East for receiving Washington’s benedictions.
The royal welcome Washington gave Ibn Saud is typical of the American approach that has given the Kremlin the political opportunity it has been seeking in the Middle East. Russia has no record of economic penetration in the Middle East; and no history of political involvement before the war. In this sense, it begins with a clean bill of health in the eyes of thousands of ardent Arab nationalists. Furthermore, the fact that the Kremlin has no prior history in the area, removes whatever restraints might otherwise exist to its demagogic support of Arab nationalism. Every reactionary move by the Americans, therefore, can be easily exploited by the Kremlin for its own imperialist, global interests. Dulles repudiates economic commitments to Egypt, and Russia enters the scene with promises of economic aid; Americans sponsor the Baghdad Pact, and the Russians join the Arab nationalists in denouncing it; Washington places its trust in the most reactionary social elements and the Russians become the champions of social change (at the same time as they maintain most friendly ties with the absolute feudal sheikhdom in Yemen); where the Americans send Marines to Lebanon the Russians supply the United Arab Republic with arms.
The tremendous propaganda capital which naturally accrues to the Russians is not limited to the Middle East. With the world’s attention focused on the area the Kremlin appears as the champion of underprivileged peoples in the eyes of many millions throughout the colonial world. It was not for nothing that Khrushchev recently proposed a toast to the Kremlin’s best friend – the American Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles.
 
WITH THE PERIOD JUST AFTER the end of World War II the Arab masses, immobilized for centuries, began to move out of their lethargy and, in the decade since, Arab nationalism has evolved into a movement of such power and passion that even the most obtuse should be able to recognize it as an irreversible national revolutionary force. It must be accepted. But not merely because it is inevitable. Its aim is also just. Ending the power of the foreign pashas will not automatically guarantee that the best of all possible worlds will immediately emerge in the Middle East. It would, however, permit a start in the right direction. How else could a more stable and democratic society arise if not through the unleashing of Arab energies and potentialities, the precondition of which is national independence?
But if we sympathize with the overall objective that does not mean that we endorse all the specific forms that nationalism has taken and all of its methods and all of its programs. There are any number of specific policies pursued by the dominant nationalist current, Nasserism, which cannot be endorsed. A detailed discussion of these objections is beyond the scope of these Notes. However, they must be mentioned to avoid any misunderstanding of our views.
First, the Arab nationalist movement has taken an indefensible position vis-à-vis Israel. It proclaims without any equivocation its intention of totally destroying the Jewish State. That the Arab world has legitimate grievances against the Israelis can not reasonably be challenged by democrats. But Israel is a fact; it is a State and not a mere Zionist plot. It is also the most advanced state in the Middle East, socially, culturally and economically, with a labor and socialist movement that is powerful and a parliamentary system that is far more democratic than exists anywhere in the Arab world. In addition, it must never be forgotten that Israel provided a refuge for hundreds of thousands of European Jews who escaped Hitler’s slaughter chambers. Without Israel where could these tragically uprooted have turned? (The argument offered by Arab intellectuals that Israel is not justified because the Jews are not a “nation” culturally is callous and irrelevant; perhaps they are not a cultural entity but the Nazis failed to see this fine point and their persecution of the Jews has resolved any question that they are a dispersed people with certain common problems and interests.)
Second, the nationalist movement wherever it has come to power has not replaced the political rule of the old ruling class with political democracy. In Egypt and Syria opposition political parties are not permitted. This policy, indefensible from a democratic point of view, flows from a basic distrust of the masses which Nasser has frankly admitted to in his important book, Egypt’s Liberation: The Philosophy of the Revolution.
Our third objection concerns the nationalist attitude toward Russia. The charge that there is a Khrushchev-Nasser axis is an absurdity that has gained currency in certain liberal quarters. There is no such axis. All one has to do is to look at the speed with which the Communist Parties are smashed wherever nationalism takes power to see how silly the charge really is. The dominant nationalist movement is not at the service of the Kremlin, but, neither has it publicly repudiated the Kremlin. The Nasserites, in exchange for the "support” given them by the Russians, are playing along with the Russians, conciliating them, sometimes praising them (at the same time that they are wary of them). Thus, at the United Nations political debates on Hungary the Arab nationalists did not denounce the Russian suppression of the Hungarian revolution and the United Arab Republic has refused to support the recent motion that the U.N. investigate the murder of Imre Nagy. There is no moral or political justification for this public indifference to Russian totalitarianism. What is more, by pacifying the Kremlin, the Arab nationalists are pursuing a self-destructive policy, because the fundamental interests of totalitarianism and nationalism are irreconcilable. If Russia builds up a popular base among the Arab masses and intellectuals, the present Arab nationalist leadership might rue the day it decided to subordinate criticism of Russian totalitarianism to what it considers its immediate interests.
 




American Radicals: Some Problems and Personalities
Edited by Harvey Goldberg
Monthly Review Press, New York City, 1951, 308 pp., $5.00.
There has been a noticeable and welcome increase in the number of books recently published concerned with the history, problems and prospects of radicalism and trade unionism in the United States. Although the quality of these studies is uneven almost all have something knowledgeable, challenging or stimulating to offer. At least one exception to this general rule, however, is American Radicals: Some Problems and Personalities, a collection of essays by 15 contributors, edited by Harvey Goldberg and published by the Monthly Review Press – the publisher of the journal, Monthly Review. Unfortunately the book’s title promises more than it gives. The editor, publisher and most of its contributors have managed to take an enormously exciting subject and transform it into a dull and academic volume. But, to be truthful and not artificially polite, academicism is a relatively minor flaw in the book; it is guilty of more serious intellectual offenses.
The American radicals discussed in the book are Heywood Broun, John Jay Chapman, William Demarest Lloyd, Walter Weyl, John Brown, Dreiser, Marcantonio, LaFollette, Altgeld, Haywood, DeLeon, Debs, Beard and Veblen. There is no portrait of a trade union figure other than Haywood. Perhaps that was an oversight. There is no evaluation of important radical figures such as Morris Hillquit and Victor Berger, center and right wing Socialist leaders who were in many ways more representative of the Socialist Party than Debs. Perhaps this merely shows poor judgment and not bias. Perhaps. But what about the Communist Party – its personalities, its problems and the problems it posed for the radical movement? Not a single essay devoted to any of these questions; not even a few pages; just a sentence here and a phrase there. Yet it was the Communist Party which had dominated the radical scene for more than three decades. In the opinion of democratic socialists for most of these years it was the bane of American radicalism, but for this book’s editor the CP was a legitimate wing of the American labor movement. However, whether it was a bane or a boon, or somewhere in between, it is impossible – so it would seem – to avoid a discussion of Communism and/or Communists in a book purporting to deal with problems of American radicalism. Had any other publisher or editor ignored the CP in a book of this nature it might be chalked up to plain stupidity. But, given the nature of the publisher and editor Goldberg’s views, no such generous allowance can be made. Here, it is not stupidity; neither is it mere bias nor an oversight. It stems largely, in my opinion, from a pose affected by so many former Stalinoids – who have not abandoned all their illusions about Russia – of being Real American radicals, respectable as all get out. For them to discuss the Communist Party might only prove embarrassing. A portrait, say, of William Z. Foster or a more general analysis of the Communist Party could hardly avoid the question of Russia. And a discussion of Russia by former Stalinoids who still hold that it is some sort of a progressive socialistic society would hardly present the reader with a confirmation of the image they project of themselves as more thoughtful variants of good old-fashioned grass roots radicals. Better, then, to perpetrate a fraud: ignore the Communist Party of today, the past decade, the Thirties and Twenties; forget about its leaders, not only Foster today and Browder yesterday, but disregard the record of leading Communists in the early days – men like Reed, Fraina, Ruthenberg and Lore.
The most extensive “treatment” of American Communism can be found in a paragraph in the book’s introductory essay, Thoughts About American Radicalism, written by Harvey Goldberg (the book’s editor) in collaboration with William A. Williams. It is a precious “thought” indeed, worth quoting:
In the ’30s and early ’40s the pitfalls were deep and the failures great for American radicals. Abandoning the independence and vigor attached to the rich tradition of the men described below, many sincere men and women were tempted into the easy solution. Either they became Russophiles, or they cast in their lot with the liberals and sought to change America by using the power of the existing national government. Now an intelligent, insightful, and Marxian American Communist might have developed an argument around the thesis that supporting the Soviet Union through famine, purge, and Stalin was actually, in spite of the illiberal features of that government, the only way to establish the necessary preconditions for a truly American radicalism.
The authors’ Stalinoid mentality – at least in 1957 – is clearly revealed in this passage. Theirs would have been a more “insightful” and “Marxian” policy: “supporting the Soviet Union” while admitting that in Russia there was “famine, purge and Stalin” and, to use their hilarious euphemism, “illiberal features” in its government. But of greater interest for the moment is the view that “supporting the Soviet Union” – critically, of course – was a precondition for building a healthy radical movement. This thought is certainly worth some elaboration, particularly as in subsequent lines the authors vaguely intimate that a renascent radical movement in this country would have to adopt a similarly critical but friendly attitude toward Russia. However, this point is dropped as abruptly as it is raised; it is more of a teaser than a thought.
 
WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER ESSAYS in the book? There is not one which is first rate or nearly so. The sketches of Veblen, Beard, LaFollette and most others are pedestrian. Bert Cochran contributes an article on Debs that plays with a comparison of the Socialist leader and Lincoln, and winds up with a half hearted defense of Debs’ dual unionist inclinations. Nevertheless, it is superior to most other chapters in the book.
A measure of the book as a whole is the inclusion of a eulogy of the cheap little politician, Vito Marcantonio. The effrontery of including him as one of America’s foremost radicals, preceded in the book by a sketch of John Altgeld and followed by the essay on Debs, is matched only by the vulgar apologia of his biographer, Richard Sasuly. When Mr. Sasuly writes of Marcantonio that, “on the foreign issues as on the domestic ones, his position had an underlying consistency throughout his seven terms in Congress” he must be relying on the naiveté of his readers – unless the consistency he is talking about was Marcantonio’s consistent kow-towing to the tortuous twists, turns and somersaults of the Communist Party. (Marcantonio’s public criticisms of the Communist Party came only at a time when he had no chance of being re turned to Congress and the Party and he had outlived their usefulness to one another.)
One essay does deserve special mention: The Renegade: A Study of Defectors by Russell Fraser. Mr. Fraser is an English professor and he lets his reader know it in a chapter that is almost painful to read. His turgid prose liberally sprinkled with Latin and French and his incredible name dropping reads like a parody of a would-be “belletrist” on a rampage. One of the defectors and renegades who drives Mr. Frazer to a religious frenzy is Walter Reuther. Reuther, you see, was guilty of “pulling down ... the moderate [R.J.] Thomas on charges of Red domination” which was reminiscent of Homer Martin’s earlier campaign to organize an auto union “cleansed of Red elements.” And Homer Martin was praised by Harry Bennet, Ford’s chief of police. So where does that leave Reuther? Get it?
But, as a literary man, Mr. Fraser concentrates his fire on such writers as John Steinbeck, Clifford Odets, Irwin Shaw and John Dos Passos. These were all writers who once found it possible to work with the Stalinists but have long since repudiated the Communist Party. They are, naturally, on Fraser’s list of defectors and renegades from radicalism. Of Dos Passos, we are assured that “A novel like 1919 proclaims on every violent page, in each meaningless incident in every joyless character, the future course of its creator.” (Shades of Mike Gold!) After polishing off Dos Passos, Mr. Fraser gets right to the core of another defecting writer’s weakness. In John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath we are told that “... the shoddiness of that novel as a portrait of ‘the people,’ its basic lack of integrity, are the best indication that the radicalism of Steinbeck et hoc genus omne was only of the surface, after all.” With Steinbeck out of the way Fraser hops right into an assault on the “jeremiads” of Robinson Jeffers, takes a poke at Edgar Lee Masters for a “pitiful attempt to diminish the stature of Lincoln” and in a few polished phrases disposes of the “maunderings” of Ezra Pound. It is not clear from who or what Pound, Jeffers or Masters defected or reneged. But what’s the difference? A little bit of learning can’t hurt.
In a charitable mood and in restrained manner the best I can say about the book is that it is not on my recommended list.
 




The Communist International 1919–1943, Documents. Volume 1 – 1919–1922
Selected and edited by Jane Degras
Oxford University Press, 1956. 463 pp.
This volume, the first in a promised series, is a valuable collection of documents issued by the Communist International during its “heroic period” – as Jane Degras describes it – from its founding call in January 1919 through the Fourth Congress in December 1922. Included are programmatic statements of the Communist International, analyses of international events, instructions and advice to national Communist parties. The letters, resolutions, theses, etc., are preceded with background and explanatory material written by Jane Degras. Her own anti-Leninist bias, revealed in many of these notes, leaves much to be desired in the way of her own contribution to the book. But her notes, which do have some value, are only of incidental importance. There are more than four hundred large pages of some of the most significant documents in Communist history. What is more, the translation, made from the German, is excellent.
Although the volume is a massive collection of documents it suffers, nevertheless, from incompleteness. Many of the most important documents are extracts. The most important theses of the CI have been edited in varying degrees; in many of them truly major deletions have been made. It would have been more useful to have fewer selections without any editing than to ask the reader to assume that the many deletions made are either of no importance or are well provided for in Jane Degras’ introductory remarks to each major selection.
 

 Jacobson: The Two Deaths of Max Shachtman (January 1973)


Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
The Two Deaths of Max Shachtman
(January 1973)

Source: New Politics, Vol. 10 No. 2, January 1973.
Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

How we admired and respected Max! The ‘we’ was small in number of course, for how many revolutionary socialists were there in the Thirties in this country? Only a handful of Trotskyists and not all of them had that special feeling for Max shared by ‘my crowd’, some barely teenagers, others in their late teens or twenties and a few oldsters crowding thirty.
We respected James P. Cannon, too. But we knew him as Cannon. Shachtman was Max. We could joke and banter with him. And when Max spoke at a ‘big meeting’ at Irving Plaza or Webster Hall we were always there. It was not merely that we were entertained by his razor-sharp wit, his polemical skills, his sense of irony, his robust humour, but primarily because we were clearly in the presence of an exceptional political intelligence. Even back then, in his ability to integrate Marxist theory, political history and specific events, he had few peers in the American socialist movement.
I and a number of my comrades continued to share these special feelings for Max for more than twenty years. It is not that we were political sycophants (though some were) or that we were unaware or indifferent to his personal-political foibles. He was not a candid man nor was he a generous man. Indeed, in politics he was possessed of a sort of vindictiveness belied by his surface bonhommerie. When he felt ‘crossed’, even on a relatively minor issue, he often retaliated with a kind of meanness that could shock his closest supporters. He was a combination of callous bureaucrat and sentimentalist. Despite these personal flaws  –  perhaps, in part, in some perverse way because of them, since they gave him a more earthbound and human dimension  –  we remained Shachtmanites in a political and personal sense.
Shachtman, born in Poland nearly 70 years ago and brought to this country as a child, was active in revolutionary politics before he was out of his teens. In his twenties, he had already achieved a degree of prominence in the Communist youth movement as an editor, writer and speaker.
The American Communist Party was one of the first sections of the Communist International to be Stalinised. Yet, in 1928, a tiny number of activists and leaders did possess the courage to rebel openly against the party’s long-established tradition of bending in whatever direction was favoured by Moscow’s shifting ideological winds. Max Shachtman was one of them. When James P. Cannon, old-time IWW organiser and a founding member of the Communist movement here, returned from Moscow in 1928, where he had been a delegate to the Communist International’s Sixth World Congress, he managed to smuggle out of the ‘workers’ fatherland’ a truncated version of a manuscript by Leon Trotsky that would later appear, in its proper form, as The Third International After Lenin. Even in its abbreviated and somewhat mangled form, Trotsky’s critique of the Comintern made an enormous impression on both Shachtman and Cannon. The two of them plus another leading party person, Martin Abern (and Maurice Spector in Canada), emerged as the leaders of the Trotskyist current. Needless to say, they were branded ‘counter-revolutionaries’ and promptly expelled from the party by fiat. Shachtman was 25 years old at the time.
Following their expulsion, Shachtman, Cannon, Abern and their few co-thinkers regrouped as the Communist League of America, which soon had its weekly organ, The Militant. Five years went by before the CLA had the resources to publish a monthly theoretical journal, The New International. For students of socialist theory and history both publications should be required reading.
The Trotskyist movement grew, but slowly. It received a significant infusion late in 1934 when the CLA merged with the American Workers Party led by A.J. Muste to form the Workers Party. The radical group led by Muste was as deeply concerned with American problems as the CLA was absorbed with the ‘international question’. Joining Shachtman as an editor of The New International, now the journal of the united party, was James Burnham, who had been a leading theoretician of the Muste organisation.
Several years later, the Trotskyists dissolved their organisation when they were accepted into membership of the leftward-moving Socialist Party. Inside the Socialist Party, the Trotskyists had their largest audience yet. They were soon organised as a well-knit faction within the SP  –  the Appeal Group  –  making enormous headway, above all in the party’s youth section, the Young Peoples Socialist League. By far the most effective Trotskyist spokesman, whether in factional debate or public rally, was Shachtman.
Two years after entering the Socialist Party, the Trotskyists left. Actually, they had sought to split, mistakenly in my opinion. Had the Trotskyists remained in the Socialist Party and conducted themselves in a more flexible and less sectarian manner, quite possibly the Socialist Party would have evolved into the revolutionary movement anticipated by the Trotskyists on their entry.
Now outside the Socialist Party, in 1938, the Trotskyists regrouped as the Socialist Workers Party with a membership several times that of two years earlier and with a youth section of approximately one thousand members.
Shachtman and Cannon continued as the two leading figures of the movement. Max was the theoretician, the writer, the one with greater appeal to the young and the intellectuals within the party and its periphery; Cannon was the organisational man, the proletarian-oriented leader and magnificent orator. Of the two, Shachtman was clearly the more thoughtful and independent personality. He would not permit himself to remain rigidly encased in dogma, never to review the validity of old assumptions and conceptions, even those he had vigorously defended. Above all, there was the ‘Russian Question’.
It was the Trotskyist view that Russia was a ‘degenerated workers’ state’. It was a workers’ state by virtue of the expropriation of the bourgeoisie and the nationalisation of the means of production. These were the achievements of the proletarian revolution of October 1917, the ‘social conquests’ of a revolution that were threatened by the reactionary political and economic policies of the ruling Communist Party. It was a view that was often challenged within the Trotskyist movement but never effectively. Never, that is, until Max Shachtman and a number of his associates rebelled at Trotsky’s notion that, despite the Stalinist terror that sacrificed the lives of literally millions and the complete extirpation of democratic rights and institutions, socialists must come to ‘the unconditional defence of the Soviet Union’, at the time that Russian invaded Finland in 1939. Trotsky insisted that all affiliates of the recently-organised Fourth International hold fast to the traditional defencist view. Shachtman objected. For him, the invasion of Finland was a gross example of imperialism. Soon everything about Russia as a degenerated workers’ state was called into question and eventually repudiated by Shachtman.
In the initial debates in the SWP between the Shachtmanites and Cannonites there was simply no contest. Cannon and his associates could not measure up in debate to Shachtman, Burnham and their co-thinkers in the party. A large minority of the party and a majority of the youth section lined up with Shachtman’s faction. Despairing of his leading American disciples, Trotsky personally rushed into the breach. It is a tribute to Max Shachtman that he was ready to cross swords with the ‘Old Man’ whom he loved, respected and feared. Trotsky was one of the intellectual giants of this century, truly a renaissance man, and without question the most brilliant Marxist theoretician at the time that the 36-year-old Shachtman engaged him in political combat. Shachtman proved to be not only courageous but he even bested Trotsky in the debate.
Inevitably the Socialist Workers Party split. The Shachtmanites, with about 40 per cent of the members of the SWP and virtually its entire youth section, reorganised as the Workers Party; its youth section called the Young Peoples Socialist League. It was during the Forties and Fifties, in the Workers Party, that Shachtman reached the peak of his intellectual powers and made significant contributions to Marxist thought. Above all, in his writings on the nature of the Russian state and Stalinism. The view that Russia was not a workers’ state, not even a degenerated one, but a society dominated by a new, oppressive counter-revolutionary ruling class, did not originate with Shachtman. But it was Shachtman more than anyone else who, within the framework of Marxist thought, developed and continually refined the theory of a new, ruling ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ class in Russia with such detail, depth and logic that his work had unique and singular importance. During this period  –  the Forties and early Fifties  –  Shachtman’s  –  and our  –  hatred for Stalinism did not move him or the movement he led to compromise their fundamental revolutionary opposition to Western capitalism and imperialism. We were a movement, sectarian in size but not in outlook, dedicated to the Third Camp of socialism, the camp opposed to both capitalist and Stalinist social systems.
The Workers Party managed to hold its own through the Forties. During the war it gained considerable respect  –  and members  –  among militant trade unionists. No small part of these gains was due to the struggle we waged in our press and directly in the unions against the wartime no-strike pledge promoted by the Roosevelt Administration, by conservative trade unionists and, most vociferously, by the Communist Party. Some of the best labour coverage in the nation was offered in the pages of Labor Action and The New International (the latter a continuation of the publication founded in 1934).
Following the post-war years, however, the Workers Party, later called the Independent Socialist League, went into a more or less steady decline. It could not withstand the combined effects of McCarthyism and the demoralisation that threatens any sect unable to break out of its isolation. There was not only a decline in membership but a gradual erosion of the movement’s revolutionary ideological perspective.
Max Shachtman, alas, was no exception. In truth, Max died two deaths. A finite physical death on 4 November 1972 and an earlier moral and political death that has no recordable day or even year.
All we know is that in the middle Fifties there were visible signs of a fundamental shift to the right in his thinking. He sought, as he put it, ‘an opening to the right’. By ‘the right’ he meant, at that time, more progressive tendencies in the trade-union movement and the American equivalents of European social democracy. Leading the Independent Socialist League into the Socialist Party in 1958 was part of this grand strategy. The ‘opening to the right’ turned out at first to be a growing accommodation to it. But once this rightward shift was under way it knew no limits. In less than a decade, Shachtman and his followers had moved far to the right of American social democracy. Having entered the Democratic Party to ‘reform’ it, they allied themselves with its more reactionary wing and became vituperative opponents of the reform movement. By the time of his death, Shachtman had become an apologist for American imperialism’s filthy war in Vietnam, aligned himself with the ugliest elements in the unions, rationalised the racist practices of the construction unions. His followers supported Henry Jackson in the 1972 Democratic primaries; in the election he led the tendency in the so-called Socialist Party that gave tacit support to Richard Nixon.
I tremble to use the word renegade. But what term better describes a man who reneged on his earlier, most fundamental commitment to social justice? To say that he died, in any sense at all, a socialist is to denude the word of all meaning, to deny the relevance and seriousness of what he taught us about socialism in years past.
Shachtman’s political degeneration, his rapid rush towards accommodation with the Establishment, coincided with the explosive disaffection of a whole generation of young people. Had he been able to make contact with the young, who were fresh and receptive to new ideas, might he not have been able to guide some into the camp of revolutionary socialism? To move them out of the path that led so many into the pseudo-Stalinist posture that predominates in what remains of the New Left today, be it rapturous approval of the Maoist horrors euphemistically called the Cultural Revolution, or the totalitarianism of societies led by a Castro, a Ho or a Kim Il Sung? But why should any of these young people have cocked an attentive ear to Shachtman’s revelations about Stalinism when they were accompanied by apologies for the American bombing of Vietnam and plaudits for some of the most reactionary elements in the trade unions and the Democratic Party?
How different radical politics might have been today had Shachtman and his followers remained loyal to the revolution and thereby have been able to make contact with and educate the young. It is this thought that mixes bitterness with nostalgia and sorrow at the two deaths of Max Shachtman.
 

us Jacobson: Russian Law Enters the "Final Stages of Communism" (1963)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Russian Law Enters the “Final Stages of Communism”
(1963)

Written: 1963.
Published in Soviet Communism and the Socialist Vision, ed. Julius Jacobson.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

The following discussion of Russian law was written toward the end of 1963. Rather than update the material, I have added footnotes wherever I thought necessary. Nothing more extensive than this was done for two reasons: first, to update the essay would destroy whatever value it has in a developmental sense, that is, it would destroy the picture of Russian law in theory and practice as it actually was at a given time in history; second, there really is not that much to change. For all the talk about Russia in ferment, there has probably been less change in procedural and substantive law in Russia than in the United States in the past eight years. Of course, there have been some changes. In some areas the law has become more harsh; in others, more relaxed (at least on paper). On the whole, however, the tendency in recent years has been to greater severity. Perhaps the most important examples of added stringency since 1963 can be found in the following legislation: a) The Principles of Corrective-Labor Legislation, drawn up in late 1969 and approved earlier this year by the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, which reduces the categories of convicts elegible for parole after serving half their sentences and sharply increases the number of prisoners who will now have to serve at least two-thirds of their sentence before they can apply for parole, b) The USSR Law on Additions to and Changes in the Principles of Criminal Legislation of the USSR and the Union Republics, which amplify and, in some respects, intensify the severity of the fundamental Principles of Criminal Legislation passed in 1958 which are discussed in the essay. As with the new Principles of Corrective-Labor legislation, it sharply limits a convict’s opportunity for parole, c) In the same period, we are confronted with the Statute on Preventive Detention in Custody which empowers the authorities of Union Republics, under certain circumstances, to hold a person suspected of having committed a crime in preventive-detention cells for 30 days, d) The Decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet On Increased Liability for Hooliganism, issued in 1966, represents an escalation of the permanent war against “antisocial” elements. The Decree divides hooliganism into three subcategories: “petty hooliganism,” plain “hooliganism” and “malicious hooliganism.” The petty hooligan can be imprisoned for 15 days by decision of a judge or police official. He has no right to appeal and cannot correspond, receive messages or parcels or purchase food and is not provided with bedding. The malicious hooligan can be sentenced for up to seven years in prison.
The antihooligan decree is not really a new phenomenon. The campaign began years ago and the new decree merely confirms the analysis provided below.
* * *
Khrushchev’s “revelations” at the Twentieth Congress of the Russian Communist party sparked a relatively intense discussion in Party, government and legal circles on the problem of “socialist legality.” Though the exchange had been initiated shortly after Stalin’s death, it assumed the unprecedented form of a limited national debate only after Khrushchev’s 1956 speech. The large-scale – but not total – dissolution of the concentration camps in the period from 1953-1957 is evidence enough to dismiss any foolish notion that this debate was merely the permissive window dressing of a totalitarian regime making wholly insincere gestures to the Russian people. Russia’s rulers genuinely wanted to rid themselves of the excesses of an “unrelieved and self-victimizing system of terror under Stalin. New rules and regulations – i.e., laws – were called for to establish both wider boundaries and more definite guides of conduct within which heads of Party and state could maneuver without the constant paralyzing fear that, for no ostensible reason, they would be dispatched to a concentration camp or to their ancestors. (This relaxation, necessarily codified in new national legislation, could not possibly be restricted to the bureaucratic class alone. Its benefits inevitably filtered down to the masses, though not without pressure from below and reluctance above.)
That the post-Stalin relaxation required new laws does not mean that to measure political changes in Russia from 1953 to 1963 one need only compare Stalin’s laws to Khrushchev’s. Laws and dogmas can be circumvented or flouted with comparative ease in a one-party system. For example, Stalin’s Constitution of 1936, with its promises ranging from an independent judiciary to political rights of national minorities, hardly corresponded to the reality of a regime that was its own judiciary and which threatened entire national minorities with genocide. Nevertheless, even under Stalin, there was some consistency between law and its practice as he sought, paradoxically, to rationalize arbitrary terror via more explicit legislation inspired and embellished by Vyshinsky’s savage “philosophy” of law. Under Stalin, confession was the “Queen of Proof”; the accused was obliged to prove his innocence; a man “probably” guilty was doomed; there was the pernicious “Doctrine of Analogy”; the rights of a defendant and his counsel were reduced to less than nothing by specific provisions of the law; to whisk away people in the dead of night, to arrest without charges, to sentence without trial and to execute without cause were actually all provided for by murderously vague and permissive statutes. Thus, there was a kind of law of lawlessness, a degree of codification of total terror; and its study offered special insights into a system given to the mass murder of its own people.
If the law provided clues to understanding Russia under Stalin, it is even more instructive in assessing Russia under Khrushchev. The reason, it should be obvious, is that the post-Stalin relaxation requires laws which, on the whole, are less stringent, more precise and in greater conformity with the realities of life. Above all, it is Russia’s new criminal legislation, the most significant of all reforms and changes in Russian political life, which sheds most light on what is meant by “the struggle for socialist legality.”
 
I.
It is now more than ten years since Stalin’s death and much of the debate on “socialist legality” has been resolved. This does not mean that the debate is over or that no new changes will be made – for better or worse – but in 1963 it is possible to examine a new body of national criminal legislation as well as some new laws of Russia’s constituent union-Republics. This is so, largely because of a series of statutes pertaining to criminal law passed by the Supreme Soviet in December 1958.
 
A Major Reform
In one of the statutes, the Principles of Criminal Legislation [1], there is tersely stated in Article 3 what is perhaps the most significant reform in current legal dogma:
Only persons who are guilty of a crime – that is, who have deliberately or through negligence committed a socially dangerous act specified by criminal law – may be held criminally liable and subject to punishment.
Criminal punishment may be applied only upon sentence of the court.
The concepts embodied in this Article had several purposes explicitly stated in the preliminary debate over the forthcoming legal reforms.
In the first place, it was designed to replace the notorious Doctrine of Analogy. According to this doctrine, if an individual committed a “socially dangerous act” not specified in law, the authorities could inflict the penalty specified for the crime which, in their opinion, most closely resembled the alleged offense committed. Now, with Article 3 of the new Principles, a man is to be convicted of an offense only if it is “specified by criminal law.”
Second, the stipulation that one can be punished only for a specified crime was intended to undercut the odious practice during Stalin’s reign of holding relatives of a criminal legally responsible as accessories to the crime.
Third, by specifying that a criminal can be punished “only upon the sentence of the court” this Article legally repudiates past techniques whereby concentration camps had been filled, not so much by the actions of Russian courts, as by administrative decrees – particularly those of the dreaded Ministry of Internal Affairs, Previously, a Russian citizen could be abducted by the secret police and promptly shipped to Karaganda. Now, so Article 3 formally states, it is necessary to prove that a specific legal provision has been violated – and this is to be determined only by courts of proper jurisdiction – as contrasted to arbitrary actions of administrative state organs.
However, this new legal concept has its loopholes, not only in other criminal legislation, but in the fact that the Republics of the USSR have passed administrative decrees permitting nonjudicial bodies of local citizens to sentence those found guilty of a “parasitic mode of life” to banishment and forced labor, subject to confirmation by public administrative bodies. We will return to these “antiparasite” codes.
 
Presumption of Neither Guilt Nor Innocence
One advanced, democratic legal concept is the presumption of a defendant’s innocence. In Stalin’s time just the reverse was the case: the defendant was presumed guilty unless he could prove himself innocent. According to this conception the prosecuting authorities were men of such high civic consciousness that they would not think of pressing charges against an accused if in their preliminary investigation the prosecutor and agents, of investigative bodies were not convinced of the incontrovertible guilt of the accused. The question of presumption of guilt or innocence was one of the most heatedly debated legal concepts. The debate continues because of the ambiguity of Article 14 of the Principles of Criminal Procedure which dodges the problem as follows:
The court, prosecutor, investigator, and person conducting an investigation do not have the right to place the burden of proof on the accused.
This, of course, is an evasion since there is no explicit statement of presumed innocence. Even as an evasion, this Article represents progress over what existed in the past. But it cannot be correctly evaluated – even if abstracted from the limiting context of the Russian political reality – without understanding that it was a concession to appease more liberal elements who had been pressing hard for codifying as an unambiguous maxim of Russian law that a man is innocent until proven guilty.
For example, the Lithuanian deputy B.S. Sharkov who introduced the Statute under discussion to the Supreme Soviet rebuked those who insisted that the presumption-of-innocence concept be legislated:
Efforts to include into our theory and practice obsolete dogmas of bourgeois law, for instance, the presumption of innocence, deeply contradict the essence of Soviet socialist law. The presumption of innocence was proposed to be included in the Principles of Criminal Procedure by using a formula like the following: ‘The defendant shall be considered innocent until his guilt is established by the final court of judgement.’ Perhaps lawyers can understand the meaning of such a complicated formula, but great masses of people could hardly understand it (quoted in W.W. Kulski, The Soviet Regime, 3rd ed., p.453).
Deputy Sharkov, reporter to the Supreme Soviet, who thought that “perhaps lawyers” (but not the “great masses”) could understand the presumption-of-innocence principle, continued his attack on the defeated advocates of this “obsolete dogma” with this concrete example:
Take a case like this: a murderer, a bandit, is caught at the scene of the crime with the goods on him. The investigator and the procurator make a careful investigation in full conformity with the law and establish the guilt of the bandit, though even without that his guilt was evident to everyone. On the basis of the law and the indisputable evidence collected, the investigator and the procurator not only have the right but are obliged in duty to hold the murderer to criminal liability and place him under guard. At the same time, law, the investigator and the procurator would be obliged to consider that bandit innocent ... The absurdity of such a state of affairs from the viewpoint of common sense is beyond dispute.
Everyone can understand this, lawyer and great masses alike.
The same sentiment was voiced by Nikita Khrushchev, speaking at the Fourteenth Congress of the Young Communist League in April 1962:
Some people reason that even if a man has stolen something but has not been caught he cannot be called to account, although many people know him to be a thief. But this kind of morality is characteristic of Bourgeois society, where people say “a man isn’t a thief until he has been caught.” Our principles should be different... We should not wait until he is caught redhanded to indict and try him. (Merle Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled (rev. ed., 1963), p.452)
If the letter of the law does not assume the innocence of the accused [2] and it is all but denied in life – what of the accused’s defense counsel? If there is one function that a defense counsel should have, by definition, it is to assist his client’s plea of innocence or if a guilty plea is entered to lighten his client’s sentence. This elementary notion is not accepted as self-evident in Russia and, though still debated, remains alien to the spirit and practice of law.
This was adequately demonstrated in the remarks of another reporter to the Supreme Soviet session of December 25, 1958 – D. Rasulov, Chairman of the Commission of Draft Legislation of the Soviet Nationalities. Mr. Rasulov summed up his concept of the role of defense counsel:
Soviet defense counsel must serve the great humane cause of defense of socialist society, law, truth and justice. That is the way to define his course of conduct in the defense of the accused – that is where the task of the defense counsel lies, and not in the defense of illegal chicanery on the part of the accused, which would inevitably grow into defense of a criminal and thus of the crime. (quoted in Leon Lipson, Socialist Legality: The Mountain has Labored, Problems of Communism, March-April 1959)
If one strips this passage of prettified phrases (“the great humane cause of socialist society, law, truth and justice”) similarly used in the era of “violations of socialist legality,” Chairman Rasulov reveals the still-widespread attitude that confuses the role of counsel for the accused with counsel for the prosecution.
 
Some Principles of Criminal Procedure
Several of the ugliest aspects of criminal procedure In Stalin’s day have heen carried over in less grievous and more covert form.
The writ of habeas corpus remains alien to Russian law. The Principles of Criminal Procedure permit either a prosecutor, the police or an agent of an investigative agency to place under arrest a Russian citizen suspected of a crime that carries a prison sentence. If the arrest is by order of an investigative agency, that arrest must be reported within 24 hours to the prosecutor, but not necessarily to the court – i.e., to the very agency that will act as the arrested person’s adversary in the event of a trial. The prosecutor is then given two days before he is obliged either to release the suspect or “sanction the imprisonment.” Actually the statutes would permit pretrial arrest for a total of nine months without notifying the courts!
A person held for nine months before either being released or having his case brought before the courts would, in all likelihood, be accused of a “state crime,” say “anti-Soviet propaganda and agitation” – a most serious criminal offense. During this preliminary investigation the accused is not entitled to defense counsel. He can be held virtually incommunicado. His longest conversations are with those preparing or investigating the case against him.
Before May 1963, he had to contend mainly with two adversaries – the prosecutor and an agent of an investigatory body. In an April 1963 decree by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the accused could be obliged to contend with a third adversary in preliminary investigations. In that month it was ruled that, “for the purpose of intensifying the fight against crime and further strengthening and expanding democratic principles of Soviet Court procedure,” the accused would now be obliged to submit to investigation by newly created “agencies for Safeguarding Public Order.”
The investigator – i.e., a representative of special administrative bodies – determines the line of investigation. Should the prosecutor feel that no case can be made against the accused, the investigator has the right to appeal this decision to a higher prosecuting authority. The investigator can also appeal the classification of the alleged crime and the scope of the indictment.
Damaging to the rights of a defendant are the relations of the courts to the Procurator General’s office (Attorney General would be the United States equivalent), and of both institutions to the Communist party. According to Article 10 of the Principles of Criminal Procedure, called “Independence of Judges and Their Subordination to the Law,” we read:
In administering justice in criminal cases, judges and people’s assessors are independent and are subordinate only to the law. Judges and peoples’ assessors decide criminal cases on the basis of the law in accordance with socialist legal consciousness and in conditions precluding outside influence on judges.
If this concept corresponded to other legal provisions and to the facts of political life we would be discussing a society undergoing a fundamental democratic transformation, But a moment’s reflection is all it should take to recognize the hypocrisy of Article 10. Can anyone picture any Russian court “precluding the outside influence” of the Communist party since to preclude such outside influence has no meaning unless the courts are privileged to make specific decisions which run counter to or overrule the will of the Party? It will be the heroic magistrate, indeed, who declares a Khrushchevian edict unconstitutional or frees an accused criminal in the face of explicit Party pressures. The truth is that the judiciary is not a whit less free of Party control today than during Stalin’s reign. (Under Stalin, too, the Constitution gave assurance in Article 112 that “judges are independent and only subject to the law.” ) Also (Article 10 notwithstanding), the courts are supervised by the procuracy, i.e., by state prosecutors. This is made explicit in the Constitution and in Article 14 of the more recent (1958) statute on the Principles of Legislation On the Judicial System, which gives to the “USSR Prosecutor General and the prosecutors subordinate to him” the right to “exercise supervision over the legality of and grounds for sentences, judgements and decisions and orders handed down by court agencies and over the carrying out of the sentence.”
A related obstacle to a defendants’ rights resides in the organization of lawyers collegiums which include all defense lawyers. For example, in a statute passed by the Russian Republic in July 1962, “The Russian Republic Ministry of Justice exercises general supervision of the lawyers collegium in the Russian Republic and control over their work.” (The Ministry sees to it, among other things, that lawyers display “moral purity and irreproachable conduct.”)
Thus a state organ – the Ministry of Justice – supervises the activities of the lawyer defending a man accused by the state, and he is tried by judges who are subject to the general supervision of the office of the prosecutor presenting the state case against him.
The inquisitorial character of criminal procedure is further illustrated in Article 21 of the procedural statute which establishes the Rights of the Accused. Here, the accused is told that he has the right to appeal, to know the charge and to offer an explanation, to submit evidence and to petition – all of which is impeccably just. But the same Article also permits him “to familiarize himself with all the materials of the case upon completion of the preliminary investigation.“ The significance of our italicized passage needs no comment. What must be added is a note of pertinent history: the discrepancy between this Article, as passed by the supreme Soviet, and what had been proposed in the draft. The earlier draft version of Article 21 included the right of the accused to receive “a presentation of evidence” during the pretrial examination. This was obviously considered too radical a departure from Stalinist techniques and consequently deleted in the final, adopted version. Article 22, concerned with the Participation of the Defense Counsel in Criminal Procedure, limits his right to defense counsel until after the pretrial arrest and examination is completed. [3]
Furthermore, when an alleged crime is investigated by the prosecutor’s office, the defense counsel is permitted to enter the case only from the time that the accused is informed of the completion of the preliminary investigation. This is a serious enough denial of an accused’s rights. More pernicious is that when a case has been investigated by the militia the defense counsel is often not allowed to participate in the case until it is heard in court. According to a December 1962 article in a Russian law journal, “the militia agencies now investigate approximately half of all crimes, including those for which the law provides quite severe penalties.”
Both the accused and his counsel are additionally handicapped by the fact that Article 16 of the criminal procedure statute permits the introduction as evidence into open court of all material collected during the pretrial investigation when the suspect, deprived of right to counsel, was at an enormous disadvantage.
Is it any wonder, then, that a court hearing is usually little more than a public, ritualistic affirmation of a pretrial verdict?
The new procedural code offers little protection to the individual, his home and personal correspondence, against administrative incursion. On the contrary, Article 35 permits an inquiry agency or an investigator “with the sanction of a prosecutor” to search a person and his premises, seize mail at postal and telegraph offices. There is no need to go to the courts first. In some “urgent cases” investigative agencies need not even get the prosecutor’s permission to carry on search and seizure of mail.
 
Double Jeopardy Remains a Law of the Land
Article 46 of the procedural code contains the following reform in its first paragraph: “In hearing a case by way of appeal, a court may reduce the penalty set by the court of original jurisdiction or apply a law governing a less serious crime ...”
Had the new statutes governing the appeal system continued in this spirit, we could point to them as highly significant reforms in Russian criminal law. Under Stalin, a higher court could impose a more severe penalty on the basis of a defendant’s appeal. According to the paragraph quoted above, an appeal from a defendant can earn him either a reduced sentence or a confirmation of the original but not one which is more severe. However, the new code also provides that on a defendant’s appeal, a higher court can remand a case to lower court for a retrial in which the defendant could be charged with a more serious offense and sentenced more severely. Much else that appears on the subject can only lead to the conclusion that reforms in the appeal system are modest compared to what has been retained from the past. Double jeopardy remains a codified principle. It is not only the defendant who has the right to appeal but the prosecution and/or the “injured party” which have similar privileges. This is codified as follows:
A sentence may be rescinded because of the necessity of applying a law governing a more serious crime or because of leniency of penalty only if the prosecutor has lodged a protest on this ground or the injured party has submitted a complaint (Article 46).
Not only may a sentence be increased on the protest of the prosecution or that of the injured party, but it is established in Article 47 that even an acquittal may be rescinded “on the protest of the prosecutor,” thereby forcing a defendant to risk the jeopardy of a court the second time, for the same charge.
Technically, a decision is considered final if the allocated time for an appeal has expired or if the appeal court refuses to rescind the verdict. However, this “final judgement” is not really final for there is still Judicial Supervision whereby a verdict that has entered into legal force can be submitted once again to review upon the protest of the prosecutor, the court chairman or their deputies. A convicted person is not similarly privileged. Under this supervisory system two previous acquittals – the first by the court of original jurisdiction, the second by a court of appeals – – can be reversed if the court finds that a judge misused his authority, that there was false evidence or there is new evidence, or “new circumstances are found” (Article 48 and 49).
The court of judicial review may not only reverse two previous acquittals, it can also set new sentences – either lighter or harsher – if it finds “a discrepancy between the penalty set by the court and the gravity of the crime or the personality of the convicted person.”
During an appeal or judicial review the prosecutor is obliged to participate in the proceedings but the defendant is not permitted to testify on his own behalf except on the special sufferance of the court.
There is a relatively modest improvement from Stalin’s time: the state’s protest of an acquittal on the basis of new evidence under this system of judicial review must be made within “one year from the day of their discovery.” But there is no limit on the lapse of time from the acquittal to the point that the alleged new evidence is unearthed.
One final point here: the Supreme Court of the USSR and those of the union-Republics not only pass on the legality of the action of lower courts, they also pass sentences.
 
Law on Criminal Liability for State Crimes
Although the 1958 provisions of the Statute on State Crimes is less harsh than what existed in Stalin’s time, they nonetheless reveal the continuing totalitarian character of Russian society. Article I is concerned with “Especially Dangerous State Crimes.” Here high treason is defined as “an act deliberately committed by a citizen of the USSR to the detriment of the state independence, territorial inviolability, or military might of the USSR: defection to the side of the enemy, espionage, handing over a state or military secret to a foreign state, fleeing abroad or refusal to return to the USSR from abroad, helping a foreign state to carry on hostile activity against the USSR, or conspiracy for the purpose of seizing power...” [4]
The above crimes are punishable by death! Article 7, labelled “Anti-Soviet Agitation and Propaganda,” outlaws the dissemination “of slanderous fabrication defaming the Soviet State and social system, or the dissemination, production, or keeping the literature of such content for the same purpose.” This crime of “agitation and propaganda” is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years and exile or banishment for a period of two to five years.
This is the legal codification of political dictatorship. It need hardly be argued that the Kremlin could find any anti-Soviet propaganda, agitation or criticism of the social system to be a “slanderous fabrication” or “defamation” and contrary to law. (How would those beguiled by Russia’s new “liberal dynamism” react to the American citadel of world capitalism outlawing all agitation and propaganda that was “slanderous fabrication” aimed at the capitalist “social system”?)
The penalties imposed by this article are stringent enough but given the broadness of its formulations and those in Article I, it is possible, depending on the given inclination and need of the regime in power, that with only the slightest stretching of the point, anyone charged with violation of Article 7 could be prosecuted under Article I, which carries the death penalty. For example, spreading “slanderous fabrications” or “defaming” the Russian social system could be said to be “helping a foreign state to carry on hostile activity against the USSR” – an offense punishable by death.
In Articles 6 and 8 are similar provisions, unique to the Stalinist mode of thought and operation. The earlier one is devoted to “wrecking,” which is described as “an act of commission or omission” designed to undermine industry or a state agency. Conviction on this count carries a penalty of eight to fifteen years in prison. In a similar vein, Article 8 illegalizes “war propaganda.” For this offense – “regardless of the forms in which it is contained” – there is a penalty of three, to eight years.
Article 9 outlaws any organizational activity or the establishment of an organization having the aim of committing any one of the gamut of crimes listed in Articles 1-8, “wrecking,” “anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,” defection, espionage, etc. – with penalties provided by the previous articles.
 
Capital and Other Forms of Punishment
Theoretically, Russian law is designed to rehabilitate the criminal. A maximum of persuasion and a minimum of coercion are to be used. So Khrushchev says, and all Russian legal experts nod approvingly. Perhaps Russian courts are heavily infiltrated by evangelists. Otherwise how could judges hope to regenerate those they condemn to death unless it be in a hereafter? And “death by shooting,” often without the right to appeal, is increasingly common in Russian courts.
We have already noted that the statute on state crimes permits the death sentence for social and political crimes. Other 1958 statutes allow the death sentence, except for minors and pregnant women, to be applied in cases of premeditated murder and some cases of banditry, These statutes were inhumane enough but since then a series of grim decrees have extended the applicability of capital punishment – decrees so “barbarous that if all else was just in Russian Law it would remain the most atrocious of any modern legal system. The first of these new decrees, passed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet in May 1961, permitted “capital punishment by shooting” for “pilfering of state or public property in especially large amounts.” In July of that year another death-dealing decree determined that “speculation in valuta valuables or banknotes conducted as a business” is punishable by death, as are speculating in foreign currency and “giving or receiving a bribe under aggravating circumstances.” In addition to economic crimes, the same method of persuasion was extended to other offenses. The May 1961 decree allows the death penalty for dangerous convicts who “terrorize prisoners who have taken the path of reform, or who commit attacks on the administration or organize criminal groupings for this purpose or actively participate in such groupings.” (If this were the law in the United States, thousands of prisoners who participated in recent violent outbreaks against prison administrations could be executed.)
On Feburary 12, 1962 the Soviet Presidium ruled that rape committed by a group or by an “especially dangerous recidivist” is henceforth punishable by death. A few days later, the Presidium ruled that merely the attempt to take the life of a People’s Volunteer could be punished by death.
According to the 1958 Principles of Criminal Legislation, where the death penalty is not applied, the maximum penalty for an habitual offender or for committing a serious crime is 15 years “deprivation of freedom.” Exile and banishment, two other forms of punishment, are not to exceed five years.
While prison sentences were lessened, this reform was partially offset by an added harshness of the parole system: it was made more difficult for some prisoners to receive time off for “good behavior.” The remarks of Deputy D.S. Polyansky, Chairman of the Legislative Proposals Committee, speaking before the rubber-stamping session of the Supreme Soviet, reveal the purpose and severity of the new parole system more clearly than the bland legalistic idiom of the new code:
In rejecting excessively long terms of deprivation of freedom, the committee proceeds from the view that the system of commutation should he fundamentally improved or abandoned altogether, so that no one except the court could change the term of punishment set by court sentence. “No indulgences for dangerous criminals” is the people’s demand. And our duty is to meet it.
Proceeding from this, parole can be applied only to those convicted persons who have served at least half their sentence and have shown by exemplary conduct and honest attitude toward work that they have reformed. Persons convicted of grave crimes may be paroled after serving at least two-thirds of the sentence. As for especially dangerous recidivists, this measure should not apply.
Since 1958, parole has become even more inaccessible to those categorized as “dangerous recidivists.” [5] Also, the punishment of a crime, apart from the extension of the death sentence, has grown more severe in the last five years.
According to Roman Rudenko, Procurator General of the USSR, this is in the best tradition of socialist humanism. In his words, “There cannot be the slightest leniency toward criminals; they must be punished mercilessly – that is the demand of socialist humanism.” While some courts are criticized for being too severe, it is only for the overzealousness with which courts interpret Rudenko’s bizarre “humanism.” A more common complaint against the courts was voiced at the July 1963 plenary session of the Supreme Soviet, against “some courts [which] have recently relaxed their work to combat lawbreaking by minors,” and there was more sweeping criticism of some courts for softness and not showing the necessary “strict and unflinching observance of the requirements of the 12 February 1962 Decree [widening the applicability of the death penalty] ...”
 
Concept of Social Danger
By any democratic concept of law, the order of punishment is relative to the degree of the wilful, conscious intent of a crime. In fact, even where intent exists but insanity can be demonstrated, there is mitigation of punishment.
In Russia’s new criminal legislation some articles acknowledge the importance of establishing intent, and they make allowances for insanity. However, the General Principles of Criminal Legislation dealing with definitions of crime tend to blur distinctions between acts of omission and commission, between negligence and intent, This can be seen in Article 7 of the Principles, which defines a crime as follows:
A crime is recognized to be a socially dangerous act (of commission or omission) specified by criminal law which violates the Soviet social or state system, the socialist system of economy, socialist property or the person or political, labor, property or other rights of citizens, or any other socially dangerous act specified by criminal law which violates the socialist legal system.
This definition, in principle, of crimes as “socially dangerous acts” is so vague that it simply does not lend itself to any precise implementation in specific criminal statutes which can adequately distinguish between crimes of omission and commission. It falls, then, to the none-too-tender mercies of the courts and parajudicial organizations to substitute their will for the imprecision of the law, always fitting their interpretations of crime to the ruling Party’s fluid political concerns of what constitutes a more or less grave social danger. Since “social dangers” are infinite in number, and therefore impossible to detail, the Party’s frequent admonition to the courts to consider the personality of the offender, to seek to reform rather than punish (this appeal is usually confined to obviously minor offenses) has a hollow ring.
A related issue is found in Article 15 of the Criminal Principles where it is stated that “punishment for preparing to commit a crime or for attempting to commit a crime is prescribed by law stipulating responsibility for the given crime.” By a more humane concept of law, a man might be punished if found guilty of preparing or conspiring or attempting to commit murder. But the order of punishment could not be the same as if an overt act of murder took place. However in Russia, as the law makes clear, men can be – and often are – shot if found guilty of plotting or attempting a murder that never materialized. This is suggestive of a quintessential totalitarian concept which equates preparations of acts with overt performance. Where preparation to rob or kill can be tantamount to the act of robbery or murder, then thought and speech can be made the equivalent of overt acts and failure to support the regime through omission or negligence can be viewed as an overt act against the regime.
The severity with which negligence is handled is typified by Article 13 of the Law on State Crimes which permits the courts to sentence a man to eight years in prison for losing a state secret due to not following regulations for handling such documents, i.e., negligence. According to Article 24 of the law establishing liability for military crimes, a recurring case of a “negligent attitude toward duty” can earn the careless soul 10 years imprisonment if there are grave consequences; in wartime such negligence is punishable by death.
One recent example of punishment prescribed for criminal negligence is the decree on Criminal Liability for Criminal Negligence in the Use or Maintenance of Farm Machinery, which makes one guilty of an “uneconomical and negligent attitude toward tractors” and the like liable to one year in prison or corrective labor for the first offense and up to three years for further offenses. This is the stuff of which “socialist legality” is made.
 
“Necessary Defense” and “Extreme Necessity”
A legal manifestation of a totalitarian state, ruled less by laws than by the ubiquitous Party, is its treatment of the State as though it were a person – and a person with privileged status. To malign an individual is a crime; to abuse the State is a more serious crime. To assault an individual is an offense but to assault the State politically is intolerable. We have already seen this in the special statute covering state crimes but it has also been expressed in the Principles of Criminal Law in two sections: in Article 13 dealing with “Necessary Defense” and Article 14 captioned “Extreme Necessity.” The first of those two articles reads:
An act which has the attributes of an act stipulated in criminal law but which was committed in the course of necessary defense, that is, while defending the interests of the Soviet state, public interests or the person or rights of the defender of another person from a socially dangerous violator, is not a crime if the limits of necessary defense were not exceeded. A clear discrepancy between the defense and the nature and danger of the violation is considered to be exceeding the limits of necessary defense.
If one can push through this underbrush of jargon he will be rewarded with the following principle: if a man bloodies someone’s nose, not just in defense of his own person but “while defending the interests of the Soviet State,” he has not necessarily committed a crime. All that has to be established to make this otherwise criminal act legal is to show that there has been “no discrepancy between the defense and the nature of the violation.” But what is the gravity of smashing someone’s nose compared to the heroic defense of the interests of the Soviet State from the verbal assaults of a “socially dangerous person”?
Article 14 – on “Extreme Necessity” – is substantially the same as the above except that here it is not even obligatory to prove “necessary defense” to legitimize an otherwise criminal act. To pursue the example of our friend with the bloodied nose: should he arrive at this painful condition because our vigilant and prescient Communist here simply foresaw the villain’s intended antisocial acts, and took manly measures to avert this danger to the Soviet State, he would hardly be charged with assault. All that he would have to prove is that there was no time to warn the proper authorities and in “extreme necessity” therefore, he personally imposed Communist justice. [6]
 
Other Highlights of Russian Law
No Jury System. Whatever defects there may be in the jury system it is inestimably more advanced, tolerant and considerate of the rights of the defendant than is the inquisitorial nature of Russian justice.
One of the reforms sought by the more liberal of Russian legalists was the introduction of the jury system. That has been denied. In place of a jury, verdicts in criminal cases are rendered by a judge and two “peoples’ assessors.” These assessors are local judges “elected” at a general meeting of a specified district for a two-year term (formerly it was for a longer period) with the exact procedure of election established by each union-Republic. They rotate their services, each one serving approximately two weeks out of the year. No special knowledge of law is required.
In Russian court procedure the three judges (i.e., the judge and two peoples’ assessors) act as judge and jury; they are permitted to participate in proceedings as an adversary of the defendant, berating or cross-examining him and then passing sentence. A majority is all that is needed.
Military Courts. Any liberal, humane philosophy of law must deny the right of a military court to try a civilian. Any proponent of this liberal philosophy would have a tough, uphill struggle in Russia. There, where Khrushchev is preparing the more advanced stage of Communism and complete democracy, the Decree on Military Courts (Article 9) gives such courts the right to try civilians on espionage charges. Article 11 extends the jurisdiction of military courts to all civilians involved in civil or criminal cases in areas where there are no general courts.
According to Article 12, a man accused of any number of crimes, only one of which is an offense that falls in the military jurisdiction, is tried on all counts by the military tribunal. According to the same article, all members of a civilian gang engaged in a variety of criminal acts must face the wrath of a military tribunal if only one of its members committed a crime within the jurisdiction of a military court.
 
II.
“Socialist Legality” as a Living Process
Thus far, we have restricted our discussion of “socialist legality” to legal provisions. It is impossible, however, to gauge the legal temper of any society by reviewing codes whose dispassionate, technical idiom tends to obfuscate the meaning of the law itself. To the average person confronted with the jargon of legalese, the meretricious and the meritorious might seem to merge and overlap into one confusing jumble. And the Russians are past masters exercising a judicious use of judicial language in their legal documents; as they arc, more broadly, experts in the art of linguistic camouflage. Vyshinsky’s Doctrines of Analogy and Confession as the Queen of Proof were the legal counterparts of Vyshinsky the inquisitor, torturer and legal assassin presiding over the mass murder trials of the 1930s. However, the Doctrines were doctrines, which is a lofty term; “analogy” is an educative word, and to describe a theory of evidence as the “Queen of Proof” seems harmless enough. The world had to await the purge trials to understand these concepts fully.
Similarly, our discussion thus far might give one the erroneous impression that all that is at stake here are technical legal quibbles. To find out the real meaning of the law, to get a less guarded picture of the state of law in Russia, one is obliged to observe the law as a living process.
One might think, from all the loose talk about “democratization” and “socialist legality,” that capital punishment is seldom, if ever, applied. The truth is that in the last few years alone hundreds of Russians have been shot to death. How many it is difficult to say, but we know that approximately 175 people – about 60% being Jews – have been executed for economic crimes since the May 4, 1961 Decree. A random sampling of death sentences for economic crimes:


February 1963: Two leaders of a ring accused of swindling the public for their own profit in the baking of meat and vegetable filled pies are sentenced to “death by shooting” by the Sverdlovsk Province Court. (They were accused of using less than the required shortening in the pies – 4 instead of 6 ozs. – and using the difference for their own gain.)
 
March 1963: Pravda reports four men sentenced to death for speculation in the selling of old rags and old paper.
 
August 1963: The director of a machine building plant sentenced to death as a bribetaker. “He only took large bills.”
 
August 1963: “Rabbi B. Gavrilov moved to Pyatigorsk from Samarkand” for the purposes of speculation, a Caucasian paper writes. He and two confederates engaged in all sorts of shady deals including melting down “dust and filings for plate and dental bridges” for speculative purposes. The Rabbi and his two friends were sentenced “to the supreme penalty – death by shooting.”


A single issue of the daily paper of the Kazakh Republic Communist Party, reports 10 separate but concurrent instances of trials and trials-in-preparation of people accused of economic crimes. In one case, “the criminals have been arrested, and the investigation of the case continues.” (But if the investigation “continues” how does the Party paper know that the suspects are “criminals”?) In another case, “the culprits have been arrested and will come to trial in the near future.” (But if the trial is to be in the future then how does the Party paper know that the accused are “culprits”?)
An example of non-economic crimes bringing the death sentence is the recent case of five boys, mostly in their late teens, sentenced to death for rape. Another, in June of 1962, involved two young Armenians who unsuccessfully tried to seize a plane in flight to flee to the West. The plane crashed, the pilot was injured, “the traitors to the homeland” caught, condemned to death, and the Court ruled that the “sentence is final and not subject to appeal.”
Ex-post facto “justice” is theoretically eliminated in the letter of Russia’s new laws. But not in life. Take, for example, the 1961 case of two men, found guilty of speculating and sentenced to 15 years deprivation of freedom. The USSR Procurator General found this sentence too lenient. He appealed to the Russian Republic Supreme Court. The Supreme Court – surprise! – upheld the Procurator General and the “light” penalty was changed to more suitable punishment to fit the crime – death by shooting from which “there can be no appeal.”
Added to the horror of this story and more to the immediate point is that the legal basis for changing the sentence was the new decrees on economic crimes passed by the Presidium after the alleged crimes were committed.
In the press, the vulgarity, the hysteria, the brutality and the disregard of civilized concepts of justice can be found in letters to the editor, feature articles, editorials and accounts of criminal trials.
For example, while the formal texts concerning the right of a defendant to counsel are bad enough, studying them might not induce more than a yawn. They hardly prepare one for the more declamatory language of articles and letters appearing in the press denouncing defense lawyers as the bane of “socialism.” Take a letter in Pravda signed by Karasov, a “Hero of Socialist Labor.”
It is not time in cases of gangsterism, murder and hooliganism to dispense with the service of paid lawyers who often try to prove that black is white and who “earn” their fees by expending the ardor of their eloquence in shielding patently vicious criminals? We must without fail, and more frequently than we do now, organize show trials and attract the attention of the wide public to them.
... any contemptible person who raises his hand against a Soviet citizen must be destroyed.[emphasis added]
Whoever thinks this is just the cultural lag of an isolated, indignant worker, enraged at the sedate pleas of some legalists who would like to see defense lawyers admitted to the human race, is naive or ill-informed. Mr. Karasov represents the lynch mentality of Russian justice as it is, not merely as it is fuzzied up in legal texts.
Our typical “Hero of Socialist Labor” has his distinguished counterparts. Take the no-less-typical letter from a professor who sports the Honored Badge of Science. “No mercy for hooligans, the wreckers of human society” is his anguished plea. “They must be destroyed like rats and bedbugs. Unfortunately, however, there are some people who appeal for humaneness, resembling those Tolstoyans who didn’t dare ‘take the life’ of a flea or cockroach.”
In the letter from the “Hero of Socialist Labor” there is the appeal for more “public show trials.” That such trials continue to exist in the land of “socialist legality” may come as a shock to many. It shouldn’t. Public show trials – that is, trials where the defendant is found guilty in advance, no defense counsel in any intelligible sense of the term is permitted, and the accused’s fate is held up as a warning to all – are common and integral elements of Russian justice.
Scores of public show trials have been held recently in Russia. One Moscow spectacular was performed in a public stadium before an audience of 2,000 jurors! This was the “trial” of five young “moral degenerates.” Under the circumstances, one should hardly be surprised that the wages of their degeneracy was that they “be banished from Moscow and made to atone for their sins ... through labor in harsh conditions.” The period of atonement, it was later decided, would take five years.
These court spectacles are also travelling road shows. A March 1959 Party-State decree “requires institutions of internal affairs, agencies of the prosecutors office, justice agencies and the courts to intensify the struggle against antisocial phenomena and to conduct public trials of malicious violators of public order directly at enterprises, construction projects and state and collective farms.”
Where court authorities are brought directly into factories and collectives all semblance of legal rights for the defendant vanishes. An acquittal would make the show as irrelevant as a gladiators’ arena without victims.
A particularly chilling “show trial” was announced in the October 20, 1963 issue of Izvestia under the head, “There Will Be No Mercy for Thieves!” It concerned an alleged ring of criminals led by two Jews, Shakerman and Koifman. Following is a summary of the Izvestia story:
Shakerman was recently widowed, but immediately after the period of mourning he started to shop around for a new wife. He set his lustful sights on the wife of a friend and relative and accomplished his objective. He had a new wife. To try to appease his forsaken friend and relative he gave him a sizeable sum of money. (These Jews, you know, think that money can buy anything.) The relative was not appeased. He informed the authorities that Shakerman was involved in some shady manipulations. (But Shakerman’s Jewish friend and relative did not mention receiving money for his former wife. There is no limit to the perfidy and deceitfulness of these money-loving Jews.) The relative’s information led to an investigation which proved, according to Izvestia, that Shakerman, a former doctor, together with a colleague and fellow-Jew, Roifnan, were heading a vast complex of embezzlers, thieves, speculators, bribe-givers, etc. – all the things that merit death in the land of “socialist legality.” Among other alleged activities Izvestia claims that the gang operated an illegal knitgoods enterprise installed in a psycho-neurological clinic with a production therapy workshop. The anti-Semitic undertones and overtones of this case are neither more nor less glaring than in so many other recent similar incidents. This charge of anti-Semitism is more substantiated than disproven by Izvestia’s disclaimer that “we mention the Jewish surnames of people who were in this gang because we do not deign to pay attention to the malicious slander that the Western press stirs up from time to time.”
But Russian anti-Semitism, the prevalence of which has been so brutally revealed by the economic trials, is not the subject of this essay. More to the point at the moment is that for these alleged crimes the newspaper Izvestia is demanding the death sentence. Not only does it demand such cruel punishment for people who have not even had the benefit of trial but it demands that the forthcoming “trial” of the criminals be “a public show trial that is widely publicized.” To make it a real national spectacle Izvestia proposes that none other than the Procurator General of the USSR, Roman Rudenko, prosecute the case. Only worldwide protest could inhibit the Russian authorities from carrying out Izvestia’s pretrial death verdict.
Another terrifying demonstration of Stalinist justice was yet to be revealed. On the heels of Izvestia’s exposé and judgment of the Shakerman-Roifman “gang,” an article in the October 30 issue of the Russian Republic newspaper, Sovetskaya Rossiya, published a demand by the Soviet Supreme Court for “public” trials of economic criminals to be given “wide publicity” in the press. Reflect for a moment. This is not a demand by the Party, or a prosecutor or the press or an individual. Here the demand for show trials is made by a court of justice – the Soviet Supreme Court at that.
Criminal cases of any importance are, as a rule, decided in advance. A man is accused of a serious crime and there follows a flood of letters and petitions to the press, denouncing the “criminal” and demanding his head. The trial may not have even begun. That is a detail, for where there is trial by press, court proceedings are a formality.
 
III.
Some of the most important features of Russian justice are to be found in the presumably non-criminal decrees known as anti-parasite laws and in extralegal institutions – Comrade Courts, People’s Guards, Neighborhood Committees, euphemistically categorized as measures of public influence and heralded as milestones in democratization.
 
The Anti-parasite Laws
One of the earliest of the anti-parasite laws was introduced to the Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet in the summer of 1957 and passed the following year. The law On Intensifying the Struggle against Anti-social Parasitical Elements avowed that “there should be no parasitic idlers in Soviet society” and promised that those able-bodied citizens found guilty of an anti-social parasitic way of life may be sentenced to “exile by public sentence for a term of two to five years, with obligatory engagement in work at the place of exile.”
All that was necessary for the law’s execution was that a “street committee” in the cities, or a village soviet in rural areas, convene a meeting of residents in designated areas to pass judgment on a suspected “anti-social parasite.” If a majority of the residents attended the meeting it was legal, and a majority of those present could, in open vote, pass “a public sentence of exile.” Once the sentence was confirmed by a district of the city soviet, it took immediate effect with no recourse of appeal.
This vigilante law, passed in nine of the smaller union-Republics between 1957-1960, was so reminiscent of the arbitrary justice during the era of the “cult of personality” that it apparently met with resistance from more liberal elements within the legal profession, postponing its extension to the larger Republics. But resistance wilted before the clearly expressed determination of the Party to extend the anti-parasite laws. In May 1961 the Presidium of the Russian Republic Supreme Soviet passed its decree On Intensifying the Struggle Against Persons Who Avoid Socially Useful Work and Lead an Antisocial Parasitic Way of Life.
The decree begins with the ceremonious but always startling news that “under the leadership of the Communist party, our country has entered the period of the full-scale building of communism.” Of course the Soviet people are “working with enthusiasm ... and respecting the rules of socialist society.” However, in the countryside and in the cities “there are still individuals who are stubbornly opposed to work.” These antisocial elements either refuse to work at all except in “forbidden business, private enterprise, speculation and begging” and the like, or else they do have jobs but only “for appearance’s sake” as they engage in such skullduggery as “home brewing” and “undermining labor discipline.” This parasitism is usually “accompanied by drunkenness, moral degradation and violation of the rules of socialist society.”
To intensify the struggle against “anti-social parasitic elements,” the Republic Supreme Soviet resolved that able-bodied adults who avoid socially useful work altogether, derive unearned income from speculation, etc., or generally “commit other anti-social acts” that permit them to live parasitically, are subject upon the order of a People’s Court to deportation for a period of two to five years with “mandatory enlistment in work” at the place of exile. The court’s decision “is not subject to appeal.”
The other category of parasites – those who do have jobs but do not labor at them honestly – are subject to the “same measure of influence” except that they can be prescribed by either the court or a “public sentence” handed down by people working in the accused’s shop, organization or collective. A “public sentence” is subject to the approval of the district (city) soviet executive committee “whose decision is final.”
Orders for deportation by the courts or public sentence are carried out by militia agencies.
This 1963 decree differed in several respects from the earlier anti-parasite laws passed by smaller Republics which have since been amended to conform with the Russian Republic’s law. It is now necessary for agencies of the militia or the prosecutor’s office to investigate a person charged with parasitism. If the charges are upheld, then a period of time is permitted the “parasite” to turn to the path of righteous labor to avoid being brought to trial before a court or a collective.
These changes represent a softening of the earlier parasite laws which denied all procedural rights to the accused. Nevertheless, as these are considered administrative decrees, the accused is still denied many of the limited procedural gains promised in the 1958 Statutes on Criminal Procedure. The new decree does not mention the right to a defense counsel and specifically denies the right of appeal. While the earlier decrees were even more stringent, they were the law only in smaller Republics with a small percentage of the national population. The present anti-parasite laws are nationwide, and perhaps the most serious retrogressive step in Russian legality in the post-Stalin period.
This throwback to Stalin’s technique recreates the quasi-legal basis for mass deportations to labor camps. This is not a theoretical possibility because thousands upon thousands of Russians have been recently sent into exile with “mandatory enlistment at work” for two to five years on the strength of the anti-parasite laws, with the average sentence closer to the maximum five year period.
How many thousands have been deported is impossible to estimate. But the evidence is that the number is huge. An article by law professor Harold J. Berman (well respected in Russian legal circles and hardly an overmilitant critic of Russia’s reformed legal system) in the Harvard Law Review (May 1963) suggests that there were at least 10,000 people accused under the anti-parasite decree in Moscow alone, 2,000 of whom were sent into exile. This information was supplied to Berman by no less an authority than the Minister of Justice. Considering the nature of Berman’s source it is reasonable to assume that both the number of accused and percentage banished were even higher. Also, this information was supplied to Berman in May of 1962, only one year after the decree took effect. Is there any reason to believe, given the intensified press campaign against “parasites,” that the annual rate of accusations and deportations declined in the following year? And is there any reason to doubt that the provinces have been as vigilant as Moscow, especially if one recalls that the smaller Republics passed even harsher antiparasite laws several years before the larger Republics? [7]
 
The Comrade Courts
Comrade Courts are not a wholly new phenomenon. They functioned off and on, mainly to discipline labor, until 1940. But the present Comrade Courts, reintroduced in many smaller Republics in 1957 and in the Russian Republic four years later, are far broader in scope than their antecedents, as can be seen in the Model Statutes on Comrade Courts passed by the Supreme Soviet in October 1959 (translated in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, November 25, 1959).
According to the Model’s first article, “Comrade Courts are elected public agencies charged with actively contributing to the inculcation in citizens of a spirit of a Communist attitude toward labor and socialist property and the observance of the rules of socialist behavior ...”
Where these courts are to be set up is established in Article 2: “Comrade Courts shall be set up at enterprises, institutions, organizations and higher and specialized secondary schools by decision of a general meeting of the workers and employers or of the students.” In addition, “Rural comrade courts and comrade courts at collective farms, producers’ cooperatives, housing bureaus, apartment house managements and street committees shall be set up.” The next article determines that “those who receive a majority vote of more than half of those present at the meeting” are elected to the court. Those elected, “by open vote,” choose the chairman, vice-chairman and secretary of the court. The courts report to the electors at least once a year.
Articles 5 and 6 specify the kind of cases to be heard. They include charges against a worker for “poor quality work, allowing defective output, or idle time resulting from a worker’s unconscientious attitude toward his duties.” Other chargeable offenses are violations of “labor discipline” including absence from work without a good excuse, lateness to work or leaving work before the end of the working day. Other cases heard include “the shirking of socially useful labor and leading a parasitic life,” using abusive language, petty hooliganism (when a first offense), “foul language” and “petty arrogance.”
Cases are to be heard at places of work or residence.
The “corrective measures” in the Model range from forcing apologies, issuing warnings and public censure, to more severe forms of punishment such as 100-ruble fines, ordering compensation up to 500 rubles [8] for alleged damage, “suggesting” to the plant manager that a worker be dismissed or demoted for three months and suggesting to the People’s Court that the guilty party be evicted from his apartment. Finally, should the Comrade Court feel that a more serious penalty is called for involving an offense beyond its jurisdiction, it will have the right to turn over all relevant documents to the higher court.
Article 16 stipulates that “The decision of a comrade court shall be final and not subject to appeal” although trade unions or local Soviets can ask for a rehearing. However, as Comrade Courts are under the direction of the local trade union committee or soviet (Article 19) it will be a rare instance when someone found guilty of “petty arrogance” or “poor quality work” finds his champion there.
In the Russian Republic, by a decree of the Presidium of the Republic Supreme Soviet in October 1963, the number and role of Comrade Courts were extended. It is no longer necessary for a collective to have at least 50 persons before a Comrade Court can be established, and an additional number of minor infractions of correct behavior were itemized – including “high handed acts” – that could lead the violator to a confrontation with a Comrade Court. This expansion of the jurisdiction of Comrade Courts in the Russian Republic will undoubtedly become the model for the smaller Republics.
One ostensible reason for extending the role of Comrade Courts is to relieve the regular People’s Court of its heavy load and to soften the punitive nature of Russian justice. However, there are many boastful admissions in the Russian press that workers would rather confront a regular People’s Court than risk the wrath of a Comrade Court. This is understandable, since an accused brought before a Comrade Court has few legal rights, is invariably found guilty or painfully humiliated and is tried by individuals with whom he is in close physical proximity and therefore in a position to harass him on or off his job. Far better then, many Russian workers feel, to take your chances before a more anonymous People’s Court than be humbled by kangaroo courts whose job it is to probe and publicly review the most private corners of one’s life, be it work quotas, family relations, style of dress, etc.
The personnel of the Courts is usually described in glowing terms; they are conscientious, stern but understanding comrades, eternally vigilant in their patriarchal supervision of their fellow workers or neighbors. In the words of one Izvestia correspondent: “a person who has broken the everyday laws of soviet life or those of the production line must answer before a stern but just comrade court.” In a totalitarian society there are many “everyday laws” that can be broken, be it on the production line or in “soviet life” in general. Consequently the Comrade Courts have a busy time of it.
The Comrade Court is not only concerned with labor discipline and quality control techniques. It watches the worker at work, it acts as a court of human relations, it supervises the personal habits of all. As the Izvestia correspondents wrote, “It fights for Communist morals in everyday life and on the production line.”
The Comrade Court system has its recognized excesses, too – incidents bordering on lunacy. For example, take the trial of a student before a Comrade Court consisting of his fellow students.
The accused is a student named Talis B. He has been charged with such offenses as stealing a ball, a girl’s ribbon, a chess set and a sandwich. Found guilty, student Talis B. was expelled from the school by the court with the approval of the school director.
What we have not mentioned, however, is that Talis B. was eight years old, his court consisted of other second grade children and chairman of the court was all of ten years old! (This “case” was ridiculed, in Izvestia. It was an excess. The question remains, though, how it is possible for such “excesses” to be manifested in the land that is approaching the final stages of Communism?)
By October 1963 there were nearly 200,000 Comrade Courts to discipline labor and defend everyday laws of Soviet life. [9]
 
The Druzhiny – The People’s Volunteers
In March 1959, the Communist Party and the Council of Ministers issued a decree, On the Participation by the Working People in Safeguarding Public Order, which ordered the formation of “voluntary detachments” of People’s Volunteers (Druzhiny). These detachments, which have their own local apparatus independent of the militia, have the duty to “stop violations of public order and restrain violators mainly through persuasion and warnings,” and more broadly, to counter “those individuals in our Soviet society who do not observe the norms of public behaviour.”
An article in Izvestia, of June 2, 1963, reports 130,000 People’s Volunteer detachments with 5,500,000 Druzhinniki patrolling major Russian enterprises, farms, cities and towns. These figures reveal not only the importance attached to People’s Volunteers but one vigilante for every 30 Russians is no less suggestive of a huge and increasing number of Russians defying Party “norms of public behavior.”
A politically offensive remark, a drink too many, a carelessly tossed cigarette, a gaudy dress, a skirt too short or trousers too long or some similar evidence of “petty hooliganism” is offense enough for a People’s Volunteer to bring the “hooligan” to headquarters for a little bit of persuasion. From there the offender can either be released or hauled before a Comrade Court or a regular People’s Court.
The Druzhiny have attracted some of the worst elements in Russian life – the servile, the venal, the sadistic (mainly young Communist hooligans). That one method of persuasion includes beating with clubs, fists and feet, sometimes with fatal consequences, is widely known. Complaints of such excesses have even found their way into the Russian press. For example, a writer from Leningrad reported, more than a year after the Druzhiny was organized, that “young communist street patrols were literally hunting down young men wearing brightly colored shirts and young women wearing slacks. They ripped or slashed the shirts. The same fate befell the slacks.” Moreover, “the method of knocking in someone’s teeth is not ... the best educational method” and “to chop off a girl’s hair ... is sheer violence.”
That such actions are neither isolated instances nor to be reported in the past tense is evidenced by the continuing accounts of similar atrocities. Two Izvestia correspondents discussing the Druzhiny last year conceded that “not only in Leningrad but also in Moscow, Kiev and Minsk, people’s volunteers at times act out of conviction that in the struggle against violators all means are fair.” While “this does not mean that people’s volunteers must fight hooligans with kid gloves” it does mean that “shaving someone’s head for ‘immaturity’ is not the way.”
The regime has apparently been unsuccessful in containing resistance to the Druzhiny. In 1961, the Armenian Communist Party reprimanded the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of that Republic’s Supreme Court for “underestimating the social and political significance of cases of murder and violence against people’s volunteers.” More telling than the reported physical violence is the candid admission that the threat is not confined to a few allegedly criminal elements but is a problem of “social and political significance,” i.e., the violence is a manifestation of wider and deeper popular resentment. By 1962, popular hostility and acts of violence had become so serious that on February 12 of that year the USSR Supreme Soviet passed a decree which makes anyone “insulting a member of the People’s Volunteers in the course of fulfilling his duty” liable to six months in jail or one year of corrective labor. If insults are “accompanied by violence or the threat of use of violence” then penalties are raised to up to five years in jail. An attempt on the life of a druzhinnik “in the presence of aggravating circumstances” can result in the death sentence. Clearly enough, these harsh and cruel penalties are the Kremlin’s response to the growth of mass hostility to the guardians of the proprieties of private manners and social behavior.
This decree could hardly be expected to persuade the Russian people of the benevolence of the paramilitia. And it even failed as a deterrent to violent forms of resistance. More than a year later, in July 1963, Pravda reported that a plenary session of the USSR Supreme Soviet was obliged to discuss “serious shortcomings that attest to certain court officials’ underestimation of the social danger of attempts on the life, health and dignity of militia workers and people’s volunteers by criminal and other anti-social elements.” (Again, the source of the trouble comes not only from “criminal” types but other, broadly defined, “anti-social elements.” ) The plenum, Pravda notes, “called the attention of the courts ... to the need for strict and unflinching observance of the requirements of the February 12, 1962, decree of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet” permitting capital punishment.
 
IV.
Why the Organizations of “Public Control”?
Before discussing the role of Comrade Courts and People’s Volunteers we should make clear what they emphatically are not.
They are not evidence of a society bursting the bonds of its totalitarian past and groping, hesitatingly and in a dialectically self-contradictory manner, as some apologists would have it, toward political freedom.
They are not symptomatic of a dictator “encouraging the people themselves, the rank and file, to participate in the running of the country” as Edward Crankshaw would have readers of his Khrushchev’s Russia believe.
They are certainly not proof that “persuasion and education [are] becoming the principal method of regulating the life of Soviet society,” as Khrushchev announced at the twenty-second Congress of the Communist Party. Our conviction is bolstered by Khrushchev himself, who, in the very next breath, emphasized that education and persuasion “do not imply relaxed supervision of strict observance of Soviet law, labor discipline and moral behavior.” (Equally certain was that delegates to the Congress were “persuaded” enough to approve all his remarks and the new Party program unanimously, and “educated” enough to greet Nikita Sergeyevich with loud, tumultuous, thunderous applause.)
Now, had Russian law, in statutes and in life, grown less stringent in the past five years and had the sovereignty of the Communist party declined as the role of Comrade Courts and People’s Volunteers was enhanced, then one might speak with some verisimilitude of the transfer of power to broader, more representative popular institutions. However, the law remains bitter and its practice cruel. Democracy is outlawed. Legal rights are more for the state than the accused. Thousands are being sent into exile under the arbitrary Parasite Laws. There are increasingly harsh penalties for crime. The rate of executions in Russia (of cases we know of) is about five times what it is in the United States. Men sentenced to death are sometimes denied the right to appeal. Men sentenced to long jail terms have been shot to death on the appeal of the prosecutor. Is it conceivable that those responsible for the modern world’s most uncivilized legal system and customs are ‘’encouraging the people to rule themselves” via Comrade Courts and People’s Guards?
If the “organizations of public influence” were to become, in Khrushchev’s words, “the principal method of regulating the life of Soviet society,” power would be gradually transferred from the Communist party, the only political party permitted by law, to broader, self-regulating mass organizations, whose policies are self-determined and not subordinate to any political party. Would that this were so!
But the Communist party is surrendering none of its authority and is to grow stronger under communism, according to latest Party dogma. In fact, it is the Party drive to absorb many of the functions of, or direct control over, state and administrative institutions which is largely responsible for the existence of Comrade Courts, People’s Volunteers and Party-State Control agencies. Khrushchev was only speaking the truth when he said that “our Party will continue to follow the course of handing over an ever larger number of government functions to mass organizations.” But the government in Russia governs less than the Party, and the Party apparatus has always looked upon governmental institutions, which have their own bureaucracies and their own ambitions, as possible sources of friction. The best way to prevent friction is to eliminate its source, accounting for the Party drive to undercut state ministries, decentralize governmental agencies and to absorb or more easily supervise their operations. How the agencies of public influence fit into this scheme of things is simple enough. The Comrade Courts with their expanding area of competence have taken over many of the functions of the regular courts, and the People’s Volunteers have become a virtual army of para-police paralleling the activities of the regular militia, thereby tending to displace the functions of several powerful Republic and USSR governmental bureaucracies. While the new public agencies weaken the authority of existing ministries, they are organizations without any national apparatus and with few full-time functionaries; they have mainly volunteer workers. This clearly delimits the possibilities of special bureaucracies arising within the new coercive institutions. Furthermore, given the local nature of their operations, they are more easily subjected to the “guidance” of local units of the Communist party.
To the extent that new public agencies have tightened the Party grip on Russia, they represent a retreat from “liberalization” since, in the context of “de-Stalinization,” conflicts engendered by competing centers of power afford a far greater chance for liberal change than the consolidation of all authority in the hands of the Party. (Tighter Party control of the whole judicial process can also be seen in the following figures based on Russian sources and supplied by Harold Berman: in the 1949 elections to the judiciary, 47% of the candidates were Party members; in 1957, 93.9% of the People’s Judges elected were Communist party members.)
There are additional reasons for Party sponsorship of public agencies, itemized in summary fashion below.
In the past half-decade Russia has become a vertical society. Everything is soaring: rockets, spacemen, industrial indices, parasitism and death sentences. At least, almost everything, one exception being the standard of living which remains horizontal, perhaps on a lower plane than any European nation, with no prospect of anything more than a slight perpendicular tilt.
Whatever pride the Russian people take in their scientists and engineers, there inevitably grows the realization that nuclear achievements are made at the expense of wage rates, that astronomical industrial growth statistics are indigestible as food for body or soul, and that vehicles in space do not provide space in which to live. Emboldened by the relaxation of terror, the resentment of the Russian people over their conditions of life and embitterment over poverty in the midst of huge expenditures for armaments and capital goods industries, have taken overt forms that were not so freely risked under Stalin. “Violations of labor discipline” in factories have become infinite in their variety while the peasant shows an increasingly flagrant disregard for the collective’s production goals as he tends his own small private plot.
Indiscipline is not confined to worker and peasant. The intellectual, far from becoming docilely grateful to the Party for relieving the country of many of Staling excesses, is now more venturesome, even truculent and defiant. Among the youth, there is the impossible-to-hide conflict of generations: the contempt youngsters show for the Party bureaucrat in their efforts to escape the asphyxiating puritanism and philistinism of “Communist morality.”
The repression of these “antisocial manifestations” provides an added and more obvious function of parasite laws and the ubiquitous agencies of popular control. In this view, these laws and agencies are not steps to loosen the social fabric of totalitarianism or to promote popular self-rule, as some Kremlinologists would have it, but are designed to stifle dissent and to brake the liberal impetus provided by the earlier weakening of the special instruments and techniques of Stalin’s terror.
One specific target of the expanding network of public agencies and the parasite laws worthy of special notice is stealing. The most recent spectacular case concerns a Moscow “gang” (most of whom are clearly identified as Jews [10]) accused of embezzling operations involving 52 factories, artels and collective farms and stealing a total of three million rubles from the state. In another recent case, several leaders of the Kirghizan Republic were condemned to death for stealing more than 30 million rubles. (This “gang of thieves” involved 50 high Republic government and Party officials.) In Sverdlovsk, 100 pounds of gold were cached by a “large band of gold thieves.” A clerk in a Stavropol kolkhoz reputedly stole 500,000 rubles. A group of enterprising economic officials in Moscow are accused of having stolen “900 looms from the state and sold them.” The head of the Moscow Oblast Economic Council Section for Distribution of Equipment performed his duties on the basis of the most generous giver, and in four years he sold on the side 50 motor cranes, 12 tower cranes, 11 electric welding machines and several mechanical trench-diggers and loaders.
Komsomolskaya Pravda reports in an article called Thieves’ Town that an entire community was built next to the site of a Siberian metallurgical plant out of stolen material: “foundation blocks and panels of reinforced concrete, slag blocks and rails, drainpipes and preconstructed buildings,” etc., were all stolen to construct the settlement. This is apparently not an isolated case since the paper concedes that despite efforts to curtail such activities with the assistance of the people’s volunteers, “thieves’ towns spring up in the old way.” The same paper admits that stealing and embezzlement are common to entire all-Union or Republic organizations, from functionaries atop down to regional and local subordinates. In some factories, managers and their entire staffs have been replaced as many as five times – they all turned out to be thieves.
A special cause for Party grief and vigilance is the peasant who will expropriate whatever he can – due less to an innate acquisitive instinct than an average annual income of around $500 a year. Not only spades, shovels, rakes and milk-pails disappear; crops, too, vanish. At a Communist party plenum in 1961 Khrushchev reported that in the Ukraine “half of the cultivated maize was pilfered and plundered as it stood.” If there has been any change since then, it has been an increase in agricultural thefts. Party activists and People’s Volunteers have been organized in special squads to patrol the fields spending “difficult, sleepless [nights], no easier than a soldier’s duties ... making the rounds, night watches.” Grain is stolen in the fields, and bread stolen in the towns. Sovetskaya Rossiya (November 17, 1963) gives an account of 21 bread thieves who stole 11,330 leaves of bread in seven months. [11]
Thus it is to curtail the incalculable financial drain on the state and the even greater social threat to a ruling totalitarian party from such a massive breakdown of “social discipline” that we find another major motivation for the public control agencies and parasite laws. [12]
The working day in Russia has been reduced. People have more free time. A democratic society would welcome this added opportunity for people to relax, think, read, write, experiment in the arts and letters, resist some ideas and advance others. Not in Russia. There, and this is the trademark of a totalitarian society, free time is considered fraught with danger. Leisure begets not culture, but vice – unless it is controlled and policed by the Party-State. One theoretician, writing in the Party’s philosophical journal, formulates the dangers of free time this way:
The community must be increasingly concerned with organizing the leisure of the working people and the youth. Where this matter is allowed to drift, all sorts of unpleasantries may arise. We must not forget about the tenacity of the survivals of capitalism, about the penetration of corrupting ideology among some channels in our midst.
To control “unpleasantries” born of free time, it is not enough to harp on the theme in the press. The Party does not rule through exhortations. Here, it is as agencies of time and thought control that we find another reason for Comrade Courts and People’s Volunteers. Their organization on house and neighborhood levels facilitates this assignment, as the shock troops of philistinism, to root out old and newly arisen symptoms of “corrupting ideologies” among the working people and youth.
Another function of these agencies concerns the Party’s need to project a more popular image and build a broader base for itself. With the reduction of rule by terror, the Party is obliged to show greater concern for public opinion. It must appear stern, but benevolent, and this is reflected in its ideology and even in Party nomenclature for organs of repression. Kangaroo courts are Comrade Courts; posses and vigilantes are People’s Volunteers. They are not to coerce, but to persuade and re-educate. They are “prophylactic” forms of “popular justice” to protect the many from the few remaining “loafers,” “parasites,” “hooligans,” “drunkards,” “degenerates,” “swindlers,” “speculators,” “embezzlers,” “petty thieves,” “ideologically corrupted,” etc. More to the point, however, is that the agencies of “social control” involve millions of people enjoying some degree or other of special status as Druzhinniki, pseudo court officials or other species of Party watchmen, who are thereby indebted to the Party. Their numerical weight becomes a significant mass social base for the ruling Party.
A more general explanation for quasilegal public control agencies and parasite laws is their usefulness to the Communist party as “checks and balances” against the Party’s own reduction of terror. In the post-Stalin legal reforms, a number of extreme manifestations of arbitrary justice were formally removed from legal statutes. But arbitrariness cannot be dispensed with by a Party which does not rely on any democratic consensus for its power. Since the Party neither wants to return to all the methods employed by Stalin nor can it divest itself of arbitrary rule, it has found one way of circumventing legal restrictions: reliance on parasite laws and public control agencies which are not formal judicial bodies.
 
V.
Socialist Legality and the Limits of Legal Reform
As law reflects social divisions and conflict it follows that where the law grows more severe, conflicts remain or become more intense. How is it possible, then, for Russia to be entering the final stages of Communism, which presupposes a final resolution of class struggles (not to mention a higher living standard than any bourgeois country), when its system of law, in the past five years, has extended the right of the Party-State to execute people and deprive them of liberty? Khrushchev’s claim of imminent Communism, as the law grows more punitive, smacks of Stalin’s theoretic contribution that as Russia attains the higher reaches of socialism, the class struggle grows ever sharper.
Nevertheless, recent retrogressive steps should not blind one to the considerable overall differences in legal concepts and practices between Russia today and Russia under Stalin. Mass deportations, mass frame-up trials, mass murder on a Stalin-scale are no longer typical of Russian justice. However, eliminating the excesses of Stalin’s irrational terror is hardly proof of “socialist legality” or democratization. For what could socialist legality mean other than that the law is imbued with the rational, democratic and humane values of socialism? To be socialist, legality must mean that political freedom becomes a cardinal principle of law. Socialist jurisprudence would absorb, extend and consistently apply the best features of “bourgeois” substantive and procedural law. And as an advance over more primitive justice, socialist criminal law – in the statutes and as a living process – would be directed toward the rehabilitation of criminals; capital punishment would be frowned upon as a hideous relic of ancient times; and, generally, the punitive “eye for an eye” code would be a historic curio of the Scriptural Canons.
Socialist legality, then, implies all that is still denied in the letter or practice of Russian law.
Russia is not governed by an ill-defined social caste that will melt before the demands of some mystical historical process drawing it out of Stalinist primitivism, beyond the limited reforms of Khrushchevism and into the realm of socialist freedom. The Kremlin rulers are neither men of whim nor helpless creatures to be shunted aside by teleological winds blowing from the pages of apologists for totalitarianism. They are men of purpose, with their own sense of history, with an ideology. They hold a distinct, unique relation, as a hardened social class, to the means of production – they own and control the nationalized economy through their control of the State via the rule of the Communist party. Their source of power, self-Interest and self-consciousness impose relatively clear limits to legal (and other) reforms with the Party-State.
That is why, whatever legal reforms may yet occur in Russian law within the framework of a one-party dictatorship political democracy will always be outlawed, and it is unrealistic to anticipate fundamental procedural reforms which protect the rights of the individual against the authority of the Party-State.
January 1965

Notes
1. All national statutes qoted can be found in English translations in the Current Digest of the Soviet Press, Vol.XI, Nos.4 and 5, published by the Joint Committee on Slavic Studies, New York, unless otherwise footnoted. Emphases have been added.
2. In recent years legal theory has moved in the direction of presumption of innocence. Article 77 of the Russian Republic Criminal Procedures Code now makes more explicit that a defendant’s confession must have other supportive evidence before proof of guilt is established. But it remains, nonetheless, a formal legal concession. The Russian press is replete with incidents indicating that an accused is in an enormous disadvantage once charged with a crime.
3. There has been a modest improvement in the rights of the accused. In August 1970 the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium revised Article 22 so that defense counsel must participate in the case from the moment a charge is made when the accused is a minor or cannot defend himself because of mental or physical handicaps; the defense counsel can participate in a trial from the time a charge is presented, on a ruling by the prosecutor. Only in cases involving possible capital punishment is the defense counsel obliged to enter the case when the preliminary investigation is completed.
4. In January 1960, the Supreme Soviet amended this article so that a person who has ties with a foreign power but has not actually committed a criminal act in her behalf will not be held criminally responsible if he voluntarily informs a responsible agency of this association.
5. As already noted, the recent Corrective-Labor Legislation still further restricts the opportunity for parole.
6. “Necessary defense” and “extreme necessity” are other areas which have been marked by retrogressive change in the past eight years. The press is filled with exhortations to ordinary citizens and members of control agencies to pummel or otherwise abuse suspected hooligans. The law permitting these attacks on those engaged in, or seemingly about to engage in “hooligan” behavior has been reinforced in various decrees, particularly those of 1966 “On Increased Liability for Hooliganism.”
7. In 1970, legislation was passed by a number of Union Republics winch, on balance, provides tor harsher administrative and criminal punishment of vagrants, beggars and against those leading “a parasitic way of life” and whose who “avoid socially useful labor.”
8. This is in old currency. The corresponding figures in the new, devalued currency are 10 and 50 rubles. The latter fine is more than two weeks pay for the average Russian worker.
9. According to an article in Izvestia, August 1, 1970 (trans. In CDSP, Vol.XX, No.32), there are still approximately 200,000 Comrade Courts m the USSR.
10. The probability is that for anti-Semitic reasons the amounts allegedly stolen by Jewish defendants in the wave of economic crimes are highly exaggerated.
11. Simple arithmetic shows that each “thief” stole an average of two loaves of bread a day. Whether this was done for profit or personal consumption is hard to say. For these crimes one salesgirl and a foreman received six-year prison sentences; the others were sentenced up to five years.
12. There is no evidence that the problem of theft has been eased since the above was written. On the contrary, there is every reason to believe that it has been aggravated. Along with the rise of thefts there has also been a rise in the number of decrees and directives for “intensifying the struggle against thefts of state and public property, violations of state and labor discipline, bribe-taking and other violations of the law.”
 







And lo behold, onto the broad Red Square
With modest majesty, gloriously enters
The Himalaya, and casting its blue shadow
Against the lofty skies, proudly lifts its head.
Stalin! My greetings I bring to you today.
1 have come to pay homage!
Your eternal being is more powerful than I.
You the great mountain of Himalaya!
Tiszataj (Debrecen), December 1952



JOSEPH STALIN INDEED MADE A MODEST and truly glorious entrance onto Red Square; glorious only for its finality, modest only because the “great mountain of Himalaya!” was being borne in a coffin on the substantial shoulders of Malenkov and those of his subordinates. The death of this mountainous personification of reaction, terror and violence leaves us with but one regret; that it was not the consequence of any upheaval in Russia, but, apparently, was brought on by an accident of nature.
What was the reaction of the Russian people? Did the news of Stalin’s death provoke profound grief or profound shock? Were the officially announced mourning millions disquieted by a feeling of insecurity and uncertainty over the future, or was Stalin a beloved father image to the 800 millions in the Stalinist empire?
It is likely that the dead dictator’s efforts to reach pontifical heights, his clever role as saviour of the nation in time of war and his guise of being stern and firm, yet kindly and moderate, may have reduced the people’s animus toward him compared to their detestation of the regime as a whole.
The absurdity spread by some correspondents in America that Stalin was a "moderate” who went to great lengths to keep the extremists in check was a myth consciously cultivated by Stalin. It was calculated to deflect mass hostility toward the regime from continuing in a consistent path and centering its repressed hatred on the chief despot of the Russian empire. This talent of Stalin’s to appear as arbiter and never as perpetrator, as mediator and seldom as an exponent of an extremist view served him well in the twenties. At that time he was also a "moderate,” opposed to the “extremism” of Trotsky’s permanent revolution on the one side and the rightist extremism of Bukharin on the other; neither world revolution nor capitalist restoration, he proclaimed, but socialism in one country. It was a thoroughly reactionary and extremist view but covered with a thin glaze of moderation easy to see through but difficult to pierce which fitted in so well with the moods of millions of Russians, exhausted physically and spiritually by eight years of war and revolution. This affectation of moderation which gained a genuine popularity for Stalin among sectors of the Russian population in the twenties was employed by him with much less success in the thirties and forties. During the murderous purges of the thirties, for example, Stalin seldom if ever acted the role of public prosecutor and executioner. Thus, the man who was chiefly responsible for the liquidation of the last of the important personal symbols of the Russian Revolution could manage an evasion of direct and primary public responsibility for the trials which consolidated his bureaucratic power. And when the purge threatened to get out of hand the executioners were ordered executed by the wise and genial Stalin, obviously a man of moderation.
But it is important that we do not exaggerate the point. If Stalin’s favorite role as a moderate man evoked personal fealty to him under the given historical circumstances of the twenties, it is inconceivable that a similar feeling of affection remains among numerically significant portions of the Russian population. His moderate pose could not have won anything resembling human sympathy in the face of 25 years of totalitarian terror. But the pose itself continued to have some effect. Even among the millions of Russians who experienced a deep sense of personal satisfaction at the news of Stalin’s death, it must have, nevertheless, produced a mood of uncertainty. Perhaps things would be even worse. Perhaps, with Stalin dead, the more extreme elements in the regime would take over and there would be an even greater terror. Perhaps, with Malenkov now Premier, this executioner who was known to have put the pin-prick mark of death next to the names of the old Bolsheviks, a series of trials, deportations and executions would be organized dwarfing anything hitherto known. Then again, suppose Malenkov and the reorganized presidium adopts a more aggressive policy in the cold war? Without the more moderate hand of Stalin to check this adventurism we might once more be engulfed in a war. These must have been some of the thoughts which overwhelmed the Russian people at the news of Stalin’s death. We deduce that these were the sentiments behind the solemnity of millions of Muscovites paying their last respects to Stalin not out of any excursions into that popular mystical entity, the Russian soul, but from the reasonable political assumption that a people living under the whiplash of totalitarianism for 25 years is not moved to tears of compassion over the death of its chief despot. The attitude may be more complicated than undiluted hatred but it can never be one of touching sympathy and love.
Yet Stalin found his adulators in the American press. Above all, the articles in The New York Times by Harrison Salisbury, read as if his pen were dipped in his own tear ducts.
The long lines of silent Musovites extending for ten miles into the suburbs, winding their way past Stalin’s bier to the accompaniment of Chopin’s Funeral March sent Mr. Salisbury into lyrical raptures. It never occurred to the Times’ correspondent that the millions who shuffled past the funereal display were as much motivated by the instinct of self-preservation as by any reverence for the deceased tyrant. Can one imagine a Moscow citizen presenting an explanation to a local party leader for failing to pay his last respects to Stalin!
 
IN EVALUATING THE HISTORICAL PERSONALITY of Stalin much of what the analysts have written reveals that they have fallen unwitting victims to the Stalin-created myth of Stalin. His life, they note, was fraught with Machiavellian evil, but an evil of great and genius-like proportions. With his abnormal capacity for deception, intrigue and violence combined with courage, stolidity and an uncanny feeling for gauging the moods of the masses, he pulled the floundering Russian nation out of chaos. In 25 years he engineered an industrial revolution in Russia that required centuries in the capitalist West. Stalin was able to succeed where everyone failed. All the efforts of Count Witte to bring modern techniques and industry to semi-feudal, pre-revolutionary Russia failed to make more than a dent in the economy compared to what Stalin accomplished. All the naive idealism of the early Bolshevik party, all the efforts of the stubborn doctrinaire Lenin, and the Western- minded intellectual, Trotsky, could not bring order to Russia. It was Stalin who finally succeeded; Stalin whose talents built a mighty industrial Russia, introduced science to agriculture, Stalin who extended the borders of the Russian empire beyond the most extravagant ambitions of the Czars with an army, the mightiest and most feared in the world.
The “greatness” of a man is a relative concept. The heroic proportions of an individual cannot be mechanically measured but we do assume that the great or heroic individual must be endowed with certain positive talents which set him aside from other men. He cannot be an individual who is steeped in all the backward prejudices of his time and whose thought and action is heavily influenced by them.
A man, in the words of Plekhanov, “is great not because his personal qualities give individual features to great historical events but because he possesses qualities which make him most capable of serving the great social needs of his time, needs which arose as a result of general and particular causes.” He can serve those social needs either through thought or action or both. Where other men cannot understand their epoch, he can; where other men cannot foretell history, he can; where others cannot clearly see the path of progress he can point it out to them. He is the intellectual and active leader of men who, as servitor, not creator of progress can nevertheless influence the development of social institutions through his consciousness.
Lenin and Trotsky were great men of the Russian Revolution because they were able to rise far above the stultifying prejudices of their social milieu. They were men of vision, imagination and action, capable of developing ideas and policies essential to the liberation of the Russian people from Czarist oppression.
Stalin, on the other hand, can measure up to none of these criteria. As a man who served “the great social needs of his times” during and before the revolution, Stalin’s record is hardly a footnote of history, but as the Grand Executioner who led the social reaction, Stalin’s fame was made secure for all times.
As a man of ideas he fares no better as a would-be great man. For Stalin was unique among the top leaders of the early Soviet government for his lack of intellectual attainment. His major work before the twenties was a brochure on the national question written in 1913 at the mature age of 33. Aside from this short work he has contributed nothing to intellectual thought. His theory of “socialism in one country” has no theoretical value. It was not taken seriously by Marx – when raised in its essence by a German national socialist, Georgi Vollmar, as far back as 1876. The importance of this “theory” for history is that it articulated the reaction which was engulfing Russia following the Civil War.
As a man of vision, Stalin cannot qualify for admission to the hall of great historical personalities. A man without originality, he did not have the capacity to predict history. Although he was the chief architect of the new bureaucratic class it is certain that he did not play his role with any degree of prescience. As a man of culture Stalin was no less lacking. More than influenced, he was moulded by the prejudices of his time and he never raised himself above the provincial bigotry of his youth in Georgia. Men who were intellectually versatile were suspect and never forgiven by Stalin for their superiority.
The mediocrity that was Stalin, is not perceived by the journalists who are awed by his achievements, but it was apparent to and deeply felt by Stalin. His efforts at self-deification served not only a political purpose, they were no less designed to mollify his own feelings of inferiority. From an obscure student radical he emerged from the pens of his biographers as a patron saint of the Georgian workers; and from a second rate figure between the 1905 and 1917 revolutions he emerged as Lenin’s chief confidante and advisor. The extremes to which he had gone in recent years to “correct” and “re-orient” scientists, writers, philologists, artists, and musicians cannot be explained in toto by the political needs of the Russian totalitarian system. They were also the workings of a narrow, vindictive man enforcing homage from more cultured men; he sought tributes never paid to him by his more learned colleagues in the early days of the Soviet government.
Many of the journalists who see an evil great man in Stalin recognize the above-mentioned facets of his personality. Nevertheless, with a nothing-succeeds-like-success psychology, they point to the fact that Stalin became dictator despite the opposition of many men of far greater abilities. Lenin was aware of Stalin’s malignant influence on the Communist Party and the revolution for several years before his death and yet could not prevent it. And Trotsky, whose great qualities were branded on Stalin’s consciousness was nonetheless ousted from the party, exiled and assassinated – by Stalin.
But Lenin and Trotsky, and the revolution, were not defeated by Stalin. The men and the revolution they led were defeated by the failure of the working class to seize power in European countries, particularly in Germany. The revolution came first to Russia despite the expectations of all Marxists, because Czarist Russia, which Lenin so aptly called the “weakest link in the chain of imperialism,” was embroiled in a world war and handicapped with productive forces which could not stand the enormous strain of the war. Her backward economy could not even provide basic military equipment for her armies at the front, where her soldiers were being massacred.
The soviets coming to power in this peasant land inherited her backward economy. No one at the time had the illusion that the revolution could sustain itself on a healthy basis for an extended period without help from socialist countries in the more advanced countries of the West. Without industry, without technology, confronting invasion by imperialist troops from without and faced with the prospect of civil war it was not possible to contemplate raising the cultural level of the nation to that of even a second rate capitalist power, not to speak of attaining socialism which means a higher culture and technology than capitalism has ever known. Without aid from socialist governments in the West the leaders of the Soviet government understood in advance the demoralization that would set in among the working class and the rift that would take place between worker and peasant if no material benefits from the revolution were to be enjoyed.
By 1922, when Stalin was chosen general secretary of the Communist Party, the revolutionary energies of the Russian workers had been largely dissipated and thousands of their best leaders killed in the civil war. The working class had accomplished the amazing task of lifting Russia out of the autocratic grip of the Czars and establishing its own political power. But four years of war and revolution following its triumph did not bring the material advantages it sought; and the ebb of the revolutionary movement in the West only increased its weariness. The working class, no longer fired with revolutionary passion, in a sense abandoned power. So long as the economic and administrative bureaucracies were made to serve its interests the working class was the dominant power. But with the growing passivity of the workers, the bureaucracies which existed in all Russian institutions developed interests and a momentum of their own. Parties could be outlawed, factions suppressed, unions devitalized, favoritism and speculation practiced, etc., once the bureaucracies no longer felt themselves responsible to the masses. Careerists and adventurers entered the apparatus of party and state and behaved with impunity; the demobilized Red Army officers found administrative positions bringing with them methods which may have been required on the battlefield but were reprehensible in civil institutions of the post civil war period.
The NEPmen and bureaucrats who were rapidly filling in the vacuum left by the retreating working class found an excellent rallying center in Stalin and the machine which he had built in the Communist Party. As general secretary, a post which had been only of administrative importance, Stalin was in a strategic position for organizing his personal machine. With the “Lenin Levy” he had thrown the doors of the Communist Party wide open to the personally ambitious careerists who had neither sympathy nor understanding of the problems confronting the socialist movement.
Stalin was created by the bureaucracy. He was selected and nurtured by it because his personality, position and background fitted in so well with its needs. If there were no Stalin, the bureaucracy would have found another man to play essentially the same role. The individual which it sought to cement and lead it did not have to be a man of rare talents. On the contrary the bureaucracy needed an individual whose character incarnated the narrow visions and petty ambitions of the bureaucracy as a whole. Just as the inspired working class sought great men of progress to lead it during the October Revolution; so, inversely, did the bureaucracy feel the need for a leader of the same mediocre quality as itself.
The bureaucracy needed a chance to relax and maneuver. Stalin helped to provide it with that possibility. His theory of socialism in one country gave it a “program” to counter what was left of the internationalist traditions in Russia; and his ascendancy in the Communist Party apparatus provided it with the club necessary for beating down any opposition to its efforts to achieve the victory of totalitarianism in one country.
We have discussed the attempts of the statesmen and journalists to create an aura of evil greatness around Stalin because it is politically significant today. Beneath this admiration for Stalin as a leader the bourgeoisie reveals its own weaknesses. They do not look upon Stalin as a great man because of any misunderstanding about the meaning of the term. This praise is inspired by their own bankruptcy; to them Stalinism has become an invincible force, something they cannot cope with and do not understand. Hence their admiration for a single individual who appeared as mighty and awesome as the system he served so well.
The admiration for Stalin’s talents reveals not only the fear of the capitalist class for Stalinism, but envy as well. Stalin accomplished a task that they would like to see performed in their own countries: the Russian ruling class appears consolidated and unified, there is no open conflict between classes, everything seems orderly and well-organized.
 
IN DISCUSSING THE POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS within the Russian empire following Stalin’s death, the columnists eliminated whatever copy problems their editors may have had. Unfortunately, the space consumed by the journalist experts was not justified by the product, with such rare exceptions as, for example, the sober and factual articles by Harry Schwartz of the New York Times. Just one sample of misinformation: Hanson Baldwin, also of the New York Times, writes that Malenkov is “associated by some observers with the school of thought in Russia that believes it is to Soviet interests to fight sooner rather than later.” The military analyst does not identify these anonymous “observers” which would be interesting only because their observation is at loggerheads with all known interpretations of the Malenkov-Zhdanov rift. The New York Post’s columnist, Frank Kingdon, possibly for lack of anything better to do takes a peek into the Russian mind and finds that Lenin and Stalin were born of the “Russian brooding soul ...”
But we do not wish to be cantankerous. If one were to examine the hundreds of articles written on the subject of Stalin’s death, it would not be difficult to find dozens of minor and major factual errors. But a more serious quarrel with the journalists is over the question of their analytical approach.
Any extended analysis of Russia cannot avoid speculation, but it should be speculation in which the writer’s imagination is tempered by an understanding of the basic features of the society under discussion. Because this was absent, their speculations often ran out of control, with predictions of palace revolutions, unbridgeable rifts between China and the Kremlin, revolutions in the satellites and Malenkovite consolidation through war with the West as the imminent aftermath of Stalin’s death.
The basic weakness in the analysis and predictions of the “experts” was their failure to note the differences between the Russian bureaucracy and other elite bodies.
The Russian bureaucracy is more than a bureaucracy, it is a class. It is not merely a governmental apparatus, as in a capitalist country. The bureaucracy in Washington can undergo internal strife publically, it can be replaced, and even investigated, but that will not necessarily entail a conflict signifying the collapse of capitalism. Whether or not the Republicans remain in power in 1956, capitalism will remain intact and a Democratic administration will guard the American capitalist way of life with no less zeal than its predecessors. The right to exploit labor and the right to produce and sell commodities on the market are not endangered and are not contingent upon which major party enjoys governmental power; and they are not threatened by inter or intra party strife.
In Russian society this division between politics and economics does not exist. The bureaucracy is in no way separated from a class controlling the means of production. In Russia the state is the sole owner of the means of production and the bureaucracy is itself the collective controller of the means of production, through its control of the state.
A conflict, then, which emerges within the Russian bureaucracy cannot be thought of in the same terms as the factional struggles and interparty conflicts of capitalist democracies. Two capitalist politicians who are constantly at each other’s throats may both be imbued with the same class consciousness and more or less equally responsible from their own class point of view. For their fight does not necessarily endanger the rule of their class. In a bureaucratic collectivist society, on the other hand, a fight between different factions of the bureaucracy on any significant scale does endanger the rule of their class. Factional struggles must be subdued, and kept within bounds. If a conflict in the Russian bureaucracy is not settled discreetly and quietly through the final decision of a dictator or directory, or a purge or similar methods which the Russian bureaucracy uses to resolve real, imagined or potential differences within its ranks, how then can it be resolved? Certainly not through organization of different parties and elections. A prolonged and fierce faction fight within the bureaucratic collectivist class which is not settled or ameliorated in a reasonable period within its upper echelons threatens to dislocate the whole social system. That such a struggle is anathema to the bureaucratic collectivists is as obvious to them as it is to us.
It is not with the easy wisdom that comes from hindsight that we say that no one rightfully could have expected a fight of major proportions to break out in the Kremlin for Stalin’s mantle; for that could have materialized only if the Russian leaders were completely irresponsible fools, bent on self-destruction. The bureaucratic collectivists have a class consciousness which is more highly developed that that of any other class in the world today. It has a clearer understanding of its needs and interests, and one of its primary needs is to present a united, cohesive front to its class enemy at home – the working class; to its immediate class enemy abroad – the bourgeoisie; and to the subordinate compradore bureaucratic collectivists in the satellite countries.
The appeals for unity to avoid panic were not directed to the nation as a whole; they were addressed to the ruling class, warning them that any breach in this monolithic front might be filled by the enemy. There could have been no doubt that the bureaucracy would answer this call with an unerring class instinct. There has been no indication that the political differences within the bureaucracy- on the organization of agriculture, the political role of culture and science, a Western versus an Eastern orientation, degree of risk to take in the cold war – are so great that they cannot be resolved or mediated today by the Communist Party in the usual manner.
Several experts looking to history for precedents to justify their predictions of paralyzing dissension within the Communist Party, turned to the factional struggles in the party which were intensified after Lenin’s death. Poorer evidence could not be offered. Looking at the openly conducted party struggles in retrospect, we can see that they were conducted in a democratic paradise in comparison with what exists in Russia today. At that time, it was still possible for different factions to conduct an ideological fight publically. When Bukharin expressed a point of view, which Trotsky felt reflected the pressure of the petty bourgeoisie and might have led to the restoration of capitalist power, he did not believe that his life was at stake. When the Left Opposition fought to preserve the policies and traditions of the October Revolution Trotsky could not have known that some day a Stalinist assassin would reward him with a pickaxe at the base of his skull for it. In short, a factional struggle in the early twenties still had the semblance of an ideological conflict, while today, to disagree with any persistence can prove fatal. Terror is not only exercised against the masses to keep them in check, it is exercised against all levels of the bureaucracy. Yesterday, only Stalin was secure from the confessioners’ dock or less public liquidation; today no one can enjoy that sense of security; tomorrow it may be Malenkov who will be the only reasonably safe man in Russia.
The conflict in the Russian Communist Party which actually began before the death of Lenin had the elements of a class struggle. The forces represented by Stalin were those of an incipient bureaucratic collectivist class, pitted against the proletarian policies of the Left Opposition and then running counter to the pressures of the petty-bourgeoisie within the party.
The forces of bureaucratic collectivism won the struggle and proceeded to liquidate all class opposition within and without the party. No such situation exists in the Stalinist Party today. There are, indeed, different tendencies but they are not moved by the social force and passions engendered by class warfare.
 
THE DEATH OF STALIN in our opinion is no cause to expect a break in the coming period between the satellites and Russia or to destroy the working arrangement which exists between the Kremlin and Peiping rulers. The bureaucratic collectivist classes in the Eastern European nations no doubt feel considerable discomfiture over their political and economic subordination to the Kremlin. But the bureaucratic collectivist class is not an internationalist class. Equal partnerships between different bureaucratic collectivist nations are only possible on the basis of equal power. This equality of power does not exist between Russia and any other totalitarian regime in Europe, or even with China. Russia is the supreme totalitarian force. In Eastern Europe it is particularly unwarranted to think that as a result of Stalin's death the ruling classes there will make any dramatic break for independence. They owe their very existence to the Russian ruling class. They did not come to power as the result of any misdirected mass movement against the bourgeoisie. They came to power and maintained it only because they had the force of the Russian army behind them. Lacking in any popular appeal, constantly supervised and purged by the selective Russian bureaucracy and at the same time unsure of their future if they did manage to achieve independence from Moscow during the cold war, we do not give much credence to the theory that Stalin’s death will precipitate a violent struggle between the Russian and satellite bureaucracies.
The relations between China and Russia are more tenuous, for the former is in a better position to bargain for equal partnership with the Kremlin than any of the satellites in Europe. The Chinese ruling class did not come to power via a Russian army of occupation; nor was the central authority of the Chinese Communist Party residing in Moscow for long years, transported to Peiping at the propitious moment and conveniently installed by the Kremlin. The Chinese Stalinist class established its own traditions; with its own armies and with widespread support among the Chinese people it came to rule over a nation of 400 millions.
The force then which binds the Peiping bureaucracy to the Kremlin is only in part due to a fear of Russian military might but to a much greater degree by a mutuality of interests. China is an economically primitive land which can expect no material assistance from any country other than Russia. Moreover, she is engaged in a shooting war with America and cannot afford a rupture with Russia which would mean cutting herself off from vital military supplies. Finally, the Chinese ruling class is well aware of what is involved in the cold war. Should war come and Russia lose, then bureaucratic collectivism as we know it today would be destroyed. This crucial fact increases the consideration of both ruling classes for each other. To think that Mao would initiate a break with the Kremlin because he is jealous of Malenkov, as many writers have predicted, in the light of all the factors operating today which tend to weld them together is reducing the importance of personal ambition in politics to an absurdity.
 
OUR DISCUSSION THUS FAR has emphasized those factors tending to give a measure of cohesiveness to world Stalinism today. But it must be understood that we do not consider the bureaucratic class a homogeneous force, or regard bureaucratic collectivism as either invincible or stable. The nervousness with which the bureaucracy reacted to Stalin’s death, the talk of “disarray and panic” in its unity appeals, are themselves indications that beneath the surface cohesiveness of the Kremlin oligarchy, there are disruptive cross currents and potential- ally explosive conflicts. It cannot be otherwise with any regime which finds it necessary to resort to naked terror to maintain itself. The terror does not find its source in the depraved mentalities of the ruling clique but reflects the unpopularity of the regime among the masses and mirrors serious dissatisfaction in the ruling class itself.
In Russia we have the anomalous situation of a ruling class which lives in perpetual terror of itself. The purge system is not merely directed against dissenters; nor is it only for the purpose of keeping the working class in subjugation. It is directed against all levels of the ruling class, serving the bureaucracy as a guarantee against any relaxation on the part of bureaucrat or worker. It is the means whereby the bureaucracy attempts to regenerate itself, for the Russian ruling class is unquestionably a tired ruling class. It has won tremendous economic advantages for itself: wage differentials in Russian industry and in her military and administrative organs are even more disparate than in capitalist countries. But it has never been able to relax; that is, it has never been able to attain anywhere near the maximum personal satisfaction out of the material advantages it has won. The purge system will not allow it.
Life in such an atmosphere, even for a bureaucrat, is not an enviable one – and sometimes it is a suddenly foreshortened one. This political-psychological factor cannot be overestimated as a disintegrating tendency in Stalinist society. Each member of the ruling class jealously guards his position, maneuvers for promotion, yet lives in constant fear of punishment for an obscure misdemeanor, or even for none at all. The plant superintendent seeks to please his party superior, but is suspicious of his subordinate foreman. The party official, himself, is in constant fear of displeasing his political overseer, who in turn is never certain that there will not be an ominous knock on the door in the early morning hours. Each bureaucrat must cater to his superior, but be prepared to denounce him at the same time, should he fall from grace.
This mutual fear and distrust penetrates the uppermost reaches of the bureaucracy. Constant vigilance against all is the law of the bureaucratic land. It is inevitable that in this atmosphere of all pervading terror personal factionalism and cliquism should flourish.
Aside from factionalism born of pure fear, there is a related factionalism motivated by different interests. The Russian bureaucracy is a vast conglomeration of 15 million party functionaries, party and non-party industrial magnates, kolkhoz supervisors, army officers, administrators, internal security officials, etc. Within this mass of 15 million, approximately half belong to the Communist Party, whose top committee, the presidium, is the undisputed ruling body of the Russian empire. But this committee, aside from Malenkov, includes the Minister of Internal Affairs, Beria, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Molotov, Minister of War, Bulganin, etc. These men owe their first allegiance to the party. Nevertheless, for their own ambitions and safety, they are forced to seek some sort of mass base in their ministries and to secure this support they must enhance the relative prestige and material well being of their respective ministries, thus generating jealousies, intrigue and cliquism within the presidium which reverberates down to the lowest levels of the bureaucracy.
Economic inefficiency is another product of the purge and terror system. Meeting quotas can be, literally, a question of life or death. Given this somewhat morbid prospect, it is not difficult to see why factory managers will often manufacture figures instead of goods. But as Russia has a state planned economy, false figures in one sphere of production leads to further unrealistic quotas and lop sided overall planning.
The disintegrative tendencies within Stalinism have been increased rather than diminished by Stalin’s death. Stalin served a unique role within the Russian ruling class. He had behind him the machinery and prestige for placing himself above the factional conflicts within the bureaucracy. He was the supreme moderator and the ultimate judge and executioner. There is even evidence that the arch-manipulator of our times encouraged personal and political animosities within the ruling circles as a means of insuring his special function.
The death of the almighty co-ordinator leaves vacant on the peak of the bureaucratic hierarchy, a post which served as a stabilizing factor in the life of the bureaucracy. A directory cannot operate with maximum efficiency and no individual in it has the “qualifications” to assume Stalin’s terrible personal power. Stalin consolidated his unquestioned personal power over the corpses of ally and foe. There is no reason to believe that a new Stalin would utilize any more charitable methods.
Malenkov is no Stalin, though apparently he was created in his mentor’s image. He has no ties with the October Revolution, he was not instrumental in consolidating the bureaucratic class in the late twenties and thirties and he has not been able to build the personal machine which Stalin did over a period of thirty years. Moreover, Malenkov comes to leadership of the bureaucracy at a time when it numbers in the millions, is already divided, suffers from fatigue and has none of the idealism, warped though it was, of the generation which backed Stalin’s bloody march to power. Given these facts it will take many years and many purges to build a Malenkov myth and if one is established it can only be done over the opposition, and perhaps over the bodies of the elder statement on the presidium whose bureaucratic souls must rankle at the thought of playing a subordinate role to this newly arrived leader. The consolidation of the presidium, the reduction of the number of ministries are symptomatic that all does not go well with Stalin’s choice. This initial reorganization has a levelling effect in the highest committee of the party by placing the tightened presidium in a better position for watching both Malenkov and the reduced number of ministries. Malenkov’s “voluntary” abandonment of his secretaryship of the party, even though it was to one of his lieutenants, is symptomatic of the Premier’s dubious position.
Malenkov, Beria and Molotov already have a history of personal and political rivalries, promoted and at the same time kept in bounds by Stalin. Each has already headed factions which have undergone purges and liquidations since the end of the war. For Malenkov to attempt to assume Stalin’s personal powers would arouse not only the hostility of frustrated ambitions, but a fierce opposition by the other members of the directory who would have good cause to fear for their very lives. Today, the fear of the personal consequences of a struggle for power and the class need to present a monolithic front acts as a balance against a mortal struggle in the bureaucracy. Nevertheless, Stalin’s death has created a precarious unity which has become an additional disintegrative tendency in the Russian ruling class.
It is in our opinion worthwhile to speculate on the possible effects of the supreme moderator’s death on the mass Communist parties outside of the Iron Curtain. The Stalinist organizations in democratic capitalist countries are not bound to the Russian bureaucracy by all the ties which weld the satellite bureaucracies to the Kremlin. In the French and Italian Communist Parties, the Stalinist leaderships have bureaucratic collectivist class ambitions which are not likely to be realized in the near future through an invasion of the Russian armies. These parties remain subordinate to the Kremlin because of the similarity of class interests, the pressures of the cold war, the prestige which is gained for them in the Kremlin “alliance,” and, to some extent, a fear of future physical reprisals should they disobey the instructions of the Russian Communist Party. But as the leadership of the French and Italian Communist Parties seek to create a mass base for themselves in their respective working classes they can be most successful when their propaganda and tactics takes into consideration the moods of the French and Italian workers and the domestic political scene, in general. Differences naturally arise within the leadership of these organizations on how best to advance their class ambitions. The Kremlin, however, cannot permit these disputes in their mass foreign agencies to get out of hand, nor can it allow policies which in any way do not fit in with its overall world strategy. With Stalin alive the Kremlin’s dictates to foreign parties were uncontested. The question that arises now is how will these mass parties in Europe be affected, in the event of a serious internal difference, by dictums from the Kremlin without the backing of Stalin.
Let us take the Marty-Tillon expulsion from the French Communist Party as a case in point. Both of these Stalinist leaders favored a continuation of a militant line in France as opposed to the new policy that was to be adopted as a world Stalinist tactic at the Nineteenth Congress of the Russian Communist Party. This new policy called for a more subdued approach. Translated into French Stalinist politics this meant propaganda with a slight people’s front flavor to unite all “progressive” Frenchmen against the encroachments of American imperialism on the French nation. The objections of Marty and Tillon coincided with the tougher policies that had reportedly been advocated by the militant Western oriented Zhdanov faction in the Russian Party.
The refusal of Marty and Tillon to bow to the new line for the French Stalinists that was being prepared in Moscow was a most ill-mannered breach of Stalinist etiquette. The subsequent expulsion of these prominent figures who had been heroes inside the Party was no doubt approved of, if not decided, in Moscow, and just as surely had the full approval of Stalin.
Should a similar disagreement arise within the French or Italian Communist Parties, this time with more or less equal divisions in their leaderships, the ability of the Russian to pass judgment with equanimity is open to question. Stalin could excommunicate any individual from the world Stalinist movement. It is not certain that the Russian presidium with Malenkov as its head could do the same, and even less certain if a difference existed within the presidium corresponding to the competing groups in the Western parties. It is not likely that Malenkov can function today as arbiter even inside the Russian regime and this leaves us with the pleasant thought that his word will not suffice at all times to mend the breaches which occasionally appear in Stalinist parties not within the Russian empire.
 
IT IS ALMOST A MONTH since Stalin has been embalmed, entombed and sanctified and the world is still waiting for the psychological offensive that the Washington administration was to let loose.
A day before the death of Stalin, the press was granted an interview by President Eisenhower. The questions revolved around the problems that would be brought on by Stalin’s imminent death. But the President was cautious; a cautiousness based not so much on profound reflection as on plain ignorance. He had nothing to say, which is perhaps the best course he could have pursued for himself. He did promise to be wary and watchful and assured his interviewers that he was dedicated to the cause of peace.
But if Eisenhower is not too perspicacious, what about his reputedly more astute political advisers, such as Dulles and Bedell Smith (whom Eisenhower believes to be the best authority on Russian affairs)? What would be the political nature of the campaign designed to drive a wedge between Mao and the Kremlin that was to come out of Dulles’s high powered conference with Anthony Eden? What would the State Department’s directives to the Voice of America produce?
The psychological offensive has, of course, turned out to be a complete washout. Neither Dulles, nor Smith, nor all the Russian experts have been able to turn the death of Stalin to any political advantage. In a prepared press conference statement following the death of Stalin the best that Dulles could do was predict the greater chances for peace in a world where “the Eisenhower era begins as the Stalin era ends.”
We doubt that the multitudes in Asia and Europe living in the shadow of hunger and war will find much solace in Dulles’ assurance that this is the beginning of “the Eisenhower era”; it is no less doubtful that the 800 millions ground under the Stalinist tyranny can find any credibility in Dulles’ promise that this is the end of the Stalin era.
Our search for a more intimate view of the projected political offensive coming from Mr. Dulles came to an abrupt halt upon reading in the March 10th issue of The New York Times that the Secretary of State speaking at a luncheon indicated that while America would pursue “no new tactics or new strategy, he (Dulles) hoped there would be a new spirit.” However, if American psychological warfare mediums are alerted for a campaign to utilize the death of Stalin as a divisive force between Russia and Eastern Europe and China, and even as a means to dislocate the Russian government, new tactics and new strategy are called for; at least something a little more plausible than a “new spirit.” (It was not made clear where this hoped for change of spirit was to take place – in Washington or Moscow – and no clue given as to the anticipated new contours of this divining force.)
While the Kremlin dominated peoples’ are not likely to learn of Dulles’ hoped for new spirit, the Voice of America can at least make direct contact with them; for despite McCarthy the Voice remains Washington’s main medium in the psychological campaign against the Kremlin. But the best that the Voice has done so far to upset the Stalinist regime was to repeat America’s “official condolences” over the death of Stalin, repeat Eisenhower’s statement of sympathy and good wishes for the Russian people, and quote from editorials appearing in American newspapers. None of these announcements, we fear, is going to weaken the Kremlin’s rule. Radio Free Europe, the heavily financed, private American counterpart of the Voice of America broadcasting to the satellite nations informed its listeners that the death of Stalin would not bring about their immediate liberation and advised them “to remain calm and act with caution.” The precise meaning of these anxious words is, we suspect, as much a puzzle to their author as to their audience.
It is not difficult to find the immediate reasons for the inability of the current administration in Washington to make any political capital out of the death of Stalin. It is an administration with a Congress that is heavily weighted with the worst of know- nothing traditions. Eisenhower himself is a symbol of intellectual vacuity in American politics and his cabinet and advisors, so heavily loaded with prosperous car-dealers and others recruited from the babitt business world, are singularly ill equipped to cope with the dynamic political phenomenon of Stalinism. The Secretary of Defense, Charles E. Wilson, had no inhibitions over declaring that one of his choices for a leading post on American psychological warfare division was Arthur Godfrey because he “knows the mass mind”! Not with the best will in the world (and we do not grant this) can Washington’s chief executive and his grey administration conduct an ideological struggle against bureaucratic collectivism. And if these men lack talent and understanding, what must be said for the American Congress! Can one imagine a Congress which is increasingly falling under the influence of the most ignorant and malicious elements in American political life, the McCarthys, Jenners, Veldes, etc., developing a political program and approach to counter Stalinist propaganda in France, Italy and Asia. The very thought is ludicrous. McCarthy is an expert at hounding all real and imaginary non-conformists, Stalinists and anti-Stalinists but he is without any qualifications, personally, politically or intellectually to break the hold of Stalinism over millions of people – unless, of course, he could bring them before a Congressional investigating committee and eventually jail them on contempt charges.
The political paralysis of the Republican administration’s world ideological battle cannot accurately be diagnosed as cerebral malfunctioning or a low intellectual metabolism, real and widespread as these illnesses are in the Eisenhower entourage and Congress. Had Stevenson been elected along with a Democratic Congress we doubt that his administration could have inspired a division in the Stalinist ranks any more successfully than Truman, whose administration provided so much grist for the Stalinist propaganda mills.
Ironically enough, not only did the administration fail to make any political capital out of the Russian despot’s death, but it was the new Russian regime which managed to exploit the death of their god to some ideological advantage. With the speeches of Malenkov, Beria and Molotov at Stalin’s rites it initiated a new “peace” offensive which has gained considerable momentum, succeeding in disorienting the Washington experts.
The failure of the Eisenhower administration to capitalize on Stalin’s death is not only due to ineptness; it is the result of a fundamental inability of American capitalism to counter the political drive inherent in Stalinism. Stalin’s death affords no significant advantage to Washington because the conflict has never been a duel between two governments, much less between individuals. It is a deadly struggle between two contradictory social systems and in this struggle the American-led forces of capitalism have proven only their impotence.
 

us Jacobson: Leninism, The Comintern and Putschism (March 1959)




Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Writing as Julius Falk
A Contribution to a Discussion
Leninism, The Comintern and Putschism
(March 1959)





An Introductory Note
The following review of Max Shachtman’s article, American Communism: A Re-examination of the Past (published in the Fall 1957 issue of the New International) was written about seven months ago. It was submitted for a scheduled issue of the New International that was not to appear because of the specific conditions under which unity between the Independent Socialist League and the Socialist Party was finally consummated.
That it has taken me this time to get my discussion into print is only evidence of the technical and financial obstacles encountered in publishing it as a personal project. Given the importance of comrade Shachtman’s Re-examination, however, a six month delay is better than dropping the discussion altogether. While comrade Shachtman might have the last word in such a discussion, if he wanted it, it would be unpardonable and misleading for the record to show that this Re-examination by the last National Chairman of the Independent Socialist League was the last and only published word in a discussion he introduced.
March 1959
Julius Falk [Jacobson]





No one seeking an explanation for the decline of American socialism can afford to point an accusing finger at the notorious “objective situation” and permit his investigation to end there. That would be too pat, too convenient. To be sure, the unique features of American life preclude, today, as they have in the recent past, a powerful socialist movement in the European sense. But, after all objective factors are considered and weighed, we must still admit that the socialist movement has not nearly approached the limits of its potential influence. In fact the term, “socialist movement” has been reduced to little more than a literary expression and an aspiration.
In Comrade Shachtman’s article, American Communism: A Re-Examination of the Past, an attempt is made to probe beneath surface explanations for this plight of American socialism. One root cause unearthed is the socialist’s addiction to political purity which promotes “splitting” as a way of organizational life. Thus, in place of a united, democratic organization in which different socialist currents can co-exist and exchange views without factional recriminations, this splitting principle has helped to sow and harvest a crop of sects and shadow “parties” – at least one preoccupied with raiding all others, and all of them isolated from the organized labor movement.
That serious damage has been done by orthodox purists is more than Shachtman’s personal view. It is an opinion commonly held in the Independent Socialist League. Comrade Shachtman, however, buttresses this commonly shared opinion with an interpretation of early Communist history which is mainly a personal contribution to a much needed discussion on how and why the revolutionary movement, so powerful in the past, failed to fulfil its promise.
Above all, his analysis of the Comintern in its earliest days is a personal opinion as it conflicts with many ISL traditions, sharply diverging from or contradicting1 much that has been assumed and written about this period in our literature. This is no crime. In itself it is not an argument against what Shachtman has to say that is new – at least new for Comrade Shachtman. But for the sake of the record – which is important – and for the benefit of a fruitful discussion – which is needed – it must be acknowledged that many of his new views and interpretations represent a rupture with the historic past of the ISL; not with everything in the past but with enough to make it disorienting to those who accept his re-evaluation of the Comintern and disturbing to those who do not.
Why disorienting to those who accept Shachtman’s review of the past? Simply because every socialist tendency or movement must have its traditions which are based upon history, language, attitudes and even, when properly understood, its Promethean spirits and legends. If it turns out that the European revolutionary movement (i.e., the Third International) in the immediate post War I period, from which we have drawn moral sustenance for so many years, whose problems have been sympathetically presented in lectures and articles, with whose struggles we have identified, whose idiom has become part of our vocabulary and whose leading figures have become authentic heroes for us, was wrong in virtually everything it said and did (except its devotion to class struggle principles) then confusion is invited. And confusion could give way to intellectual chaos if traditions are effaced and nothing offered in their stead.
This importance of tradition can hardly be gainsaid if, as I have already suggested, it is not confused with the unthinking, sentimental, sterile religiosity typified by orthodox “Trotskyists” or the equally holy, traditional exhortations of anti-Leninists exorcising the Bolshevik devil.
 
The Comintern and the American Left
Comrade Shachtman’s article is divided into two sections: the first is concerned with the early American Communist Party; the second is primarily a re-evaluation of the nature and role of the Communist International in its formative years. The two sections are related in the obvious sense that the American Communist Party owes its formation primarily to the impact of the Bolshevik Revolution and the organization of the Comintern. More than that, the American CP, without significant antecedents in the American labor movement and without roots in the mass organization of the working class at the time of its formation fawned on the Comintern organization, seeking a substitute source in Moscow to sustain its moral prestige and political authority in the United States. It was inescapable, then, that the American Communist party would be among the first parties in the International to be Stalinized.
While acknowledging the connection between the early pitfalls of American Communism and the Communist International, I do object to the kind of use Shachtman makes of the relationship. It is evident that a weighty polemic is delivered against the vulnerable Communist Left Wing in America in order to soften up the reader for a briefer but far more important polemic against the conceptions and activities of the early Communist International, not merely as they applied to America, but as they were developed in general and executed in Europe. The method is as follows: first, reveal the absurdities that could be found galore in the American Communist Left Wing, prove that it had no roots in American life, as can easily be done, show how it defamed its opponents, crawled to Moscow for answers to questions neither really understood, etc.; the second step is to show how Moscow seemed to encourage many of these absurdities with its theory of the independent revolutionary party and took the willing American party into a form of receivership facilitating its Stalinization; the conclusion is that the Comintern was wrong not only for welcoming a split in the American socialist movement but for pressing for the formation of Communist parties throughout Europe.
I am aware that Shachtman tries to substantiate his case against the Comintern with some arguments and a little evidence that are not taken from the peculiar history of the American Communist Left. But the distribution of the evidence, the sheer physical weight of his debate with the early American Communists, once it is related to the Comintern as Shachtman relates it, is tantamount to tarring the Comintern with its American brush. This is impermissible – even if one recognizes that the American brush was often wielded by the Comintern itself.
Class relations were totally different in America as compared to Europe after the first war. Here, capitalism emerged more powerful, even if more troubled, than when it entered the war; in Europe, capitalism wobbled on the brink of disaster. (Not that American capitalism could have easily sustained itself were its European counterpart inundated by a revolutionary tide.) This difference between the two continents should have been fundamental to the tactical considerations of the Comintern. Unfortunately, Moscow was not sufficiently “exceptionalist.” It condoned left wing splits in the United States as readily as it encouraged splits in Germany; it put forward the same conditions for American socialists as it did for the German Independents. Its Twenty-One Conditions described Europe and America as entering a civil war phase! It ordered European communist parties to build cells in the military and instructed the two rival American ’communist’ parties to do the same although the only cells they could build were in each other’s party.
However, if you were to extend the examples of the initial foolishness of the Comintern vis-à-vis the American Communist parties to book length proportion it would hardly prove a thing about the Comintern tactic of building independent revolutionary parties in Europe. The Comintern with its inflexibility could have been wrong in the US, but its theories and strategy justified for Europe.
 
Ignorant of American Labor Movement
It should be mentioned, however, for the sake of a fair and balanced picture of the Third International’s role in America that no leading figure in the Comintern organization understood very much of the American labor movement. Trotsky was an authority on France, Radek knew Germany, but neither Trotsky, Radek, Lenin, Bukharin nor Zinoviev knew much about American socialism and labor; this despite the fact that Trotsky lived here for several months as did Bukharin and Kollontai. It is small wonder, then, that Zinoviev – knowing little of conditions here and getting his information from American Communists who knew or understood as little as he did – could make the following statement in a major report:
But one must not forget that in the ranks of the Second International there are still some large organizations, supported by the workers and serving as a powerful support to the bourgeoisie. We are speaking of the English Labor Party, the moderate English Trade Unions, and the old Trade Unions of America under the leadership of Mr. Gompers ... At the present moment this “Labor Party” is the only considerable Labor party remaining in the Second International. The same must be said of the American Trade Unions, headed by Gompers, a well-known agent of the bourgeoisie. These two important labor organizations are the real basis of the Second International; ... [Emphasis added].
Such grotesque misconceptions of American labor by leading world Communists can be produced by the bushel. I am not illustrating the CI’s ignorance to excuse or condone Comintern mistakes with regard to America; I am more interested in understanding their origin and significance.
 
Strategy Based on European Conditions
It should be clear that the strategy of the Comintern – and of the Bolsheviks before the Third International was formed – was based on its understanding of European conditions. It was predicated on the belief that Europe was on the verge of revolutionary upheavals. It was necessary, the Cominternists reasoned, to provide the revolutionary millions a party that was uncompromising in its revolutionary will, capable of winning the esteem of the revolutionary masses, influencing the wavering, and providing the working class with direction and leadership.
Before the war’s end the Leninist concept of the vanguard party was only that – a concept. Now, it gained a special urgency. If there was a revolutionary situation but no revolutionary party and if it was true that the latter was necessary to climax successfully the former, then Communist Parties had to be formed out of existing working class parties which had either betrayed the workers through their support of the imperialist war or else exhibited the half-heartedness and confusion, which, in Leninist terminology, is known as “centrism”.
What is distressing in Comrade Shachtman’s article is the skimpiness of his evaluation (or re-evaluation) of the Cominternists’ analysis of the crisis in Europe. Were they correct or mistaken in judging Europe to be rife with actual and imminent revolutionary situations? Was it correct or incorrect to look, above all, upon Germany – the key to all Europe – as a nation where the bourgeoisie could no longer rule in the old way; where, in fact, its only chance for survival was in its collaboration with German Social-Democracy; where the overwhelming majority of the working class – and possibly an absolute majority in the nation – was fired by a revolutionary enthusiasm that might have moved it to achievements even more dramatic and far reaching than the formation of a bourgeois republic, provided a determined revolutionary socialist organization existed?
Shachtman does point out that after the ebb of the European revolution the Comintern admitted that it had “misjudged the situation in Europe.” It could hardly have admitted anything else. It anticipated successful proletarian revolutions and there were none. But the question merits repetition: what of the revolutionary situations at the time, before they were either crushed or had spent themselves? “There were, of course,” Shachtman concedes many “‘revolutionary situations’ in Europe throughout the Twenties and Thirties.” At least one is entitled to an explanation for his qualifying quotation marks around “revolutionary situations.”
 
What Has Changed: the Viewer or the Facts?
The last time Shachtman discussed in detail the European scene after the first world war he drew a picture that has no resemblance to his discussion in this article. In a lengthy reply to someone who had just left the movement upon discovering the virtues of reformism and the sins of Leninism, Shachtman had the following to say:
“Against what was Lenin, and the early Comintern, fighting in the Second Congress theses? Against the Kautskyans and reformists of the world who were committing a double sin against socialism: first, in their advocacy of the purely parliamentary road to working-class power, in general; and second, in their advocacy of this view above all in those days. And what were they? They were the days when an unprecedented revolutionary crisis was sweeping over all of Europe; when civil war between proletariat and bourgeoisie raged in one country after another; when power lay in the streets very often, and bourgeois parliamentarism had collapsed to the point where it could be propped up only by the degraded social-patriots in the labor movement; when the idea of the Soviet form of government was in the mind of millions of militant European workers (even in far, far-off Seattle and Winnipeg – yes, American Seattle! – Soviets, workers’ and soldiers’ councils were being spontaneously established!) and the watchword of Soviet power was on their lips; when parliaments were the last trench of the bourgeoisie. The issue was not, as so often in our own day, the defense of bourgeois democracy from fascist totalitarianism, but the social-democratic defense of parliamentarism and capitalism from revolutionary proletarian power.” [Emphasis added.]
The picture is perhaps overdrawn, particularly in its American detail. But that is the picture we all more or less accepted. There were no quotation marks around “revolutionary situations” such as Shachtman now places as preparation for his new view that Leninism “invites” putschism.
 
It Is Necessary to Be Concrete
The formation of the Comintern and its Twenty One Conditions, the haste with which Communists tried to organize independent parties of their own and the methods used to build them, all this was not the product of some abstract conception of the vanguard party conceived by Lenin in a dyspeptic moment. Nor was the idea of an independent revolutionary party put forward as an eternal principle for all countries and all times. The conceptions and strategy of the Comintern were clearly rooted in the historic events following the moral and political collapse of the Second International in the First World War And they were designed to consummate the Communists revolutionary aspirations in the concrete revolutionary circumstances that panicked the European bourgeoisie.
It is not enough, then, to condemn the vanguard party, as Shachtman does, as if it were a permanent splitting principle. It is necessary to relate the theory to the events which impelled it and to the immediate problems it was to resolve. Shachtman fails to do this. What did Germany look like? What did German socialism look like? What about France? And Italy? Or for that matter, most countries other than the United States. A definitive historical analysis is not required. Just something more than ambiguous formulations and sermonizing which avoid concreteness and annihilate straw men.
To judge the early Cominternists it is necessary to recreate, at least in part, the world in which they functioned. And more than that is called for. If Germany, let us say, were discussed concretely – as Shachtman does not do – and the policies of the Communists then taken to task the critic would also be obliged to show what alternative policies the Communists could realistically have followed within the limits of their experiences to further the cause of socialism. Here, too, Shachtman fails to meet the requirements of a meaningful re-evaluation. Without any reconstruction of events and without any realistic alternatives posited, his new views lack the precise thought his subject warrants.
If I charge Shachtman with failing to discuss concrete events and problems that is not to accuse him of not mentioning them at all. The difficulty is not only that concrete events are merely mentioned, but that they are often mentioned in variance with the facts – although presented in such an absolute fashion that one is almost inclined to accept his synoptic versions of history for their sheer categorical force. These are serious charges to make against an important author dealing with an important historical topic, and must be backed up with some textual analysis. Following are a few of the errors of fact and method which should inspire some readers to pause for a moment or two before endorsing what is, in effect, a repudiation of much of their past.
 
Good Edicts and Poor Logic
1. On Page 236 Shachtman writes:
“A socialist movement of any serious nature cannot be established overnight; it cannot be established by arbitrary mechanical means; it cannot be established by decree. It cannot be established in head-on opposition to the existing movement of the working class. And above even that, it cannot be established by virtue of a universal formula applicable to all countries, at all times and under all circumstances.”
The last sentence in this paragraph obviously alludes to the early Comintern and its splitting policies. But between the allusion and the reality there is more than a shadow of doubt. I do not know of any Leninist “formula” that was to establish a socialist movement “by virtue of a universal formula applicable to all countries, at all times and under all circumstances.” But if we leave aside this injudicious reference we are left with a good set of abstract edicts of what one should not do to build a serious movement: a movement should not be created mechanically or arbitrarily and certainly not by virtue of universal formulas transcending time and space. They are good edicts. They are also abstract edicts. And, if the reader will excuse a commonplace, an abstraction doesn’t always provide us with an answer to a real live problem. Or, to borrow from Shachtman, I might say that an abstraction cannot be taken as “a universal formula applicable to all countries, at all times and under all circumstances.” In fact Shachtman is quite prepared to violate his own edict in the next page when he writes:
“If the conservative leadership of a united movement tries, under such circumstances [where “a revolutionary situation exists or is imminent”], to gag and bind the radical wing, to deny it its elementary democratic rights inside the movement, to prevent it from advocating its views and winning support for them in a loyal manner, a new situation exists. That is essentially what the German “Majority Socialists” did during the first world war, not only with the Spartacist Left, but also with the Center group of Haase, Ledebour, Kautsky and Bernstein. A split was inevitable and it occurred. Both the Left and the Center set up their own independent parties. But the responsibility for the split was clear and unmistakable in the eyes, not merely of doctrinaires, but of the socialist workers.”
If one looks closely at this paragraph, examines it and compares it with the previously quoted passage, the whole framework of Shachtman’s argument against the Leninist tactic of building independent revolutionary parties in a revolutionary epoch begins to sag. In the first quotation – the abstraction – Shachtman establishes the more or less acceptable generality that a socialist movement “cannot be established in head-on opposition to the existing movement of the working class.” But in the second quotation – that which mentions a concrete situation – a split from the existing movement of the working class is clearly justifiable.
Shachtman, it might be argued, is not in a contradiction here. He is simply discussing the question on two different levels – the abstract and the concrete. Possibly. But the right to discuss on two levels should not be denied to others. For example, Lenin is found in a contradiction when, in 1907 (!), he had kind words for Kautsky, the Second International, proposed comradely competitiveness between different national parties and then, 12 years later, after the fundamental change in the role of social democracy and when bourgeois equilibrium was replaced by revolutionary turmoil, Lenin and the Comintern as a whole pressed for splits and violently denounced the Second International. The spirit of 1907 was not “grossly violated” as Shachtman puts it. Everything was different. There is no more of a contradiction or a “gross violation” between Lenin of 1907 and 1919 than between Shachtman’s abstract appeal for unity and concrete approval of a split in the same article.
 
Shachtman Gives an Example of a Good Split
2. In the above passage from Shachtman’s article we are told that where “a revolutionary situation exists or is imminent” a split is “inevitable” and justifiable, and its reasons are “clear in the eyes of ... socialist workers” when the “conservative leadership of a united movement tries ... to gag and bind the radical wing.” This is part of a discussion of German Social Democracy “during the first world war.” To be less vague than Shachtman, it relates to Germany 1916. But this is startling news. Where was the “revolutionary situation” in Germany 1916 that forms the justifiable context of that split of a centrist minority? There was none! Was the revolutionary situation “imminent”? Hardly. A revolutionary situation developed in Germany more than two years later, but it was not “imminent” in 1916. At any rate Shachtman is not really in a position to insist that it was “imminent” in 1916 in Germany when elsewhere in his article he strongly suggests that the post war revolutionary situation seen by Leninists in Europe, which includes Germany, was more “misjudgement” than fact. It is a little difficult to connect this “imminence” with the “misjudgement”; if there was no genuine revolutionary situation in Germany 1919 then it could not have been “imminent” several years earlier.
It is inexcusable to manufacture historical circumstances to justify a split of moderate socialists from their more conservative parent body – although that split was inevitable and correct. Is it the case that Shachtman cannot find a single exception to his anti-splitting-edicts in the history of the early Leninist movement which he is re-evaluating? Must he turn for an example to the more respectable Independents – and even this made more palatable with “imminent” revolutionary situations?
 
Shachtman Re-examines the German Revolution
3. In our previous point we have seen how the Independent Socialist Party of Germany (USPD) fared pretty well. Here is how the extreme Left, the Spartacists, is handled (i.e., mishandled):
“The Spartacist uprising in 1919 was a putsch, undertaken against the pleadings and warnings of Rosa Luxemburg. It was one of several putschist attempts, all of them undertaken without the socialist workers, who were the great majority, and against them.” (p.239)
The section in Comrade Shachtman’s article dealing with the early Comintern is peppered with such sweeping statements, altogether wrong in fact and altogether lacking in that compassion for revolutionaries and feeling for history that was and I hope remains characteristic of our movement. After everything that has been researched and said, analyzed and reviewed, by our movement, by other socialist tendencies and by academicians on post war Germany, Shachtman has to come up with this: the 1919 German revolution was a putsch! There is so much wrong with this assertion that an itemized account of some objections is necessary:
a) The January 1919 revolution in Germany was not a putsch, i.e., a conscious act by a small minority to seize power, usually by force. This was not the case in January 1919. The revolution was not executed by any conspiratorial Spartacist general staff. Just the reverse. The revolution was thrust upon the Spartakusbund. It was thrust upon it by the revolutionary militancy of wide sections of the German working class; a militancy that was elemental and chaotic.
b) Did the German revolution have the support of the majority of the people or of the working class? Probably not. But does this mean, as Shachtman would have us believe, that the revolution was “undertaken without the socialist workers ... and against them” (Italics added)? Had this sentence appeared in any context other than Shachtman’s article it might be passed off as careless writing.
The hundreds of thousands of German workers who participated in the 1919 revolution were supported, if not by a majority of workers, at least by millions. However, although the majority of German workers did not actively support the revolution, they would do nothing actively to oppose it. They did not feel that the revolution was “against them”; neither did they feel, unfortunately, the need to break completely from their traditional party. The majority of workers, then, as indecisive, but far to the left of the German Social-Democratic Party for which they voted: a Berlin metalworker and a Noske may have been members of the same organization but they were light years apart in conviction, spirit and aspirations.
If the vast majority of German workers thought that the 1919 revolution – led by Spartacists and left Independents and the powerful Shop Stewards movement – was a putsch against them, the majority, how can one explain the mass desertions of members and voters from the Social Democratic Party? In the June 1920 national elections the Independents campaigning on a program calling for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and a Soviet Germany received nearly 5,000,000 votes which, if added to the Communist vote of slightly less than 500,000 was the equivalent of the Social Democratic total. There was a corresponding rise in party membership with the Independents reporting a membership of nearly 900,000, just 20 percent less than that of the Social Democrats. These simple facts hardly justify a picture of irresponsible fanatics carrying on a putsch “against them [the majority of workers].”
c) But we need not turn to the elections a year and a half later to show that it was not “against them” and that it was not a “putsch.” While hundreds of thousands of revolutionary workers demonstrated in the Berlin streets the first week of January, there were no detachments of loyal Social Democratic workers to stop them. How come? It wasn’t lack of courage. It was simply that the Social Democratic government could not command enough respect from its own “supporters” to organize such detachments. And the government for its part was too sensitive to the danger of arming even professedly loyal workers. Instead, it was forced to rely on specially selected military detachments and secret negotiations with monarchist generals.
 
The Measure of a Revolution
The “putsch,” as Shachtman calls it, succeeded in isolating the regime from active support of the masses not because it was planned so effectively – on the contrary, the revolution was largely spontaneous, without real discipline and leadership – but because so few were ready to lay down their lives to defend the caretaker regime. Here is how Noske described the government’s isolation:
“... the members of the government had arranged to meet somewhere else [apparently it was not safe to meet at the Wilhelmstrasse]. I met Ebert and Baake there, as I had my belly full of Down with Noske! ... Somewhat later a message came that the Spartacists had occupied the Vorwärts building and, a little later, other newspaper buildings. We sat together in a depressed mood. The continued threats made it inadvisable to return home. To go out to a restaurant for dinner was not possible, for the waiters were on strike. I telephoned to an acquaintance, who gave us some food. In his apartment, later in the evening, I met Scheidemann and the same Baake. We spoke a lot, but arrived at no decision. It was not possible even to guess how Berlin would look to us the next morning.”
It was quite a “putsch” that deprived the government’s head of military defense of the comfort of a meal and a safe journey through the streets!
d) By referring to the January uprising as a Spartacist putsch the impression is created that the Spartacists organized the uprising. That was not the case. The phrase, “Spartacist uprising” is actually a misnomer. The Spartacists were a small band of about a thousand members in all of Germany who could not have easily led the spontaneous and massive January upheavals even if they had wanted to. And they did not exactly want to. It was the more cautious policy of Rosa Luxemburg which frequently prevailed in the top councils of the Spartacists (organized as the Communist Party in December 1918). To the extent to which there was an organizing force, it was provided by the Shop Stewards movement and left-wing Independents and Spartacists operating as individuals which often had to contend with the opposition of the newly organized Communist Party. It was not until the street fighting was already under way that the Communists formally endorsed the action and even then its ties to the Shop Steward movement were tenuous. Liebknecht had been ordered by the Spartacists to break off official connections with the Shop Stewards movement before and during the revolution – which he refused to do.
The fact is, then, that the “Spartacist” uprising was not really a Spartacist uprising and to say that it “was undertaken against the warnings of Rosa Luxemburg” is misleading for it was her negative attitude toward the Shop Stewards movement and her general disapproval at the time of open armed conflict with the counter-revolutionary Ebert government which was the prevalent view in the top committee of her Party.
e) There is no indication in Shachtman’s discussion that this “putsch” was in large part a response to an enormous provocation by the Social Democratic government. The government actually wanted the revolution which it regarded as inevitable. But a revolution at its convenience. Its power was slipping and it hoped that a premature revolution could be isolated and easily smashed. These provocations, climaxed in the dismissal of the left-wing Berlin police chief, Emil Eichorn, brought the revolution to a head. It also served to panic the government which was not prepared for the large number and fierce will of those who picked up the gauntlet. That the uprising was, in part, due to provocation does not mean that it was not a putsch. My case doesn’t rest on this. But if Shachtman is interested in presenting any kind of balanced picture of the alleged “putsch,” and not just scoring points against the Leninist concept of the party, then he cannot afford to miss the element of provocation in this particular event – and through such omissions handle history in so lifeless a fashion.
f) From “a” to “e” under this point I have questioned Shachtman’s presentation of the “Spartacist uprising” as a “putsch.” Apart from this, I am uncertain about the relevance of his point, or, more exactly, about what Shachtman considers its relevance to a re-evaluation of the Comintern. Except as an inspirational source, the Bolsheviks and, later, the Third International had limited contact with and less programmatic influence on the Spartacists. The Luxemburgist concepts of a party and the road to power were by no means the same as Lenin’s and it was the former which permeated the thinking of the Spartacists. One measure of the divergence between the two could be found in the instruction the German Communists gave Hugo Eberlein, its representative to the founding Congress of the Third International, that he was not to affiliate the German party to the Comintern. (The Party opposed the formation of the Third International.)
 
An Elemental and Chaotic Upheaval
It strikes me that Comrade Shachtman has found enough complain about in the activities of the early Comintern without tossing in the imagined sins of unaffiliated Spartacists for good measure.
But if the misnamed “Spartacist uprising” is not exactly relevant to Shachtman’s list of Comintern sins, the 1919 revolt and its surrounding history are central to any discussion of Comintern conceptions of an independent revolutionary party. One will look in vain for such a discussion in Shachtman’s article.
The revolutionary upheaval in Germany, as already noted, was elemental and chaotic. The working class with its accumulated experiences, its education and socialist traditions was propelled in a revolutionary direction by all the horrors of a four-year-long imperialist war and this movement accelerated by the Russian Revolution. As the working class moved forward, the social fabric of pre-war Germany’s ruling class was being pulled apart. By 1918, the power of the princess was a negligible quantity, the General Staff was confronted by an increasingly mutinous army and the industrial magnates had to deal with a working class that was rapidly losing all illusions of Burgfrieden. In November 1918, German people, with one mighty puff, blew down the once exalted house of Hohenzollern.
In November and December all the objective conditions were present for a successful and relatively peaceful socialist revolution. One decisive element was lacking – a mass party to act as a unifying force to give form, substance and leadership to the working class. And, in Germany, there could be no substitute for a revolutionary party. The Shop Stewards movement organized in 1917 as an underground movement emerged as a powerful mass movement but, by its very nature, it could not act as a mass party. The Councils of Workers and Soldiers that covered Germany in 1918 were loosely organized, internally divided, dominated by the Social Democrats and for all their potentialities as organs of socialist state power they were not equipped or ready to lead a proletarian revolt.
The vacuum left by the collapse of the old regime in November 1918, was rapidly being filled by the Social Democratic Party. This party could have organized the socialist revolution had its leaders willed it. For the leadership was faced with a ready revolutionary mass. But it was incapable of raising itself to the level of mass consciousness. The SPD bureaucracy and its overlapping trade union leadership with their most ardent supporters found among the more skilled and higher paid strata of the working class, was infected with the conservatism that overcomes any group which has a vested interest in maintaining a harmonious social balance among the classes.
This subtle creeping paralysis that was striking at the brain of the world’s most powerful labor movement before 1914 reached its acute stage by 1918, after four years of service to the Kaiser as his loyal shepherd of the proletarian flock. Its conservatism was backed by a formal kind of “Marxism” which pretended to see social evolution proceeding according to very definite schemes. According to the scheme, Germany could go no further than a bourgeois republic in November 1918. Even that was rushing the orderly course of history for some SPD leaders. Thus, when Philip Scheidemann proclaimed the Republic on November 9th, Fritz Ebert, soon to be chosen the Republic’s first president, berated Scheidemann: “You have no right to proclaim the Republic. What becomes of Germany – whether she becomes a Republic or something else – a Constituent Assembly must decide.” That was typical of the formalistic fetishism of a hidebound bureaucracy that could not adjust itself to the needs of the hour or the mood of the masses. Instead, it tried to fit history into its preconceptions and worked diligently to drag the masses down to its conservative level.
 
An All-Inclusive or a Revolutionary Party?
Under these conditions, advocacy of an all inclusive party as a concrete policy in Germany after the war would have been a kind of madness. The German SPD had to be supplanted as the party of the working class as a precondition for a socialist Germany; it could not be reformed from within but had to be replaced from without. The slogan of party unity and the concept of all-inclusiveness would have had precious little meaning where the Right Wing leadership was busy negotiating with the General Staff to smash its revolutionary wing, and the revolutionary wing, in its turn, was busy organizing demonstrations against the Right Wing’s caretaker government. Or, to put it another way, Noske, the Right Wing Social Democrat and Liebknecht, the revolutionary socialist, could live in the same party in, let us say, 1907; but Noske, the assassin, and Liebknecht, his murdered victim, could hardly have shared the same offices in 1919.
Shachtman must be concrete. What policy should the Russian Communists have advised their German friends to follow in the specific circumstances which were not of their making? No one arranged the time schedule for a revolutionary crisis. The crisis was there. The objective conditions for socialist revolution were present but they would not wait for ideal conditions for organizing a revolutionary party. Either the German Communists had to build an independent revolutionary party swiftly, which meant splitting sections from the existing mass party of the working class; or, it could resign itself to the fatalistic view that in Germany, 1919, there was a tragic and insoluble contradiction between the objectively ready and the subjectively unprepared forces of social revolution.
 
The Non-Objective School of History
4. With long, vigorous strokes Shachtman paints his picture of the early Comintern on a wide canvas, sacrificing details to abstractions. But, where the artist’s abstractions are simplifications of form suggested by reality, Shachtman’s generalizations, as we have already seen, have little analagous relationship to experience and historical data. And where the forms of the creative artist have a logical unifying interrelationship, Shachtman’s sweeping edicts do not always correspond to one another. On close examination it turns out that he has presented us with an impressionistic sketch; not a completed or thought out painting at all.
In the sections dealing with the Comintern it is possible to take almost any half dozen consecutive sentences to demonstrate Shachtman’s lack of internal consistency and error. On the top of page 238 there are five such sentences, all intended as forceful points against the early Comintern:
“It turned out there, from the day the Communist Party was formed in 1919 to the victory of Hitler, that the Social-Democratic workers of the Right or the Center constituted the vast majority, the Communist workers the much smaller minority. The refusal to remain in the same party with the Social-Democratic workers was tantamount to a declaration by the Communists that they did not need their support, even though they were for socialism in their own way. It was a declaration, in effect, that these workers could not be included in deciding the course toward the socialist revolution. To deny this on the ground that the Communist Party always urged the Social Democratic workers to join it, is positively absurd. If, as members of a united organization, you cannot get a given group of workers to abandon their leaders and their program in favor of yours, it is preposterous to believe that just because you split the organization and form a new one, the same group of workers will enter your ranks because they are urged to do so.”
This passage, one of the more important sections of Shachtman’s re-examination, deserves to be examined sentence by sentence.
a) In the first sentence we are newly informed that:
“It turned out there [Germany] from the day the Communist Party was formed in 1919 to the victory of Hitler, that the Social-Democratic workers of the Right or the Center constituted the vast majority, the Communist workers the much smaller minority.” (Emphasis added.)
Germany is the worst case that Shachtman can turn to for proving his thesis that the policy of split, in 1919, produced futile Communist sects. If we substitute a real number or two for Shachtman’s vague algebraic expressions – “vast majority” and “much smaller minority” – it becomes clear that another column of his polemical structure rests on very shaky foundations.
In the 1933 elections, just before Hitler strangled Germany, the Communist Party received nearly 5,000,000 votes to the Social Democrats 7,000,000. The figures hardly fits Shachtman’s “vast majority” of Social Democrats and “much smaller minority” of Communists. But we need not jump to 1933 when the CP was already a Stalinized party [1]. Nine years earlier, in 1924, just four years after its formation, the Communist Party won 3,750,000 votes to the Social Democrats 6,000,000. The Right Wing had a “vast majority” of 3-2. But this figure, which by itself does so much damage to Shachtman’s political mathematics, becomes devastating to his argument when it is remembered – and we will recall it in a subsequent point – that it was a vote taken after the Communists underwent a decisive defeat in the Fall of 1923, losing enormous popular support.
 
The Argument of Tantamountcy
b) The indictment continues in the second sentence:
“The refusal to remain in the same party with the Social Democratic workers was tantamount to a declaration by the Communists that they did not need their support, even though they were for socialism in their own way.”
This sentence, with all its built in safeguards (“tantamount to”) has no resemblance to the truth. It might well be argued that Lenin’s tempo was wrong or, more than that, that his idea of the independent revolutionary party was wrong. But it cannot be argued that the course pursued by Lenin and his supporters was “tantamount” to rejecting the support of the social democratic workers.
The Leninists were for the formation of independent Communist parties because they believed that, in the revolutionary crisis in Europe, that was the way to win the socialist workers. They were convinced that by forming a new party and raising its banner, you can by and in action win the workers (i.e. the social democratic workers) where that could not be done by a left wing faction quarrelling inside the party with a powerful bureaucracy; at least not in such a way as to meet the requirements and opportunities of a revolutionary situation.
If anything was the case in the Comintern’s formative years, the Communists suffered from an all consuming passion to win over the social democratic membership. While there is abundant evidence for such a criticism there is none that Shachtman does or could offer to give weight to his “tantamouncy” theory. And how could he give evidence for the theory when in the four-year period following its birth the Communists increased their electoral strength by 3,250,000, all garnered from the social democratic parties of Right and Center? How could the Communists have won these mil lions if they operated as if “they did not need their support’”
The argument of “tantamouncy” has a familiar and unpleasant ring. It is all too reminiscent of those Russian experts intent on proving that Lenin was a conspiratorial type who could only operate with a small band of apostles and disciples plotting to control, to manipulate and finally to dictate to the masses, but never to win them and never (Lenin forbid!) to trust them. That view was most cleverly presented by Bertram Wolfe. It was most persuasively answered by Shachtman – ten years ago in his articles, the Four Portraits, published in the New International. Given his present theory Shachtman could no longer perform the same necessary service.
When the Independents split from the mass party of the German working class in 1916 (that split, Shachtman agrees was a good one) did that mean that the Independents did not want the support of the majority of workers who remained in the SPD? And when Rosa Luxemburg with her tiny band deserted the centrist Independents, and were thus twice removed by splits from the SPD, did that mean the Spartacists, either “in effect” or in “tantamouncy,” turned their backs on the millions of Right and Center social democratic workers? Shachtman would be the first to defend the Independents and the Spartacists from such a crude indictment.
What, then, was the difference between Leninist and Luxemburgist splitters? What was there about the Leninist splits which made them so unique: schisms organized by splitters who, unlike all others in the socialist movement, told the majority of workers (in effect): “we do not need or even want your support”? It could only be that the former, in its basic organizational conceptions and methods, was a conspiratorial type movement. Just like Wolfe said all along. What else is Shachtman’s re-examination tantamount to?
c) Shachtman, in the above sentence, goes further than charging the CP with discouraging the masses from joining the party. The party, he tells us, did not even seek, in effect, their support! Shachtman’s next sentence presents a charge against the Leninists that explicitly and by implication goes far beyond anything we have yet quoted or interpreted: the Leninists, because of their splitting policy, were actually excluding the majority of workers from “deciding on the course toward the socialist revolution.” Does this not reduce ambiguity to a minimum? If the policy pursued by the Bolsheviks, from 1915 on meant, in reality, that workers could not join the party of the Bolshevik elect, that workers need not support the Party and are not wanted by it, and, finally, that the workers are excluded from deciding the fate of the revolution, itself, then what else is left to say except to sum up Leninism as an objectively undemocratic, conspiratorial and putschist sickness within the socialist movement. More than that, a party which shuns members, repudiates mass support, denies the masses their historic right and duty and seeks power is the type party with which we are all too familiar: no matter what its pretensions, it is a Stalinist or incipient Stalinist type organization.
For this portrait of the Leninists, Shachtman produces no figures, no documents, no quotations – and no logic. He says that the Communists in effect excluded the workers from deciding their fate. Yet, what resemblance is there between this image of the party and reality? In Russia, the Bolsheviks demanded that the spontaneously organized Soviets seize power at a time when the Party was a minority; and in Germany, the Communists called for all power to the Workers and Soldiers Councils – the equivalent of Russian Soviets – at a time when no Leninist party even existed and the Spartacists were a persecuted minority, denied their elementary rights in the Councils by the dominant reactionary Right Wing Social-Democrats.
 
Two Devices: The Club and the Caricature
d) Following the sentences which simply assert that the Communists, in effect, did not want mass support and denied them their proper role in the revolution, Shachtman takes after those who would dispute his assertions with a sort of club: “To deny this [Shachtman’s assertions] on the ground that the Communist party always urged the Social Democratic workers to join it is positively absurd” (emphasis added).
Who, after all, wants to be “absurd,” not to mention, “positively absurd”? But let us risk Shachtman’s rather severe censure, particularly as one might suspect that his intolerant expression is a façade to hide a lingering doubt over a vulnerable and poorly developed thesis.
Is it not Shachtman who is taxing one’s credulity when he suggests that the same party that was in effect “declaiming” (no less!) that Social Democratic workers are not wanted is the same party that was “always urging” them to join it?
e) Shachtman writes in his fifth sentence:
“If, as members of a united organization, you cannot get a given group of workers to abandon their leaders and their program in or of yours, it is preposterous to believe that just because you split the organization and form a new one, the same group of workers will enter your ranks because they are urged to do so.”
This is a device used too frequently by Shachtman in his article. The technique is to reduce the object of criticism to a ludicrous position and then proceed to destroy the caricature. Can anyone in his right mind deny that it is preposterous to think that “just because” you split an organization, those who would not join you in the united party will try to break the door down to get into your new, rival organization? It is “preposterous.” It is more than that: it is insane. The only trouble with his appeal to reason is that it is utterly irrelevant, a strong polemical point scored against no one at all. No German Communist to my knowledge ever said, or acted as if he believed, that “just because” you split the Social Democratic parties their members will become loyal Communists. There were many putschists in the German CP but few complete lunatics.
 
Another Example of a Breathtaking Abstraction
5. One of Shachtman’s major points – actually a pervasive theme – is the inevitable futility of revolutionaries breaking away from mass socialist parties. For Shachtman, the conception of the independent revolutionary parties has led only to putsches and uninfluential sects.
We have already seen how Shachtman’s blanket condemnation of “vanguardism” has inspired a peculiarly unconvincing discussion of history. The following quotation is but another example of his breathtaking abstractions, divorced from the real world, designed to reduce the Leninist conception to just so much ridiculous baggage that has weighed down and impeded progress in the socialist movement.
“Revolutionary parties and revolutionary leaderships cannot be constituted overnight. Revolutionary sects? Yes, any time of the day or night that a group of solemn minds is ready to announce itself to the indifferent world as The Revolutionary Party, like the seven tailors of Tooley Street who began their famous proclamation with ’We, the people of England ...’ Revolutionary parties, which can seriously count on the political support of masses? No.”
We can move the seven tailors of Tooley Street to a headquarters in Berlin without offending anyone, for the Communist Party there was “constituted overnight” and it follows from everything that Shachtman has written in his new history that the Berlin tailors, too, could not build a revolutionary party which could “seriously count on the political support of the masses.” All they could do was gather together in a “revolutionary sect.”
The indicated question is: did the German Communists produce a party or a sect? If it was a sect, then Shachtman’s example of the Tooley Street Tailors has both wit and merit. If it was a mass party then he is just left with wit.
Fortunately or unfortunately (it all depends upon one’s point of view), whether reviewed with the added (sometimes all too facile) wisdom borne of hindsight or judged with all the limitations of contemporaneity, the indisputable fact is that the German Communists had a party – a big, powerful mass party. This, we have already shown in the few statistics given in a previous point. And even those figures do not reveal the full extent to which the party, a few years after its inception, could have counted on the political support of the masses.
The tremendous vote the Communist Party received in the German elections of May 1924 was only a tragic reminder of how powerful it was during the German crisis of 1923. Just three years after the German Communist tailors issued their proclamation, their party was in a position to lead the majority of workers in a struggle for power. The events which propelled them to such a strategic position should be familiar to those who have read even part of the thousands of pages that our movement – and those hostile to us – have published on the subject. All that needs to be noted here is that despite its hasty organization in the 1919-1920 period, despite its subsequent addiction to putschism, its many undeniable mistakes vis-à-vis the German Social Democratic party, that is, despite all the elements that Shachtman declares should have kept the Communist Party of Germany an obscure sect, it was in a position to lead a struggle for power with the political support of the majority, or near majority of German workers! The reasons why the party missed its opportunity in October 1923, are not germane to our discussion and the fact that the party would have been better equipped to fulfill its responsibilities in 1923 if it made no earlier mistakes doesn’t rescue Shachtman from his predicament.
 
Dangers Inherent in Leninist Organization
6. Only a religious person who travels around with a self-awarded Badge of Bolshevism as if it were a magic icon which immunizes him against all sin – and all thinking, too – could claim that the Leninist concept of the party avoided all the dangers that inhere in other political parties.
All political parties are subject to a variety of internal and external pressures that can produce a complex of unhealthy organizational and political habits. And the Leninist party was not just any kind of party; it was a special type, unique in form, in the intensity of its cadre and the boldness of its purpose.
Anarchists and syndicalists denied the importance of political parties; social democrats came to look upon the party as a machine to educate workers on whom to vote for in order to elect socialism to power; Luxemburgists placed their hopes in a militant working class which through a series of mass strikes culminating in the political general strike would topple the bourgeoisie.
The Leninists, however, regarded it as their special mission to raise the working class, a class without history and without culture, from the level of economic consciousness which it reaches almost instinctively to the level of socialist consciousness for which the “outside” influence of the party is required. To bring this consciousness to the working class the party was essential; to see to it that consciousness was joined by action, the party was necessary; to see to it that the successful struggles of a socialist working class were not frustrated or dissipated the party was decisive.
The party was the indispensable agent for the victory of socialism. It would take a special talent, indeed, not to see that in addition to the democratic content of the concept – the emphasis on consciousness – there are also special dangers that inhere in a political movement which assigns itself such momentous tasks.
Because of the seriousness of its purpose the Leninist party laid considerable stress on the necessity of discipline; but its stress on education and consciousness also induced a rich and democratic internal life. Discipline, however, can be difficult to reconcile with democracy and maintaining a proper balance between the two in the actual functioning of the party is not guaranteed by a rule book of “democratic centralism.” A party which accents discipline so heavily might succumb to bureaucratism more readily than a broader socialist movement. That is one danger. A second danger is that a small, fanatical combat party which conceives of itself as a vanguard of the masses might produce grandiose delusions which would encourage elements to substitute the party for the masses and thereby promote, not revolution, but quixotic adventures. To recognize these obvious dangers in Leninism, however, is not to be confused with the thought that Leninism logically led to or invited them.
A third danger inhered not so much in the Leninist concept as in the special circumstances under which Leninist parties were born. History did not allow any leisurely development; Communist parties were forged rapidly in the heat of social revolution. They were pieced together by splitting and capturing other socialist parties swiftly, sometimes ruthlessly, with the result that organizational manoeuvring could and often did become a fetish and an end in itself.
 
Leninism and Putschism
Shachtman, of course, recognizes these dangers in the Leninist party. They are the subject of his discussion. But these defects and potential dangers are isolated from politics which is always concerned with alternatives, and they are magnified beyond recognizable limits. His exaggerations, omissions, vagueness and occasional misstatements – only a few of which have been mentioned here – seem to lead to one mighty conclusion: Leninism was a putschist conception; or it inevitably led to putschism. This is hinted at throughout the article. Shachtman is not ready to go that far. In fact, he draws back a bit from that conclusion. But the thought is there. Here is the way he finally formulates the question:
“Lenin was not, contrary to widespread opinion, a putschist, and the Bolshevik Revolution was not a putsch. But Lenin’s revised theory [2] invited putschism, that is, the armed attempt of a resolute minority to seize political power without the support of the majority of the people or even the majority of the working class, and in opposition to the majority.”
This is actually more of an uneasy concession than a denial. If all the early Communist efforts to take power outside of Russia were putsches and if these adventures were “invited” by Leninist concepts, then it surely follows that Leninism and putschism, if not synonymous, are at least most intimately juxtaposed.
This relationship would be hard to challenge if what Shachtman presented in his article really conveyed the flavor and substance of Lenin’s conceptions of the independent revolutionary party, how it might be formed, what its role should be and what its relationship to the masses had to be. Read Shachtman’s essay carefully and see how the vanguard theory is dealt with. Explicitly and by innuendo, the impression is built up that the essence of the vanguard theory was SPLIT. If the Leninists cannot get a majority they split; if they can get a majority, they expel. It is all so simple and clear. And if the sine qua nan of the independent revolutionary party is splitting, then, indeed, who can deny that the concept’s fatal flaw is its invitation to putschism?
Lenin’s writings on organizational questions are permeated with the thought that the party must win the confidence of the masses. He repeated this over and over in a thousand different ways. The revolutionists would have to strive for their organizational independence in the revolutionary epoch, but only from the opportunists, never from the masses; it must convince the majority of the working class to accept its leadership; the party cannot substitute itself for the people. He polemicized at length against putschism, against Blanquism, against all elements from right to left in the socialist movement who divorced the party from the masses. For Lenin was a revolutionary democrat and his view of the vanguard party was an extension of this fact in the realm of internal party organization and the party’s necessary external relationship to the working class.
 
Misjudging Concepts by Their “Advocates”
Yet, Communist parties did organize putsches, particularly in Germany. But they were organized by men who made a farce of the vanguard theory, not those who lived up to it.
The vanguard concept, however, is not the only idea which cannot be judged merely on the merits of what those who presumably subscribed to it actually did in practice. For example, let us look at the idea of the broad all-inclusive party that Shachtman proposes as a permanent alternative to the Leninist party. In theory this would be a party that embraces diverse socialist elements from reformist to revolutionist. The Second International before the First World War contained many such parties. Take the American Socialist Party at its peak. It was a broad party whose members and factions covered the political spectrum. But in 1912-13 the right and center wing leadership of this all-inclusive party organized a split, forcing out of its ranks about one fourth of its membership – its revolutionary syndicalist wing. Not many years later the same Socialist leadership in the American party, which believed, in theory, with broadness, and objected to vanguardism, saw fit to expel the overwhelming majority of its membership. These bureaucratic acts were not peculiar to the American party. Many of the European parties also suffered from their leaderships’ violation of their own organizational precepts.
Does the fact that American and European socialists, time and again, sometimes outrageously – like professional splitters – violated their broad, all-inclusive organizational concepts disqualify this type movement as a proper form of party organization? Shachtman would be the first to point out that this would follow only if it can be proven that bureaucratic acts were naturally invited by the very concept of broadness. The perversions of party democracy that eventually became second nature to many parties in the Second International no more negates the idea of all-inclusiveness than the putsch of the German Communists discredits the Vanguard theory.
In the United States the bureaucratic expulsions – in 1912-13 – were caused by exceptional internal discord which could not be resolved within the framework of a broad party. In Germany there were specific circumstances that prompted Communists to abandon the Leninist concept. Tbe putsch of 1921 was not promoted by the idea of a vanguard party but by the absence of such a party. It was the terrible sense of frustration felt by many German Communists following the 1919-1920 defeats, when they could not win the confidence of the majority of the working class, which encouraged them, in 1921, to accept the bizarre theory of “electrification” – a theory which presented the comforting thought that the inertia of the masses could be overcome by the example of a self-sacrificing (and unsupported) revolutionary party in armed revolt. (Another element, it should be added, behind the German putsch in 1921, was the genuine conviction of many communists that desperate measures had to be chanced to save Russia from total collapse.)
It would be instructive at this point to quote briefly from a speech of Trotsky’s shortly after the 1921 German “revolution,” repudiating the putschists and summarizing once again the meaning of vanguardism:
“Preparation (for winning power) for us means the creation of such conditions as would secure us the sympathy of the broadest masses. We cannot under any conditions renounce this factor. The idea of replacing the will of the masses by the resoluteness of the so-called vanguard is absolutely impermissible and non-Marxist. Through the consciousness and the will of the vanguard it is possible to exert influence over the masses, it is possible to gain their confidence, but it is impossible to replace the masses by this vanguard. And for this reason the Third Congress has placed before all the parties, as the most important and unpostponable task, the demand that the majority of the toiling people be attracted to our side.” (Emphasis added.)
One could hardly guess from reading Shachtman’s article that leading personalities in the early Comintern (there is only one passing reference in the entire article to Lenin and Trotsky’s insistence that the party had to win the majority of the masses) held to the Leninist conception that “we cannot under any condition renounce ... securing the sympathy of the broadest masses,” and that the Comintern had “placed before all the parties, as the most important and unpostponable task, the demand that the majority of the toiling people be attracted to our side.” (emphasis added)
 
Leninism and Stalinism
7. Shachtman is too busy to give the Leninist conception a fair shake; too busy trying to prove his case that:
“From the conception that the majority of the socialist workers are not needed (even, in a sense, not wanted) in the party which is to decide the policies to achieve the socialist revolution, not too far a jump was required to the conception that these workers are not needed to carry out the socialist revolution.” (Emphasis added.)
I would go Shachtman one better and say that if it is true that from the Leninist conception of organization “not too far a jump” was required to exclude the masses from “a socialist revolution,” then it is not too far a jump to conclude that a dictatorship of a new kind was inherent in (at least “invited” by) Leninism. If Leninism in its organizational conception could invite a movement to overthrow the bourgeoisie without the support of the masses (and as we are told elsewhere, even “against them”) then, again, the link between Leninism and Stalinism is, if not firmly established, clearly indicated. An anti-capitalist party which takes power without the workers must fill the social vacuum left by the demise of the bourgeoisie, not with the dictatorship of the proletarians who opposed the revolution, but with the dictatorship of the party.
We have already seen that this is not the only place or the only approach in Shachtman’s article in which a logical connection between Leninism and Stalinism is implied. (See point 4 in my discussion.)
Just a quick look into other sections in the article where the connection is suggested:
First, there is a section which begins with:
“The Communist International and its Executive Committee were established with the grand aim of being ‘the general staff of the world revolution.’ This is not the place for an analysis of the Comintern. But this much can be said: The aim, to begin with, was only a hope. It soon became a myth and an illusion. It ended as a monstrosity. It was never a reality. Even before the triumph of Stalin, the Comintern and its Executive never organized or directed or led a revolution. It did organize or bear the responsibility for several disastrous putsches, in Germany, in Bulgaria, in Estonia. The Executive Committee began to function as the authoritative leadership of the world Communist movement but the limits of its authority were narrowly circumscribed, it never got beyond a beginning and it lasted for no more than two-three years.”
Following this passage there is a lengthy discussion of the growing corruption of the Communist International. Almost everything Shachtman writes here can be accepted. The Zinovievist method of carrying on Comintern affairs was inexcusably bureaucratic; there were unprincipled manoeuvres, leadership became an end in itself, ultimatums from Moscow to subordinate parties became routine practice, there was intellectual intolerance and suppression of elementary democratic rights, etc. These habits became ingrained with the passage of time and eventually developed a momentum of their own.
The question that must be answered, however, is how did these practices gain a permanent foothold in the Comintern. What transformed the organization with the grand aim of socialist revolution into the vehicle of the Stalinist monstrosity? In the socialist movement there have been, broadly speaking, two answers which interest us here, one contradicting the other. One is that the Stalinist degeneration was inevitable, part of a logical disintegrative process set into motion by initial Leninist conceptions. The other answer is that Leninism and Stalinism are opposites, without any inherent evolution from one to the other, and views the triumph of Stalinism over Leninism as the price the working class paid for the defeat of the revolution in the West.
On the basis of Shachtman’s discussion of the problem in this section of his article, and throughout the article as a whole, one would have little reason to doubt that he is pointed toward the first answer: Stalinism flows from Leninism. [3] The degeneration of the Comintern is treated (in a six page long discussion following the above quotation) purely in organizational terms, as a cumulative process initiated by original Leninist conceptions. Absent from his discussion is anything more than a hint of the view, basic to our movement’s historical analysis of Stalinism, which traces the moral, political and social disintegration of the Comintern to the failure of the European revolution.
To those who will argue that this is making too much out of an omission – “after all Shachtman cannot discuss everything in one article” – I can only reply that my point is missed and that they are possibly naïve. The omission is in itself significant and its importance grows in light of the emphasis given throughout the article to the allegedly close relationship between Leninist conceptions, the party’s separation from the masses and putschism.
 
A Question of Method
The charge that Shachtman is abandoning the historical conceptions of our movement vis-à-vis the rise of Stalinism does not rest only on omissions and the other specific points I have mentioned. There is also his method of judging the right and wrong of early Comintern ideas. For example, where Shachtman poses the question, “Was the 1919 split and formation of an independent Communist Party historically justified?” he finds support for his negative answer (with which I agree for the United States) in the fact that the formal program of the present Communist Party has removed all the sectarian nonsense contained in the program of the original Communist Party. His reply has merit only if there is assumed a basic continuity between Leninism and Stalinism – unless Shachtman is suddenly agitating dissident CP’ers today in an article designed to re-examine the views of the anti-Stalinist socialist movement. But, if Stalinism is discontinuous with and the negation of Leninism, this method of determining the validity of the 1919 split is impermissible.
This is not the only instance in the article whe.re Shachtman uses an example from the recent history of the Communist Party to judge Leninist habits and conceptions. To show that the recklessness of the Comintern in the early days grew increasingly worse with time we are reminded that “a snap of the finger in Moscow in 1945, and Browder is not only out of the leadership but of the party as well, cursed, reviled, debased.” (Emphasis added.)
Shachtman is aware of the difficulty of judging or comparing the early communist movement in terms of Stalinist practices when he writes:
“But that comparison is unfair and misleading, it may and probably will be objected to by some. The present Communist Party is not a real Communist Party, it is Stalinized through and through. The authentic Communist movement was ravished and ruined by Stalinism.
“We will grant the objection in the interests of a more thorough discussion of the question. We will take the Communist movement before it swallowed the poison of Stalinism ...”
The problem, however, is not whether Shachtman will generously “grant the objection in favor of a more thorough discussion of the question”; the crux of the matter is whether the reader who finds that Shachtman’s “comparison is unfair and misleading ...” has a justifiable complaint.
 
Should the Communists Have Split – Judiciously?
8. I have pointed out several inconsistencies in Shachtman’s article. One more must be mentioned, and underlined, for it contradicts his thesis, practically in its entirety. On page 225 there is the following retrospective judgment:
“The argument that the Third International had to be organized and to operate differently from the Second International, was quite correct, but only within limits. These limits were exceeded in the most reckless way before they could even be properly established.”
Reflect on this passage for just a moment. Shachtman, before and after these sentences, has been hammering away at the Communist idea of splitting from the mass parties of the working class in a revolutionary period. But in this paragraph we are told that it was “quite correct” to organize a Third International, one that had “to operate differently from the Second International.” This is more than an inconsistency. It is a terrible contradiction: it is logically impossible to berate the Communists for splitting existing mass parties and at the same time justify the formation of a Third International. This Third International even if organized with greater judiciousness and moderation (“only within limits”) and with more caution and less recklessness (“these limits were exceeded in the most reckless way”), would have been, I presume, not a network of educational committees but a world organization of political parties. What else? But an International of political parties – of militant working class parties – must have members to begin with and more members to end up with. Where were they to come from? There’s the rub. For they could come only from the existing mass parties of the working class – the reformist and centrist organizations. Where else? These reformist and centrist parties had a monopoly on the millions of politically conscious workers in Germany, Italy, France, in Austria and elsewhere. To win workers to a section of the Third Inter-national, then, meant to win them away from their reformist leaderships. The monopoly had to be broken, which is only a euphemistic way of saying that in order to build sections of the Third International – with all of Shachtman’s qualifications – it was necessary to pursue a policy of splitting the established mass reformist movements.
It is either one or the other; either it was wrong to split the European socialist parties in the post-war period or else it was “quite correct” to organize a Third International. Shachtman is in the unenviable position of making the first judgment and implicitly approving its opposite.
The passage just quoted stands out for two reasons as far as I am concerned. First, for the fact that it so clearly contradicts his thesis; second, because it is one of the few sentences discussing the Comintern with which I can agree. I believe, along with Shachtman, that the Third International had to be formed. I agree, too, that the Third International that actually was formed committed many mistakes, i.e. it “exceeded in the most reckless way” certain necessary limits. Many of the formulations and conditions of the famous “21 points,” for example, were revolutionary excesses; and the Third International made many reckless mistakes in its zealous flushing out of “centrists,” especially in its dealings with the centrist Independent Socialist Party of Germany; and it is not difficult to see that the Third International was weakened from the beginning by the disproportionately one-sided role given to the Russians.
Reckless and needless mistakes were made; they became codified and emerged as “Leninist” principles as bureaucracy in the Third International was nursed by defeat and demoralization in Western Europe and in Russia. But to recognize these “reckless mistakes” of Leninists is a far cry from locating one of their main sources in Leninist organizational conceptions and the unquestionable excesses of the 21 Points does not invalidate their historical justification – the necessity of creating independent revolutionary parties to contest capitalism in post war Europe.
 
Good Old Fashioned American “Pragmatism”
9. I have already discussed one objection to Shachtman’s method: the improper use made of a mechanical association of the ersatz communism of the American Left Wing with the Comintern. But there is another and more serious dissent to Shachtman’s over-all method, to which all other weaknesses relate; his re-evaluations and judgments suffer from an over-application of good old-fashioned American “pragmatism”: if a theory seemed to work out in life then it was a good theory and, conversely, if a theory did not work out then it was a bad theory. This is hardly the approach that is called for in re-examining complex political and historical questions.
Obviously, if activity toward a specific objective is made on the basis of a theory and that objective is realized in life that becomes substantial evidence that the theory was good and correct. But it doesn’t prove that it was the best theory, if alternative theories were not applied. Once again, the converse is also true, and more pertinent to our discussion. If actions made consistent with theory are not crowned with success, that does not necessarily prove the theory wrong. In the first place, it must be learned if any alternative theory could have worked toward achieving the same objective, and, second, it must also be the purpose of a meaningful re-examination to see if there were subsequent factors not predictable at the time that frustrated a certain course of action. This seems elementary to me. Yet, Shachtman is guilty of a pragmatic oversimplification when he lays such great stress on the failure of the Leninist concept of the party to “work” as irrefutable proof of its bankruptcy.
If the Leninist party was too volatile a movement, what could have substituted for it, concretely, to reach its socialist objective? Shachtman, of course, does not present realistic alternatives to the Leninist party but with a kind of wooden logic dismisses it for not having withstood the test of time, i.e. it didn’t work. And he is guilty of a formal and static method in his failure to recreate historical circumstances to see if the Leninist theory and its execution was hindered by later developments which could not have been foreseen and accurately gauged, such as the ability of social democracy to reactivate itself, the extent of Social-Democratic treachery in Germany and elsewhere, the resiliency of world capitalism, etc. Could the Leninists have prophetically assayed the course of all such events? And could they accurately have known how their own activities would have influenced the mood of the masses and other decisive social factors? I doubt it.
But, even if the Leninists through some special mystical powers could have foreseen certain negative developments in Europe which non-prescient people could not, that still does not necessarily mean that they should have departed from their given revolutionary course. If the early Communists had to be sure of every element, present and future, before they could determine their policies they would have been paralyzed from the start. History is made by men and movements who take risks, not irresponsible or reckless ones, but risks nevertheless.
If one were to give a literal interpretation to Shachtman’s observation that “life has settled all the arguments of 1917-1919” that statement would mean nothing less than wringing out of history all problematical and debatable ingredients. Yet, this literal interpretation is warranted by his whole approach in the article. If life has settled the questions Shachtman discusses, one is justified in asking whether life has settled the debate that has ranged in the socialist movement around the problem of the Russian revolution. According to the sophisticated anti-Leninists, the October Revolution was a mistake. And, for them, life has settled any question of that. Just look at Russia today. Leninism did not work, the revolution did not work. What is more, they say: “Didn’t we and our political antecedents warn the workers (and they did) that if the Bolsheviks took power in Russia the revolution would be isolated for it was premature to think of aid from the West, without which, a proletarian revolution in Russia – even if we concede that that is what the Bolsheviks led – was doomed?” Therefore, they conclude, the Bolsheviks should not have made or led the revolution. Hasn’t life proved these prophets and critics correct? Yes, in a certain formal and superficial sense. But what a sterile way to discuss history! Shachtman, through his evasions, abstractions and pragmatic method, discusses the early Comintern with the same air of unreality. If I were to try to answer these critics of the Russian Revolution within the confines of his method I would have to surrender before the debate even started.
 
What about the Lessons of the Russian Revolution?
But if we were to accept Shachtman’s pragmatic method then what does history teach when it informs us that the only country where the socialist revolution succeeded (as Shachtman believes it did) was in Russia, that is, in the only country where a vanguard party was permitted to develop and consolidate itself in time to meet a revolutionary crisis? If Western European history has taught us that the Leninist party invites putschism and defeat and therefore, as Shachtman writes, the idea of the independent revolutionary party deserves to die, how is this alleged lesson from life reconciled with the lessons of the Russian revolution?
To pursue the point one step further: if the Bolsheviks, following the collapse of the Second International, sought to build a broad party that would include Social Revolutionaries Â«nd Mensheviks, could Soviet power ever have become a reality in Russia? Most unlikely; and I believe that Shachtman would agree with this. In which case, if the vanguard Bolshevik party brought the revolution to a successful climax and if our political understanding leads us to doubt that a broad party could have achieved the same objective, is that not weighty evidence for the historian today to conclude that not only was the existence of the vanguard party a decisive factor for the success of the Russian revolution but that its absence in Europe, especially in Germany in 1919, was no less a decisive factor for the defeat of the West European working class?
 
A Party Above History, Theory and Tactics
Shachtman concludes his article with a declaration that “we want a socialist movement that works.” But he has failed to give us an idea of how this permanently broad all-inclusive party would work. Detailed diagrams are not needed but he should tell us a little more about his substitute for the revolutionary party.
At one time, Shachtman would have heaped ridicule on the idea of a party permanently cemented by mutual affection and respect. He has changed his mind. That is all right. But his former disdain for his present proposal was based on tangible theoretical and practical objections [4] and if he is to be effective in his new views he must let us know what these objections once were and why he no longer believes them valid.
If Shachtman were only discussing the needs of the present socialist “movement” there would be little to quarrel about. Today, I am for a broad and loose socialist movement, precisely because no movement exists. [5]
Shachtman, however, no longer believes in the independent revolutionary party at any time. It is now to the broad all-inclusive type movement that he looks as the best form of socialist organization; not only as a form which corresponds to the needs of the American working class today, but as a loose structure which under most, if not all, conditions, can serve the socialist cause better than the narrower revolutionary party.
According to Shachtman, the “Right Wing” and the “Left Wing” can live together in the same party indefinitely so long as the following two conditions are met:
“That regardless of all other differences – on history, on theory, on tactics, on the road to socialism – there is clear agreement that socialism means the fullest achievement of democracy and that the socialist movement is committed to democratic means in attaining its goal and does not seek to impose it upon the working class or against the working class. And in the sense that the party and everyone in it zealously respects full and equal democratic rights for all members and tendencies. The only cement that can assure the unity of a party in which there are differences of opinion on the best way to achieve a common end, is compounded of democracy and loyalty. No individual or group in the socialist movement has a right to demand more of any other individual or group; equal democratic rights accorded to all and loyalty to the party from all. Under these elementary conditions, a united socialist movement was possible in the past and is possible, and necessary, today.”
Shachtman is not offering membership regulations for college campus clubs. He is talking about a political party, as it should look today and tomorrow, when it is a small group and when it becomes a mass movement, when it is operating in a period of passivity and when it is to lead the working class in a period of decisive struggle. For Shachtman, party unity has apparently become a fetishism raised to the level of a theory of organization; the Party, one and indivisible, a phenomenon above and permanently undivided by history, by theory, by tactics, by the road to socialism. For the permanent good health of the party there is only a two-condition prescription: 1) different tendencies must be in “clear” agreement (does it have to be crystal clear?) that socialism means the fullest achievement of democracy; 2) the party must respect the democratic right of any tendency conforming to the first condition provided it, in turn, remains loyal to the party.
This medicine is hard to swallow and more difficult to digest.
If only the German socialists in 1919 could have abided by these simple strictures how different the world might look today. For both Left and Right met at least one half of Shachtman’s conditions for permanent unity! Luxemburg was committed to the idea that “socialism means the fullest achievement of democracy”; but so was the entire Right Wing German leadership. Everybody agreed that Socialism was democratic and they all believed that their common objective should be reached by democratic methods. It seems they could not get along on precisely those questions which Shachtman now tells us, so belatedly, need not divide democratic socialists; they just did not see eye to eye on questions of “history, on theory, on tactics, on the road to socialism.” And because these German socialists exaggerated the importance of such tertiary questions they found themselves violating Shachtman’s second canon for a united movement: the Left could not operate in a manner loyal to a party controlled by the Right; and the Right could not permit the opposition its democratic rights (it preferred to let them be assassinated).
 
A Not-So Hypothetical Example
How would Shachtman’s formula work in the United States? Let us say that the united socialist movement here gains many supporters. It becomes a powerful mass party with deep roots in the labor movement. But being an all-inclusive party, it includes tendency “x” which, under a radical guise, collaborates with corrupt labor officials in the union movement, and tendency “y” which believes that the unsavoury elements should be expelled from the labor movement. A difference in “tactics,” I suppose. But both tendencies are made up of socialists who are in the clearest agreement that socialism means the fullest achievement of democracy. (They merely have a difference on what democracy is or means in the union movement.) Thus far, then, there is no justifiable reason for a parting of the ways as the first of Shachtman’s conditions for party unity is met.
His second condition for unity is that the majority respect the rights of the minority and the majority act loyally to the party. But what do democratic rights and party loyalty mean, concretely, under these conditions? Can tendency “y” demand of its “socialist” opponents that they reverse themselves in the unions – under threat of expulsion from the party? That would not be democratic. And how should tendency “x” (assuming it is the minority) prove its loyalty to the party? Allow itself to be defeated in or expelled from the union movement? Anything else could be interpreted as a flagrantly disloyal act to the united party. I’m afraid that the question could never be satisfactorily resolved within the framework of Shachtman’s theory of socialist organization. In a large movement such hypothetical examples will become real problems. In fact, we can find a similar problem in the history of the American socialist movement, and it is a pity that Shachtman did not discuss it in the light of his theory and its relevance to his article. In 1912 the American Socialist Party was a powerful organization with more than a hundred thousand members. It was also a divided movement. There were two main contending factions each one responding in its own way to the struggle raging in the broader labor movement between the IWW syndicalists and the Gompers dominated American Federation of Labor: Haywood and Hillquit sought to smash one another within the party just as the IWW and AFL sought to push one another into total oblivion.
Given the specific character of the fight in the union movement how could the factional situation in the party have been resolved? Haywood and his followers declare themselves loyal to the Hillquit dominated Socialist Party and abandon the IWW? Or, perhaps, the Hillquit majority respect the democratic rights of the syndicalist Left Wingers and permit them to hold party cards and carry on their campaign to destroy the AFL at the same time? Neither was possible. Mutual loyalty and respect meant nothing. As I think that Hillquit was more correct than Haywood, the best solution would have been for the syndicalists to admit their mistakes and devote themselves to working as responsible socialists within the AFL. But the Haywood followers did not and could not see it that way.
The deep division in the party, then, was resolved in the only way it could be under the circumstances: a split in the party corresponding to the civil war in the labor movement. Yet in theory, the Party was governed by its all-inclusive concept of organization. The concept, however, which seemed to work in earlier years simply succumbed to narrower definitions determined by political reality. Is the concept of broadness to be permanently indicted because it failed to meet the test of workability in 1912? Or is it to be permanently approved because at other times it seemed to be successful? Similarly is the concept of the independent revolutionary party to be impatiently dismissed for all times because it didn’t work in Europe; or is the early Bolshevik party to become a permanent model for socialists everywhere and at all times because it worked in Russia?
The whole approach to party organization suggested by these questions is wrong, of course. But that is just the approach indicated by weighing ideas on the pragmatist’s scale.
 
Revolutionary versus Reformist Conceptions
The idea of a party geared to meet a revolutionary situation with a combative spirit, with discipline, with trained cadres, with fanaticism born of idealism and intelligence flowed from a certain revolutionary conception of society and how it is to be transformed. It was no historical accident that the most vigorous opponents of the Leninist party within the socialist movement were those who rejected in practice (and often in theory) the idea of uncompromising class struggle, who denounced the Leninist theory of the state and who looked upon the established parliamentary system as the vehicle of social transformation in contradistinction to the revolutionary conception of the road to power which they denounced as adventurism, putschism, etc. For these reformist socialists a party that was loose, less disciplined, less demanding and less centralized (in theory) was the type which they naturally endorsed. And for good reason. Reformism implied greater political conformity; reliance on existing political institutions negated the necessity of militant and more narrowly organized parties.
What is at stake in Shachtman’s discussion of the Leninist conception of the party is much more than organizational stratagems or their historical evolution. Nothing less is involved than those theoretical questions – reform or revolution – which have been debated in the socialist movement from its inception. I am not charging Shachtman with repudiating basic revolutionary conceptions of social struggle because he has rejected the idea of an independent revolutionary party. Obviously one can be a revolutionary Marxist without holding to the Leninist type party. Luxemburg is a case in point. Perhaps Shachtman is of the opinion that the permanently broad party is compatible with revolutionary theory. I do not know; I am no mind reader. I do know, however, that in his failure to discuss political assumptions of our movement in his re-examination of organizational and historical questions, i.e., in his failure to relate theory to organization, he has at least left his readers in an uncertain state as to the depth and significance of his re-evaluations.

ADDENDUM
The “Spartacist Putsch”
The latest scholarly study on the subject, Eric Waldman’s The Spartacist Uprising of 1919, devotes special attention precisely to refuting the “putschist” charge against the Spartacists.
He shows, of course, that the initiative and leadership in the January 5 demonstration came not from the Spartacists at all, but from the Independents and Revolutionary Shop Stewards, following which the Spartacists endorsed it and signed the call. Waldman documents the fact that at this point it was the Spartacists, and only the Spartacists, who explicitly warned against turning this movement into an attempt to seize power, not only privately but in their public appeals.
Then the demonstration showed turbulent revolutionary moods in the Berlin masses; the Independents and RSS’s were carried away. In the large steering committee meeting, the overwhelming majority voted against a handful to adopt the aim of seizure of power. There were two Spartacists there. Liebknecht (as well as Pieck) swung over and may even have been one of the leading spirits.
So far we see that it was the overwhelming majority of the Independents and RSS’s who were carried away by what was objectively a “putschist” spirit, and not only Liebknecht. Now come two crucial facts:
Fact 1: The Spartacist leadership did not support the decision or Liebknecht’s giving; Luxemburg and Jogisches were against both. Another exploded charges, by the way, is the one that the Spartacist leadership secretly supported Liebknecht but did not want to take public responsibility.
Fact 2: So far none of this has anything whatsoever to do with Lenin and the Bolsheviks. But there was one Bolshevik around, Karl Radek. Whereas Luxemburg, though disagreeing with Liebknecht, felt that there was no alternative except to fight along with the others once battle was joined, it was only the Bolshevik Radek who urged the Spartacist leadership to exert pressure on the Independents and RSS’s to call the whole thing off instanter.
Waldman shows that it was the “bloodhounds” who invented the very term “Spartacist uprising” to describe all this.
The Spartacist rank-and-file did indeed have an ultra-leftist majority, shown especially in its convention vote against participation in the elections. The ranks were swamped with green Wilde and lumpen-elements. The Spartacists had unfurled their own banner only days before the crisis was on them, instead of being able to forge a steeled revolutionary party over a whole period of preparation, as did the Bolsheviks. The Wilde element was so strong not because the Spartacists had trod in the Bolsheviks’ footsteps but because they had not. Only Radek saw true, not because he was more brilliant than Luxemburg but because he had been trained in a school which knew the difference between putschism or “revolutionism” and serious revolutionary preparation and action. What “invited” putschism in the January days was the absence of an effective revolutionary vanguard.

Notes
1. I mention the 1933 statistics only because Shachtman includes that period in his discussion. Admittedly, I am discussing on his own terms, which are false terms. For it is inexcusable to include a picture of the Communist Party in 1933, in Germany or anywhere else, as in illustration of the consequences of a Communist policy in 1919. In 1933 the German Communist party waj the agwit of a counterrevolutionary state: Russia; in 1919, the German Communist Party, whatever its mistakes and shortcomings, was the party of socialist revolution. But this is all part of Shachtman’s new method of evaluating the Leninist concept of the party by the Stalinist monstrosity it presumably encouraged or invited. We will take up this question of method further on in our discussion.
2. Lenin’s revised theory is that in “the epoch of world revolution the revolutionary elements had to break out (from the Social Democratic Parties), constitute themselves independently and assume the task of revolutionary leadership.”
3. Of course, I do not claim that Shachtman holds this view. Nevertheless, this is the implication I find in his article.
4. For example, what is the relation to be between the Broad Party member who is active in the unions or in neighbourhood organizations and his party? In the kind of party Shachtman has aimed at the Party was to be the political institution to which its members owed their first political obligation. That is to say; the individual trade unionist functioned in the unions as a Party person and the Party, wherever feasible, functioned as a disciplined fraction in the unions or in neighbourhood organizations or in still broader non-socialist political organizations. Will the Broad Party Shachtman advocates “work” in this way or is it to be a Party where everybody can do more or less as be pleases?
5. My rejection of Shachtman’s article must not be interpreted to mean that I hold these historical and theoretical questions to be the issues which define a socialist tendency today. It is obvious to me that what holds a tendency together in the present period are concrete political questions; in the case of the ISL, its political common denominator can be found in its support of the Third Camp, analysis of Stalinism, commitment to democracy and advocacy of independent class political action. I think that a comrade who accepts Shachtman’s views of historical questions is weakening the theoretical basis of our common political ideas. But that is something to debate, not act upon.
Furthermore, if our tendency is defined by its political positions this does not mean that it must have an independent organisational existence. I am not for sects.
 




There is a perceptible decline in the self-assurance of today’s college student. The reports in the press about the growing list of unemployed have had their effect on his psychology. There is an uneasiness on the campus which does not resemble the insecurity of the ’30s but which is nevertheless having corrosive effect on the easy attitudes of the ambitious collegiate.
A recent survey conducted among some of the nation’s leading industrial firms indicates that the downward trend in unemployment will hit hard at the new crop of college graduates. These firms reported a declining market for college grads and a pessimism concerning the likelihood that this trend will reverse itself in the near future.
Although the student remains apathetic to politics, there is every reason to believe that this growing insecurity on the job front, when mixed with the present drive on academic freedom and the increasing pressures of a developing war economy, will shock the American student back into the political world. This revived interest in social problems will not be on an academic level. It can be expected that students will actively participate in organizations and actions.
But in what organizations will these disillusioned students find a political home for themselves? The Communist Party will, no doubt, put in a heavy bid. And they stand a good chance of gaining considerably (witness the Student for Wallace movement before the elections) unless there is another genuinely militant organization to oppose and expose the Stalinists. Otherwise the CP, through its various front organizations, will be able to recruit large numbers of members and much support on the basis of its current “radical” anti-capitalist line. They will never be able to approach their strength of the �0s, but their influence will surely grow several times its present size unless a student movement develops which is genuinely anti-war – i.e., a Third Camp student organization.
 

Based on Anti-War Program of Third Camp
A significant step was made last month towards the development of this needed Third Camp on campus with the formation of the New York Student Federation Against War.
This New York federation begins as an anti-war student movement in name and in program. This is quite different from the manner in which militant student organizations were initiated in the ’30s. The National Student League, for example, was originally organized around local campus issues such as free text books and academic freedom cases. The program of the National Student League was not of a primarily anti-war nature.
However, this is to a large extent a formal difference when compared to the recently organized N.Y. federation. The National Student League’s character was determined in life, not in written program. It developed the reputation as a militant anti-war student movement and this reputation set the organization’s character and gave to it attractiveness and dynamism. The anti-war strikes, the taking of the Oxford Pledge, the meetings and rallies on war issues – all of these activities sponsored by the NSL set the political level of the organization considerably deeper than its concern with the price of textbooks (which was an important issue in the ’30s).
One important reason why the NSL could develop this anti-war popularity without narrowing itself programatically was that it began in New York with hundreds of active members of the Young Communist League on campus, and the YCL, in turn, had the sympathy of wide sections of the student body.
The New York Student Federation Against War was formed under different conditions. It began with the support of seven or eight student clubs, each of which is relatively small in numbers and influences. In order to make itself felt as an anti-war force, the Federation had no alternative except to develop along narrower political lines than was the case with the NSL. It cannot hope to hope to earn for itself the reputation as an anti-war force through strikes, demonstrations and similar forms of agitation and protest.
 

Will Publish Quarterly Student Magazine
The only way that it can establish itself as a Third Camp force on campus is through its program and propaganda. Therefore, the program of the Federation is weighted in the anti-war direction and anti-war political requirements for affiliation are provided in its constitution.
It must also be remembered that there are any number of student organizations today which would resemble the New York Federation if that Federation were not of ah anti-war character. If the Federation were without its present political program it could not distinguish itself sufficiently from other organizations (such as the Students for Democratic Action and the Student World Federalists) despite its more radical membership.
Here too, the small size of the Federation is the drawback. The Federation would not have to worry about formally duplicating the other student organizations if it were large enough to make itself felt in action as a fighter for student rights and an opponent of war preparations, thereby permitting it to retain a broader political foundation.
As a propaganda force (which does not mean abstaining from political action) the Federation plans to establish itself through its projected quarterly magazine and meetings on a local and city-wide level. The Federation will also be invaluable in the moral and political strengthening it can give its affiliates.
The Federation is counting heavily on its ability to publish a magazine. This magazine would not only present the opinions of the Federation but is designed to become in part a literary forum on campus in which conflicting points of view can be expressed from within and without the Federation.
A successful magazine will virtually assure the success of the Federation in the coming period. And a successful Federation in the coming period will open up the possibility of re-creating a broad student movement against war which will make itself felt on campus and in American life in general.
 

Wallace Circus Comes to Berkeley
BERKELEY, Cal. – On Wednesday, May 11, the Wallace troupe showed up at the University of California. The group which spoke under Young Progressive auspices included the following: Mrs. Paul Robeson; Michele Giua, a “left wing” (i.e., pro-Stalinist) socialist senator from Italy; H. Lester Hutchinson, member of the British Parliament; and, of course, the Common Man himself.
The main theme of the meeting was the usual whitewash and eulogy of the Russian totalitarian system. The present drive towards war was analyzed as being the SOLE responsibility of the “American-imperialist-Vatican-fascist bloc.” The solution to the cold war as envisaged by the speakers was equally ludicrous: “make the United Nations work” was the cure which these apologists for totalitarianism offered.
This “make the UN work” line of the meeting was followed by the announcement of the formation on campus of a new Stalinist front group for Peace Through the UN. The mood of the vast majority of the several thousand who attended the meeting was apathetic. There were at the most, one hundred students close to the speakers�platform who clapped and cheered at the “appropriate” moments and a similar number of students scattered through the audience who booed and heckled. Several fraternity boys showed up wearing red hats adorned with hammers and sickles and carrying a sign which read: “We want to be liberated like Czechoslovakia.”
The meeting revealed the utter bankruptcy of the Wallace movement. Politically, it proved itself once again to be a thinly disguised mask for the Communist Party. Organizationally, despite the large attendance, the apathy of the audience and the sparseness of Wallace supporters indicated the steep decline of the Wallace movement on campus.
 




Prominent among campus political organizations today are various groups of students working for “world federation.” On campus they are represented by the Student Division of United World Federalists, and to a lesser degree by World Republic.
These organizations have mushroomed in the last two years, but their growth has tapered off somewhat recently. UWF has a chapter on almost every large campus in the country, and it is quite conspicuous where it is active. It claims 9,000 members on 250 campuses.
The ability of UWF to attract arch-conservatives, liberals of the ADA stripe, Stalinoids, religious anarchists, and social-democrats is explained by the broad and meaningless policy of the organization. On one campus a statement by a UWF chapter on world peace received endorsement or some favorable action by the Young Republicans, Students for Democratic Action, Young Progressives, an independent socialist group, and a pacifist club. Due to the effort of the industrialists and corporation lawyers in the national office, the UWF has gained “respectability” and now has little difficulty drawing support from the middle class.
Most of these supporters of “world federation” are liberals fearful of the coming war between the two imperialist camps and fed up with the traditional diplomatic methods. They are yet unable to see the real causes of war, but reach out for any “new” solution that appears. Most of them have no difficulty supporting the World Federalist statement of policy, and hence are willing to pay their dues in the hope that they are helping to establish peace.
 

Section of Student Membership Dissatisfied
Based on their broad support, the national officers proceed on. a very particular program of action. The statement “the world must be united politically” is interpreted by the officers to mean: the world must be united by pressure on the president and Congress to confer with Russia. Moscow and Washington, plus their respective satellites, should then agree upon a convention of the UN to make out of that body a “world government.”
A section of the student membership is dissatisfied with this narrow approach. Some of them agree with the World Republic group in pressuring for a “People’s Convention” of elected delegates from all countries, and others have a revolutionary approach.
These groups have been quite vocal at conventions and other official gatherings of UWF, but have been unable to inform the general membership of their existence. This bureaucratic censorship is due to the monopoly of communication by the national administration in its official position.
It is with these members that socialists should be concerned. Most of the students, although generally dissatisfied with various aspects of the UWF program have not evolved a crystallized position of their own. There are some who believe that effective political action can only be accomplished by the working class and definitely oppose the effort toward a world government resulting from a deal between Wall Street and Stalin.
Socialists should be alert for these members as they are usually very close to a third-camp position. Individual members and possibly entire chapters can be brought closer to a socialist position on the war if we can provide the answer to their search for peace.
 

Social-Democratic Sad Sacks on Campus
A meeting under the auspices of the Social-Democratic Federation was held on June 9 in Berkeley just off the University of California campus. The. occasion was the 25th anniversary of the New Leader, Social-Democratic weekly publication.
There were two speakers for the evening. The first was Robert A. Gordon, an economics professor from the University of California, who is also an important figure in the local ADA and a member of its national executive board. His speech was primarily a frank admission of the lack of drive, selflessness and initiative in the liberal movement today.
The second speaker, Prof. Brandt from Stanford University, who is a former official In the German farm cooperative movement, gave a ridiculous performance. He first praised the New Leader and then gave a right-wing Christian-Democratic line, finally ending up by speaking in favor of a constitutional monarchy for Germany!
All in all, the meeting provided pretty sad specimens of people who fawn on American imperialism and call themselves socialists. In the question period which followed the speeches, the discussion revolved around the slogans “Neither Washington Nor Moscow” and “A Labor Party Now”, which were raised by individuals in the audience.
 




Several weeks ago, we discussed in this column the organizational crisis in the Stalinist youth movement. Our particular subject was the disappearance of the American Youth for Democracy (AYD), which actually disintegrated before its Stalinist mentors gave it the official coup de grace. This move was contemplated at the last national convention of the Communist Party which gave blunt evidence of its control of AYD and its intention of merging the remains of AYD with the Youth and Students for Wallace movement, alias the Young Progressives of America (YPA).
The Stalinist hopes ran high at its convention for a mass youth movement, despite AYD’s collapse. For the Stalinists looked towards the Wallace youth as a new and irresistible force. The YPA was to reach peaks of membership and influence never attained by a “left-wing” youth organization; a front that was to be the transmission belt for the creation of a “Young Marxist League” affiliated to the Communist Party.
But something happened. Exactly what is not important at the moment. The fact is that all plans misfired and the YPA is now deader than could have been imagined during the pre-election Wallaceite jamborees on campus. One hardly notices them today. An occasional leaflet is all we have to remind us of the YPA’s recent prowess. Their meetings are few and uninspired. The “Jimmy Higgins” work is carried out primarily by Stalinist Party members and hardened “sympathizers.” Here and there are even rumors of liberal opposition developing within YPA against the organizations Stalinist core.
 
Book Membership
We have just received a copy of the committee reports of the first founding convention of the New York State YPA. The sections of this report issued by the YPA which concern the organization’s size and membership are significant. The total number of delegates, fraternal delegates, and observers at the convention numbered 428, of which 282 were regular delegates. All indications are that a delegate represented no more than a dozen members or major fraction thereof, which would mean a state-wide book membership of about 3,000. This estimate is strengthened in the section on membership perspectives. We are informed that the goal is 10,000 members by April 1949, The resolution states that “in order to start the drive off with a big push, we propose that every delegate present pledge to sign up ten members of YP of New York ... (emphasis ours)
Assuming that only the 282 voting delegates (that is, excluding fraternal delegates and observers) are covered in this resolution, it can be concluded that a pledge of almost 3,000 new members to “start the drive off” towards a goal of 10,000 members, bears out our deduction that the YPa in New York State is probably no more than 3,000 in number. The bulk of this membership we can be certain is strictly confined to the books.
Compare this figure with those claimed by several New York Wallaceite campus clubs before the elections and we can more graphically see its precipitous drop of membership and attractiveness. On two campuses in New York City – Brooklyn College and City College – the combined membership claimed by students for Wallace was well over 1,000. In other words the Wallaceite membership, less than a year ago, on two New York campuses was at least one- third of our estimated total of New York State YPA membership today.
A comparison between the present status of YPA – a self-styled “broad” organization – with the Young Communist League of ten years ago is even more unfavorable from a Stalinist point of view. For the narrower Communist affiliate had on the above mentioned campuses, approximately 1,000 members and unquestionably had a larger state-wide membership, than that of the present “mass organization,” the YPA.
What is true of the local YPA is by no means exceptional. From all reports we have received it has met with no more success on the national level. On the contrary we know that some of its most powerful chapters outside of New York have almost totally collapsed.
The Youth for Wallace movement has passed its zenith. We do not believe that the fading light of this descending Stalinist star can shoot upwards again, illuminating the campus – and the Communist Party’s hopes – with its folksy line of corn- bred ballads and square dancing.
The reasons for this decline will be discussed next week.
 




“How strong are the Stalinists in City College?” “If the Stalinists control a student action, should you support it?”
These are two questions one hears from all sides today and they deserve serious answers.
The Stalinists at City College do NOT control the strike, though they are very influential in it. The strike is run by the Student Council, in which the Stalinists are a definite minority.
However, they are a large minority and a well-organized one, giving them a serious advantage over any single anti-Stalinist force on the campus. The anti-Stalinists at City College range from the conservatives who oppose the strike to militant socialists. Only a small group of anti-Stalinists are aware of what Stalinism really means and are programmatically capable of fighting it on a healthy basis. The bulk of the anti-Stalinists – the majority of all student organizations – do not understand their totalitarian opponent, and they are programmatically incapable of conducting a genuinely progressive fight against it.
The confusion among the student leaders on the nature and aims of the Communist Party is exploited by the Stalinists; the confusion permits them to exert a seeming influence far beyond their actual extent of control.
The City College strike committee has issued excellent strike directives, insisting that political parties must not be allowed to utilize the strike for their own partisan ends, demanding a maximum of order on the part of pickets, and instructing students not to interfere with those who wish to attend classes. The first mentioned order is certainly indicative of the Stalinists’ inability, so far, to control the strike. The other two instructions intelligently meet the given situation, which (we must remember) is a student strike and as such does not necessarily employ the same tactics as a trade-union strike.
 
If The Stalinists Control
But even if the Stalinists at City College did control the leadership of the strike lock-stock-and-barrel, that in itself would not necessarily determine our attitude. A socialist cannot base his activity on a concrete issue merely on the degree of Stalinist control.
The demands of the City College students are justified demands and IF the Stalinists were leading this strike of many thousands of students it would still remain the socialist’s responsibility to participate in the strike. But it would then be his additional responsibility to oppose the leadership of the strike, warning the students against the danger of the strike turning into a demonstration for Stalinist partisan interests.
On the other hand, IF the Stalinists at City College were to take over the leadership of the strike and maintain that leadership, then the original purposes of the strike would tend to give way to the propaganda speeches and slogans of the Communist Party. In that hypothetical situation the popular base of the emasculated strike would certainly dwindle and it might be incumbent upon socialists to withdraw their support. Speculations on these matters cannot be more definite.
The Stalinists are an important factor in the City College strike. There can be no doubt that they arc particularly anxious to gain control of it. This follows from the exclusive emphasis the Stalinists are giving to civil-rights issues on and off campus. It is obvious Stalinist policy in the schools is to avoid meetings on world political events. Instead, the activities of the CP-dominated clubs are devoted to social activities (folk-song festivals, square dancing, film presentations) and to campaigns and rallies on civil-rights issues.
 
Keep Away From Politics
The reasons for this approach merit elaboration.
The Stalinists cannot expect any worthwhile response for their position on world politics from the student body. Meetings devoted to justifying the Russian role in Berlin, the purges and trials behind the Iron Curtain or conditions within. Russia will boomerang. Precisely because the campus Stalinists are on the defensive in this field they have become extremely aggressive and “militant” on civil-rights issues.
This is designed to deflect attention from their role as agents of an unpopular totalitarian power and to deflect student concern from the brutal, undemocratic conditions in Russia and its satellite neighbors. The Stalinists hope to be in a position where they can effectively say to the student: “Why are you so concerned with reports about the lack of democracy and the existence of slave labor in Russia, when democratic rights are being abrogated at home?”
The Stalinists on campus, in order to make this abrogation of civil rights more vivid to the student, try to find local campus violations of academic freedom. Their question can then be posed: “Why listen to stories about conditions in Russia when democratic rights are being violated on your own campus?” This search for academic-rights issues is accompanied by conscious Stalinist efforts to make its members and front groups the victims of reactionary school administration regulations. This victimization is planned to give them further prestige and to facilitate their control of academic-rights struggles and their pretense to be the only real defenders of student rights.
CP Strategy
This strategy has another purpose. Not only is it intended to deflect attention from criticism of Russia but academic-rights issues can be used as a springboard from which the Stalinists can bring in most especially the government trials of the 11 Communist Party leaders. We can be sure that wherever the Stalinists, gain the upper hand in a student action for democratic rights that the trial of the 11 will eventually eclipse the immediate issues at stake.
Another important motivation behind the campus Stalinists’ campaigns on civil liberties is the more obvious organizational one: it is the easiest way they can win student sympathy, which in turn can be channelized into more direct organizational support for the CP fronts on campus.
In City College the Stalinists were particularly anxious for a prolonged strike as against the more realistic proposal of a one-day stoppage. A prolonged strike required more preparation and should not have been called before the Easter holidays. The Stalinists, with their smoothly operating machine inside of the Student Council, managed to push through a strike referendum which was so worded that even though a minority of those who voted were in favor of a prolonged strike, the extended strike was nevertheless called. The Stalinist pressure for a prolonged strike was motivated by the strategy described. This strategy will continue to be frustrated for the most part as long as they do not control the strike policy.
 







This is the way the AYD ends,
This is the way the AYD ends,
This is the way the AYD ends,
Not with a bang but a whimper.



Our apologies for this profane revision of T.S. Eliot, but we can think of no more fitting epitaph to the unlamented self-dissolution of the American Youth for Democracy (AYD).
This Stalinist front youth organization, initiated with much pomp and bombast in 1943, has quietly passed away; its unobtrusive end standing in marked contrast to all the noisy and expensive efforts of the Communist Party to build it into an impressive mass youth front. This organization, which received enough publicity in its five years to fill many issues of the Sunday papers, has passed oil! the American scene so quietly that neither the press nor many AYD members were aware of it. In true bureaucratic fashion the AYD was dissolved from above, without serious discussion among its rank and file, leaving many of its members unaware of the fact that their organization was no longer among the living.
The first we heard of the AYD’s demise was a leaflet distributed by its former chapter at the City College of New York (CCNY). The leaflet announced the end of AYD as a national organization, but informed the students that some local chapters would continue to function.
We attempted to check on the story by calling up the local and national offices of AYD, thinking that they might have been kept open for a few weeks. But, no luck; their phones were disconnected. We then called up the Stalinist Jefferson School. But they claimed complete ignorance. The Daily Worker was next. We asked them if they had a recent story on the disappearance of the AYD. The Daily Worker librarian told us that they never heard of such a thing and referred us to the New York County Committee of the Communist Party! We dutifully called up the Communist Party. The response from this quarter was likewise a disavowal of all knowledge about the AYD’s sorrowful end and an indignant query as to why the Daily Worker should have referred us to them in the first place!
Can ANYONE send us a few details about the AYD before we go into mourning?
The dissolution of the AYD, increasing the political vacuum on the American campus, brightens the prospects for the growth of a socialist student movement. Many AYDers will be repelled by the Stalinists manipulation of CP-inspired organizations. From this experience with Stalinism, it can be expected that non-Stalinist AYDers will be more receptive than heretofore to genuinely progressive organizations.
 
Shake-Up Coming?
A promise of the AYD’s burial was indicated during the last convention of its founding fathers, the Communist Party. At that time, the Communist Party, dissatisfied with the inability of the AYD to grow, decided on two courses of action with regard to youth work: one was to build a new mass youth front out of the remnants of AYD and an anticipated large youth section of the Wallace party; the second line of attack was to build a new Young Communist League which would draw members out of those sucked into the new front organization.
This, however, was before the Wallaceite debacle at the recent national elections. Following its defeat at the polls, the bottom fell out of the Wallace movement, dubbed the Progressive Party. The Young Progressive Party on campus, which looked so promising to the Stalinists before the elections, virtually collapsed. It has scarcely been heard from since then. With the now fading prospects for a significant Young Progressive Party and the total collapse of AYD, the Communist Party’s chances for a large youth affiliate have gone by the board.
This defeat for the Stalinists may have a larger meaning. The Communist Party not only looked toward the Progressive Party and its youth section as a fruitful arena for recruiting to a new Young Communist League, but as a powerful instrument in the labor movement and source of new members for the Communist Party itself. The failure of the Wallace movement may well presage a shake-up in the Communist Party. In all totalitarian parties mistakes must be punished. Therefore, it is not out of the question that the William Z. Foster (national chairman of the Communist Party) leadership which pressed most persistently for building up the Wallace movement, will be challenged for leadership. The expenditure of time and energy by the Stalinists on the Wallace organization resulted in a weakening of the Communist Party, a loss of membership, without a compensatory mass Wallace movement from which to recoup its losses and expand.
 




At Queens College, Olivet, University of Washington, Oregon and elsewhere the attacks on academic rights have spread like a political rash. There is no evidence of “conspiracy” between the administrations of these institutions, but the assault on student and faculty rights in each of them is politically related to the intensity of the cold war and the general uneasiness which grips the academic powers-that-be in such a pre-war atmosphere.
The attempts of civic and school administrations to stifle dissent is nothing new in the United States. But there are a number of unique aspects to this particular drive which need to be indicated and discussed.
The traditional source of inspiration, as well as the initiative for and leadership of the drive to “kick out the Reds” from the school system, is no longer the same. In the past it was the most prejudiced and reactionary forces – Hearst, for example – which virtually monopolized this “crusade.” Today, however, the spokesmen for suppression of classroom freedom include “socialists,” liberals of high academic standing and the like. These gentlemen have introduced a new ingredient into what is essentially the same anti-democratic stew. Unlike the Hearst followers of yesteryear, they do not emphasize chauvinism or jingoism but use a much more subtle approach: what they claim is the best interests of academic freedom.
The argument goes as follows: a teacher who is a member of the Communist Party is not a free agent but, on the contrary, must follow the dictates of his Russia-dominated party. He must bring into the classroom not only the curriculum but the various political twists and turns of his constantly gyrating organization. Therefore, the Stalinist as a teacher cannot be objective or allow for honest investigation and the free play of ideas, but must constantly channelize lecture and discussion in such a manner as to indoctrinate students with totalitarian concepts. Thus, the argument concludes, the Stalinist teacher falls outside the pale of academicians, privileged to teach in conformity with accepted democratic educational techniques.
 
Political Motivation
The story looks almost convincing on the surface but a bit of reflection is all that is necessary to unmask the superficiality of this approach.
To begin with, it must be pointed out that the Communist Party, is not the only reactionary institution which has its spokesmen on the campus. There are many others who must follow the dictates of their organizations. For example, a member of the Catholic Church who teaches, and there are many such, is bound by a discipline no less insistent than that of the Stalinists, to teach in accordance with his theological views. Otherwise he may be excommunicated by the church and as a result damned to the fires of everlasting hell. Therefore, isn’t it fair to conclude that the tie of a devout Catholic teacher to his church has at least as much compulsion as the obligation of a Communist faculty member to his party? At least the Communist Party has not as yet asserted its powers over individual destiny in the hereafter.
The answer lies outside the realm of educational philosophy. It is not an academic problem primarily, but a political one. The motivation for the drive against the Stalinists flows from the conflict between Russian and American imperialism and the desire on the part of the American ruling class to eliminate opposition to its ideology in our great halls of learning. It is the campus counterpart of loyalty purges and Taft-Hartleyism. What is more, this pressure is being felt, not only by the Stalinists, but, as is inevitable, by non-conformists of all types, liberals, pacifists, socialists, etc.
 
Exchange of Ideas
What must be pointed out next is the simple fact which is so freely overlooked by the sophisticated exponents of thought regulation. That is, that the Communist Party, fortunately, neither writes the textbooks nor makes up the curriculum for the course of study. It is impossible for any Stalinist, no matter how hard he tries, especially in the physical and natural sciences, to make his own Stalinist views more than incidental to what is the normal course of study.
The fact that a Stalinist history teacher may distort certain phases of his subject, is no more reason to fire him than the typical bourgeois teacher who is hardly objective in his approach.
One function of the classroom should be that of a laboratory wherein all ideas can be discussed and examined. From this point of view, the presence of Stalinists on teaching staffs serves a useful function of introducing students to this particular ideology. Students are not so intellectually frail that contact with Stalinist ideology via either other students or teachers will make them succumb to it in a democratic atmosphere. We should not fear, but rather welcome the opportunity to combat Stalinism in the open. The legal suppression of Stalinist teachers will not even accomplish its purpose of delimiting the influence they have had on the student body. On the contrary, it will afford the Stalinists the opportunity to utilize their mistreatment, pose as martyrs of the progressive cause and thus gain additional support from- the student body which might not be the case if students are permitted contact with all ideologies.
 
Analogy with Fascists
But aren’t you in favor of dropping fascists and Nazis from teaching staffs when they preach anti-Semitism, racial discrimination and labor-hating, the earmarks of this genre of totalitarianism? If so, why quibble over the dismissal of those who demonstrably owe allegiance to Stalinist totalitarianism? This argument by analogy is another clever approach employed to justify the recent firings. Let us see how valid it is.
The methods of fighting totalitarianism are not absolute. That is, they vary from situation to situation and from one kind of totalitarianism to another. The above question does not take this into consideration, and therein lies its essential fallacy. The teacher who teaches race hatred cannot be regarded in the same light as the one who tries to convince us of the blessings of Russian life. Today, those who can be swayed by a Nazi will not be the same element as those convinced by a Stalinist. The former will be the most backward students who are predisposed to racist propaganda; the latter are invariably the more rebellious students and they are the ones whom we must be most concerned with. The suppression of the Stalinist teacher will not break the rebellious student from Stalinism but only increase its prestige in his eyes.
In a comparison of the right of the Stalinist and the Nazi to teach, we must bear in mind the base of support each of these totalitarian forces has off campus. In the one case, the Stalinists have their support in a section of the working class; the Nazi or fascist organizations have support in the most backward wing of the middle class, land and capitalist class. We should be interested in winning away the Stalinist worker from his party; we do not show the same concern for the social base of the Nazi or fascist movement. We cannot break the Stalinist worker from his party by refusing his intellectual leaders the right to teach in the school system.
 
Standard of Competence
Another reason why progressives must defend the right of a Stalinist to teach, and not necessarily that of a fascist, is the fact that anti-Stalinist legislation on campus can be more easily broadened to include all those who are genuine opponents of American imperialism; off campus this kind of legislation can always be extended to include real left-wing parties and the labor movement itself.
No teacher should be barred from his profession on the basis of his convictions. The prime determinant must be, not political ideology, but competence in his particular field. If a Stalinist can teach math effectively then he is entitled – as is the Catholic or the advocate of “free love” – to be a teacher. For once the standard of competence is dropped and that of ideology substituted for it, no matter how “democratic” the motivation given, the consequence will spell disaster for freedom of education.
 




Do you remember what happened when anyone called the former American Youth for Democracy (AYD) a Communist Party front organization? All the abuse in the Stalinist slander lexicon was heaped on whoever dared suggest this. The most righteous indignation coming from the members of the Communist Party inside – and on top of – AYD.
If in 1945 you merely suspected that this organization’s support of military conscription was motivated by Russian foreign policy, you were obviously a “red-baiter” and a “reactionary.” If a year later you hinted that AYD was now against conscription because Russia’s foreign policy had changed, you were sure of being branded a “war-monger.”
Last month, in this column, we described the dissolution of this self- styled “broad youth organization.” At that time we did not have a copy of the referendum posing the question of dissolution before its membership (though this was decided long before any member voted on it). Now we have a copy. In the February 18 issue of the Daily Worker the referendum’s text is given in full. Here are some excerpts:
“To endorse the objective of helping to found a Marxist youth organization: to dissolve national organizations of AYD ...
“They are cooperating locally with youth and student clubs of the Communist Party and with a number of individual college and community Marxist societies. They are prepared to contribute effectively in the coming few months towards the building of a new national organization that will lead young people in the spirit and devotion to the working class, and democratic heritage of our country and goal of socialism.”
Now that the AYD is no more, nationally, and is very little more than the CP members on campus locally, the mask is abruptly and unconscionably torn off. The Stalinists evidently figured that with their “broad youth organization” flat on its back, they might as well get as much direct help as possible for the Communist Party from the few feebly thrashing local limbs of AYD. Thus, all pretense had to be done away with and local clubs are to help “found a Marxist youth organization” and cooperate locally with “youth and student clubs of the Communist Party.” If you look up the resolution on the youth question passed by the Communist Party at its last national convention, you will find that its new perspective is to “found a Marxist youth organization”!!!
In some ways it is difficult to understand why the Stalinists should openly reveal their control of a front organization, even if that revelation comes through a post-mortem, for the story of Stalinist control of the AYD will surely reach the ears of those who have been sucked into other fronts. We will do our bit on this score. It seems doubly foolish from the CP point of view considering the fact that AYD was one of the most controversial of its offsprings, with charges and denials of CP control running through the American press since AYD’s inception in 1943. Perhaps the only explanation is a cynical and bureaucratic indifference towards its past denials of sponsoring the AYD and dictating its policy now that it is defunct and of no use; and an equally cynical conviction that no matter what they do, they will be able to keep on convincing “innocents” that to call a Stalinist stooge organization by its real name is “red-baiting,” “reactionary” and “war-mongering.”
 




In theory an injunction is a court order which prohibits individuals or groups from committing lawless acts. This vague principle in itself sounds harmless enough. But in its concrete applications to labor, the injunction has proven to be the most effective tactic for breaking the back, of many workers struggles for better conditions. Put aside its innocuous dictionary, definition, strip it of wordy, legal embellishments and we get a clearer focus on what a labor injunction really is: government sanctioned strike-breaking.
It is not only the effects of labor injunctions that are vicious. The quality of labor injunctions as a means – or a technique – is on a reactionary level, consistent with its aims. A brief examination of injunction procedure will bear this out.
Injunctions fall into three general categories: the temporary restraining order, the temporary injunction and the permanent injunction. Into the first class fall court orders recognizing the “validity” and “urgency” of an employers complaint, which prevents union activities without having notified the union first. The decree comes as a complete surprise to the union, and the workers must wait for a hearing before they can even hope to get the restraining order dismissed. In the meantime the union .is paralyzed and morale begins to sink. When the hearing finally takes place (often after delays granted to company lawyers) the court invariably lives up to its essential class character and grants a more definite and strangling writ against the workers – the “temporary injunction.”
“Temporary injunction” is actually a misnomer. It may be months or even years before the issue can be argued in court. In the interim the workers are prevented from using all the normal means of fighting to win their grievances. Unless the union is willing to risk contempt proceedings, the workers cannot meet, picket, agitate or in any significant way advance their interests. The result is almost always the same: a broken morale, depleted strike funds and finally another government court-broken strike. Or, in the not infrequent temporary injunction against unionization, the unorganized workers are intimidated, the union organizers are prohibited from discussing or recruiting to their union and the drive is stymied by the anti-labor conspiracy of the capitalist and his federal (or state) court.
Contempt proceedings are an integral part of the anti-labor injunction tactic. Without contempt proceedings or the threat of it, the injunction would be ineffective.
At the slightest display of resistance to court imposed restrictions the union is charged with contempt of court. The workers are fined, the strike leaders are put in jail, and the government noose around union activities is drawn tighter. Often the attributed violations of the injunction are fantastically far-fetched or purely fictitious, made up for the purpose of enabling the court to bring down the full force of its judicial power on the head of the union.
Another important problem relative to injunction procedure, is the absence of jury trials in such cases. When an application for a labor injunction is made, the judge is also the jury. The union, denied trial by jury, must plead its case to a capitalist judge who seldom is interested in the legal rights of the union, and even less concerned with their needs and demands. This is also true of contempt proceedings. The union has to prove, not to a jury but to the judge who issued the injunction, that it was not in contempt. Under such adverse conditions the union’s chances for exercising any legal rights is obviously negligible.
Several weeks ago, we discussed the most important of the early injunction cases: The Debs case. We saw how eagerly and effectively the government courts responded to the railroad magnates’ plea for help, with an injunction and subsequent contempt proceedings which finally crushed the strike. We cannot describe minutiae, or even give the background of any of the thousands of injunctions which followed the Debs case in one article. However, it is important to note the following facts: Between 1901–1927 there were 118 reported applications to Federal Courts for injunctive “relief” against union drives and strikes. Of this number, one hundred were granted! But this is only the figure for reported cases. There are innumerable unreported injunctions. Also, we must remember that the 118 reported cases were applications to Federal Courts. The number of injunctions granted by state and local courts are almost too many to count. In New York State alone, from 1923 to 1927, there were 48 reported applications for labor injunctions of which 35 were granted. This figure too refers only to reported cases.
A few quotations from injunction texts in important precedent-setting cases, should help us to understand the reactionary sweep and vindictiveness of labor injunctions.
From a restraining order issued by Judge Wilkerson during the 1922 railroad strike: Striking workers were enjoined from “in any manner conspiring, combining, confederating, agreeing and arranging with each other or with any person or persons, organizations or associations to injure, interfere with or hinder said railway companies ...” In another part the order prevented the workers from “aiding, abetting, directing or encouraging any persons or person, organizations or associations by letter, telegram, telephone, or word of mouth, or otherwise (!) to do any of the acts aforesaid.” (Emphasis mine – J.F.)
An “improvement” on previous injunctions was made by Federal Judge Benson W. Hough, in a startling order during an important and bitter coal strike in 1927, which made it mandatory that “each picket should be a citizen of the United States and shall be able to speak the English language.” Testifying before a Senate committee, AFL President Green pointed out that “... More than 90 per cent of the workers in these mines in Eastern Ohio are foreign speaking men ...”
State injunctions have been no less rabid than those issued by Federal courts. Just one quote from a typical state court injunction should indicate this. In the 1926 injunction against the Interborough Rapid Transit workers of New York City, we read that the defendant, individuals and union, “and each of their agents, servants, attorneys, confederates and any other persons acting in aid or concert with them” were enjoined from “holding or causing to be held meetings of the employees of the plaintive for the purpose of using persuasion or exhorting them to absent themselves from their places of duty or to leave the service of the plaintive.” Furthermore, the workers were forbidden “to make demands upon the plaintive for increased wages ... And further down the text declares that the workers cannot ... congregate, picket or loiter in or on the neighborhood of the plaintives cars ... or other premises for the purpose of inducing or persuading plaintive’s employees to desist from their duties.”
 




The speeches and articles of politicians discussing America’s educational accomplishments have been long and bombastic. From ward-heelers to Senators we have heard an infinite number of times stock phrases such as “our finest educational system in the world” and “millions spent for education.”
Let us examine the meaning of the first platitude: “finest educational system in the world.” Viewed relatively, there is more than a grain of truth to it. Compared to devastated Europe or barbaric Stalinist Russia, educational opportunities in America appear good. But a comparison of this nature is misleading. An educational system, superior by comparison with other countries cannot be equated to an educational system superior in itself.
The relative worth of our educational system has some significance, but it is not valid as a measure of actual educational achievement in America. The fact that other countries are extremely deficient in providing adequate and progressive educational facilities for their youth does not in any way justify what we will sec to be the appalling failure of America’s educational opportunities.
 

Some Facts on Education
The National Educational Association (NEA) has just published an annual report to the public titled, Our Children. Though the NEA is a conservative, semi-official group, its report is factual and objective. The facts published are startling. I am sure that even the wisest of us would sit back and re-read with incredulity some of the facts concerning the status of America’s educational level and school facilities.
Space allows for only a few of the more important facts uncovered in this study, with a minimum of editorial comments.

In the 1940 census it was discovered “that there were twice as many adults who had never gone to school at all as there were students in our institutions of higher learning.”
 
The same census showed that these “average citizens of twenty years of age had attended school for only nine years.” That means that the average-American does not pass the high school freshman stage.
 
The census also revealed that there were ten million in America who are “functionally illiterate.” In four states, Louisiana, South Carolina, Mississippi and Georgia, more than 30 per pent of adults over twenty-five years did not have more than four years grammar school to their credit. The national percentage for this category of semi-literate adults is amazingly high, 13.57 per cent – more than one out of every eight!
 
Indicative of the low educational levels is the fact that 676,000 were rejected by the Selective Service for mental and educational backwardness. And those who were in the army, perhaps know best, from personal observation, that the Selective Service standards could not have been very high.
 
In 1940 “there were more inmates of prisons, mental institutions, and aims houses, than there were students in universities.”

Our capitalist society is evidently more conducive to developing paupers, delinquents and neurotics than to the growth of well-educated and adjusted adults.
 
Despite child labor laws and compulsory school laws there are five million young people of school age who are not in school.

(To be continued)
 




The unenviable position of America’s teachers is beginning to emerge from obscurity. Front page articles reporting teacher conditions and teacher demands are common today. Their problems have aroused nationwide interest in the status of American education. They have been awakened not merely to the new problems created by the teacher shortage but to the aggravated traditional problems of our school system: inadequate school budgets, lack of health programs, unequal educational facilities ... Taking cognizance of this public interest in education, a number of feature writers have been assigned series of articles on the social and economic status of the teaching profession and on education in general.
Insofar as many of these newspaper studies are objective and factual they are useful. But the objectivity of capitalist journalism obviously has its limits. The most shocking condition in our school system is permitted to pass without serious reporting or editorial comment. That condition is – discrimination of students because of color or creed.
Educational discrimination is still typical ot the South and is becoming more and more of a problem in the North. Religious and racial minorities above the Mason and Dixon line are finding discrimination, condoned by local and state authorities, an ever increasing obstacle in their path. The failure of the New York State legislature to provide a bias-free state university is just one of the many cases in point.
However, it is still in the South that unequal educational opportunities are most shocking. There young Negroes are forced by state segregation laws to attend separate schools which are for the most part broken down and unsafe, staffed with inferior teachers and without proper equipment.
In The New York Times of Feb. 18, Benjamin Fine, that paper’s education director, devotes his ninth in a series of ten articles to the differences between state expenditures for education. He correctly points out that Mississippi spends only $25 on an average for each child as compared with five times that sum spent in New York. All of which is true and important. But why doesn’t Mr. Fine point out that the $25 spent in Mississippi is only an average? Actually it is $57 spent for white pupil and only $7 for Negro pupil. Is the omission of this fact a mere accident, or is it the typical method which capitalist journalists use to cover up the rotten society.
This intra-state racial discrimination has even more significance than the inter-state school budget differential. The source material for Fine’s figures and those offered here were the same: a nationwide 1940 census. Yet the more innocuous figure is used by Fine and thereby the damning fact is evaded. Nor does he indicate that the same census concealed that only 32 per cent of the amount spent for the education of white pupils was allocated by the authorities for Negroes in nine southern states during 1939 and 1940. Nor does he show that racial discrimination among southern teachers parallels the fate suffered by Negro students in the South. In 17 southern states Negro teachers, working under infinitely more difficult conditions, received only half the pay of white teachers.
Is it any wonder that only two out of five Negroes, trapped between economic poverty and unequal state allowances for schools and teachers, have been able to pass the fourth grade in school? Another fact conveniently forgotten by Mr. Fine in an article which discusses the educational levels of the American people! The facts are there; but Mr. Fine is interested only in some of them. We intend to publicize all of them.
 




According to capitalists and capitalist-inspired theoreticians, government is above classes. It is, they say, an impartial system which recognizes and administers to the needs of the people in general. Socialists, on the other hand, deny this. They maintain that a government is a class institution which is primarily concerned with maintaining the rule of one class against the encroachments of another; in America, of protecting the capitalist class against the wants and needs of the working class.
In the history of American courts, socialists find an almost perfect test tube illustration of the inherent partiality of government institutions to big business. As long ago as 1828 a perspicacious American senator said that “the power of wealth ... is harmless without the connivance of judges.” In two quick phrases the senator accurately summed up the essential relationship between big business and the judiciary.
The background for court orders restraining workers from fighting for better conditions was provided by the victory of the Northern capitalists in the Civil War, which set the future industrial pattern of American life. On the heels of this triumph there followed a tremendous growth of American industry and a concomitant development of a large and permanent working class. By the 1890’s the industrial system finally emerged as the dominant characteristic of economic life in America.
 
Early History
The American labor movement did not keep pace with this rapid industrial growth. The Knights of Labor, with its vague idealistic program, and a membership which crossed class lines, was passing out of existence by 1890. The American Federation of Labor was in its infancy at this time and had but a few hundred thousand members.
Though the organized labor movement was weak, its possibilities for growth in a rapidly expanding capitalist system were tremendous. The new and powerful capitalist class was conscious of this, consequently, it resorted to crudest tactics in an effort to smash unionism as an existing and potential force.
In the early labor struggles the industrialists found the quickest and most effective anti-union weapon in injunctions and restraining orders issued by state and federal courts. Whenever the capitalists were hard pressed by an aggressive working class, they repeatedly turned to the courts for aid and comfort. The courts, in turn, which had the power to enforce and interpret the laws, have an almost unblemished record of answering the demands of the bosses with restraining orders and injunctions.
If we examine several earlier injunction cases in the two industries which have been most affected by such court orders, railroads and coal, we get a more accurate picture of the connection between the capitalist class and the government.
 
The Sherman Act
The history of the labor injunction actually began in 1890 with the passage of the Sherman anti-Trust Act. The Sherman act was supposedly aimed at the growing monopolies. It outlawed, as conspiracies, combinations which interfered with interstate commerce. On the surface it appeared to be progressive. Union leaders hailed it as a victory for labor. But the labor movement was soon to learn that the Sherman act far from curbing monopoly was to be repeatedly invoked as a legal basis for anti-labor-injunctions.
The wage scale and living conditions of the Pullman Company shopmen in the 1890’s were among the lowest in the country. Some workers were paid as little as $1.50 per day. They lived in company owned houses and the pittance they received for a salary was further thinned down by deductions for rent, gas and water.
As if these conditions were not wretched enough the Pullman Company announced in 1894 a twenty per cent wage cut. The shopmen who were well organized, replied with a strike. Fortunately the shopmen secured the help of the American railway union led by Eugene Debs, whose members refused to haul trains that included cars built by the Pullman Company.
The capitalist statesmen and press unleashed a ferocious campaign against the strikers. But in the face of verbal threats and physical assaults by company police, the railroaders remained solid. Even when the government sent troops into striking areas the workers would not budge. It appeared as if nothing could crack their solidarity.
 
The Arrest of Debs
But the Pullman Company found a valuable ally in the government and a worthy agent in Richard Olney, U.S. Attorney General and ex-chief counsel of the Erie Railroad. At the instigation of the attorney general a suit was brought against Debs and the striking workers. The charge was interfering with government mails and interstate commerce. The legal basis was the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.
The government courts issued a sweeping injunction against the strikers and “all persons – whether identified or not” with the strike. The injunction prevented the workers from “compelling or inducing or attempting to compel or induce by threats, intimidations, persuasion, force or violence, any of the employees of any of the said railroads to refuse or fail to perform any of their duties as employees of any of said railroads.” (Emphasis mine – J.F.) The workers were gagged by the government. The edict deprived them of every means including speech (“persuasion”) of winning their demands.
Despite this government trust against the militant workers they did not go back to work. But the government courts, persistent in their drive, found four strike leaders guilty of contempt and sentenced Debs to six months in jail.
With the strike decapitated by the government the workers became demoralized and the strike was swiftly ended.
The Debs case set the precedent. The government by injunction became for a number of years the favorite strike-breaking technique of the capitalist class.
 




While the status of the Socialist Youth League today doesn’t warrant an ambitious newspaper project, it is nonetheless vitally necessary for our organization to have a respectable pamphlet which will present the program and aims of the SYL. As yet we do not have a single printed publication of our own.
An SYL pamphlet can accomplish two things:

It should have an inner educational value and help raise the morale of our units.
 
Of at least equal importance it will help considerably in our contacting and recruiting.
 


Asks Contributions
Number of young people have recently requested of our national office literature presenting the SYL program. Just think how much more effective it would be if in reply we could not only send Labor Action and other Workers Party publications, but supplement them with a pamphlet published by the SYL, emphasizing such youth problems as conscription, inadequate education, lack of job training, etc., etc.
At the last meeting of our Buro, it was decided that every effort must be made in the next month to secure the finances from members and friends to overcome this sorely felt lack of educational and agitational material. Quotas for our various youth units have not yet been made. But it is certain that the cost of a 16 or 32 page pamphlet cannot be met by the SYL without the help of friends. Our comrades are young people from working class families without independent means. We are therefore asking readers and sympathizers to send in contributions, no matter how small, to help raise the $200 required to finance this limited but necessary project.
 

Chicago Leads Recruiting
In terms of recruiting at least, the Chicago SYL unit is setting the pace. A month ago we didn’t have a real unit in that city – only a fraction and an ineffective one at that. Today, largely through the efforts of Comrades Waller and Martin we have a relatively large, functioning unit there. Seven young comrades were recruited in recent weeks and in a letter from Comrade Waller, we are assured that in six months we will have a flourishing unit in Chicago “of between 30 and 50 members.”
The Chicago unit has embarked on an intensive educational campaign. Well publicized educationals are held each week and in addition, a new class on Shachtman’s pamphlet Fight for Socialism will begin shortly.
 




During the war, the Stalinists, who were super-patriots in America, tried to show their good faith with American capitalism by “dissolving” themselves. However, this was a Kremlin-sponsored farce which no one took seriously. All the Stalinists did was to change their name from Communist Party to Communist Political Association. The reactionary political content and activity of American Stalinism was not changed.
Just as the Stalinist Party thought it necessary to continue functioning under an assumed name, so did the Young Communist League reconstitute itself in new garb. Instead of the radical-sounding Young Communist League they now bear the respectable title of American Youth for Democracy.
Despite its superficially progressive appeal, and by virtue of its complete control by the Stalinists, the AYD’s political program is basically reactionary. Using almost the identical cliches as the Daily Worker, the AYD calls upon American youth to support and place their faith in “unity of the Big Three.” They do not see or do not want to see the inherently reactionary content and nature of British and American capitalism.
It should go without saying that there isn’t a word of criticism against rapacious Russian imperialism in any AYD publication. Not even a suggestion of a complaint against such typical Nazi-like acts as importing slave labor from conquered countries, leveling the industries of over-run lands (Manchuria), or the exclusion of the oppressed European Jews. The AYD has nothing but admiration for the political prison that Russia is today.
Not only the politics but the internal life of the AYD bears an odious resemblance to the tactics of its CP mentors. Serious differences of opinion are not only discouraged, but prohibited in bulletins and at meetings.
In the proceedings of the second national convention of the AYD an hysterical resolution on Trotskyism was passed which read as if it had been lifted from the proceedings of the Moscow frame-up trials. There is the same verbiage and methodology in this resolution that characterized the Russian witch-hunt. All left-wing critics of the reactionary AYD-Stalinist line are lumped together under the all-inclusive title “Trotskyites” and abused as “stool pigeons, disrupters, red-baiters.”
A number “of these wrecking individuals,” the AYD resolution informs us, were expelled by AYD clubs in California, Pennsylvania, New York and elsewhere. No doubt these junior Vyshinskys would have liked to report the Trotskyists shot instead of expelled. Among the reasons for their expulsion given in the resolution is the fact that “Trotskyists actively opposed the Second World War as a reactionary war” and “sabotaged labor’s wartime no-strike pledge.”
On count 1, we plead guilty. The Workers Party and its youth section, the Socialist Youth League, regarded it as their elementary socialist duty to expose and fight against the imperialist character of the Second World War. Revolutionary socialists everywhere worked ceaselessly with their limited forces to indicate to the working class that the real aims of the war were completely alien to their needs.
On count 2, the Trotskyists will just as readily sign a confession. Precisely because as revolutionists they maintained their socialist perspective during the war, they were opposed to the union movement surrendering its most powerful weapon – the right to strike.
Actually, these two AYD charges against left-wing and socialist critics are a confession of its own reactionary politics.
 

s Jacobson: From Star to Bit Player – The reasons for McCarthy’s Sinking Fortunes (Spring 1955)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Writing as Julius Falk
From Star to Bit Player
The reasons for McCarthy’s Sinking Fortunes
(Spring 1955)

First Published: Notes of the Month, The New International, Vol. XXI No. 1 (Whole No. 167), Spring 1955.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

FOUR YEARS AGO IN WHEELING, West Virginia, a relatively obscure senator speaking at a political rally dramatically waved a sheaf of papers. It was the climactic moment of a speech inveighing against the alleged treachery of the Democratic Party, delivered in a voice and manner that have become so painfully familiar since then. Speaking “from deep down inside,” to borrow one of the senator’s favored expressions, he informed the nation through his audience that he held in his hand a list of 205 communists currently in the employ of the State Department. The tightly clutched papers were promptly put back into the briefcase lest a gust of wind blow the “documents” among the newsmen and thereby prematurely bury McCarthy’s ambitions.
McCarthy’s extravagant accusation against Truman and Acheson made in Wheeling was a political gamble; a throw of the dice by an ambitious man of mediocre talents seeking notoriety and support through irresponsibility. There was no way of knowing in 1950 whether charges of treachery against the Democratic administration would lead to oblivion or popularity. The day following the Wheeling episode McCarthy himself must have been surprised to learn that he had rolled a “natural.” The ferocity and vehemence of his charges almost immediately brought both the wide acclamation and the animosity he sought. He had hit upon the technique which, within the context of the times, could lead him to a positon of enormous influence in American politics and make him an internationally feared figure: decry “communism” in government, expose “communism” in the Democratic Party, spotlight “communists” in industry, wave fraudulent papers, follow through with sensational investigations, etc.; perform these activities with a perverse devotion to vilification and a passionate disregard for truth that would single him out from all other witchhunters, and his future seemed assured.
Though McCarthy gambled in 1950, his success was not accidental. The element of risk had been sharply reduced by the political climate of the times. Had these charges been made against Roosevelt or Marshall during any of the farmer’s four administrations their author would have been relegated to the category of public nuisance. McCarthy’s allegations could be given credence only in a period of profound reaction. This reaction set in and developed in tempo paralleling the inevitable rift and conflict between American capitalism and Stalinism. The architects who laid its foundations were the same Democratic Party politicians in power who were now to become the target of McCarthy’s sledge hammer blows. Before McCarthy’s name was splashed all over the front pages, the social phenomenon now known as McCarthyism had already grown from seed to sapling and its poisonous roots were deeply and firmly imbedded in America’s political soil. The atmosphere of fear and suspect-thy-neighbor, the firings, witchhunting and defamation, this sickly political complexion of postwar capitalism virulent by 1950, permitted the success of McCarthy’s gamble; it raised him not out of the sewer, but with it onto the center stage of American politics.
After Wheeling, McCarthy wedded the anti-Communist technique proclaiming, in effect, a monogamous monopoly over it. His life was circumscribed by his political bride. All of his energies and interests revolved around exposing “communism and corruption in government” more militantly than his nearest competitors. McCarthy as no one before him, succeeded in raising communist hunting to an exclusive political way of life. In three years the senator won the enthusiastic support of millions, he received powerful support from men in Washington who admired and feared him, his influence was decisive in senatorial races and he earned the profitable respect of Texas oil tycoons.
McCarthy bludgeoned his way to the peak of his career by the end of 1953. At that time, a poll taken by the American Institute of Public Opinion (Gallup) revealed that of many thousands who were polled from different geographic areas and economic categories, 50 per cent endorsed the senator’s activities. It also indicated that his support was more or less equally distributed among all social classes.
 
IF MCCARTHY’S RISE to his peak in 1953 was at a whirlwind rate, his loss of popular support and decline in official standing has been jet propelled. As of this moment, slightly more than a year since McCarthy attained his pinnacle of success, he is not thought of by the citizenry as either a public menace or a public hero. He is either not thought of at all, or as one of the nation’s most crashing political bores – which is in itself no mean achievement in current American politics.
The measure of McCarthy’s lost prestige and power can best be taken by a brief review of pertinent 1954 election figures.
In McCarthy’s home state, Wisconsin, Republican Governor Kohler squeezed through by a margin of 33,000 over his Democratic opponent, William Proxmire. In 1952, however, Kohler was elected to the governorship by a majority of 400,000 over the same opponent. In the earlier election the governor received 62 per cent of the vote while in the recent contest it dropped to 51 per cent. If the November contest had not been an off-year election, McCarthy’s gubernatorial candidate might have been defeated. Again, in Wisconsin, the pro-McCarthy incumbent, Charles Kersten of Milwaukee, was defeated in the race for Congress by an openly anti-McCarthy Democrat, Henry Reuss.
In Michigan, one of McCarthy’s pet Neanderthalites, Kit Clardy, was defeated for re-election to the House. In New Jersey, Clifford Case, “left-wing” Republican whose campaign for the Senate was publicly sabotaged by McCarthy, won an upset victory. In Colorado, Democrat Edwin Johnson, who was on the Watkins Committee and the object of McCarthy’s special scorn, was elected governor. In Illinois, Senator Paul Douglas, whose anti-McCarthy reputation is as large as it is unearned, defeated his ultra-reactionary opponent, Joseph Meek, publicly embraced “by McCarthy, by a large margin. In Montana, Senator Murray, who has been one of the more spirited Democratic opponents of McCarthy was re-elected. In Michigan the powerful right-wing Republican, Homer Ferguson, was beaten for re-election to the Senate.
The Senate motion to condemn McCarthy in line with the report of the Watkins Committee which passed by a. vote of 67-22 is the only statistic one needs to gauge the senator’s calamitous drop in official standing. What must be underlined here is that a successful motion to repudiate McCarthy was unthinkable before 1954.
The 22 votes against the censure motion cannot by any stretch of the imagination be interpreted as coming from senators who owe undying fealty to McCarthy. When Senator McCarthy saw fit to vent his spleen on Eisenhower in a public break with the administration following the President’s praise of Senator Watkins, the most important of the 22 senators who voted against condemning McCarthy in the Senate were quick to dissociate themselves publicly from McCarthy’s malevolence. Even Everett Dirksen made it politely clear that he would not follow McCarthy into the lion’s den. McCarthy is no Daniel in Dirksen’s well thumbed bible.
During the debate on the Watkins report, the McCarthyites saw fit for the first time to initiate an independent organization on a national scale, the Ten Million Americans Mobilizing for Justice. Unlike the extreme right wing “For America” group which operates as an “educational” and pressure group inside the Republican Party, the “Ten Million” attempted to form an organization outside the confines of the two major parties, not limited to propaganda, but busily engaged in such activities as petitioning and organizing mass meetings to combat the censure movement in Congress. Though it was not projected as a permanent organization, it was at the very least a feeler for a possible third party movement and intended as a threat to the Republican Party leadership. Had this movement succeeded in arousing a significant amount of interest and support, McCarthy could either have used its success as a club inside the Republican Party to recover his declining fortunes, or as a vehicle for a third party jaunt, should he have felt compelled to break formally with the party.
But the “Ten Million” died aborning. It charged onto the national scene with a rafter of retired admirals, generals, professional bigots and politicians at the head of a brigade of old ladies, priests and true white patriots, and as though exhausted by the very effort of the attack, quietly collapsed and disintegrated before coming within sight of the enemy. It had arranged for mass meetings in three of America’s largest cities. Two were called off and the third, held at New York’s Madison Square Garden was a first class fiasco. The “Ten Million” predicted a capacity crowd of 20,000 with an overflow of many thousands listening outside the gates. The turnout was little more than half of what was expected and traffic outside the Garden was not impeded by swarms of enthusiastic McCarthyites.
The “Ten Million” was no more successful in its petitioning. As the name indicates, ten million signatures were to be collected protesting the move to censure McCarthy. Most of the energies of the organization were focused on this objective. Petitioners gathered outside of Catholic churches and priests cajoled inside; 10-year-old parochial school children were obliged to become signatories and circulators of the petitions. There were numerous reported instances of individuals intimidated into signing. Nevertheless, when all was added up, the “Ten Million” did not even claim much more than a fifth of its goal although the drive was extended ten days. If one were to deduct fraudulent and coerced signatures, ten per cent might be a charitable figure.
On February 10th of this year, the “Ten Million” gave up the ghost “without so much as a post mortem or a two-paragraph obituary in the leading New York papers. It left in its un-lamented wake a few scattered, local groups the most recent of which is the Americans for American Action headed by former Democratic Governor of New Jersey, Charles Edison.
An interesting statistical show of McCarthy’s decline was evidenced in another Gallup Poll released on November 6, 1954. This poll was on the pro and con of the move to censure McCarthy. Fifty-six per cent of those polled favored censure of McCarthy, 12 per cent were of no opinion and 32 per cent did not think that censure was proper. While there can be no question that the 56 per cent who favored censure were anti-McCarthy it is reasonable to assume that the 32 per cent in opposition to censure were not all motivated by loyalty to the senator. Compare these figures to the 50 per cent support of McCarthy shown by the Gallup Poll ten months earlier and we have a graphic picture of his decline.
 
The Rise of McCarthyism as a Factor
in McCarthy’s Decline
WE SEE IN THE RISE of McCarthyism one of the more important reasons for the decline of McCarthy. But before discussing this paradox, it is necessary to define our terms a little more clearly.
The definition of McCarthyism is not an arbitrary question, a matter of individual choice where one can say “this is what I mean by McCarthyism” and another can provide McCarthyism with a content at great variance to it. In the very choice of the term “McCarthyism” there is recognition, consciously or not, of something new and specific which does not allow for much ambiguity or conflicting definitions. The term is a new label and new political labels which are permanently incorporated in our political vocabulary are resorted to only when we consciously acknowledge or at least sense a profound political change. The most accurate and politically useful definition of McCarthyism, then, is not one which merely notes surface manifestations of change, but which also answers the questions: how deep are these changes in American politics, how permanent are they, who and what is responsible for them?
McCarthyism is most commonly thought of by liberals and respectable conservatives as an assault on democratic rights by reactionaries and the use of particularly offensive witch-hunting techniques promoted by extreme right wing irresponsibles m either or both major parties. We reject this definition. If McCarthyism is something’ new, for which traditional terms are obsolescent or not sufficiently dramatic, then this definition fails to demonstrate it. This theory is weak in that it implicitly underestimates the extensiveness of the McCarthyist virus. McCarthyism becomes nothing more than the offensive of right-wing elements in Congress and in the two parties; throw these reactionaries out of office, crush the extreme right wing in both parties and the political devil will have “been exorcised. McCarthyism in this view is little more than a road sign, reading “Danger, Bad Men At Work.” We wish that such were the case, for then we might find a ready detour. [1]
In our opinion, what is qualitatively different in American politics today that necessitates a new label is the gradual nibbling away at the foundations of bourgeois democracy; but this destructive process is not engineered solely or even primarily by one wing of capitalism against another determined to preserve the rights and institutions of bourgeois democracy. McCarthyism in our view is the label which refers simply to the class politics of American capitalism as a whole. McCarthyism, which is manifested by subversive lists, feverish investigations, loyalty oaths, the Smith Act, McCarran Act, Taft-Hartley, executive orders, is the political methodology of a bourgeoisie which is frightened and panicked – not without reason – in its struggle with Stalinism. Just to list these tangible symptoms of McCarthy-ism should be sufficient evidence that this threat to basic civil liberties is a class offensive – though not a united one.
It makes as little sense to evaluate McCarthyism in terms of right-wing politicians as to ascribe the Permanent War Economy to the ideology of Truman’s economic advisers. Both the Permanent War Economy and McCarthyism in their early phases were introduced by the left wing of the Democratic Party; they have flourished under the liberal wing of the Republican Party and no wing of either party can consider fundamentally reversing this economic and political drift of American capitalism. The hope that some see in the Fair Deal wing of the Democratic Party as the agency which will save America from McCarthyism, is, itself, a reflection of the drastic shift to the right in the nation’s political values. It has not mobilized masses of people against McCarthyism and it will not, because the Fair Deal is deeply committed to this political attitude.
The most reactionary law to date which in effect illegalizes the Communist Party – and which can be broadly interpreted to include any Marxist party – was introduced by Hubert Humphrey and rushed through by the Fair Deal Democrats. It is true that there are those Democrats who, moved by some dimmed sense of conscience, pretend to resist McCarthyism with all their feeble strength – but they voted for the Humphrey bill; there are those who owe their congressional seats to labor support and minority group backing and feel compelled to vocalize on the virtues of democracy – but they voted for the Humphrey bill; there are the politically sophisticated Democratic senators who, recogni2ing the damage done to American prestige abroad by McCarthyism, are emphatic in their opposition to excesses – but they voted for the Humphrey bill.
Our point is not to be misconstrued as placing all wings of either or both parties in the same file folder, labelled “McCarthyists.” Between the Republicans and the Democrats, and within the Democratic Party between the Southern reactionaries and the Fair Dealers, significant differences do exist on the question of democracy. The Republican Party, more so than ever, the party of big business, its politics are particularly crude with strong isolationist and powerful chauvinist pulls and with a voting base in the more backward rural areas. Thus, it feels relatively comfortable in the McCarthyist era compared to the Democratic Party with its more liberal traditions, its powerful labor backing, its greater sophistication and its recent history in world affairs which makes even it suspect by the extreme McCarthyist criteria of subversion.
What is more, we will grant that the impact on the democratic consciousness of the nation would vary considerably given a sweep of the Democratic Party in the 1956 Presidential elections as against a Republican victory. A Democratic victory might well tend to relax the grip of McCarthyism for a limited time. A winning Republican ticket headed by the Eisenhower wing would try to keep McCarthyism within “moderately progressive” limits. But a right-wing Republican victory would unquestionably tighten the McCarthyist stranglehold.
We do not minimize, then, the genuine differences on the question of democracy which exist in bourgeois politics, but this does not vitiate in any way our main point that all wings cf both parties are functioning within the framework of McCarthyism. The Fair Dealers, the left wing of American capitalism, do not include in their “liberal” program a return to classical bourgeois liberalism, but limit themselves to the liberalization of McCarthyism. America has become so psychologized to McCarthyism and its shift in values so accented, that no one can sensibly expect the Fair Dealers to do anything more than slow up its tempo. This shift in values has already gone to such extremes that even the Southern Democrats can be lavished with unashamed praise by our most enlightened liberals for the role they played in the Senate debate on the Watkins Committee recommendations to censure Senator McCarthy. One got the impression from Murray Kempton, writing in The New York Post, for example, that Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina far from being the Southern bourbon he is, is a kindly, good-natured, fair and square sort of fellow; a cross between a mint-julep – Southern – gentleman, and an evangelist. In one rhapsodic column on Senator Ervin, a man whose last consideration would be to undermine McCarthyism., Kempton concludes with a generalization about the anti-McCarthy Southern Democrats:
The true conservatives who are not new because true conservatism is well-seasoned by definition have spoken up at last. They are fighting from the old secure ground for principles they grew up with. It is nice to hear from them again.
Who would have thought only five years ago that political standards would be lowered so drastically that a left-wing liberal would virtually bedeck himself with Confederate grey, even if only in an off moment?
This preeminence of McCarthyism produced the paradox that is central to our discussion. As McCarthyism has taken firm, root, it has served as a determinant for McCarthy’s relaxed hold on the public imagination. In 1950, McCarthy was a unique phenomenon, outstanding in his lack of subtlety and candor. His unexcelled militancy in his war against alleged “subversion” was not in contradiction to the spirit of 1950 but far in advance of it. But McCarthy and his singular “style” in 1950 have proved to have been but an interesting preview of things, including politicians, to come. As the post-war reaction evolved from a mood to a virtual political institution; from reactionary laws only occasionally enforced, to even more sweeping laws and witch-hunting on a large scale, McCarthy with his limited imagination, has had the wind taken, out of his sullied sails. Activities and accusations which once bore the distinctive McCarthy trademark are now uttered with the greatest of nonchalance by leaders of his own party – and by the Democrats. For example – within his own party – the charge of treason against the Democrats which McCarthy made explicit in his party-sponsored speeches in 1952 had a startling effect on the nation. Since then, however, that charge or its equivalent has been hurled against Democratic ex-presidents by such “moderate progressives” as Dewey, Brownell, Nixon and even by Eisenhower. While the frequency of the charge may not reduce its political effectiveness, its choral performance has acted as a levelling force on McCarthy by bringing his fellow party members down to his once private pit.
 
THE FULL MEASURE of this decay of democratic values can be gauged by the attitude toward democracy of our educated liberals, men of learning and presumed enlightenment who pride themselves on intellectual independence, and prefer not to think of themselves as political automatons.
For the most part, these men who might at least set an intellectual tone of rebellion over methodical encroachments on democracy have not seen fit to give organized and principled battle to the legions of reaction and anti-intellectualism. What is worse, many of them have gone over to McCarthyism, some with reluctance, others with abandon. The bulk of the intellectual liberal world puts up a confused resistance to the more extreme symptoms oÂ£ McCarthyism at the same time partially adapting to it, accepting as necessary some of its concrete measures and many of its premises. Instead of functioning as the conscience of America, it has for the most part provided the government with apologists, rationalizers, advisers and authorities on the boundaries of witchhunting.
Almost as though to demonstrate this, a book has been published recently, written by two prominent liberals: McCarthy and the Communists by James Rorty and Moshe Decter. The book merits some reference here not only for what the authors have to say, but because it was sponsored by America’s leading organization of liberal intellectuals dedicated to the preservation of freedom and culture (behind the Iron Curtain, to be sure) – the American Committee for Cultural Freedom. Although the Committee does not endorse every opinion of the authors, it is nevertheless apparent that as a whole, the book reflects its sponsor’s attitude.
From this book the shift in values of these atomic age liberals and intellectuals can be briefly demonstrated and itemized:
Item: The new virtues of many Cold War liberals are illustrated in the following passage on page 151:
McCarthy was not then (1950) allied with the group of militant, dedicated anti-Communists in the Senate, which included McCarran, Bridges, “Wherry and Eastland. These men were conservative; some of them were isolationists who opposed constructive measures like the Marshall Plan, designed to strengthen the free – world. But they had the virtue of being strongly anti-Communist and anti-Soviet in the critical years immediately following World War II. (Emphasis added.)
Item: On the Loyalty Program. Decter and Rorty have several serious criticisms of the loyalty program instituted under Truman’s Executive Order. They present the statistic of 17,060 cases being tried by the Civil Service Loyalty Review Board by June 1953. Of these cases 557 were dismissed or denied employment. The authors comment: “It does not take a trained investigator to see something wrong with this picture: either too many innocent people were placed in jeopardy, or too many guilty persons were being cleared. Actually, the Truman loyalty program was faulty in both respects.” The authors then proceed to emphasize Truman’s “laxness” in allowing not only Communists but “especially fellow travellers and Communist-fronters [to slip] through the loopholes of the loyalty standards.” Insofar as McCarthy’s charges of Communist infiltration of the State Department are concerned, the authors believe that: “in spite of exaggerations on both sides McCarthy’s essential point was a valid one: the State Department’s security program had been lax and frequently ineffective/’ Damaging evidence of Truman’s lax witchhunt is then offered. Of the 110 names submitted by McCarthy in 1950, 18 of McCarthy’s cases had finally by 1954 “been separated in one way or another from government service” thus proving to these sterling liberals that the Truman administration was trying to overlook subversives for partisan reasons. Decter and Rorty list the most “notorious” and “dangerous” men on McCarthy’s list including Owen Lattimore, William Remington, John Carter Vincent, concluding that:
There were quite a few similar cases; people with bulging records of pro-Communist activities and associations successfully, weathered many departmental security hearings, only to be discharged or allowed to resign under fire later – after McCarthy’s charges. (Emphasis added.)
As a tribute to Joe McCarthy for his battle against laxity, and for his list of dangerous names, there follows:
In calling public attention to these and similar derelictions, Senator McCarthy and others performed a public service. The subsequent acceleration of the State Department’s security processes was certainly the result, at least in part, of the public pressures stimulated by the senator’s activities.
In a summary section of the book, the authors have the following praise of Eisenhower’s more inclusive – job exclusive – program:
It was one of the grave drawbacks of the Truman administration’s security program that it placed the major emphasis on finding grounds for doubting the loyalty of an employee. And it is one of the major advantages of the Eisenhower program that the loyalty and security programs are now formally combined. This means that decisions will tend to emphasize security, which can be ascertained with far more objectivity and accuracy than Soyalty.
Item: On Investigating Committees. Rorty and Decter do an effective job in laying bare the various frauds that McCarthy perpetrated while chairman of the Senate Permanent Sub-Comrnittee on Investigations. But this does not deter the authors from praising with, an almost disarming frankness the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee while headed by the late Senator McCarran. The work of this committee is used as an example at least four times in the book of the type of investigating committee America needs, with, such comments as “the sober and devastatingly factual hearings conducted by the McCarran Committee.”
For those who may have forgotten the “devastatingly factual hearings” conducted by this committee, they produced the “sober” report that Owen Lattimore “was from some time in the 1930’s a conscious articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy.”
Item: On Communist teachers: Needless to emphasise, Decter and Rorty feel that membership in the Communist Party is prima facie evidence of “unfitness to teach.” But the authors go Sidney Hook one better. Whereas Hook wants to leave it up to the faculty or school administration to dispense with the services of Communists on the faculty, our authors coyly suggest that:
It has been suggested that legal acknowledgment of this principle might end the debate about the “right” of such persons to teach.
The book expresses similar attitudes on most major questions of democracy. It berates those who do not inform on former Communist associates, it admonishes others who “hide” behind the Fifth Amendment, it justifies firings of individuals with dubious backgrounds from government positions and defense plants.
In the interests of the Cold War these “liberal” authors, in effect, justify and rationalize the witchhunt. They are themselves a peculiar breed of moderate McCarthyists.
Thus, the consolidation of the Cold War reaction, and the increasing displacement of constitutional liberties by the witchhunt, the growing lack of libertarian ideals in the liberal world have all served to eclipse the Wisconsin senator.
 
McCarthy’s Irresponsibility
IN TERMS OF PROVIDING a political barometer the Senate debate was by far the more instructive and important of the two. In the Army-McCarthy hearings the speeches and verbal blows exchanged were rarely raised above the trivial formal charges: who posed with whom and why, did Adams leave McCarthy’s house on good terms with a slice of cream cheese under his arm, who shined Schine’s shoes, how many times did Cohn, seeking favors for Schine, disturb Adams at his New England retreat, etc., etc.? Similar weighty problems were aired ad nauseam. The hearings understandably produced a general revulsion against all participants, accused and accusers, counsels and judges for their general spinelessness and ineptness. If nothing else, it provided the nation with an object lesson in how low the watermark of American politics can fall.
Despite this character of the hearings it is not to be denied that beneath the inane charges and counter charges more serious political issues were at stake. McCarthy’s appeal for government informants, made late in the hearings, was the only overt evidence of the seriousness of the rupture between McCarthy and the administration.
The Senate debate on the Watkins Committee report was a different matter. This debate had only one very important feature in common with the Army hearings – the superficiality of the charges. The general accusation that McCarthy insulted the dignity of the Senate, and should therefore be censored – or condemned – can hardly be taken seriously. Abuse of one senator by another Is not that novel nor arc senators as a rule that sensitive. At any rate McCarthy’s abusiveness nowhere near matched that of the late uncensored Senator Bilbo, for example, whose foul language was no less personally directed than McCarthy’s.
Unlike the Army-McCarthy hearings, in the course of the Senate debate political differences were clearly expressed. The political motivations of the Eisenhower administration to drop McCarthy which can be deduced from the Army hearings were clarified at the Senate debate.
If these differences were openly expressed at the debate, it was no less clearly shown that for the bulk of the Senate McCarthy was not to be condemned for McCarthyism. The differences were serious but not that fundamental. It was only a rare speech by Senator Monroney or Lehman that revealed genuine misgivings over the institutions of McCarthyism. For the most part, senators went out of their way to let the nation know that they are for die Cold War witchhunt. Republican Senator Alexander Smith of New jersey, who finally voted to condemn McCarthy, felt that any Senate action should “... in no way be interpreted as condemning the junior senator from Wisconsin, Mr. McCarthy, for the work he has done in investigating the public menace.” This same concern over maintaining the witchhunt was expressed by the majority of Republicans and Southern Democrats who led their parties’ attack on McCarthy. They rolled around in the mud of McCarthyism before taking the floor to berate McCarthy so that no one could accuse them of going soft on the witchhunt.
That it was not McCarthyism which was disturbing the Senate as much as Senator McCarthy and the needless, restrictive, and often partisan excesses of the committee he led was made most explicit in the speeches of Senators Ervin and Stennis, both members of the Watkins Committee and both highly praised in the liberal and anti-McCarthy press.
Senator Ervin speaks:
Other members of the Congress have fought Communism with as much devotion and with far more wisdom than has the junior senator from Wisconsin. I cite the names of only a few of them: Vice-President Nixon, Senator Karl Mundt, Senator Willis Smith, Representative John Woods and Representative Francis E. Walters.
Senator Stennis made his position clear.
I commend the junior senator from Wisconsin for what good he has done. But the fact that he has done good work in that mission of the Senate does not give him license to destroy other processes of the Senate or to destroy its members.
The Senate majority was so conscious of its need to delimit the condemnation of McCarthy that they threw out the one charge which might be interpreted as a broad repudiation of Congressional investigating techniques, The Watkim Committee reported its finding that “the conduct of Senator McCarthy toward [General] Zwicker was reprehensible” and that for this conduct he should “be censured by the Senate.” The implications of this charge were too strong for the Senate majority. General Zwicker, although a war hero, was, in fact, roundly abused by an enraged McCarthy seeking to bolster his faltering Fort Monmouth investigations. This disrespect for the military angered many legislators but to condemn McCarthy for it implied a limitation on the “right’ of investigating committees to browbeat and threaten witnesses and the charge was dropped from the final resolution of condemnation adopted by the Senate. In its place was a condemnation of McCarthy for referring to the Watkins Committee as the unwitting handmaidens of communism. There were a host of reasons for the overwhelming vote to condemn McCarthy. There was the obvious advantage to the Democrats in furthering the already wide rift in the Republican Party. For the Eisenhower Republicans, in the course of the debate and preliminary committee hearings, the vote to censure McCarthy took on a wider political meaning as an attempt to discredit the right-wing isolationist Republicans, closely identified with McCarthy, who were openly challenging the wisdom of the Eisenhower-Dulles foreign policy.
But the primary reason for condemning McCarthy was the simple irresponsibility of the Wisconsin senator. In the course of a speech by that Liberace among politicians, Everett Dirksen, included the following defense of McCarthy:
... Joe McCarthy, in the language that I understood in my neighborhood when I was a boy, is something of an alley fighter. That is a pretty good description. He is no master of the English language. He does not know all the fine and tripping phrases. There is a bluntness about his spirit.
This tribute to McCarthy’s character is, indeed, “a pretty good description.” McCarthy is an “alley fighter” par excellence. But this is precisely what disturbed the Senate. As an alley fighter, McCarthy drew no fine distinctions and his cat’s claws were growing long and sharp, nailing too many and too deeply.
McCarthy is too unpredictable and completely without scruples, becoming thereby a source of worry to more responsible Republicans. He was beginning to witchhunt the witchhunters, and that was insufferable to half the Senate Republicans and all Democrats. It meant playing outside the rules of the game. Perhaps if McCarthy committed his excesses with less ostentation – if that were possible – he would not have run into the obstacles he did. But part of McCarthy’s political irresponsibility is his boisterousness and publicity consciousness.
He broadcast his irresponsibility to the nation and the world. In terms of America’s prestige abroad McCarthy was an obvious liability. He presented to Europe and Asia a distorted image of America which only served to discredit the Eisenhower administration and added considerable ammunition to the propaganda arsenal of world Stalinism.
McCarthy’s irresponsibility reached its apogee in the last week of the Army hearings when he gave notice to the Eisenhower administration that he considered himself beyond the pale of legal restrictions. His appeal to all Federal employees to send him information, even if classified and secret, concerning “communism and corruption” in government, was such an open and brazen flaunting of lawful procedure, that then and there the Eisenhower administration was left no alternative but to batter McCarthy. The Army-McCarthy hearings were inspired by the senator’s invasion of the military pillar of capitalism; the Senate condemnation was brought on by his further irresponsible and totalitarian threat to place himself outside and above the hierarchy of bourgeois institutions and laws. Had the Eisenhower administration and the Senate permitted this, it would have suffered more than lost dignity; it would have established the precedent whereby a dangerous demagogue could displace the source and center of political authority.
In addition to condemning McCarthy for challenging the authority of the administration, the law and government agencies, the Senate was anxious to relax (not relinquish) the witchhunt which has been getting out of hand. Even the pioneer among witchhunters, Representative Martin Dies, has felt the need to defend the American constitution in the light of hysterical security procedures. McCarthy was the personification of witchhunt excesses and through its condemnation of him, the Senate was expressing its desire to “normalize” the witchhunt which has had a crippling effect on American diplomacy and generally disoriented and hampered the efficiency of government operations.
 
McCarthy’s Ineptness and Poor Record
A MYTH HAS DEVELOPED around Joseph McCarthy: he may not have much finesse or polish, he may not be a man of vast erudition but to compensate for these inadequacies he is a brilliant tactician, very clever in cross examination, an expert in timing his blows, etc. This misconception of McCarthy served him well. It confused his critics and helped to intimidate his would-be opponents in advance. Any objective evaluation of McCarthy’s record will reveal, however, that every clever tactical move he has made has been accompanied by twice as many blunders which have, in the long run, served to divorce him from many adherents and made bitter enemies of influential men. His greatest defect on this score is his utter inability to gracefully retreat in the face of more powerful opponents or to parry their blows, and an irresistible urge to strike out against all antagonists with a violence peculiar to himself. In short, McCarthy is more blunderer and blunderbuss than brilliant tactician.
Among the blunders which have so blighted McCarthy’s career we would list the following: his refusal to retreat when Washington sounded the attack which precipitated the Army-McCarthy hearings; his behavior before the Watkins Committee; his abuse of General Zwicker originally and before the Watkins Committee; his earlier accusations against General Marshall and his offer to teach Adlai Stevenson Americanism with a slippery elm club, his “revelations” about Adelaide Case, his poorly concealed innuendoes about the loyalty of the Eisenhower administration (“21 years of treason”), his conduct at the Senate hearings on the Watkins Committee report and his subsequent direct break with Eisenhower – all these were blunders. A list of similar exam-pies of poor timing is endless and the accumulated effect has inevitably been a negative one on McCarthy’s prestige and power. There has been no compelling political reason for McCarthy’s outbursts. His self-chosen calling as America’s No. 1 witchhunter did not require, for example, that he extend the arena of alleged treason from the Democrats to men high in the councils of the Republican Party. This last demonstrative public move by McCarthy only served to intensify his isolation., It lost him the support of such men as General Van Fleet who was “shocked” by the “personal bitter attack against the President.” (Up to the day that McCarthy excoriated Eisenhower, Van Fleet was a leading figure in the Committee of Ten Million Americans.)
What has impelled these broadsides against anybody and everybody is not exclusively in the realm of politics but psychology. That much should be obvious to anyone who has followed McCarthy’s outbursts; frequently incoherent and irrational, during the televised Army-McCarthy hearings and in the course of hearings he has conducted as Chairman of the Permanent Sub-Committee on Investigations.
To be a successful politician and demagogue one need not be equipped with a temperate and well balanced personality but the forms of McCarthy’s distemper and imbalance must be accredited as an important factor contributing to his decline.
During the Army-McCarthy hearings this fatal lack of self-control and the absence of self-consciousness was most visibly coupled with an incredible lack of political intelligence. Worse than politically untutored, McCarthy is a total ignoramus. He has yet to make a speech or statement which reveals any understanding of genuine political problems. To get the flavor of McCarthy as a political person we must quote at least a few of his precious lines at the televised hearings. The quotations below are taken from the verbatim report of McCarthy’s first day on the witness stand. The questions are asked by the temporary chief counsel of the of the Senate Permanent Sub-Commtitee on Investigations, Ray Jenkins, a shyster murder trial lawyer from Tennessee.
* * *
In response to a question by Jenkins on the imminence of the Communist threat from within, McCarthy draws a parallel from history:
Mr. Jenkins, let me say this by way of answer, and I’ve been admonishing my staff to make short answers, I hesitate at making a long one. In 1917 or 1918 – I forget “which it was – the Kaiser sent seven devoted Communists into Russia. They were headed by Nicolai Lenin. Seven men and within a hundred days those seven men had taken, over and enslaved a nation of 180,000,000 people, and those 180,000,000 people no more wanted to be communist slaves than we do. Seven people.
Well now – we’ve got 25,000 and they’ve got the experience of a good number of years behind them, so it’s very imminent, urgent day to day danger.
* * *
Question: Senator McCarthy, how do you regard the communist threat to our country as compared with other threats with which it is confronted?
Answer: ... answering your questions, Mr. Jenkins, I think I can best answer this way. Back in 1848, that’s 106 years ago, you could number the members of the communist conspiracy on the fingers of both your hands.
They made very little progress in so far as numbers are concerned until 1917 and 1918. It’s true they did organize some hard cells throughout the country. Then all of a sudden their membership – those under communist domination, increased to 180,000,000,
* * *
In response to another question, McCarthy offers the following prescription for those suffering from insomnia:
And I may say, Mr. Jenkins, if you only have, if only you have 54,000 communists, if you could block out the fellow-travellers, block out the fellow-travellers, then we could sleep much more easily at night.
* * *
McCarthy now replies to a question with the passion of a man whose livelihood is threatened:
Q. Should we get comfort from the decrease in CP membership?
A. No, no, no, Mr. Jenkins.
Q. Why not?
A. Because they are tightening up their organization.
* * *
And now McCarthy as a Doctor of Pedagogy:
... now I may say, Mr. Jenkins, I don’t care how much, of a screwball or crackpot any professor or teacher may be, so long as he or she is a free agent.
But if McCarthy himself is not of an intellectual bent what of his advisors. Here too, we have a gauge of the man’s worth and a cause for his lowered station. McCarthy did not even feel the need to surround himself with men of talent. His staff consisted of such zeros as Carr, Cohn, Schine, Surine, Juliana, and his tipsters included such authorities on communism as Matusow and Bentley.
If McCarthy failed to surround himself with intellectual heavyweights, it is not only because he failed to seek them out. It is a mutual repugnance. There are scattered intellectuals who defend McCarthy, but with reservations. McCarthy failed to achieve the respectability which could attract a loyal intellectual elite, and he has built no organized social movement which could provide a focal point for intellectuals of the extreme right.
The ruggedness of McCarthy, his bluntness, arrogance and aggressiveness did serve him well for a time. It blended with the strong, rugged-individualist, know nothing and xenophobic traditions so powerful in the United States, particularly in the midwest. McCarthy, in a sense, talked the language of the people. He was not a slick, mealy-mouthed politician but a man who spoke his mind freely and without fear! He would take on anyone who crossed him! This had an undeniable appeal for a large segment of the American public.
But the basis of this appeal is also a reason for the growing alienation of large numbers of his supporters. While the public may admire a man who can speak its language, it demands more than that of a leader. It wants talents which it, itself, may not possess and which McCarthy has made increasingly clear he does not possess, either.
 
THE DISILLUSIONMENT WHICH GREW among large numbers of people who watched McCarthy’s antics can only be exacerbated by the wide publicity recently given to McCarthy’s record. The Senate Permanent Sub-Committee on Investigations which McCarthy chaired, devoted its main energies in the past three years to two major investigations: (1) The International Information Administration which is an adjunct of the State Department and parent body of the Voice of America and (2) the Fort Monmouth Signal Corps laboratories. McCarthy initiated the investigations with grandiose claims. In the IIA he was to uncover an enormous Communist plot and at Fort Monmouth he promised the same exposures plus revelations of “very, very current espionage.”
McCarthy not only failed to produce “spies” in either investigation, but in neither case was able to expose a single current member of the Communist Party. Instead he brought to the witness chair an army of ex-Stalinists, liberals, crackpot stoolpigeons, men accused of atheism, others of sexual communism, etc., but no one on whom the Communist label could be made to stick.
In the Fort Monmouth hearings, as a result of McCarthy’s pressure and independent army witchhunting, 36 technicians were dropped as security risks. Not one of them was proven to be a Communist and the cases were so flimsy that to date the army has been obligated to reinstate 28 of them.
It cannot be claimed that the McCarthy hoax has been exposed to the satisfaction of all. There are still large numbers of lukewarm admirers of Senator McCarthy who say in effect “we do not like his methods but at least he gets results,” but their ranks have been thinned by the increased publicity of McCarthy’s record.
 
Lack of Program
McCARTHY IS AN AGITATOR but he is not a social demagogue. An example of the latter could be found in Huey Long, who developed a social program, organized a movement and attempted to create a devoted, socially conscious mass plebeian base, McCarthy has attempted none of these things, and in his inability to follow Long’s pattern we see one of the more basic reasons for McCarthy’s rapid decline. Year in and year out McCarthy has strummed only one string on his guitar – anti-Communism. But exposing non-existent internal Communist plots by its very fraudulent and restricted nature offers no resolution of anxiety producing social problems, and has fatal limitations as an outlet for the dissatisfactions and frustrations of the mass of people. The monotone produced by McCarthy’s one-string guitar plucking could not hold a large audience of admirers spell bound for ever. Boredom began to raise its indifferent head.
Any politician who is going to restrict himself to Communist hunting can ill afford to delude himself with prospects of indefinite notoriety and widespread affection. Communist hunting can only effectively raise a politician to permanent importance if the internal threat is real, if the exposed plots involve real spies – not dentists and clerks, and/or if political passions have been so inflamed by social conflict and overt dissatisfaction that the threat of Communist subversion, even if fictitious, can nonetheless, effectively be made to appear genuine. On the other hand had McCarthy decided to make a permanent place for himself in American politics by embarking on a program of social demagoguery, he could not have escaped disaster. If he attempted to build a political base for himself as a distinctive political personality, it could only be through a distinctive political program. But what would such a program look like and to whom could it appeal today? A program of “works projects” would have little meaning in a period of prosperity, an appeal to farmers for “full parity” would only mean one voice among many. Any extreme proposals of economic demagoguery calling for “sharing the wealth” or “soaking the rich” would not find a positive mass reception and would alienate McCarthy’s important financial “backers who look upon him only as a Communist hunter and a good man to have around for knocking about “pinko” Democrats – and Republicans. In this connection a recent poll taken by Fortune magazine (April-May issues, 1954) is extremely instructive. A number of the nation’s top business executives were polled on their attitude toward Senator McCarthy, A large percentage generally supported the senator’s activities though the editors of Fortune noted that this support had declined from the previous year and was now highly qualified. But, in response to the question of how they would feel about the senator developing any economic reform program Fortune reports the following:
... one of the best illustrations of the limitations upon the senator’s future is to ask a pro-McCarthy businessman how he would feel if Joe turned “liberal” on questions of domestic economic policy. Some astute political observers have said they eould not get alarmed about McCarthy unless, along with his appeal to anti-communism and nationalism, lie also developed a broadly demagogic appeal on economic issues. What if McCarthy suddenly started talking up a more liberal revision of Taft-Hartley than the president has proposed? Vast public works programs? Cheaper money? Pro-McCarthy businessmen said they would start unloading him. Fast.
These pro-McCarthy business men would “start unloading him fast” despite his continued Communist hunt-ting not because at any and all times they are opposed to demagogic appeals – even to reforming the Taft-Hartley Act – but because there is absolutely no necessity for it today. Such extreme and, for it, dangerous appeals become necessary only in times of great social unrest when whole sections of the bourgeoisie feeling itself under enormous internal pressure may make every effort to divert mass discontent.
McCarthy has enough instinctive understanding of politics to know that developing a social program – for which he does not have the talent, even if times were permissive – would be directed against the domestic policies of the Republican Party and could lead only to an organizational rupture. And any attempt to build a “Third Party” today based on a program of economic demagoguery is slated for quick political embalming.
McCarthy obviously feels the need for broadening his interests, and in recent months has shown it by a paying greater attention to American foreign policy. But the impact of his opinions on foreign affairs could not move a steel hall balanced on an egg. McCarthy is already stigmatized as a Communist hunter – and a somewhat discredited one at that – whose opinions on other matters are of incidental significance. The press, for example, refuses to take McCarthy seriously on foreign policy. His speeches, warnings and threats over “softness” toward China have been producing ever diminishing returns. As a Communist hunter, McCarthy In his heyday could hit headlines almost at will; today, however, he stands no chance of usurping Knowland’s position as the spokesman of isolationism.
A final reason for McCarthy’s weakened grip is the personal popularity of Eisenhower and more fundamentally, the fact that the Republican party, dominated by the “moderate progressives” is in power. In a sense, McCarthy needs the Democratic Party in control of Washington. He is in no position to break from the Republican Party now and his most virulent attacks are still reserved for the opposition party. His rantings against a party not in power have obvious limitations for a nation which is becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the domestic “accomplishments” and foreign, “program” of the Republican Party.
A new reactionary third party in our opinion is extremely unlikely for reasons already given. But politics is not always rational and we cannot exclude the possibility of an independently organized coalition of the most rabid McCarthyites and isolationists in and outside the Republican Party. Even in the case of this unlikely development we cannot foresee McCarthy regaining his lost popularity. In the first place this new third party would in short order be reduced in the public eye to a crackpot level; in the second place, within such a coalition there is no reason to assume that McCarthy would be its central figure. McCarthy, given all the limitations in his personality, record and intelligence isn’t capable of playing a dominant independent political role.
Julius FALK
* * *
Footnote
1. There are other theories of McCarthyism which we cannot discuss in this article due to space limitations. Above all the theory that McCarthyism is the American form of fascism. This theory, however, has already been discussed in an earlier issue of The New International. A more recent and novel theory that is coming into favor attempts to relate McCarthyism to Populism. This view is drawn to hilarious lengths in a recent article by Peter Viereck printed in the Reporter. Viereck draws a parallel between McCarthy and Robespierre and McCarthyism becomes a form of Twentieth Century Jacobinism.
 




IN OUR LAST ISSUE, WE indicated how differences on the war question provided the initial charge which overcame the inertia of militants remaining in the Socialist Party after the departure – forced and voluntary – of the syndicalist left following the party’s 1912 convention. However, differences on the war alone could not have generated the powerful left wing which developed in the Socialist Party between the time of America’s entry into the war and the fall of 1919. Of even greater significance were the Russian revolutions of March and November, the revolution which swept over all Europe from 1918–1920, and the great class struggles at home immediately after the war.
The enthusiasm created among American socialists by the Russian and European revolutions had a less fortunate concomitant in accentuating romantic and ultra-revolutionary theories and activities which had always characterized the left wing in the United States; above all, views were encouraged which greatly obscured the strength and relationships of political and economic forces in the United States. This was due, in part, to the changing national composition of the Socialist Party, which change, in turn, is also to be largely accounted for by the European revolution. The wave of revolution had swelled in the old world, promising to inundate all Europe. In the backwash of this flood, in the United States, thousands of immigrant workers, primarily from Southern and Eastern Europe, imbued with an understandable feeling of pride, self-confidence, militancy and aggressiveness, poured into the Socialist Party. By the end of 1919, of the 108,000 SP members, 57,000 (53 per cent) belonged to the foreign language federations. The number of foreign-born in the party must have been even higher than this, as many non-native socialists belonged to regular English-speaking branches of the organization.
The strength of the federations had more than doubled in the war years, with the greatest increases recorded by the Russian Federation. When first admitted to the party in 1915, this Federation had little more than the 500 minimum number required of a foreign-language group for party affiliation. It grew geometrically from 2,300 members at the end of 1918, to 7,800 four months later and in another four months there were additional thousands in the Federation.
These foreign federations became the backbone of the left wing. And the Russian Federation with its enormous membership, taking full advantage of its ability to appear as the true representative of the Bolsheviks – an appearance born more of language than politics – was the dominant force in the left wing.
 
Was the Left Wing a “Foreign” Movement?
THE INFLUX OF FOREIGN-BORN into the party from 1918–1919 was one of the reasons why the left wing tended to substitute conditions in Europe, at the time, for a balanced and realistic appraisal of class relations here. It is also but one of the reasons, and a minor one, why the socialist movement in this country has not maintained itself as a significant, organized force in American political life. Nevertheless, it is a factor which most historians writing on American socialism dwell upon with relish. To them, it is convincing evidence that revolutionary ideology is a foreign importation, alien to American life and doomed to disaster. It is true, that the revolutionary enthusiasm in the Socialist Party during this particular period was due, in part, to foreign developments. But revolutionary thought and action in the American labor movement are not restricted to the allegedly foreign-inspired ultra-revolutionary views of the pre-Communist left in the SP. The objectives and activities of entire sections of the labor movement from the 1880s up to and contemporaneous with the period under discussion, is a history of bitter class conflict, often carried on by class conscious (not merely job conscious) workers who were not always alienated or repelled by revolutionary ideology. When the American Railway Union was crushed by the power of government in the 1894 Pullman strike its leaders turned toward socialist politics not because they were dazzled by a foreign ideology, but due to a hatred born of bitter experiences for a social system and a government which had crushed their union. In 1901, the Western Federation of Miners adopted socialism into its program. This was not a response to a European stimulus, but the aftermath of years of struggle in which miners were forced to defend their lives and their union with rifles and dynamite from the attacks of scab and militia. And in a dozen other major chapters in the history of American labor, when workers accepted the leadership and opinions of socially conscious radical leaders, it was not because they were immigrants feeding on events in their native land, for whatever views they might have had in the old country, their opposition to capitalism was initiated or confirmed by experiences here. The early struggles of the American working class carried on with fighting ardor were the product of purely American conditions – the class struggle – involving mainly English-speaking immigrants, assimilated foreign-born from Northern Europe and led by such men as Debs and Haywood who were as American as flapjacks and maple syrup.
When it suited their needs, American workers have erected barricades, organized their para-military defense corps and learned to tolerate, even accept, revolutionary social concepts as a result of their experiences. If American workers today seldom show a comparable mood, it cannot be ascribed to any inherent or permanent prejudice which distinguishes them from European workers. If the left wing of the Socialist Party failed – and it obviously did – it was not because it was revolutionary, foreign or foreign-inspired, but primarily because of external factors beyond its control in the United States and Europe which led to its isolation and degeneration.
 
THE CAUSE OF AMERICAN SOCIALISM was, nevertheless, handicapped by a disproportionate number of unassimilated foreign-born in the pre-communist left. As the driving force in an American left wing, but often drinking at the fount of the European revolution, it served to inflict on the left wing a political program and an atmosphere more fitting for a European than an American party. But, even here, we must be cautious in assessing o the responsibility and sins of “foreignism” in the left wing. It was not only because so many of its supporters were aliens that the left wing adopted a host of ultra-revolutionary views. It was also operating in the tradition of old-fashioned American radicalism, in which revolutionary romanticism ran a steady utopian course. For example, the left wing of the SP was dedicated to the principles of revolutionary industrial unionism, opposed fighting for reforms, sneered at parliamentary activity and was later moved to a publicly proclaimed advocacy of violence as the only means of achieving a workers’ republic. These views did not flow out of the ethnic composition of the left wing or the European revolution. Syndicalism and anti-reform were earmarks of the extreme left wing of the American labor movement for decades past. In the left wing of 1919 these views were reinforced, not sponsored, by the “non-American” elements.
The foreign-born who joined the Socialist Party during the war were, in their vast majority, proletarians. This marked a complete change in the social character of the party. In 1910, 71 per cent of the Socialist Party was native born. Less than a decade later, the party with two and a half times the membership had a majority of foreign born. The earlier figure is evidence of the non-proletarian composition of the party, which at the time had only 20 per cent who were unskilled workers, and an almost equal percentage of farmers. It was in the nature of things that any party which aimed to be the party of the most oppressed sections of the proletariat would have a large foreign-born membership, since the industrial working class had been recruited from recent waves of immigrants. This produced the following paradox: the 1919 Socialist Party with its large foreign born membership was closer to an American party of the proletariat than the 1910 organization with its preponderantly native-born adherents.
Undoubtedly, the revolutions in Russia, Hungary, Germany, etc., instilled in many an immigrant not only a profound pride but a sense of belonging to history, even though in a strange country. Emotional attachments to the land of one’s birth are not easily broken and foreign-born here shared in the joy and heartbreaks of the European working class which was to overthrow all the powerful monarchies of Europe and in many lands were embattled in the struggle for socialist emancipation. Many immigrant workers here, though, more than sympathized with the European working class. There was also a longing to return to the old country, derived partially of enthusiasm for the turn of events in Europe, but no less born of disgust with their lot in this country. America’s declaration of war was followed by a wave of chauvinism from which foreign-born could not escape victimization. The bourgeoisie and its government, its propaganda, wealth and patriotic societies and hypocrisies, struck out at ‘‘foreign agitators” and non-conformists, real and imagined, with unprecedented ruthlessness. When the war ended, the reaction, instead of ebbing, was intensified. Foreign workers who might have seen an opportunity before the war to raise their status by conforming were more than ever alienated from society. That many of them would become receptive to militant socialist propaganda was only a normal consequence of conditions in America and further guaranteed given the rising tide of revolution in Europe. Here, too, then, we must reject the mean implications of those who insinuate or openly indict socialism as an alien movement, either before, during or after the period under discussion. Immigrants have always played an important part in American life. How could it be otherwise in this “melting pot”? In the labor movement, they have played different and conflicting roles, sometimes serving as a conservatizing force, at other times as a radicalizing agency, but at all times reacting in a manner revealing and indicative of American life.
 
IF THE LEFT WING WAS A FOREIGN movement because it viewed the United States through European glasses, what can one say for the rest of society? For it was not only the radical wing of the American working class which was profoundly affected by the European revolution. All movements and all classes were moved to extremes of political passion as the spectre of revolution grew from a spook to full bodied and tangible proportions. It was a horrible vision to some, glorious to others and caused no small degree of anguish to the many who were maddeningly confused by the revolution’s complexity and demands of allegiance. Above all, the American bourgeoisie suffered acute panic in the face of European revolution. Its delusions of the internal menace of bolshevism was as Russian-inspired as the grand images of the coming American revolution seen by the left wing. If this shows that the left wing was living in Europe, it no less proves that the bourgeoisie had psychologically set up camp there – along with everyone else: liberals, the official labor movement, patriotic societies, the press, radical unions, etc.
Above all, the American businessman and the press responded to events in Russia with an attentiveness that rivaled that of the radicals. When news of the February revolution reached the United States, businessmen did not panic. Their fears that the new liberal Russian regime might conclude a separate peace with Germany on whom we were about to declare war were considerably allayed by persistent reports that the new regime was not going to renege on any of its obligations to its allies – a commitment whose sincerity was soon to be proved by the Russian dead piled high in a futile offensive. Their fears were most assuaged, however, when they took a long hard economic stare at the new regime which truly stirred the liberal imagination of more than one Yankee businessman. Before the war it was France which had heavily invested capital in autocratic Russia. But France could only come out of the war crippled, with nothing further to invest, and without a friendly Russian court to protect its interests. The prospects for American capital investment seemed bright and businessmen were not dismayed to hear the Russian Ambassador, Bakhmatieff, inform them that Russia looked forward to American investment. And their indignation over the indignities imposed on the Russian people by the czar must have grown to holy proportions when Miliukoff announced that nothing now stood in the way of a “new commercial treaty between Russia and the United States.”
The possibilities in Russia for American capital had already been noted by Samuel McRoberts, executive manager of the National City Bank and a “prominent expert” on Russia:
Within the borders of Russia are found all the natural resources that are essential to modern civilization. It has very large known deposits of iron, coal, oil, copper and precious metals ... To gain a full conception of the opportunities afforded for American capital in Russia it is necessary to compare Russia, not with the United States, at this time, but with the United States at the close of the Civil War.
As the revolution developed in Russia, and from Russia to Germany, Hungary, Finland, Italy, etc., the dollar sign which had beguiled the businessman when the moderates were in power in Russia, was now replaced by the hammer and sickle. Not only were possibilities for unlimited investment in Russia foiled, but capitalism itself was under siege in all Europe. Moved by a fear of the revolution in Europe, seeing its portent even in the United States, the American businessman through his patriotic societies – the National Security League, the American Defense Society, the Navy League – financed an enormous Hate Russia campaign.
It was in the bilious prose of the press that the businessman’s anti-socialist hysteria found its most lurid echo. According to the Washington Post, the Bolsheviks were “assassins and madmen ... human scum.” The New York Tribune denounced Lenin as a “new Czar” who “spent German money to induce Russia to betray loyal allies and to scuttle from the defense of civilization.” The New York Sun cast its light beam as follows: “The noose yearns for the crime mad leaders of Red Bolshevism for more reasons than one.” One orgiastic minded fellow writing an editorial in the New York Herald raved:
“Bolshevism, drunk from its saturnalia of crime in Russia, has staggered into America to loose its base passions upon a progressive civilization and destroy it. The beast has entered the gate ...”
Thus, bourgeois fears and socialist hopes were both nourished by revolution in Europe. The logical extension of the premises on which the left wing has so commonly been adjudged a foreign movement could only lead to the conclusion that in 1919 a real American, along with the buffalo, belonged to an extinct species.
 
The Effect of the Russian Revolution on the SP
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION NATURALLY found its most fervent support in the Socialist Party. But the popular socialist press did not always provide accurate information, and its analysis often varied from the uninspired to the incorrect. In May, 1917, the Call referred to Lenin as “the fanatic (but not German paid) advocate of immediate separate peace.” Another editorial from the same socialist publication offered this mish-mash:
The Social-Democracy, however, is divided into the Mensheviki and the Bolsheviki, or Minority and Majority faction, which factions differed upon the question of participation in Duma elections. The Mensheviki, or Lenine faction, did not unite with the rest of the Socialists in this election; but it is becoming more and more apparent that they are nothing but a factious group of dissenters, with strong anarchist, anti-political tendencies.
Matters were admittedly impossibly confusing to the Call editorialist at the time of the Bolshevik-led revolution:
The spectacle that Russia presents now, from a sociological standpoint, is difficult, though understandable. From the standpoint of pacifism, however, it is utterly incomprehensible.
Although the Bolshevik revolution was “incomprehensible” to many SPers at the time, and Lenin was described as a Menshevik leader with anarchist tendencies, the Socialist Party as a whole was swept along by the second stage of the Russian revolution. The party leadership’s misgivings over Lenin and his “factious group of dissenters” had been concocted of plain ignorance and, despite the St. Louis Resolution, an inbred conservatism. The leadership equivocated, but support of the Bolsheviks – in Russia – was not withheld for long. At any rate the ranks of the party were far ahead of the leadership in their support of the Bolshevik revolution and would not have tolerated any excessive criticism, not to speak of denunciation. It would be unfair, however, to attribute purely opportunistic motives to the leadership; the imagination of the party bureaucracy had also been stirred by the revolution though more slowly, just as it had been moved out of its conservative orbit by the rampage of militarism and chauvinism. The support to the Bolsheviks given by a wide section of the party’s moderate leadership was to persist for years. Two years after the party split of 1919, Hillquit wrote in his From Marx to Lenin:
The Russian revolution has taken possession of the government in the name of the workers. It has effectively expropriated the private capitalist owners and has nationalized the greater part of the industries. It has also written into its program the socialization of the land. Measured by all practical tests, it is therefore a Socialist revolution in character as well as intent.
While the Russian revolution helped revive the flagging spirits of the Socialist Party, it was also used by many as the basis for compromising its opposition to the war as stated in the St. Louis Resolution. In the previous issue of the NI we explained why the moderate party leadership could support this militant anti-war resolution, although never completely happy with it. But support of the dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia prompted a substantial section of party leaders to support the war. To defend the Russian working class it was necessary to defeat Germany! And to defeat Germany, it was necessary to tender assistance to the United States. This argument became particularly common in the party after Russia’s forced submission to German imperialism. At Brest-Litovsk, Germany had robbed socialist Russia of vast stretches of territory. Even this did not satisfy the German General Staff who, in violation of the treaty, continued its physical assaults on recognized Russian territory. Under these new conditions, Algernon Lee, one of those who drew up the St. Louis Resolution, felt no compunction about heading the vote of New York socialists on the Board of Aldermen. for Liberty Bonds. At the state convention of Illinois socialists held in May 1918 a move to support the war in order to defeat Germany, defend Russia and advance Wilson’s peace program, was narrowly defeated 31–27. A month later, a similar motion was passed by a convention of Massachusetts socialists, 72–46. By the spring of 1918, perhaps one half of the party’s national leadership had, to one degree or another, placed themselves in the Allied war camp.
The situation in the party had become hopelessly confusing. While most of the moderates, with the rationalization of defending Russia, moved closer to the war camp, it was not true of all party conservatives. The most extreme right wing leader in the party, and next to Hillquit and Debs, the most influential party personality. was Victor Berger. Berger, who prior to American intervention advocated a military draft and heaped abuse on those who upheld the view that the working class had no fatherland, ran for re-election to Congress on a program calling for the withdrawal of American troops from France at the same time that New York socialists supported the third Liberty Loan. His support of the Russian revolution was tepid at most while his criticisms of the Bolsheviks were frequent. Thus, his politically conservative and cautious “endorsement” of the revolution could not inspire a retreat from an anti-war position, however superficial and opportunistic, unlike his more radical colleagues. To add to the political chaos in the party, Louis Boudin, who was still on the editorial board of the major left-wing publication, The Class Struggle, introduced a resolution at an important New York party conference in the spring of 1918, specifically designed to repudiate Berger’s anti-war stand. The resolution stated that:
“In view of the present international situation, we deem all demands for a withdrawal by the United States of its armed forces from Europe at the present time as not in consonance with the principles of international socialism ...”
The resolution was voted down.
 
The Effect of Wilson on Left and Right
IT WAS NOT ONLY THE PARTY MODERATES who shifted from an anti-war position. There were men more closely identified with the left wing who also abandoned a principled opposition to imperialist war. Max Eastman and Floyd Dell, for example, while on trial for the anti-war stand of their suppressed Masses changed their views in the middle of the trial, not out of cowardice, but because of their desire to defend Russia. It was not the Russian revolution alone which inspired or provided a rationalization for this retreat, but the revolution combined with the Wilson peace program, one that was unique among all the avowed political objectives of Allied statesmen. Eastman, in particular, had become a Wilsonian Bolshevik. In the first issue of the Liberator which he edited, he accomplished the acrobatic feat of praising the Bolsheviks for dissolving the Constituent Assembly in one editorial while in another article, he purred contentedly over the idealistic mouthings of Woodrow Wilson [1] – the president whose administration at the time was embarking on an all-out campaign to crush the socialist movement in the United States.
To defend the Bolsheviks, the vanguard of proletarian revolution, and to be bemused by Wilson, the archenemy of socialism, is ridiculous perhaps only in retrospect. Hindsight gives rise to an all too easy wisdom which can obscure the complexities of the past. For a revolutionary socialist to have supported Wilson during the war was wrong, and most left wingers did not fall victim to his sanctimonious blandishments. However, not all the socialists, left wingers included, and thousands of unaffiliated radicals disoriented by Wilson’s platitudes, were charlatans or scoundrels.
The fact is that the Wilson administration’s attitude toward the Russian revolution was unique among that of all the allied powers. Barely a month after the czar was overthrown, Congress acceded to Wilson’s appeal for a declaration of war against Germany. The Russian revolution was, no doubt, a factor in Wilson’s calculations. Under the czar, the Russian army had suffered one disastrous defeat after another. Rumor was rife of Russian court intrigues aiming at a separate peace with Germany. With the czar deposed and the emergence of what appeared to be a liberal and popular regime, Wilson saw the possibility of a more effective military ally. And, at home, the collapse of Russian autocracy greatly enhanced the political preparations for war. Before March, plans for a holy crusade against Kaiserism were propagandistically weakened by an implied alliance with Europe’s greatest despotism – czarism. The revolution resolved this dilemma. Wilson could now add to his crusade a defense of Russia’s newfound freedom, which cleared the way for support of his war program among Jewish elements and among radicals and liberals who could not see their way clear to endorsing an alliance with the pogromist czar, certainly not with an easy conscience. In his speech to Congress on April 2, asking for a declaration of war, Wilson took full political advantage of the March revolution:
Does not every American feel that assurance has been added to our hope for the future peace of the world by the wonderful and heartening things that have been happening within the last few weeks in Russia ... it [the Russian autocracy] has been shaken off and the great, generous Russian people have been added in all their naive majesty and might to the forces that are fighting for freedom in the world, for justice, and for peace. Here is a fit partner for a League of Honor.
The attitude of Wilson toward the Russian revolution even as it developed immediately after November, was singular as compared to that of Allied leaders in Europe or bourgeois propaganda here. Clemenceau, for example, favored armed intervention against the Bolsheviks immediately after the November revolution. Wilson, however, maintained a position toward the Russians that was somewhere between neutrality and outwardly restrained friendliness. Wilson’s peace program, his famous Fourteen Points, formulated after the Bolsheviks came to power, declared against foreign interference in Russia’s internal affairs, for a withdrawal of all foreign troops there, and a promise to respect her national sovereignty. In the early months of 1918, when the interventionist mood among allied powers already reached uncontrollable proportions, Wilson continued in his opposition to armed intervention. France and England had urged him to endorse a projected landing, eventually executed, of Japanese troops in Siberia. Wilson wavered but his State Department finally sent a note of protest over the plan to the Japanese and Allied governments which observed
... that the whole action might play into the hands of the enemies of Russia, particularly of the Russian revolution, for which the government of the United States has the greatest sympathy, in spite of all the unhappiness and misfortunes which for the time being spring out of it.
As it turned out, Wilson had feared Japan’s imperial ambitions in Russia more than he feared the holding power of the Bolsheviks. He also hoped to reach a working arrangement with the Soviet government which would permit the reconstituting of an Eastern front against Germany in a manner acceptable to allied imperialism. In any case, Wilson could afford a softer policy against the Bolsheviks than his European allies. The appeal to and reliance of the Bolsheviks for support on the world working class carried with it a far greater threat to the European ruling class than to American capitalism.
Wilson’s professed considerations for the Russian people were to be proved as fickle as his allegiance to the Fourteen Points. Three months after the above quoted State Department protest, the president approved the landing of 4,000 American troops in Archangel. The Soviet government had made it clear that it would not be a military pawn of Allied imperialism, the Bolsheviks had been in power for nearly a year, and the American press spearheaded an anti-red campaign of hysterical proportions which Wilson had no reason to resist.
Whatever deceit there was in Wilson’s initial tolerance of the Soviet government, his liberal attitude appeared to be the voice of reason itself to thousands who could not be unimpressed by the contrast of Wilson’s approach with that of European diplomats and American hate-mongers.
Wilsonianism as a divisive force in the socialist movement, however, was dissipated by America’s eventual intervention in Russia; and following the president’s performance at Versailles in 1919, his stock fell to a new low not only among socialists, but in the liberal world as well.
 
WITH THE CONCLUSION OF EUROPEAN hostilities, differences in the party engendered by it were not decelerated. The record of the party on the war was no less serious a contentious matter. More important, however, in 1919 as a divisive force between right and left was the attitude toward the Bolsheviks, the European revolution and the Third International. It was not only what the right wing said or did which aroused the leftists; it was what they did not do. That the differences were not always apparent and could give an impression of hair splitting was recognized by the left wing leader, Ludwig Lore, when he wrote just one month before the split in the party:
The political sins of the American “Right Wing” have been sins of omission rather than of commission. Its great fault lay in its failure to act at a time when action meant life and growth in the party, in failing to crystallize the tremendous anti-war sentiment that existed in the country at the time of our entrance in the European war into a great mass movement for political and economic liberation. It adopted a radical platform at the St. Louis convention, and failed, miserably, to live up to its tenets.
The “sins” of omission the left wingers had in mind were more than the party record on the war. We made the point that all wings of the party declared their allegiance to the Soviet government. But there were different degrees of enthusiasm, which differences grew in importance as the revolution spread in Europe and civil war continued in Russia. When the Bolsheviks assumed power the left wing elements immediately hailed it while in the right wing press there was a significant time lapse during which it was less committal. It was not until rank and file sentiment was demonstrably clear that the party leadership continued in its support to the Russian revolution. When the Soviet government dissolved the superfluous Constituent Assembly, the left wingers defended its action while the right wing was obviously embarrassed. When the Allied governments made clear their plans to intervene in Russia, the left wing and the party membership as a whole raised their voices in a furious protest while the party leadership was noticeably more reserved at first in its statesmanlike criticisms.
In another period different degrees of enthusiasm over events in Europe could hardly cause an unbridgeable gulf in a socialist party in the U.S. But this was 1919, the year of great hope for the world working class, and divisions within the Socialist Party of America can only be understood in the light of cleavages in the world socialist movement at a time when differences in “tactics” or “dogma” could and did mean the difference between victory and defeat for world socialism.
Though the left wing exaggerated the conservatism of the right it is no less true that one could get a false picture of the Socialist Party leadership if it were judged solely by its propaganda. Many of the articles and statements in the official party press at times seem to have come right out of Class Struggle or Revolutionary Age. Early in 1919, for example, Morris Hillquit wrote:
In countries like Germany, in which the struggle for mastery lies between two divisions of the socialist movement, one class-conscious and the other opportunist, one radical and the other temporizing, the support of the Socialist International must ... go to the former.
In an obvious reference to the European social-democrats’ dogmatic criticism of the Bolsheviks for attempting to organize a socialist revolution in a backward country, not economically prepared for it, Hillquit had the following to say:
Shall the socialization of industries and national life be attempted by one master stroke, or shall it be carried out gradually and slowly? Shall the working-class immediately assume the sole direction of the government as a working-class government, or shall it share government power and responsibilities with the capitalist class at least “during the period of transition”?
While the question involved is one primarily of power, to be determined in each country according to the conditions existing at the critical moment, there can be no doubt about the stand which the Socialist International must take on it.
In all cases in which the proletariat of a country in revolution has assumed the reins of government as a pure working-class government, determined upon the immediate socialization of the country, true Socialists of all countries will support it. Whether we approve or disapprove of all the methods by which such proletarian government has gained or is exercising its power, is beside the question. Each revolution develops its own methods, fashioning them from the elements of the inexorable necessities of the case.
One would imagine from these statements by the party’s leading political spokesman that the party would declare its fidelity to the Third International. In fact, though, two months before these remarks, the SP had handpicked three representatives to attend the Berne Conference which was to reconstitute the Second International! And while the Berne Conference was in Hillquit’s opinion proven “hopelessly backward and totally sterile,” it still did not move him to endorse the Third International. This was typical of the gap between the radical word (not always so radical) and the more conservative deed of the party. During the war it was the St. Louis Resolution and party leaders voting for Liberty Loans; later it was defend the proletarian governments from the attacks of the social democrats but send representatives to the Berne Conference; now it was criticize the Berne Conference but no unambiguous support to the Third International. And while Hillquit was energetically defending the “radicals” against the “temporizers” in Europe, his National Executive Committee colleague and fellow lawyer, Seymour Stedman, was attacking the left wing “radicals” in a bourgeois court in the United States. In an effort to persuade the Appeals Court that five leading Chicago socialists, Berger, Kruse, Engdahl, Tucker and Germer, indicted for violation of the Espionage Law were respectable citizens, Stedman’s brief argued:
We are witnessing in this country a violent break along that line of cleavage, along what is known as the left wing and the other members of the Socialist Party. Mr. Berger and his associates are seeking to preserve the integrity of the Socialist Party – are trying to defend it against that branch of the Socialist Party called the left wing, whose policies are committed to extreme action, and who are trying to transform the sane and scientific Socialist Party into a violent communistic organization.
Hillquit defends Bolshevism in Russia. Stedman attacks its most committed supporters here in a U.S. court!
The article by Hillquit, passages of which we quoted, is itself a perfect example of the inconsistencies in the ideas and actions of the party. The radical thoughts in the beginning of the article, were a prelude to the conclusion that life with the left wing was impossible, that the left wing is a “purely emotional reflex of the situation in Russia,” and the best thing for socialism was for the comrades on both sides to “separate, honestly, freely, and without rancor.” Hillquit felt more at home with a party including Berger [2], Stedman and Lee and other “temporizers” than with the radicals. And how Hillquit and his friends went about implementing this appeal for a cold split will reveal how incapable they were of fulfilling this disingenuous sounding call for a parting of the ways “honestly” and “without rancor.”
Another source of party friction was the strong undercurrent of national prejudice. The Socialist Party had prided itself on being an American movement in composition, outlook and psychology. This was true of the native-born leaders of the party and was no less the case with foreign- born leaders who felt themselves to be assimilated Americans. And it is true, no doubt, that the majority of foreign-born in the party before the development of the new left wing, mainly Finns, British, Germans and Scandinavians, were more attuned to the American scene than the immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe who joined the opposition. They were also as a rule more educated, more cultured and more accepted. This friction between American and foreigner in the party could be seen only in undertones during the early months of the 1919 faction fight, but it was real and more frankly revealed toward the end of the year. At the September 1919 convention of the Socialist Party a constitutional amendment was adopted and submitted to a membership referendum providing that all new members who are not citizens must apply for citizenship wherever possible within three months of admission.
 
The Growth of the Left Wing
IN THE LAST ISSUE, WE noted that the organized beginnings of the new left wing were to be found in the formation of the Socialist Propaganda League centered in Boston. Although the left wing continued to grow it was not until late in 1918 that other significant left wing organizations developed and not until the early months of 1919 did the left wing take on a national organizational character, with a distinctive program and affiliated groups.
On November 7, 1918, the first anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution, the Communist Propaganda League of Chicago was organized. Just six months later at the Cook County convention, representing over 6,500 members, this left wing made a clean sweep. Of the 650 delegates, 400 voted with the left. The foreign language Federations which played an important role in this convention, charged the right wingers with making bigoted insinuations about the “alien” character of the Chicago left. Seymour Stedman, along with about ten per cent of the delegates bolted the convention.
Shortly after the formation of the Chicago Propaganda League, the left wing Boston local began publication of its own newspaper, the Revolutionary Age, which was to become the national spokesman of the left wing movement.
In New York, which was to be the opposition’s national center, a local left wing was formally organized on February 15, 1919, by a group of delegates who bolted a New York party conference. A number of left wing delegates at the conference were anxious to pillory Algernon Lee who had recently added to his pro-war record on the Board of Aiderman his support of an $80,000 appropriation for a “Victory Arch.” Lee had admitted that it was a mistake because it meant “squandering so much of the people’s money” but denied there was anything wrong with it as a matter of “socialist principles.” The chairman would not recognize a number of the left wingers who wanted to question the socialist alderman. Thereupon, nearly half the delegates left the conference, reconvened at the Rand School where they formally declared themselves the Left Wing Section of the Socialist Party of Greater New York. They proceeded to elect a committee of fourteen to draw up resolutions and manifestos. A local left wing convention was held shortly thereafter, resolutions voted on, a fifteen-man executive committee chosen, including John Reed, Jay Lovestone, Benjamin Gitlow and Bertram Wolfe, and a nine-man committee selected to investigate broadening the New York left wing to a national movement. In addition to manifesto and program the convention authorized issuance of factional membership cards and its own publication. In April 1919 the first number of The New York Communist appeared, edited by John Reed. This left wing was not, of course, inspired by opposition to Lee. It was the cumulative effect of growing differences in the party, nationally, for several years.
The conservative leadership of the New York City and State organization met this challenge with a suspension of all locals adhering to the declarations of the New York left wing. The New York left charged that as a result of disciplinary action it was deprived of 2,000 votes in electing delegates to the Socialist Party convention scheduled for the end of August 1919.
The New York left wing manifesto was nationally circulated and endorsed by some of the party’s most powerful language federations, and city and state committees including Seattle, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Boston, Michigan, Minnesota and Massachusetts. By the middle of 1919 there could be no doubt that the left wing had the support of the party majority. One contest which revealed its strength was a national referendum on affiliation to the Third International.
Late in January, the Russian Communist Party issued a call to a Moscow conference to be held early in March for forming a Third International. The call was reprinted in the Revolutionary Age and the Boston local of the party moved for a referendum on affiliating to the Third International. The party leadership shelved the Boston motion on a technicality but at the behest of another local authorized the referendum. The results, not published for several months, showed a preponderant vote for immediate affiliation to the Third International.
A second and even more decisive show of left-wing strength were the elections for a new national committee, also to be determined in a referendum vote – the SP’s traditional method of electing national committees. Although the referendum was held in April 1919, before the formal organization of a national left wing, it was clear where the various candidates stood. The left wingers were those who had identified themselves with the manifesto of the New York left wing or were members of the organized left in Chicago. New York or Boston. When the votes were in and tallied by the right wing, it was truly alarmed. The left had decisively won. The right wing attempted to suppress the count and when that was not possible it refused to recognize the results, maintaining that they were the product of fraud. The charge was preposterous. Evidence of fraud in a hotly contested referendum could possibly be proven by both sides but the one-sidedness of the referendum was so great that there could be no question that the mandate of the membership was for a new left wing national committee. The left wing had won twelve out of fifteen positions; for the post of International Secretary, left-winger Kate Richards O’Hare received 13,262 votes to Morris Hillquit’s 4,775; for International Representative John Reed polled 17,235 votes to Berger’s 4,871.
The right wing, refusing to recognize the elections, decided to leave the question of a new National Committee to a future convention. But to insure itself against being deposed there the old right wing national committee, actually an illegal party body, began a series of wholesale expulsions and suspensions from the party. The Hillquit type socialist proved himself an admirable exponent of political democracy, except when democracy meant a change in party leadership and program. Then it was time to forget about democratic niceties and get down to the business of guaranteeing right wing minority control of the party even if it meant tearing the organization apart in the most callous and bureaucratic manner. Which is what the illegal national committee proceeded to do.
Meeting in the first week of May 1919, the SP’s right wing National Executive Committee, not only declined to announce publicly the results of the national party elections but performed some major surgery. It lopped off the entire Michigan Socialist Party which had been in the forefront of the left-wing movement. The expulsion was explained on constitutional grounds. The Michigan SP was a peculiar tendency in the party. It repudiated immediate demands and ran candidates on a “One Plank” program – the Abolition of Capitalism. This, the SP right wing maintained was in violation of the party constitution which binds all groups “to be guided by the constitution and platform” of the party. Expulsion on this ground was obviously a hoax, as the Michigan SP had held its abbreviated campaign platform for several years with no punitive measures taken by the party leadership. In addition to expelling the Michigan socialists, the right wing NEC at the same meeting suspended the Russian, South Slav, Polish, Hungarian, Lithuanian and Lettish language federations. In another month, the same body expelled, in addition, the Ohio and Massachusetts organizations. A total of nearly 45,000 had been tossed out or suspended. Aside from the charge against the Michigan SP, the disciplined sections were accused of breaking party discipline, organizing a party within a party, adhering to the Manifesto of the New York left wing and fraud. The right wing champions of democracy provided no trials for the disciplined sections. Local Cuyahoga County (Cleveland) initiated a call for a referendum to rescind the suspensions and expulsions. The party's national secretary, Adolph Germer, waited for 10,000 party members (3 times the number needed) to second the motion before informing the Cleveland socialists that the motion was unconstitutional because it contained comment.
 
FROM JUNE 21–25, A CONFERENCE of left-wing organizations was held in New York City which was of historic moment in the annals of the American Communist movement. The conference call had been sent out by the New York left wing, also signed by Fraina for the Boston SP,and Charles Ruthenberg for the left-wing dominated Cleveland organization. The political basis of the conference was the manifesto and program which had been adopted by the New York left and the conference agenda had four broad points: the crisis in the party; “affiliation with the Bolshevik Spartacist International”; prepare a declaration of principles of a national left wing: consideration of other means for furthering the cause of revolutionary socialism. There was to be one delegate for 500 members and no more than four delegates from any one group (thereby limiting the representation of the left-wing language federations). More than ninety delegates were seated.
At this conference a National Council of nine was elected which approved a new manifesto shortly after the conference adjourned in the name of the now nationally organized left wing. Before continuing with the details of the conference, its disunity and the subsequent organizational disorientation of the left wing we must pause long enough to examine the manifestos of the left wing. In the political analysis made by the left wing and in its style, particularly those sections dealing with American problems, we can get both the ideology and flavor of the only numerically significant revolutionary Marxist movement in this country, past or present.
 
Mass Action
THE FIRST TWENTY YEARS OF THE CENTURY in the United States were witness to an extreme economic polarization. The relative numerical strength of the farm population and its political importance had declined considerably, while American industry had grown gigantically and presented a text book case of the power and evils inherent in monopoly capitalism. With the growth of mass industries there was a parallel growth of an industrial proletariat. While the craftsman had his skill, which he regarded as a form of property to be coveted with all the zealousness of a small shopkeeper guarding his wares, this new industrial proletariat had nothing – neither property nor skills. In the view of the left wing, this ever-widening gulf between worker and capitalist would, by itself, arouse the unorganized working class to a pitch of militancy and organization that would sweep everything before it. It would instinctively develop the tactics of mass action – strikes and other economic demonstrations of class struggle which could not be contained within the limits of economic activity but would, inevitably and on its own steam, assume a revolutionary character. This political mass action would find its organizational form and driving force in revolutionary industrial unions. Given a collapse of American capitalism, which was soon forthcoming in the view of most left wingers, these industrial unions taking the lead in a revolutionary struggle against capitalism would overthrow it, and reconstitute society under the control of organized producers.
Neither the phrase, mass action, nor its general meaning, were introduced by the left wing. At the turn of the century, Rosa Luxemburg had referred to mass action as the elemental, instinctive and spontaneous revolt of the proletariat against bourgeois conditions of economic and political life with the role of social democracy necessary for giving it political drive and direction.
In this country the first we have heard of the phrase was in a passing manner in a report by C. Karklin, secretary of the Lettish Federation to the 1912 convention of the SP. But it was not until after the war that the term became common parlance in the socialist movement. Its most consistent advocate was Louis Fraina – a point not always to his credit – who did more than his share to reduce a semi-syndicalist conception to the level of a physical reflex, where through constant and indiscriminate use, mass actions were seen everywhere and anywhere until the conception became a ritualistic, revolutionary fire dance. A picket line, an anti-war demonstration, a move to organize the unorganized all became signs of an imminent mass revolutionary upsurge.
The theory of mass action as promulgated in the left wing manifesto was wrong to begin with, as an abstract theory with its overdrawn emphasis on “instinct,” the “inevitability” of revolutionary industrial unions springing directly out of the “spontaneous revolt” of the unorganized proletariat. “Mass action starts as the spontaneous activity of unorganized workers massed in the basic industries; its initial form is the mass strike of the unorganized proletariat.” Mass action had become a theory and a dogma in the American left wing which felt that the Russian revolution was initiated by a spontaneous mass upheaval and therefore decided that this was the total blueprint of revolution for all times and all places.
While the left wing as a whole was perfectly delighted with the theory of mass action, it was not universally accepted there. One of the more interesting phenomena in the left wing was the Michigan Socialist Party, an important element in the left and opponent of the theory of mass action. It is unfortunate that the Michigan Socialist Party has been either largely ignored by historians of socialism, or shunted aside in reminiscences of ex-Communists familiar with the Michigan SP as a bunch of “wiseacres.” This state organization had 5,500 members at the time it was expelled by the right wing with the bulk of its strength in Detroit where it played an important role in the local Federation of Labor. The Michiganers – who ran for public office on the one-plank program: the overthrow of capitalism – had a fierce suspicion bordering on hatred for intellectuals. Nevertheless, they insisted, the socialist movement had to have a highly educated membership. Imperative then was an intensive educational campaign among the working-class members of the party. The worker was to be intellectualized, trained in all basic and subtle Marxist ideas. This was necessary for socialist action and to keep the movement out of the control of middle-class theorists. Education became a fetish in the Michigan party, and its Proletarian University of America became a local Detroit institution, with annexes in a number of other cities. The emphasis on educating the worker brought the Michigan party into ideological conflict with the left wing’s emphasis of mass action; intelligence versus instinct. An attack on Fraina, Rutgers and the theory of mass action appearing in the Michigan publication, The Proletarian, observed that
“Masses acting instinctively, however, are a poor reed to lean upon ... What we are suffering from is the instinctive actions of the masses right down the history of the working class. Only when they are educated in Socialism and cease to act as instinctively as mules will the workers be ripe and ready for emancipation.”
Where the majority of the left wing exaggerated the extent to which the strike wave of 1919 was symptomatic of the increased political maturity of the working class and thought of the United States as entering a pre-revolutionary stage, Dennis Batt, one of the Michigan party’s leading spokesmen wisely cautioned:
“We are quite ready to acknowledge that general unrest and strikes are grist for the mill of the revolutionary movement; but it is our task to organize this unrest and give it intelligence.”
But while the Michigan organization made cogent criticisms of the national left wing, its own intelligence was not extended to recognizing the merit of struggling for reforms, and in their rejection of immediate demands, they found a common sectarian meeting ground with the majority of the left wing.
The theory of mass action is of interest today, not only because it is a part of American radical history, but as evidence of the contradiction in values between Stalinism and the early communist tendencies. In its organizational structure, actions, politics, tactics, philosophy, Stalinism is a complete negation of the democratic values of the early communists. No matter how much one might take to task the theory of mass action as expounded by the forerunners of the American communist movement, it must be recognized as a view democratic in the extreme. It placed its faith in the self-reliance and democratic potential of the broad mass of workers. The struggle for socialism was to be conducted from below and the leadership of revolutionary, mass political strikes were to come out of the ranks. “Mass action can dispense with leaders and continue its activity of itself, spontaneously and successfully,” Fraina wrote in November, 1917. The Left Wing Manifesto declared that “The final objective of mass action” was the “revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat.” But the dictatorship was to undertake measures including: “Workers’ control of industry, to be exercised by the industrial organizations of the workers, operating by means of the industrial vote.” The left wing, the antithesis of its Stalinist degeneration, believed that “Not the state, not politicians and bureaucrats, but the workers themselves shall manage industry for the workers – for peace and liberty and happiness.”
The fallibility of “mass action” as a left-wing theory was not its greatest sin. Mass action became an all-pervading philosophy which served to disorient the early communist movement on all practical, domestic political problems. Current political struggles were magnified out of proportion to fit the revolutionary optimism of mass action in the United States.
 
The Left Wing and the Union Movement
THE MODERN UNION MOVEMENT HAD its beginnings in 1881 with the loose association of 50,000 craft unionists in what was to be called the American Federation of Labor five years later. A full decade passed before its original membership rose another 100,000. By 1912, the total number of American unionists was somewhat more than 2 million. By the time of the 1920 convention of the AFL, its membership claim rose to 4 million. This figure, however, by itself, gives an inflated picture of the strength of American unionism at the time. Government and even corporation resistance to unionization had eased up considerably during the war period. Gompersism performed valuable war-time political services for the bourgeoisie and it was rewarded by an unsigned contract with the government whereby it was permitted to draw additional numerical strength and revenue from war-inflated industries. By the end of 1920, the union movement was already being thinned out. The government had no need of its services, a depression had set in and the corporations embarked on an anti-union campaign which came perilously close to destroying the union movement. But even the 4 million figure plus the million in independent unions were not staggeringly high figures when compared to the population of 105 million or to the union movement in highly industrialized European countries. The British unions totaled more than six million in a population less than half of the United States, had organized the decisive sectors of the economy with a probable majority of the nation’s industrial workers in its ranks. Here, after the 1929 crash, the AFL membership had declined close to the vanishing point. It only claimed about 2½ million members and even that was an artificially manufactured figure. It was not until the late 1930s that the American union movement began to come into its own with a phenomenal rise in union membership, union consciousness and making an irresistible assault on the nation’s hitherto impregnable mass manufacturing industries.
Before the turn of the century, trade unionism was an established institution in England. The bourgeoisie there resisted the demands of the union movement, but it had no hope of crushing the organized working class as such. In the United States, for reasons which we summarized in our first article, trade unionism was not resisted on the bargaining level; its very existence was challenged as an irreverent encroachment on the sacred rights of private property which had to be exorcised. Through violence and through government intervention, the unions were under the constant threat of total collapse. And more than one labor organization had been utterly destroyed before labor was able to maintain itself as an independent class force.
Before the formation of the AFL, the most powerful labor organization was the Knights of Labor. One of P.W. Brissenden’s sources gives the Knights a membership of 1,200,000 in 1888, nineteen years after its formation, but this figure is probably about 25 per cent too high. Although a radical movement, the Knights was not a class organization. Membership was open to anyone except lawyers, bankers, stock brokers, gamblers and liquor dealers. Its emphasis was, however, on improving the lot of the laboring man. In its local assemblies, trade unionists played a prominent role and craft distinctions were specifically abjured. Nor was there any discrimination as to sex and race. The Knights, however, could not withstand its own weaknesses. It was a highly politicalized body which became a common battleground for every radical tendency in the country: the SLP, anarchists, syndicalists, single taxers, populists. The presence of so many political tendencies was a disruptive agent and the very existence of politics in the Knights alienated many unionists who preferred to see the organization devoted to fighting the economic battles of the working class. Unions in the Knights did conduct strikes, but the official policy of the organization strongly opposed such activity, preferring to concentrate on politics and organizing cooperatives – which failed – as a means of fighting the monopolists. Many of the important strikes led by unions affiliated with the Knights were lost and workers who joined thinking that they could improve their lot here and now, were sorely disappointed. The Knights was not a party, though absorbed with politics; it was not a union though it attracted hundreds of thousands of unskilled and skilled workers; it was not a cooperative movement though it organized cooperatives. Given its nebulous character, it could not sustain its membership swollen out of proportion to its staying power.
The American Federation of Labor was formed as a militant class organization of the working class by unionists, including Knights, who keenly felt all the shortcomings of the older organization. It was not organized, at first, as a competitive body to the Knights, though inevitably it became that.
Samuel Gompers, who moulded the thinking of the AFL, didn’t believe in the panaceas offered by the Knights. He did not believe that cooperatives or cheap money were going to solve the problems of the working class. He believed in resisting the monopolists but he did not hold to any utopian schemes for smashing the trusts. The concentration of industry was, so far as he was concerned, an inevitable economic tendency. The early Federation acknowledged the class struggle and at its first convention its principles recognized “a struggle between capital and labor” that would crush the “toiling millions’’ if they did not organize resistance. This organized resistance would be most effectively offered by an economic combination of workers against the economic combinations of capital, and its most effective weapon was not a lobby, or even its own party, but the strike. The militancy of the early Federation, its class approach, its understanding of industrial development, won the warm praise of the prominent Marxist thinker, F.A. Sorge.
But the American Federation of Labor in a few decades grew from a militant class-struggle organization into one of the most conservative labor bodies in the world. The pure-and-simple trade unionism of the AFL, its underlying philosophy, had become unattractively adorned with a hidebound social conservatism and class collaborationism. One reason was the terrible struggle which raged in the Federation between the pure-and-simple unionists and the Socialist Labor Party which attempted to impose its ideology on the organization. These conflicts served to quicken the conservatizing of the AFL, but it could not have been responsible for it. We suggest rather, that the power of the corporation and its alliance with government and court was so powerful in the 1890’s and the early part of the century, that the American Federation of Labor sought safety behind its anti-socialism and its narrow organizational conceptions, offering its support to capitalist politicians whom it thought to reward for some favor or other and from whom it hoped to receive some paternal benefactions. In the AFL there was at all times a predominance of skilled workers organized along craft lines, who naturally tended toward conservatism. Unlike the unskilled worker in the growing mass industries, the craft worker had his skill which gave him a greater bargaining power to begin with than the unskilled workers who could be so easily replaced from among the unemployed or the next wave of immigrants. In addition, many of the craft workers in the AFL were from competitive industries where the threat of strike carried with it the threat of bankruptcy for the employer; it was no simple matter to find scabs with a craft skill. The mass of replaceable unskilled workers, on the other hand, had to contend with large, powerful corporations.
Given these conditions and the history of labor struggles in the last two decades of the 19th century, it is easy to understand why most craft workers who left the Knights to organize the AFL developed a conservative outlook. The workers in the crafts wanted an organization which would defend their interests, protect their skills. They felt no idealistic urge and saw no immediate economic need to organize the unskilled in mass industries, for that, to them, was courting disaster. The strikes in the mass industries, and those led by independent industrial unions had been many, violent and most often, unsuccessful, in the 1880s and 1890s. In railroad, an industrial union of 150,000 had been crushed; and, in the basic steel industry, the once powerful craft union, the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers was crippled in the Homestead strike of 1892, defeated again in 1901 and completely wiped out by the power of the corporation in 1909.
In the main, the AFL was a loose federation of conservative craft unions, but in many important sections it had industrial unions. One of its most important unions was the industry-wide organized Brewery Workers which had left the Knights for the AFL. And if the brewers were hardly in a basic industry, there was the United Mine Workers organized in 1890, also an industrial union, which became by far the largest union in the AFL. Friction did occur between the industrial unions in the AFL and the Federation’s craft-minded leadership, but these industrial unions survived the conservative leadership. In fact, with one exception, there were no important industrial unions outside the AFL by 1900. Those that did exist were tiny and the one important exception was the Western Federation of Miners. Organized in 1893, these western miners joined the AFL, struck out on their own fours years later, became a driving force in the organization of the IWW in 1905, from which it withdrew two years later, grew politically conservative and returned to the AFL in 1911, retaining its industrial form and renamed the Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers. It is important to bear this in mind in assessing the attitude of the pre-communist left wing from whose denunciations of the AFL one could hardly realize that at no time was less than 25 per cent of the AFL organized in industrial unions and a greater percentage in basic industries, organized on craft and industrial lines.
 
If the objective situation in the United States militated against the AFL developing a militant class-conscious leadership, it was also responsible for a brand of syndicalism in the labor movement which burned its way into the thinking of the 1919 left wing in the SP, thereby weakening the early communist movement and setting back the labor movement as a whole.
The organized expression of American syndicalism was the Industrial Workers of the World. It was inspired by the Western Federation of Miners, the SLP-controlled Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance, the United Metal Workers which withdrew from the AFL in 1904, locals from the AFL miner’s union and a number of prominent socialists. The IWW and the AFL drew conclusions from class struggle experiences which were similar in that both, after some hesitation, rejected political action. But the AFL withdrew from political action in order to acquiesce to capitalism, while the IWW repudiated politics to overthrow it. The IWW viewed the failures of the politicalized Knights of Labor and the myriad labor parties which flared and fluttered in the preceding period and concluded that capitalism cannot be meaningfully opposed in the political arena but has to be fought and uprooted via the economic power of the revolutionary industrial union. The reliance on the industrial union was raised to a syndicalist philosophy. If the defeat of the workers was due to private capitalists and the government operating in concert, then after capitalism was overthrown the basic economic and administration unit in a workers’ republic would be the revolutionary industrial union, thus guaranteeing the working class against possible incursions by the political institutions of a state.
Syndicalism in the United States was a numerically negligible factor before the first war. In the course of its growing anti-politicalism and the increasing conservatism of the Western Federation of Miners, the IWW underwent a number of splits. Its first – and last – president led a faction out after the first year, the Western Federation of Miners left after the second, and a DeLeonist wing separated in 1909. By 1912, the IWW was reduced to less than 15,000 members [3] and it was not until the Lawrence textile strike of that year that it achieved a national reputation.
While IWW activity did not have a wide effect on the unorganized and unskilled before the war, its activity and ideas furthered the disunity in the socialist movement from its inception in 1905 through 1919. At the end of 1912, the SP had a membership more numerous than all the membership cards the IWW had issued (even with its large turnover) since its birth; and it received a vote that was about sixty times the IWW membership. But the existence of the syndicalists brought to the fore the question of the relation of the socialists to the unorganized and unskilled and to the AFL with its several million members. Unfortunately, the socialist movement divided into two theoretically extreme positions; those who sided with the IWW and regarded the AFL as a prime obstacle to the organization of the working class and those who took the attitude that the Socialist Party was the political party of the working class which should not interfere with the economic organization of the workers. There were groups and individuals in and out of the Socialist Party who advocated what was, in this writer’s opinion, the correct view: for all militants and socialists to join in the AFL, recognizing it as the largest and most stable economic organization of the working class, to function within that organization with the aim of winning sympathy and support for organizing the unskilled on an industry-wide basis. This was the theoretical view of William Z. Foster’s Syndicalist League of North America, and of some Marxists inside the Socialist Party. That this view did not gain wide currency among the militants in the Socialist Party either before or after the first war was only to be expected: the left-wing workers in the party included many who were themselves victimized by the AFL’s narrowness, the state of the class struggle encouraged politically-conscious socialist workers to turn a friendly ear to class-conscious syndicalists, and the professed neutrality of the Socialist Party leadership toward the economic policies of the AFL could only incite the militants in their denunciation of the “reactionary” AFL.
The left wing of 1919 showed a hostility toward the AFL that was even greater than that of the 1912–1913 syndicalist left wing. And it was no less denunciatory of the trade-union politics of the party moderates than the Haywood faction was, although the party leadership had moved considerably to the left on all questions. While the party attitude toward the AFL was certainly open to criticism from a Marxist point of view, much that has been ascribed to it was unjust. The formal position of the SP toward the AFL was given by Morris Hillquit in testimony before the Commission on Industrial Relations in 1914:
... We don’t engage in the economic struggles of the workers, except where such struggles assume a political and general aspect. We do not consider it part of our mission, function, or power to interfere with any detail of economic or organized labor in the shop or in the unions. We would consider that meddling.
Before the same Commission, in response to questions put by Sam Gompers – Hillquit and Gompers cross-examined one another – the socialist leader disowned the earlier views of Debs that the working man should “sever his relations with the American Federation” and join with the IWW. Hillquit, speaking for himself and the SP, repudiated the position of Debs, remarking that “the Socialist Party at no time had any substantial criticism of the American Federation of Labor.” But Hillquit, always a careful lawyer, was quick to add: “the majority of its [SP] members do believe that the present leadership of the American Federation of Labor is somewhat archaic, somewhat antiquated, too conservative, and not efficient enough for the object and purposes of the American Federation of Labor.”
Although the Socialist Party emphasized the division of labor between the Socialist Party and the trade unions, it would be false to conclude that the party actually never did “meddle” with the internal affairs of the AFL. In the 1912 convention resolution of the party, partially as a compromise with the syndicalists, the AFL was implicitly assailed for failing to pay sufficient attention to the organization of unskilled and immigrant workers and the party offered to “cooperate with the labor unions in the tasks of organizing the unorganized workers ...”
The ferocity of the attacks by syndicalists and the 1919 left wing on the trade-union policy of the Socialist Party served, to the present day, to exaggerate, if not falsify, the conservatism of the SP leadership’s trade-union position. In the bit we have quoted above, it can be seen that at least formally the Socialist Party leadership was not indifferent to the fate of the unskilled and the failure of the AFL to engage in major campaigns to organize the mass industries along industrial lines – the only way they could be effectively organized. But even more revealing than the formal position of the party was the activity of prominent socialists inside the AFL who did challenge the Gompers leadership at times and offered an alternate policy of industrial unionism. Just one year before Hillquit’s testimony, a powerful combination of socialist and progressive labor delegates to the 1912 convention of the AFL put up its own candidate for president, Max Hayes, a prominent socialist, who received one-third of the votes. A resolution favoring industrial unionism was also introduced which received the same support. It is ridiculous to believe that these were the activities of socialists who operated purely as individuals. The role of the SP in the organization and activities of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers union and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, one of the industrial unions in the AFL, is a well known example of how the SP, in fact, did participate in the internal union movement. And in a host of other unions, craft and industrial, members of the Socialist Party carried on oppositional activity and for limited periods assumed the leadership of some of the more important unions. At the 1908 convention of the United Mine Workers, of the more than 1,000 delegates, 400 were members of the Socialist Party led by Duncan MacDonald and Adolph Germer. The socialists had taken over the leadership at this Indianapolis convention of the largest union in the United States. A few years later, a member of the Socialist Party was elected president of the International Association of Machinists. In the highly skilled Tailor’s Union, socialist-led progressives took the leadership of the union away from the conservatives.
This opposition to craft unionism and Gompers from within the AFL could not have been possible if the party, in reality, as well as in form, rejected party interference in the unions as “meddling.”
We do not wish to give the impression that the right-wing leadership of the Socialist Party in the first twenty years of its existence fought inside the unions and in the party propaganda organ consistently and uniformly, or on the basis of a centrally-directed policy, for a change in the structure of the AFL. The party as a whole in its resolutions failed to make its weight felt as a force for industrial organization. Many party members were functionaries inside the AFL who, affected by the conservatism of the Federation soft pedalled criticism of craft unionism and of Gompers. Nevertheless, the extreme attacks of the syndicalists and the 1919 left wing on the party were unwarranted, reflecting a fundamentally reactionary ambition to destroy the American Federation of Labor. There was certainly not enough in the history of the Socialist Party to excuse the following unqualified condemnation from the June 1919 Manifesto adopted by the National Left Wing Council: “This party [the SP] moreover, developed into an expression of the unions of the aristocracy of labor – the A.F. of L. The party refused to engage in the struggle against the reactionary unions, to organize a new labor movement of the militant proletariat.”
 
THE LEFT WING MANIFESTO ALSO DECLARED that:
Our task is to encourage the militant mass movements in the AFL to split the old unions, to break the power of unions which are corrupted by imperialism and betray the militant proletariat.
It further denied that the craft unions were “actual class organizations.” The Manifesto not only assigned revolutionary socialists the responsibility of smashing the AFL and organizing industrial unions but declared that these industrial unions were to be revolutionary. This was not an ultimate objective, but something within reach and to be fought for at the time.
Our task, moreover, is to articulate and organize the mass of the unorganized industrial proletariat, which constitutes the basis for a militant socialism. The struggle for the revolutionary industrial unionism of the proletariat becomes an indispensable phase of revolutionary socialism, on the basis of which to broaden and deepen the action of the militant proletariat developing reserves for the ultimate conquest of power.
These thunderous proclamations of the inevitable course of history substituted for a balanced and realistic appraisal of the class struggle in the United States. By dreaming up an American proletariat soon to organize its forces in revolutionary unions in preparation for mounting the barricades, by denying that craft unions were even working-class bodies, and renouncing the major existing organization of the working class, the left wing, actually abandoned a growing progressive sentiment in the AFL in 1918–1919 to the wrath and trickery of Gompers and impelled its own isolation from the union movement.
 
THE LEFT WING DID NOT HAVE a pure syndicalist position. Where the Wobblies, after the split with the De Leonists, denied categorically the need for politics and had anarchist conceptions of a workers’ republic, the left wing recognized the need for a political party and a workers’ state. But it was semi-syndicalist in that its theories of mass action and the timing and role given to projected revolutionary unions would have made, in effect, a communist party the subordinate, advisory adjunct of the economic organizations of the working class.
In a sense, the views of the left wing on the trade unions seemed more justifiable than those of the syndicalist opposition of 1912–1913. The year 1919 was in all ways radically different from the period immediately before the war. Aside from the intensity of politics, internationally and in the United States, there were three main elements new to the American class struggle which gave the mistaken view of the left wing some relation to reality:

the role of the conservative union bureaucracy 	in the war and its response to the Russian Revolution;
 
recent success of the IWW and,
 
the fierceness of the class struggle, all 	provided the left wing with a rationale for its revolutionary 	optimism.

1. Politics of the AFL. During the war, the AFL formed a servile political alliance with imperialism and after the war, reached its political depths by doing whatever little it could to impede the growth of world socialism, which, in 1919, appeared to be the wave of the future. As the AFL continued in its political devolution, the firmer and more extreme was the left wing’s repudiation of it as anything more than a cancerous growth in the working class. Gompers had developed an almost pathological hatred of socialists by April 1917. He had learned to worship at the shrine of capitalism and the image of world socialism held the same terror for him as for his capitalist allies in the National Civic Federation. Long before the Bolshevik revolution, international socialism was, in Gompers’ view, little more than the aftermath of a Prussian conspiracy to subvert her enemies. When the March revolution occurred in Russia, Gompers welcomed it, as did most everyone else, but a little more tepidly, perhaps. Early in the history of the Miliukov government, Gompers cabled an appeal for moderation to the Petrograd Council of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. When Elihu Root was appointed head of an American mission to Russia, it was Gompers who tried to placate Russian socialists who could not see how a reactionary businessman could sympathetically review the Russian revolution. The Bolshevik revolution itself found in Gompers one of its most rabid, intolerant opponents.
Gompers and the AFL were so embittered by the rising tide of European socialism after the war that they could not even see their way clear to affiliating to the conservative but “socialist”-led International Confederation of Trade Unions (Amsterdam International) reconstituted at the end of the war. Gompers preferred to confine his international connections to his role as a labor attaché of Wilson during the peace negotiations which reduced Germany to semi-servitude; his contribution was to assist in the formulation of some insipid labor provision of the Versailles Treaty.
The Gompersites objected in general to the pro-socialism of the Amsterdam trade unionists, but they were particularly incensed when that organization, despite its vigorous antiBolshevism, opposed the inhuman Allied blockade against famine-ridden Russia designed to starve communism out of power. It was Gompers’ considered opinion of Bolshevism that “No more monstrous or degrading movement was ever set up anywhere in the world” and it was the position of the AFL that no effort should be made by it to lift the blockade as that “could be construed as an assistance to, or approval of, the Soviet government.” There was some opposition in the AFL to the anti-sovietism of the bureaucracy but it was never a major threat to the powers that be, and was overwhelmingly crushed at Federation conventions.
2. The IWW. The progress made by the IWW from 1916 until 1918 was another reason for the semi-syndicalism of the left wing. Where the IWW was a floundering organization at the time of the split in 1912–1913, it had grown considerably immediately before and after America’s entry into the war. In its earlier period, the IWW organized workers on the fringe of society. Migratory workers had become the mass base of the syndicalist union and their nomadic existence accented the IWW’s fluidity. In 1914, fully one half of the membership was unemployed. Were it not for the war- born economic revival in 1915–1916, the depression that set in during the winter of 1913–1914 might have continued, and completely wiped out the IWW, leaving nothing more than an idea. Concentrating as it did on the jobless and migratory workers, it was not really an “industrial” union, and it was a dual union to the AFL mainly in concept; in only rare and local cases did it threaten AFL unions. Much of that was changed by full wartime production. Members of the IWW had become stabilized workers and the organization grew more business-like and efficient. It was able to break through public prejudice and company and government terror. It now gained the sympathy and support of thousands of more permanently employed farm hands, lumber workers, miners, textile and maritime workers. In 1914, Vincent St. John could only claim 14,000 members. Now the IWW boasted of 120,000 members. Even if its claim were exaggerated, it had become a formidable organization and a live threat to the power of craft unionism. Toward the end of 1918, the membership began to fall off sharply and by 1919, the IWW only reported 65,000 members, little more than half of its peak 18 months earlier. The primary reason for the decline was the war and post-war reign of tenor against the IWW. The organization was physically and brutally broken by beatings, lynchings, mass arrests and convictions.
Although in decline in 1919, the recent successes of the IWW appeared to offer some empirical justification for the left wing view that the evolution of the economy created a discontented proletariat which would instinctively mobilize itself via revolutionary industrial unions.
3. The Class Struggle. With the exception of the formative years of the CIO, the year 1919 stands out as the most heroic period in the history of the union movement. Long before 1919, the American union-conscious worker had made his mark as a tough and resilient fighter. But in its militancy and magnitude, the struggle of the American working class for recognition and advancement in 1919, had never been matched.
In Seattle, a general strike was prepared and led by the AFL craft unions from February 6–11, called in support of the demands of shipyard workers for higher wages. Although the leading unions were craft unions, there was a strong radical and socialist force in the local labor movement which was a factor in the strike.
In August 1918 a National Committee for Organizing Iron and Steel Workers had been formed. A tremendous push was planned to break the power of the steel corporations. By the middle of 1919, hundreds of thousands of steel workers, skilled and unskilled, had flocked into the union and a strike was long in evidence before the strike call went out in September 1919, which was answered by 365,000 workers.
In May 1919 the independent Amalgamated Clothing Workers won a four-month strike of 60,000 workers in New York, gaining the 44-hour week.
Lawrence textile workers struck on February 3, 1919, under the slogan “48–54” – reduction in hours from 54 to 48 a week without loss in pay. The strike was won 15 weeks later. Out of this struggle, there emerged the Amalgamated Textile Workers, a radical, industrial union which rose to a membership of 50,000. Its general secretary was A.J. Muste.
In 1919, the United Mine Workers had reached a membership of well over 400,000, and by the middle of the year were preparing to strike for their demands, including a 60 per cent wage increase.
These were among the most dramatic struggles of 1919, but far from the total. Four million workers struck in 1919, and another million went out in unauthorized strikes. Not only the extent of the strike struggle, but the forms which it took worked to instill in the left wing oracles an unwavering conviction that the working class was moving in a revolutionary direction, for craft unionism and labor conservatism were now clearly on the defensive. When the massive struggles exploded in 1919, they were, sometimes by implication, at other times consciously, an attempt to break out of the limitations of Gompersism. The pure-and-simple union philosophy of the AFL had outlived whatever usefulness it had in its formative period and its continued domination by the craft unions and adherence to these obsolescent forms of organization could not meet the needs of a working class which was now in its majority employed in highly concentrated mass industries which were dependent on a large force of semi-skilled and unskilled laborers.
But if Gompersism was to be destroyed it had to be done from within the established union movement. It certainly could not be done by left-wing manifestos calling for the destruction of the AFL, and for revolutionary dual unions. The failure of left wingers and other radicals to conduct the fight for industrial unionism in a sane and responsible manner inside the AFL led to the following criticism of them by William Z. Foster in 1920, when reviewing the defeat of the steel workers he led:
... their time and energies have been worse than wasted in trying to build up organizations such as the I.W.W. When one considers that the life of nearly every labor union depends upon the activities of a very small fraction of its membership, it is clear that this constant draining upon its best blood must have seriously hindered the advance of the trade-union movement.
 
The Left Wing and the Labor Party
FOR OR AGAINST THE LABOR PARTY? Until recent times that problem was nearly constant in the socialist movement around which debates raged and groups were suspended, expelled or split.
To one degree or another the Socialist Party had expressed its opposition to a labor party from the year of its formation until 1921. The policy of the organization had been firmly established in 1903 when its national committee adopted the view that a labor party could only be a rival organization which had in the past “proven disastrous to the ultimate end of the labor movement ...” whereas “the history of the labor movement of the world has conclusively demonstrated that a Socialist Party is the only political organization able to adequately and consistently conduct the political struggles or the working class ...” This was a firm party policy but far from widely accepted at all times. The resolution just quoted from was, itself, a repudiation of California socialists who supported a local labor party, and a rebuke to a sub committee of the National Committee which endorsed the Californian’s attitude. Until 1910 there was considerable disagreement in the party, mainly between trade unionists who favored a union-based labor party and the SP leadership. In 1908 Debs’ vote was only slightly greater than it was in his previous presidential campaign which was evidence to pro-labor-party socialists that the SP was too far off from becoming the party of the working class to forego pressing the unions to organize their own political party. With the election successes of 1910 and 1912 talk within the SP of a labor party was reduced to a whisper. The party had more than doubled its national vote in 1912 and the prospect of the SP becoming the political party of the working class had a realistic basis.
There is no point in this article in a detailed discussion of the labor party question before 1918. We will only permit ourselves this observation: the answer to “For or against the labor party?” depends on the condition of the labor movement and its prospects at the time the question is posed. There was no stricture which said that the Socialist Party could not also be the mass labor party as was the case in Germany. In 1912 it appeared that the party here, differently from the Germans, might develop into a truly mass movement. Today, when the unions embrace 16 million workers and the organized socialists so few, it is obvious that a labor party experience is vital for the working class to defend itself politically and should be endorsed by socialists as a necessary stage in raising the political and class consciousness of the workers. In 1912, however, the relationship of forces was quite different. The unions were weak, making but slow progress while Socialist influence was growing inside the union movement and in the nation as a whole. Why then should the SP have urged the formation of a labor party? A national labor party in 1912 would have handicapped the SP as an independent, electoral organization at a time when it was most successful. Had there been in 1912 a mass sentiment or an irrepressible urge among progressive leaders in the union movement to organize a national labor party that would bypass the SP, the opposition to a labor party might have been unjustified. But such was not the case and the real problem was whether or not socialists should take the initiative in urging the union movement to organize its own political arm.
While one might debate the merits of the SP attitude toward a national labor party in 1912 when none was really in sight, the position of the entire socialist movement, left and right, after the war was detrimental to the entire labor movement. Toward the end of 1918 a labor party movement was initiated on a local level, quickly growing to national proportions. Its first sign was a local organization sponsored by Bridgeport machinists arising out of a local strike situation. But the major drive for a labor party had its source in the Chicago Federation of Labor, led by its president, John Fitzpatrick, and its secretary, Edward Nockels. Neither of these men was a socialist. They were, along with many others, militant progressive unionists disillusioned by the course of the war and at loggerheads with the Gompersites. They developed a movement and program which were not “revolutionary,” but far to the left of anything the old “progressives” had offered. Most important, though, it was to be the platform of an independent political party of the workers. This program known as Labor’s 14 Points included demands for collective bargaining, democratic control of industry, labor representation in all government departments and commissions, an appeal to supplement the League of Nations with an international league of workers to help bring about universal disarmament and “to the end that there shall be no more kings and no more wars.”
In January 1919, 125 Chicago locals endorsed the proposal for a labor party, and met in convention a few months later. John Fitzpatrick was chosen to run in the April mayoralty elections as the labor party’s candidate, receiving 56,000 votes. The Chicago move spread nationally. The Illinois State Federation of Labor organized a Labor Party early in 1919 and won a number of offices in the state-wide municipal elections. At the same time a significant labor party was organized by New York unionists – the American Labor Party. Its founding convention was attended by close to 900 trade union delegates. A state-wide labor party was formed by Wisconsin unionists. Cleveland unionists organized a local party. In May 1919 the Pennsylvania Federation of Labor decided on a labor party course. In Pittsburgh, Iowa, North Dakota and many other areas the labor party movement was gaining ground.
From November 22–25, 1919, a national labor party was organized in Chicago, with 1,000 delegates from local labor parties and unions from 37 states and the District of Columbia. The party’s name was the American Labor Party.
What was the attitude of socialists to this political demonstration which paralleled the great strike wave of 1919? The right-wing leadership of the party failed to reverse its position of 1903, although the labor movement was completely different, and the party itself was being torn asunder and losing steadily at the polls and in the union movement since 1912. Nevertheless, it continued to look askance on all other political parties. At its January, 1919 meeting the National Executive Committee adopted as its only concession to labor party sentiment already in evidence a policy of “watchful waiting” and opposed “destructive criticism.” But it warned that the party constitution “forbid members from joining any other political organization” and declared that no support could be given to the new movement until it could be “judged by their deeds rather than their promises.”
What of the left wing? By the time the labor party movement was picking up speed in the spring of 1919, the left wing was already rolling along with its throttles wide open disregarding all blocks and warning signals and driving straight toward the American revolution – in preambles, resolutions, manifestos and conferences. The Left Wing Manifesto of July disposed of the labor party with the following flourish of its super revolutionary quill:
A minor phase of the awakening of labor is the trades unions organizing a Labor Party, in an effort to conserve what they have secured as a privileged caste. A Labor Party is not the instrument for the emancipation of the working class; its policy would in general be what is now the official policy of the Socialist Party – reforming capitalism on the basis of the bourgeois parliamentary state. Laborism is as much a danger to the revolutionary proletariat as moderate petty-bourgeois socialism, the two being expressions of an identical tendency and policy. There can be no compromise either with Laborism or the dominant moderate socialism.
Both the style and content reveal the flights of revolutionary fancy which typified the left wing’s analysis of American political problems. The labor party was symptomatic of the “awakening of labor” yet in the same sentence it was no more than an effort of union bureaucrats to “conserve” what they “secured as a privileged caste.” Also, this phase of the “awakening of labor” was a threat, not to the bourgeoisie or Gompersism, but to – “the revolutionary proletariat.” Which might be the case where we had a revolutionary proletariat – in Russia, Germany, Hungary – but not in a land where the proletariat was just going through an “awakening” period. Had the left wing been as awake to the character and level of struggle of American labor as the non-socialist leaders of the Chicago Federation of Labor, it would have been a better movement for it.
Several months before the left wing June conference, Fraina wrote that “An American Labor Party would be an expression of the A.F. of L. The policy of the A.F. of L. is clearly reactionary.” The conclusion of this syllogism is as clear as the premise was wrong. The labor party movement was not the expression of the AFL and if it had been it would not have been of the AFL as it existed in the United States in 1919. The truth is that Gompers and the bulk of the conservative AFL leadership, angered by the activities of the progressive trade unionists, tried their best to squash labor party activity. Gompers went so far as to call a special meeting of his Executive Council to which the progressive unionists were invited to dissuade them from their course and to remind them that according to the AFL constitution party politics of any sort “shall have no place in the conventions of the American Federation of Labor.”
There was a surface similarity between the views of SP right and left on the labor party question. The former warned against it and advocated a policy of “watchful waiting” while the left lost little time in condemning it for non-revolutionary impurities. Actually the differences were even deeper. A large number of leading unionists who played an important role in the labor party movement such as Max Hayes and Duncan McDonald had been prominent figures until recently in the SP. Max Hayes, who ran against Gompers in the 1912 AFL convention, quit the Socialist Party when the Ruthenberg forces captured his Cleveland local. But he left behind him many moderate SPers who actually eyed the labor party movement with more favor than the official party stand indicated.
 
Parliamentary Action and Immediate Demands
IN A JULY 19 ISSUE OF the Revolutionary Age I.E. Ferguson, secretary of the National Council of the Left Wing wrote:
The labor revolt rapidly acquires consciousness of the desperate nature of the combat, and of the futility of all processes except its own mass defiance.
One of the “processes” the left wing regarded as “futile” – or nearly so – was parliamentary activity and reform demands. Why fight for reforms for the working class when the “labor revolt” would “rapidly” acquire a political “consciousness” bringing it into direct and fundamental conflict with capitalism? Why urge the American workers to struggle for a few pettifogging demands when, as Ferguson wrote, in the same article: “... the conditions for the social revolution are here”: the growth of centralized industry and the machine process, the violations of parliamentary democracy by the all powerful financiers and on the other hand an industrial laboring class created which would shortly accept only the process of its own mass defiance?
The extent of the left wing’s sectarianism was made most painfully clear in the Manifesto of the New York left:
We may soon expect the master class in true Bismarckian fashion to grant all sorts of social reforms (old age pensions, medical laws, unemployment insurance, factory laws, etc.).
By agitating for these reforms, therefore, the Socialist Party would be playing into the hands of our American imperialists.
And in its program:
1. We stand for a uniform declaration of principles in all party platforms both local and national and the abolition of all social reform planks now contained in them.
2. The party must teach, propagate and agitate exclusively for the overthrow of Capitalism, and the establishment of Socialism through a Proletarian Dictatorship.
3. The Socialist candidates elected to office shall adhere strictly to the above provisions.
These were not temporary aberrations of the pre-Communist left wing. It was carried into the thinking of the two Communist parties organized in September. In the first Manifesto of the Communist Party, for example, we learn that “parliamentary representatives shall not introduce or support reform measures.” And in the first program of the Communist Labor Party we find that:
“Communist platforms being based on the class struggle and recognizing that this is the historical period of the Social Revolution, can contain only one demand: The establishment of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.”
Most unfortunate about these proclamations was their execution in much of the day-to-day political activities and propaganda of the early communists ranging from calls to boycott the elections to leaflets to strikers urging them to fight for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. When one bears in mind that we are not discussing a tiny sect but a movement which had thousands of followers, it is clear that the political primitiveness of the early left wing and, later, the Communists, not only did harm to organized socialism but served to disorient the labor movement as a whole.
In the next issue: Organization of 2 communist parties and causes for their decline.
* * *
Footnotes
A. Typographical error in the first install of this series (Fall 1955, p. 152): Mencken referred to Theodore Roosevelt as a “glorified bouncer,” not “glorious banner.”
* * *
1. Example of Eastman’s pro-Bolshevism:
And on this day. January 20, the Marxian premier, Lenine. has suspended and dismissed the democratic parliament as a “relic of Bourgeois society,” and declared Russia to be a Socialist republic in which the Congress of delegates from Worker’s, Soldier’s and Peasant’s Unions is the sovereign power. Thus comes into actual existence that “industrial parliament” – the crowning and extreme hope of the Socialist dream-theory.
Example of Eastman’s pro-Wilson position:
As an international socialist I welcomed President Wilson’s Program of the World’s Peace in his message to Congress of January 8 (1918). It seemed an earnest approach to a basis upon which peace negotiations could be demanded by the peoples not of the allied countries only, but of Germany and Austria, too.
2. Hillquit couldn’t tolerate the emotionalism of the left wing but we have not seen any repudiation by him of the unemotional language of Berger’s testimony in his trial. A portion of Berger’s testimony reported in the Ohio Socialist included the following:
“I believe in absolute obedience to the law, whether it is good or bad ...
“I knew Mr. Burleson very well. We sat in the House of Representatives together, and Mr. Burleson and I were the antidotes of Haywoodism.”
This “Mr. Burleson” was not an SP member. He was the Postmaster General in Wilson’s administration, a scoundrel who thrived on depriving radical publications of their mailing rights.
3. Testifying before the Commission on Industrial Relations, Vincent St. John gave the IWW 1914 membership figure as 14,310 with 236 locals.
 




EXCEPT FOR THE SUDDEN AND all too brief revival of the Socialist Party in the early 1930s, the numbers, quality and influence of American socialism have been marked by a steady and precipitous decline from their peak some 35–40 years ago. The favored position of American capitalism, the peculiar characteristics of the American working class, government repression, the defeat of the European revolution, the growth of Stalinism – all these related factors have conspired to reduce socialism as an organized force to little more than a shadow of its once robust proportions. This virtual extinction of the socialist movement has made it uncommonly easy for the joyous would-be pallbearers of socialism to create the myth that socialism never amounted to anything in the United States, or that its early successes were an aberration of American life never to be repeated, or, certainly, that the decline of socialism is both evidence and proof of the invulnerability and dynamism of American capitalism. There are those such as Daniel Bell who would bury socialism with a condescending sigh, explaining in fact-studded rites how’ American capitalism has given us a virtually classless, equalitarian society. Then there are the pulp writers ranging from Benjamin Gitlow to Jacob Spolansky who simply try to inter socialism under an avalanche of abuse, filth and distortions. The more serious biographers of American socialism such as Ira Kipnis and Ray Ginger have been, unfortunately, all but obscured by these embalmers and undertakers.
While socialism as an ideological and organized current in the American labor movement has fared poorly at the hands of the pulp writers, the particular currents in American socialism which led to the formation of the American Communist Party have been treated with studied indifference to facts, superciliousness and venom. In these articles, primarily concerned with the beginnings of Communism in America, we cannot pretend to provide all or most of the facts and political circumstances leading to the emergence of the American Communist movement. But, at the very least, we propose to treat the subject with the respect it merits.
 
BY 1912, JUST ELEVEN YEARS AFTER its founding convention, the American Socialist Party could boast of 150,000 book members. In the presidential elections of that year Eugene V. Debs received nearly 900,000 votes, six per cent of the total cast. The party published 13 daily newspapers in English and foreign languages, nearly 300 weeklies and a dozen monthly periodicals. The Appeal to Reason was one of the most popular and widely read newspapers in the midwest, reaching a circulation of 500,000. The party had fourteen locals in Alaska, one in Puerto Rico and members-at-large in the Canal Zone. It maintained a network of socialist schools for children and provided Lyceum courses for adults. In nation-wide local elections held in 1910 the party elected hundreds of local officials and by 1912 there were over 1,000 elected office holders with red cards, including 56 mayors, several state senators and one congressman. The leading spokesman of the party, Debs, had been for years a nationally prominent figure whose activities were as a matter of course reported in the press.
The American Socialist Party was by no means comparable in size or political maturity to the mass party of German social democracy. But it had become a balance of power organization with seeming possibilities for growth which provoked extravagant exaggerations of its potentialities in the bourgeois world.
Partially as an effort to curb the growing popularity of the Socialist Party the Democratic Party incorporated many of the S.P. demands in its platform. Even the Republicans included “radical” planks in their program; and the newly organized Bull Moose party led by “Roosevelt I” (as Mencken titled a “glorified bouncer” [A]) adopted S.P. reform proposals as its very own. Socialist leader and congressman Victor Berger protested before the House in 1912 that “... ‘progressives’ are simply trying to appropriate some of our minor planks.” This progressivism was impelled by the need to stabilize, make more palatable and somewhat civilize, America’s raucous corporate wealth. But it was also inspired by a growing popular resentment against capitalist violence, and fed by a consciously felt need to head off the Socialist Party, whose reform campaigns were winning votes among progressive elements in the country. Progressivism was successful in deflecting votes from the S.P. to Wilson and Roosevelt, and its emergence was a tribute to the rapidly acquired strength of the Socialist Party.
The growth of the Socialist Party was in many ways unique when compared to the development of European social-democracy, particularly the German Social-Democratic Party. The party’s progress did not follow or parallel a comparable expansion of the trade union movement. It grew at a time when America had hardly emerged from its frontier days, when a permanent, stable industrial working class was still in its formative stage. It grew without major assistance from a significant body of alienated intellectuals or radicalized youth. But the party could grow despite these inhibiting factors for it had become, in effect, not so much a party with a clearly defined social program, as a broad movement of social protest. It had attracted workers who, defeated in pitched battles with the bourgeoisie, felt they could continue the struggle against their oppressors via the party; following the collapse of the People’s Party thousands of populists joined the SP (in 1909, 15 per cent of the Socialist Party members had been previously associated with the Populists); middle-class reformers, ministers and professionals, outraged by the savagery of American capitalism, joined the party as a means of fighting social ills; thousands of German and Jewish immigrants born to socialism in the “old country” naturally found their way into the party. Populism, Utopianism, Christian Socialism, reformism, syndicalism and Marxism – all had been poured into the Socialist Party vessel.
But the fact that the party had become an all-embracing organization was not a source of permanent strength. As a coalescence of various and conflicting currents of political dissent the Socialist Party could prosper – but only for a limited period. By 1912, when the party was at its numerical peak it was also at its lowest potential, torn by irreconcilable factions.
 
THE TERM “PETTY-BOURGEOIS” is perhaps used loosely at times in the Marxist movement. But as applied to the bulk of SP leadership and a significant proportion of its membership by 1912 it is a literal as well as an ideological description. The party had become flooded with lawyers, doctors, accountants, small businessmen, farmers and reform-bent clergymen. Many brought with them prejudices common to their class: they attacked class hatred as immoral, they equivocated on racial discrimination, some were opposed to drinking and others thought women biologically inferior creatures ordained to cook and sew. Above all, they abhorred “extremes.” They were firmly convinced that the party was going to be voted into power. And Socialism, to them, was inevitable, not as the aftermath of revolutionary working class struggles, but, because capitalism was organically evolving in a socialist direction. The electoral successes of the party were confirmation for this Right Wing that its heavy emphasis on reform campaigns and de-emphasis of the class struggle was the road to social salvation.
On the other end of the political spectrum in the party were the “reds,” the revolutionary elements in the party, many of whom were members of the Industrial Workers of the World along with their acknowledged leader, Bill Haywood. This Left was not Marxist in character but revolutionary syndicalist. It was also as politically primitive as it was fundamentally correct in its reliance on the working class in the struggle for freedom. The Left Wing was repelled by the new paunch the party had grown following its electoral gains; it could not abide the 1,000 elected officials who now had a vested interest in maintaining a moderate reform party; it could not stand the unscrupulousness of a man like Victor Berger and it was not smitten by the highly polished Marxist phrases of the talented lawyer, Morris Hillquit.
Neither wing of the party was interested in building a broad forum of public opinion. Both wanted to build mass movements. And both wings were moved by an optimism which made a split inevitable. The revolutionary syndicalists were confident that the proletariat in America’s rapidly expanding mass industries would heed the “propaganda of the deed”; the Right Wing was even more convinced that the voters of the nation would soon be swept up by its ballot box appeal. The split came at the 1912 convention of the party, initiated and pushed through by the Right Wing. In the words of Berger at the convention: “The time has come when the two opposite trends of thought that we have had in our party must clash again. And the parting of the ways has come again.” The parting of the ways was effectuated by a constitutional amendment, passed by 191 to 90, making membership incompatible with the advocacy of industrial sabotage and violence (Article II, Section 6). Years later Berger boasted that he was the author of the amendment. The Right Wing succeeded in splitting the party. Bill Haywood was recalled from his position on the National Committee. The party membership which had reached 150,000 a few weeks before the convention (held in Indianapolis, May 12–18) dropped to a yearly average of 118,000. The difference between the peak and average figures was largely due to the exodus of thousands of militants from the party. Their energies, however, were to be dissipated. A large number were immediately lost to the revolutionary movement and thousands of ex-party members who went to the IWW exclusively went to a movement that was foredoomed. For the IWW – given its aversion to political action, its hostility to theory and intellectuals, its uncompromising opposition to the official labor movement and, most important, its failure to understand the psychology of the American worker and the growing strength of American capitalism – could not, in its very nature have achieved any degree of permanence.
 
Following the expulsion of the syndicalist Left in 1912–1913 the Socialist Party moved rapidly – in reverse gear. By 1916 the membership declined to 83,000, little more than half of its 1912 high point. Its vote in the 1916 presidential elections was cut to 600,000 – two-thirds of the total received in 1912 but given the rise in the voting population only one-half of the six per cent of the votes garnered four years earlier. Ironically enough, the 30,000 Left Wingers forced out of the party who had nothing but contempt for the vote-getting policy of the SP were an important factor in explaining the party’s declining fortunes at the ballot box. It was in those sections where the Left Wing was strongest that the 1912 SP vote showed an enormous increase over the 1908 figures and a corresponding drop in 1916. [1] Also, responsible for the loss of votes was the choice of Allan Benson, a Right-Wing nonentity, as presidential candidate. Much to the delight of the party leadership, Debs, a Left-Winger with enormous popular appeal, had neither the inclination nor the physical energy to run for the presidency as he had on four previous, successive occasions.
The only claim to fame that history will reserve for Benson was his striking contrast to Debs as a socialist presidential candidate. Debs always stamped his campaign with his own personality – energetic, colorful, militant. Benson also left his mark, a barely visible imprint of an imposter in the socialist movement. It was only six months after his campaign was over that Benson, the “anti-war” candidate of the party denounced those who upheld an anti-war position adopted at the St. Louis convention of the party a few days after the U.S. entered the war. He noted, with an antediluvian’s sulkiness, that:
Young hotheads who were wearing knee breeches when many of the middle-aged men present became socialists, felt entirely prepared to brand such of these older men as disagreed with them with regard to tactics as “traitors.”
The “tactics” were whether or not to support the imperialist war!
The party was in a state of organizational decay. It was not only because of the failure of Debs to run or the exit of so many thousands of militants. “Progressivism” was becoming a competitive force to the party. The appeal of Wilson’s liberal rhetoric and the “radicalism” of the Bull Moose Party undoubtedly drew many thousands of voters away from the SP by 1912. As the party continued to water down its program “progressivism” and Socialism were almost tangential movements. In 1916, not only party supporters refused to vote for the SP candidates, but well known socialists such as John Reed [2] and Max Eastman declared themselves for Wilson. Even the presidential candidate of the party, Allan Benson, moved by Wilson’s pacific declarations in the 1916 campaign asked the electorate to vote for the Democratic candidate – if they didn’t vote for Benson.
In the midwest a farmers’ movement wrought havoc with the party organization. The Non-Partisan League of North Dakota had been organized in 1916 by a former active socialist, A.C. Townley. It had a farmer’s program, demanding a state marketing system, a state agency to purchase and distribute farm supplies, a low interest state rural credit system, etc. As a pure farmer’s organization with a militant reform program it attracted large numbers of farmers who previously had been loyal only to the Socialist Party. By 1918 it had over 180,000 members and was to elect governors, congressmen and scores of state officials, spreading to South Dakota, Oregon, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Idaho, Colorado, Washington and Montana. In a special report to the Socialist Party’s National Committee, John Spargo, an extreme Right-Winger (a McCarthyite today!), stated that the League is going “far toward wrecking the Socialist Party, unless some adjustments in our party organization can be made ...” Instead of an “adjustment,” however, the party took a hostile position toward the League, branding it a dual, competitive organization and forbidding party members to join. But the pull of the League proved irresistible not only for rank and filers but even for members of the National Committee. Lewis J. Duncan of Montana, a leading Left Winger at the 1912 convention, and Arthur Le Seuer, a Right Winger from North Dakota, were members of both the National Committee and the Non-Partisan League.
While Progressivism was taking its toll in the Socialist Party, the prosperity of 1915–1916 born of the World War was also dissipating the influence of the party. The 1912 election campaign took place on the threshold of a new economic crisis; four years later the United States had replaced England in the South American market and factories were humming, producing war materials for the Allies.
By 1916 the party was not only in an organizational funk, but intellectually, it had become utterly lifeless. Its official publications had a somnambulistic quality born of piety, reformism and confusion. As a sample of confusion we might offer the following excerpt from an article by a leading party intellectual, Max Eastman:
I think that men’s hereditary intuitive reactions are such that they will go to war (even against their economic interests) whenever a plausible war is declared, that our only hope is in preventing declarational war, that this can be accomplished only through international federation and that the main driving power toward international federation is international capital – the biggest of big business. We ought to support and encourage the capitalistic governments in their new motion toward internationalism, because they will go there before we will. (Masses, February 1917. Italics in original)
 
A DETAILED DISCUSSION OF the Socialist Party prior to America’s entry into the war is outside the scope of this article. The above sketchy paragraphs on the SP from 1912 to 1916 are intended merely to illustrate an important point in considering American Communism: that the American Communist movement began from virtually nothing. It was not the continuation of the Left Wing of 1912, and was fundamentally different from it. The earlier Left Wing was directly the product of the American class struggle. It fought that struggle on the picket lines and, in a sense, it fought that struggle within the Socialist Party against the petty bourgeois leadership. It was a revolutionary but utopian syndicalist group which tried to push the working class onto the path of revolutionary industrial unionism in a manner alien to that class – and toward an objective for which it was not historically prepared. During the war, a new Left Wing was to emerge, but unlike the earlier syndicalists, it was generated by world-shaking international events: the World War and the Russian Revolution. This Marxist Left Wing was as removed from direct participation in the class struggle at home as the syndicalists were a part of it; it was as devoted to the cause of the international working class as the syndicalists were indifferent to world politics. In social composition and attitude toward theory the two Left Wings were different: the first had as its basis proletarians and underprivileged farmers, who shied away from theoretical debate; the later Marxist Left Wing acquired considerable support from the more advanced and educated workers and middle class intellectuals, and was absorbed with the theoretical problems of international socialism.
In any analysis of the American Communist movement it is necessary at all times to bear in mind that communism in America had a pre-history of but a few years. It had no native Marxist traditions to draw on and the personnel of the Socialist Party’s 1917–1919 Left Wing had little previous experience in the American class struggle. In fact a number of leading Left Wingers of 1912 who remained with the party were among those most hostile to the Left Wing which grew up after April 1917: Frank Bohn, Rives La Monte, H.L. Slobodin, William English Walling.
The failure of the American working class to develop a significant and continuous Marxist tradition was, to be sure, a reflection of the special characteristics of the American bourgeoisie and the American working class. By the time the United States declared war on the Central powers it had become the world’s most powerful capitalist nation. But the ascendancy of finance capital in the United States was swifter than in any European nation. The industrial revolution in this country’ was not under way until after the Civil War and the American frontier was not closed until the 1890’s. By the time an American proletariat was beginning to emerge the working classes of the advanced European nations had already made their mark on history.
The growth of large scale industries here was so swift and their organizers so powerful and ruthless that the newly formed proletariat could not adequately defend itself. The embryonic proletarian class had neither the economic wherewithal, the stability, the experience or the public sympathy to resist the blood spattered wealth of America’s “Robber Barons” with their spies, thugs, economic resources and friendly courts. The political and economic organization of the working class was complicated by its culturally diversified character, composed in its great majority as late as 1910 of foreign born from all parts of the old world. Its organization was further inhibited by the fluidity and social mobility of American life. Chances for advancement did exist within expanding industries and if an immigrant did not advance his position in society, he felt that his children, at least, might achieve the respectability and security denied to him.
The new magnates of American industry were a cold-blooded and pragmatic lot. They were not concerned with ideology or political finesse. The working class, too, showed a similar disdain for political theory. The violent and telescoped growth of concentrated capital combined with the misery of a worker’s existence did not allow the growth of an intellectualized body of workers who could, by their own efforts, raise themselves above the limited political insight of their class. Those sections of the working class which resisted the bourgeoisie were often waylaid by simple political panaceas or exhausted themselves in magnificent trade union struggles which had little chance of immediate success. And at no point in its early history did the socialist movement recruit to its banner numbers of educated, middle-class Marxists who could identify themselves with the working class. America produced its literary realists and muckrakers who performed invaluable services in exposing the inhumanity and corruption accompanying the growth of monopoly. But at no time could the American socialist movement boast of a sizeable group of theorists respected by the ranks, integrated into the life of the movement, absorbed in the problem of building a working class party and capable of understanding the special problems of the American working class.
This lack of theoretical leadership was common to all wings of the American Socialist Party. By 1912 the German Left had Rosa Luxemburg while the American Left was led by Bill Haywood; the German Center had Kautsky while the Americans had Morris Hillquit, the German revisionists had Bernstein while the extreme Right Wing in the American party had to settle for Victor Berger.
It was more than a difference between individual talents, accidentally placed. It was the difference between two worlds, two histories.
 
FOR FIVE YEARS AFTER THE COLLAPSE of the syndicalist faction there was no well knit Left Wing opposition in the Socialist Party. But not all the direct actionists left with Bill Haywood. In addition, not all the Left Wingers of 1912 were in agreement with the growing anti-politicalism of the syndicalist Left. Some of the leading figures in the party, whose denunciations of the Right Wing rivaled the colorful epithets of the syndicalists, remained political socialists. Men such as Debs, Louis Boudin and Henry Slobodin did not revile the SP for participating in elections; they attacked the party for making electioneering a political way of life and for the mildness of its campaigns. And they emphasized the necessity of the political organization of the working class to overthrow the political institutions of the bourgeois state. Although they supported the Left Wing as against the Right there was no reason why they should have left the party along with the thousands who dropped out after the 1912 convention. In their view, and they were correct, the Socialist Party was still the only political, socialist movement in which to function. (The Socialist Labor Party had been, for years, a hopelessly sterile, bureaucratic, i.e., sectarian, group).
The only individual who could have taken up the cudgels once again for a militant program was Eugene Debs. His popularity was enormous and his position in the party inviolable. But Debs never abandoned his saintly attitude toward factionalism, thus doing himself and the movement a grave disservice. He would not participate in faction fights or, even, in conventions, on the ground that his weight in the party was so great that if it were harnessed to a particular faction in an organizational fight it might produce an unthinking endorsement of his views. What Debs would not do in the way of reorganizing the remnants of the Left neither Boudin, the major Marxist theorist in the party, nor Slobdin, former national secretary of the party who was to become a militant chauvinist, nor Charles Ruthenberg, a leader in the Ohio SP – a gray and overestimated man in the history of American socialism, nor a dozen other leading leftists in the party could do. The mood in the party – and in the nation – ran counter to the re-emergence of a strong, unified Left.
 
THE SIGNS OF A NEW LEFT were first visible early in 1915 with the formation in the SP of the Socialist Propaganda League.
This League from its very inception was composed primarily of foreign born workers. It was organized largely through the efforts of two foreign socialists: Fritz Rozin and S.J. Rutgers. Rozin, born in Latvia, was a representative of the Lettish Social Democratic Party on the Bolshevik Central Committee. Arrested by the Czarist police in 1907 he escaped to the United States where he edited a Lettish newspaper and became secretary of a Lettish socialist organization in Boston. Rozin returned to Russia after the October revolution where he died in 1919. Rutgers’ role is perhaps even more important in its influence on the Left in the Socialist Party which was the forerunner of American Communism. He was also a “Bostonian” but not of the Back Bay variety. Rutgers was active in the Boston Lettish group and like Rozin worked on a Lettish newspaper. He was Dutch by birth, however, and a member of the Social-Democratic Party there until he emigrated to the United States. After the Bolshevik revolution, Rutgers went to Russia where he engaged in Comintern activities as a member of the Dutch Communist Party. His contributions to the English language Left Wing socialist press were among the best political writings of the Left.
Lenin established contact with the League upon receiving one of its handbills in 1915. In exchange for the leaflet Lenin sent material on the Zimmerwald Left and a copy of Socialism and War in German “in the hope that there is a comrade in your League who knows German.” Lenin placed considerable importance on the role of the League urging A. Kollontai – who made two trips to the U.S. between 1915 and 1917 – and N. Bukharin – who was here in the winter of 1916–1917 – to maintain contact with the League and to pay particularly close attention to the strong, militant, Lettish wing of the party.
Upon receiving material of the Zimmerwald Left the League immediately adopted its views pressing them inside and out of the Socialist Party. It was not until January 1917, however, that the League published its first regular periodical, The Internationalist, which shortly was renamed The New International and edited by Louis C. Fraina. [3]
The League achieved considerable notoriety inside the SP but in its early period was in no position to function as a national, cohesive faction fighting for organizational control of the party. It was not until America’s participation in the war was imminent that the proper political topsoil was laid in which a new revolutionary Left Wing could flourish in the party. This soil, watered by the Russian Revolution, permitted the Socialist Propaganda League and similar tendencies to sink their roots deep into the party with branches embracing thousands outside the SP, as well, and crushing the Socialist Party in the process of growth. By June 1917, The New International was able to boast that the Socialist Propaganda League had 20 organized groups in 12 states. But this growth was even outdistanced by the political influence of the League and complemented by the emergence of other organized Left Wing currents.
 
PRIOR TO THE WORLD WAR, the American socialist movement’s attitude on foreign policy bordered on indifference. It suffered from a provincialism which reflected the general sense of insular security from world political problems shared by the vast majority of the population. The Left Wing was certainly no more conscious of international developments than the Right. At the 1912 convention there were resolutions on Temperance and White Slavery but no one seemed to feel the need for a special resolution or discussion on war, imperialism and foreign policy.
The American party was, nevertheless an anti-war movement. It formally endorsed the vigorous anti-war resolutions of the 1910 and 1912 international socialist congresses. It ran occasional articles which attacked militarism and the growing concern of American capitalism with foreign markets and sources of raw material. There was also in the party a strong element of Christian socialism which on pacifist principles was opposed to all wars.
Before August 4, 1914, the party had implicit faith in the ability of the Second International to prevent a European conflagration. It never doubted that in a war which pitted worker against worker in the interests of capitalism the mass parties of European social democracy would be true to its promise of carrying on class struggle activity to frustrate the ambitions of European militarists. When the war came, not over the opposition of European Socialism, but with its blessing, the American party was genuinely shocked – though not sufficiently aroused to call a special convention to discuss both the war and the betrayal of the Second International. (A convention was not to be held for another 2½ years.) Shocked though it was by the conduct of the International, the Socialist Party refused to condemn its “brother parties” in Europe. This reluctance was one of the important political differences on the war which sparked the new Left Wing.
One week after the opening of hostilities in Europe the party issued an anti-war manifesto which began:
The Socialist Party of the United States hereby extends its sympathy to the workers of Europe in their hour of trial, when they have been plunged into a bloody and senseless war by ambition crazed monarchs, designing politicians and scheming capitalists.
But in the same manifesto, a few paragraphs later:
The Socialist Party of the United States hereby pledges its loyal support to the Socialist parties of Europe in any measures they might think it necessary to advance the cause of peace and good will among men.
We doubt that this appeal for “good will” produced more than a yawn on the military visage of the Second International but for the Left Wingers in the party it was to provide political ammunition.
The National Committee of the party made repeated attempts to revive an International which did not want to be and could not be reactivated as a force “to advance the cause of peace.” One of the earliest efforts was made in September 1914. The party issued an appeal to all European socialists to consider meeting in Washington, D.C., to discuss ways and means of ending the war. The party promised to foot the bill. Quixotic, to say the least, and, as could only be expected, nothing came of it. Included in this appeal was the following:
We do not presume to pass judgment upon the conduct of our brother parties in Europe. We realize that they are the victims of the present vicious industrial, political and military systems and they did the best they could under the circumstances.
The Left Wing elements in the party demanded that the leadership face up to the reality of the Second International betrayal. Without branding European socialism for its conduct, the sincerity of the party’s antiwar manifestos was questioned by the Left Wing. But for the Right Wing leadership of the party to condemn, say, German social-democracy implied a repudiation of itself. German social-democracy had been held up to the membership by the SP leadership as a model organization. Just two years earlier, the leadership of the party at the 1912 convention used Karl Legien, Social-Democratic member of the Reichstag and president of the German Federation of Trade Unions, to beat the syndicalists over the head. Legien accepted an invitation to address the convention and in his speech immediately proceeded to use his authority and prestige to belittle the syndicalists: “In our German movement we have no room for sabotage and similar syndicalist tendencies.” To repudiate the German party, and Karl Legien and the whole of the International required a self-effacing act of courage which it was constitutionally incapable of doing at the time.
In September 1915, nearly forty observers and delegates from anti-war socialist parties and anti-war tendencies within pro-war parties met in an international conference at Zimmerwald. According to A. Kollontai, who made two trips to the United States between 1915–1917, the initial attempts to recruit the American Socialist Party to the Zimmerwald movement failed, when at a meeting of German language socialists a proposal brought in by Ludwig Lore to join the movement was defeated “after heated debates” by Morris Hillquit and Maxim Romm (Romm was a Russian political exile living in the United States). A month later, however, the organizing committee of the Zimmerwald movement (the International Socialist Committee) received a communication from the Executive Committee of the SP announcing that it and all its affiliated foreign federations joined the Zimmerwald movement. Joining the Zimmerwald movement unquestionably reflected a growing left mood in the party, although the Zimmerwald movement was itself very broad, embracing all wings of anti-war socialism from moderate pacifist-socialism to the revolutionary, class struggle views of the Zimmerwald Left, led by the Bolsheviks.
The critics of the party leadership had more to go on than the embarrassed apologies made for the “brother parties” in Europe. In the life of the Socialist Party, during the war, before and after America’s entry, there was a considerable gap between the manifesto and the deed. The antiwar declarations had an inflamed, passionate quality which gave a distorted image of the political convictions of the leadership, its activities and the party’s day to day propaganda. In May 1915, the National Committee of the party proposed an amendment which would expel any SP office-holder who voted for military or war appropriations. This amendment was passed in referendum by the one-sided vote of 11,041–782. But this didn’t stop the seven socialist aldermen in New York from supporting the third Liberty Loan three years later, nor did it deter Mayor Hoans’ Socialist administration in Milwaukee from meeting its patriotic obligations; and socialist congressman Meyer London met with no rebuff from the party officialdom when he failed to vote against military appropriations immediately after America’s declaration of war.
While the military posturing of American politicians was condemned, the architect of American imperialism, Woodrow Wilson, was often regarded in the party press as a misled, somewhat inconsistent pacifist. As late as December, 1916, the party’s official organ, The Call, editorially referred to “... President Wilson’s latest move in the interest of peace ...” A much touted brochure by Allan Benson, the party’s 1916 presidential candidate written in that year was a mish-mash of pacifism, an appeal to the better side of Wilson and an endless number of pages intended to prove that instead of building battleships Congress could use the money better to mine the entire Atlantic coastal waters – a mine every few hundred feet.
In addition to the party’s tolerant views on its “brother parties” and the gap between its resolutions and activities, the leftists in the party had a third serious grievance. They charged that a number of party leaders were moved in their formal denunciations of Allied imperialism by a pro-German sentiment. An editorial in the May–June issue of The Class Struggle (published by the Left-Wing Socialist Publication Society) referred to:
... the offensive and degrading pro-Germanism of a large proportion of our membership and party bureaucracy, who seek to cover up the sin of Germany and of Germany’s majority-Socialists by the mantle of “neutrality.”
Considering the month and year this Left-Wing charge was made it was at best a gross exaggeration. There can be no question, however, that for at least the first year or two after the opening of hostilities a pro-German sentiment did exist within the party. Among the Jewish workers, there was no love lost for the Allies. Many of them had recently fled from Czarist anti-Semitic terror and all of them took bitter note of pogroms accompanying the Russian armies’ advances and retreats. When Russian pogroms were matched against the reputed benevolence of Franz Joseph many Jewish workers found themselves sympathizing with the latter in the military conflict. But this was no longer a factor at the time The Class Struggle made its charges for the Czar had been overthrown two months earlier and Jewish workers, in particular, celebrated, for it meant the end of pogroms in Russia as a conscious, Czarist-inspired policy. There was also a pro-German tendency among German party members who could not bring themselves to denounce German war aims and among a strata of party members who would not renounce German social-democracy. But these sources of pro-Germanism had also been largely dissipated by the middle of 1917.
 
ON APRIL 7, 1917 THE Socialist Party met in its historic St. Louis convention. Called as an emergency convention by the party’s National Committee it was given a special dramatic and timely significance as its opening sessions followed by a day Congress’ declaration of war. The convention called but one month earlier was long overdue. It was five years since the last convention and more than two since the opening of European hostilities. The convention was not preceded by organized discussion in the ranks and voting delegates appeared at convention sessions without proper authorization by the membership.
There were nearly two hundred delegates at the St. Louis convention. A fifteen-man Committee on War and Militarism was chosen and after several days of debate three reports were made to the convention: the majority report signed by 11 committee members, including Berger, Hillquit, Ruthenberg and Algernon Lee; a minority report signed by Boudin, Kate Sadler and Walter Dillon; a second minority, pro-war report signed only by John Spargo.
Spargo’s report consisted of all the trite arguments for support of the war gaining currency among an important section of party writers and intellectuals. The Allied powers were to be supported because:
The present war, which broke out in the summer of 1914, had its origins in the economic conditions and the political institutions and national ideals prevailing in Europe. Germany began the war, and rejected all attempts at arbitration, because of the peculiar conjunctions of economic conditions and political institutions and national ideals characteristic of her national life.
American capitalism entered the hostilities not out of imperialistic considerations but because:
The provocation to war, which this nation has borne with a patience and forbearance which will glow brightly in our history, has been great indeed. No nation with power to defend itself has, in modern times, endured so much.
Then there is the shallow “lesser-evilism” which has become such a cheap and popular game with ex-radicals who, losing heart in socialism have done the next best thing, embraced the bourgeoisie, or, at best, remained aloof from the class struggle:
... Regardless of the capitalist motives involved, it is a fact that on one side are ranged the greatest autocracies in the world, the most powerful reactionary nations, while on the other side are ranged the most progressive and democratic nations in the world. To this fact we cannot be indifferent.
Spargo’s report, crude in its construction and permeated with enraged chauvinism, mustered a grand total of five votes. However, the actual support for a defensist position was much greater. Following the rejection of his report, Spargo drew up a new resolution, much briefer and less obvious in its meaning, but consistent with his rejected report. According to this resolution:
We opposed the entrance of this Republic into the war, but we failed. The political and economic organizations of the working-class were not strong enough to do more than protest.
Having failed to prevent the war by our agitation, we can only recognize it as a fact and try to force upon the government, through pressure and public opinion, a constructive program.
This resolution, whose greater ambiguity carried a greater conscience sop to the pro-war elements in the party was signed by fifty-two convention delegates. It was submitted to the membership in a referendum vote and overwhelmingly defeated.
The rejection by the convention and then by the membership of Spargo’s position soon brought to a close one chapter in the fragmentation of the Socialist Party.
Some of the most talented party spokesmen and publicists, including a few associated with the Left Wing in the past, but most of them inveterate Right-Wingers, collapsed completely under the social pressure of a liberal, bourgeois nation preparing for, then entering the war. Charles E. Russell, a leading party educator, more impatient than his patriotic colleagues, had moved into the pro-war camp two years before the St. Louis convention, and shortly afterward wormed his way up as a collaborator of the arch-reactionary Elihu Root. A few months after the convention Frank Bohn announced in a letter to the New York Times that the war was between feudal Germany and the modern West. Therefore he had to leave the party which did not accept these formulations or his conclusions. (Bohn had already been dropped by the party for non-payment of dues!) In a letter to The Call printed a few days before the delegates convened, A.M. Simons, an outstanding historian and a founding member of the party, announced that there was a “close connection between the German foreign office and the Socialist Party.” Simons together with Winfield Gaylord as their parting crack at the party wrote a letter to Senator Hastings of Wisconsin a week after the St. Louis convention in which they denounced the anti-war position finally adopted by the party and urged “the discreet use of authority for the prevention of general circulation of this pernicious propaganda.” Walling, Upton Sinclair, Stokes, Stoddard also left the party. After Spargo’s resolutions met a crushing defeat he sent the party a kindly resignation announcing that he could not live in a party making “Teutonic” demands. And Allan Benson announced that “Socialist lawyers” who were convention delegates told him that parts of the Majority resolution “were treasonable” and thus ended his brief fling with socialism.
The Committee on War and Militarism’s majority report to the St. Louis convention met with the approval of 140 of the 200 delegates. From its opening sentence – “The Socialist Party of the United States in the present grave crisis solemnly reaffirms its allegiance to the principle of internationalism and working-class solidarity the world over, and proclaims its unalterable opposition to the war just declared by the Government of the United States” – to its last – “The Socialist Party calls upon all the workers to join in its struggle to reach this goal (socialism), and thus bring into the world a new society in which peace, fraternity, and human brotherhood will be the dominant ideals” – the St. Louis resolution was as militant, as clear and as impassioned a protest against imperialist butchery as the socialist movement in this country has produced. Wars, “whether they have been frankly waged as wars of aggression or have been hypocritically represented as wars of ‘defense,’ they have always been made by the classes and fought by the masses.” The resolution called “upon the workers of all countries to refuse support to their governments in their wars ... The only struggle which would justify the workers in taking up arms is the great struggle of the working class of the world to free itself from economic exploitation and political oppression, and we particularly warn the workers against the snare and delusion of so-called defensive warfare.” As a course of action the resolution called for: “Continuous, active, and public opposition to the war, through demonstrations, mass petition, and all other means within our power,” at a time when “... the acute situation created by war calls for an even more vigorous prosecution of the class struggle ...”
Although this resolution received the votes of two-thirds of the convention delegates it no more presented an accurate reflection of the political composition of the party than the meager five votes given to Spargo’s.
The views in the majority resolution were not subscribed to even by some of its authors. This charge was made by both the extreme Right and the new Left in the party. It was also to be acknowledged by a number against whom the charge had been directed.
How does one explain the leftward turn of the Socialist Party? The party leadership was no less reformist than its European counterparts who rallied to the “defense of the nation” when war was not merely a threat but a horrible reality. The answer lies in a combination of circumstances:
(1) Unlike German social democracy the Socialist Party had no stake in society. It could not be made to feel the same pressure and responsibility as German social democracy which was a powerful mass party whose actions could have a direct bearing on the military fortunes of the Kaiser. The American party was small, and in a sense, this weakness was a source of political strength for it afforded reformist elements the luxury of militancy without being made to feel that their anti-war policies had any practical consequences.
In Germany, there was the best organized and most powerful working class in the world. The bureaucracy of the German Federation of Trade Unions was intertwined with that of the Social Democratic Party. It was a relatively easy matter for a reformist party, given its strength in this powerful trade union movement to adopt a policy of civil peace in time of war. The need to protect the living standards of the German workers and the need to defend the economic and political institutions of Europe’s most advance proletariat required, so the rationalization went, a suspension of the class struggle. In the United States the trade union movement had grown considerably by 1917 but the Socialist Party had become a negligible factor in the AFL. From 1911 to 1913 socialists had a considerable base in the AFL, actually challenging the Gompers leadership and winning the support of one-third of the AFL convention of 1913. Gompers immediately waged a successful war against the Socialists and as the AFL grew in strength from 1913 to 1917 the Socialist strength dwindled to the vanishing point. By the time of the St. Louis convention the party’s trade union strength was eagerly confined to radical, Jewish unions inside and out of the AFL. Unlike German social democracy, then, the party’s weakness in the organized labor movement also served to discourage any thought that it had a material stake in the war.
(2) The United States entered the war when all of its ghoulishness had fully unfolded. Given this simple fact it is easy to understand how the chauvinist elements in the party, primarily middle class intellectuals, could not rally any enthusiasm in the ranks for their views and were compelled to leave. The horrors of war were not only apparent to the ranks of the party. They were clear to the nation as a whole. This, plus the isolationist background of American political life, Wilson’s past hypocritical declarations of peace which won the election for him, left large sections of the American people cold, even hostile, toward the military, imperialist ambitions of American capitalism in 1917. This anti-war sentiment provided a fertile field for recruitment – for an anti-war socialist movement.
(3) The Russian revolution and the resurgence of anti-war sentiments in European socialism also operated as a Left-Wing pull on the political consciousness of the reformist leadership of the party and, above all, the ranks.
(4) Finally, the reformist wing of the party feared the growing strength of the Left Wing. Certainly, under more normal circumstances an individual such as Berger could no more vote for the St. Louis Resolution of which he was an author than Jasper MacLevy could join the I.W.W. today. But there is this difference: Berger was faced with a resurgent revolutionary Left-Wing in the party which had to be headed off, while MacLevy has excellent reasons to believe Bridgeport safe from wobbly control. Berger later admitted that though the St. Louis resolution was completely alien to his way of thinking he feared that if he and others were to insist on a more moderate resolution, given the mood of the party, the Left Wing might have presented to the membership and won its support for an even more militant declaration than the one adopted. It is also possible that had the United States thrown its weight on the German side of the trenches Berger might have taken a more “principled” stand against an antiwar resolution. But Berger was not typical of the reformist wing of the party. He was an inflexible municipal “socialist” without a touch of Marxism in his bloodstream. This was not true of men like Algernon Lee and Morris Hillquit, the principal authors of the resolution, who were genuinely influenced by events in Europe, affected by the isolation of the party from the labor movement, aware of the anti-war feelings of large numbers of Americans and, of course, unwilling to allow the real Left Wing of the party to be sole spokesmen for a revolutionary, anti-war stand.
There was, in the St. Louis Resolution, the element of compromise in some of its phraseology. But the document, as a whole, was, in fact, not so much a compromise resolution between the Left Wing and the leadership as a case of more moderate elements forced to bargain for greater “reasonableness” in some of the resolution’s formulations. For example, Hillquit, apprehensive of the militancy of the Left Wing with its theory of “mass action” (a theory which we will discuss in detail in the next issue – J.F.), insisted that the phrase “mass movement” be inserted in the following action plank of the Resolution: “Should such conscription [military and/or industrial] be forced upon the people we pledge ourselves to continuous efforts for the repeal of such laws and to the support of all mass movements in opposition to conscription.” Hillquit was anxious to have concrete party manifestation of anti-conscription activity based on a “mass movement.” He feared – not without justice – a tendency in the Left Wing to engage in isolated, adventuristic, anti-conscription protests. The other “concessions” to the moderates were of a similar nature; they did not always subtract from the Majority resolution’s militancy and sometimes added to its theoretical correctness. The moderates were frightened by their own child somewhat reluctantly conceived and born of “compromise.” Sooner or later most of them began a long process of disowning the spirit and eventually the letter of the antiwar manifesto. In less than a month after the resolution was penned, Hillquit said of that section pledging party opposition to the war through demonstrations, mass petitions and “all other means within our power.”
As to the phrase “all other means within our power” what means are in our power except the legitimate ones, and then only such of them as the powers that be will care to leave open to us?
There was nothing in the resolution specifically favoring use of anti-militarist techniques outside the framework of “legitimacy”; but in the spirit of the resolution there was anything but the commitment to wage the struggle against militarism within the confines of legal operations circumscribed for the party by the “powers that be.”
The attitude of the Left Wing toward the majority resolution was a curious thing, indeed. For months after its passage the Left Wing press acted as carping critics. It was attacked by influential Left Wingers as the product of “compromise” and derided for not taking a clear-cut revolutionary position on burning problems of the relation of nationalism to internationalism, of class struggle to national struggle, on the question of defense of small nations, etc. The criticisms of the resolution’s deficiencies as a final, definitive, theoretical and all-knowing exposition of every political problem posed by the war were either wrong, misplaced, irrelevant or unfair in their severity. These Lefts claimed that the convention majority “was the result of political tricks and maneuvers such as has seldom been seen before at a Socialist convention.” That there were maneuvers, even tricks, is not to be doubted. But the all important point was missed by many Left Wingers: after the smoke of battle “maneuvers” had cleared the moderates had to sign an armistice with the Left via a moving and politically sound, class struggle oriented condemnation of the war. Some of the Left Wingers were apparently more enraged by the names of Berger and Hillquit being coupled with that of Ruthenberg on the resolution than impressed by its close correspondence to their own views. This hostility was shared by 31 Left Wing delegates at the convention [4] who did not vote for the majority resolution.
When one considers the resolution these Left Wing delegates did vote for, their post-convention criticisms become “curiouser and curiouser.” If one could turnabout and move backwards in socialist history, coming upon the Left-Wing criticisms of the St. Louis convention he could only expect to see, shortly, a detailed, brilliant and revolutionary Left Wing analysis of the war. What a disappointment would await our time-inverted traveler. The Left Wing resolution was far inferior to that supported by the convention. Half the length of the majority resolution, it had no separate suggested course of action as did the majority’s, its language was pedestrian, and its formulation no more precise or Marxistical than the majority’s. And if the dissenting Left Wingers were disappointed with a resolution which did not explicitly condemn the Second International it could not have been inferred from their own resolution which did not have one censorious line on the European parties of War Socialism.
The failure of the entire Left Wing to support the majority resolution at the convention demonstrates what was to become a characteristic failing of the Left: an unreasoned sectarian impulse to differentiate itself from all other tendencies inside the movement, and radical and working class organizations outside of it.
The disunity of the Left Wing elements at St. Louis, half voting for the Majority resolution and half for its own document, was due only in part to the Left’s lack of organization inside the party and the speed with which the convention was assembled. The common misrepresentation of the pre-Communist left in the Socialist Party is of a bunch of irreconcilable hotheads torn only by inner factional maneuvers of different power oriented blocs. Nothing could be more erroneous. In no sense was the Left Wing at any time in its history a monolithic or even a cohesive tendency. True enough, it was to be rent by petty bickering, but it was also divided in a much healthier fashion by genuine differences of political conceptions, sometimes obscured but always operative.
As an example of how wide a gulf sometimes existed among prominent members of the Left and pertinent to our discussion of the Left and the war we should pause for a moment to note the war position of Louis Boudin. Louis Boudin, as we have already mentioned, was the party Marxist, high in the councils of the Left Wing, the most important Left Wing figure at the St. Louis convention and probable author of its minority report.
In Boudin’s many and lengthy articles on the war he always began with the roar of a famished lion flushing out weak game, but by the time Boudin finished his polemics the would-be victims could feel safe in their lair. For Boudin’s roar was not that of the Lord of the Jungle but of the timid lion in the Wizard of Oz. Boudin was highly critical of the St. Louis resolution for its alleged lack of revolutionary, Marxist clarity. But his own articles on the war often included proposals on how to achieve lasting peace which, by comparison, would make the United World Federalists look like flaming revolutionaries. Boudin, the Left Wing leader at the St. Louis convention believed that the bourgeoisie, brought to its senses, realizing that war was self-destructive, could be persuaded that out of self-interest it adopt the policy of “complete disarmament, and international organization.” Boudin gives a detailed blueprint of how this bourgeois “United States of the World” would meet and resolve problems:
But there is a certain minimum of powers which such international organization must possess, in order to answer the present emergency: the administration of all underdeveloped countries, and the protectorate of all semi-developed countries, must be placed in its hands; to be administered primarily in the interests of the natives, and then of the world at large without discrimination between nations; and to remain under such administration until they shall have become ripe for self-government, when they shall be admitted into the community of nations. Once the fear of war, and with it all strategical reasons, are abolished, there is absolutely no reason in any enlightened self-interest, even from the capitalist point of view, why the different nations interested should not turn over all of their possessions in Africa, for instance, to the International Administration, just as the American colonies gave up their claims to the Northwestern territory in favor of the Federal Government, and why the entire African continent, with the exception of the self-governing communities of the South African Federation, should not, thereupon, be administered internationally, and new states carved out therefrom, from time to time, to be admitted into the World-Union, or some integral part of the World-Union, as its Constitution may provide.
The World-Union, and its International Administration, must, of course, have an armed force, in order to be a real power.
As neither this writer nor the readers of the N.I. are likely recruits for the Legion of Space Cadets we need not debate the interminable sentences just quoted: a melange of world-federalism, pacifism and imperialism. They are of significance, however, as an example of the diversity of political concepts this country’s prenatal Communist movement.
It is of interest that the views expressed by Boudin were not at all foreign to the Socialist Party. The party peace program in 1915 called for “international Federation – The United States of the World.” In 1917, after the St. Louis convention Hillquit wrote that peace can be attained “even today before the competitive system of capitalism, the most direct cause of modern wars, is abolished.” This was in direct conflict with the St. Louis Resolution which Hillquit helped author, which explicitly states that the war “was the logical outcome of the competitive capitalist system.” But Hillquit at least modified his views of permanent peace within the framework of world capitalism – and contributed to political confusion – by adding that “To this end the governments must first of all be divorced from the capitalist interests, and be true mouthpieces of the people.” With Boudin, however, such qualifications were not essential to his view.
 
IN THE YEAR FOLLOWING THE United States’ declaration of war the Socialist Party made capital gains on the basis of its anti-war position. This was graphically demonstrated in the 1917 election campaign of the party. In New York City, Morris Hillquit, running for mayor, received 142,000 votes, nearly 25 per cent of the total cast. When one considers the large number of foreign-born workers who were not citizens and additional allowances for Tammany fraud as the party claimed, the percentage of actual party support in the city unquestionably topped the 25 per cent figure. Four years earlier, Charles E. Russell, running for the same office, received 33,000 votes. New York elected ten socialists to the State Legislature, seven party members to the Board of Aldermen, and one socialist was elected to the municipal bench. In Chicago the socialist candidates received 80,000 votes out of 240,000. In Cleveland the socialists went up from 6,000 in 1915 to 21,000. In Dayton, Ohio, the party received 45 per cent of the total, losing out to the combined efforts of the Republicans and Democrats. Similar increases were recorded in other industrial centers, including Buffalo, Yonkers, Utica, Toledo, Ft. Wayne. Allentown and a host of other communities in Ohio, Indiana and Pennsylvania.
The party campaign was subjected to the sharpest criticism by Left Wing writers. As was to be so often the case with the Left Wing their criticisms combined elements of theoretical correctness and poor judgment. Whether or not some moderate party campaigners wavered in their attacks on the war, the party campaign on the whole was conducted on an anti-war basis, revolving around the injustice of the war itself and attacking the high cost of living and other hardships it induced. The voters took the party at its word – the St. Louis Resolution – and their vote could only be understood as a mass demonstration against war and capitalist oppression.
The gains the party made were not restricted to the ballot box. The May 1917 circulation of The Call doubled that of 1916. More important, was the membership turnover in the party. Where, before the war, the strongest sections of party influence were in rural areas, the centers of organized party strength had shifted to larger Eastern and industrial metropolises, without incurring any loss in numerical strength. Thousands left the party immediately before and after the St. Louis convention but their places were taken by new members.
These recruits were largely foreign born workers who could not work up any enthusiasm for the imperialist ambitions of their new homeland where conditions of life were often more like Gehenna than the Promised Land. Opposed to the war and inspired by revolutionary developments in Europe, large numbers of these immigrant workers joined the foreign federations affiliated to the Socialist Party and formed the mass base of the Left Wing. [5]
 
THE LEFT WING CRITICISM OF the SP election campaign was but one example of how an abstract, theoretically correct criticism could be transformed into petty sniping at all the deficiencies of a progressive mass movement. The fact that such left wing Wilsonians as Amos Pinchot and Dudley Field Malone supported Hillquit was enough to bring jeers from the Left Wing press. But while the criticism of the SP campaign was unwise and not always justified in all specific instances, and its articles generally weighted too heavily in a critical direction, the Left Wing, at least, did support the candidates of the Socialist Party.
The first major demonstration of the negativistic purity of the Left was its hostility to the peace movement in the United States which assumed mass proportions following Congress’ declaration of war. This peace movement is a sadly neglected chapter in the history of American radicalism. We cannot remedy that in this article, but a brief review of it is an integral part of our analysis of the Left Wing spearhead of the American Communist movement.
In the most important section of the organized labor movement, the AFL, a modest peace movement was manifested in 1915. A conference of trade unionists was organized consisting mainly of representatives from the West and Midwest, which met in Indianapolis in May 1915 under the chairmanship of Daniel Tobin. Among the delegates were miners, carpenters and teamsters. It was prompted by the downpour of militaristic propaganda following the sinking of the Lusitania. But the conference, though of an anti-militarist nature, took no concrete measures and was fated to collapse under chauvinist pressure from the outside and the Gompers leadership within. The Socialist Party was in no position to provide leadership to this anti-war sentiment in the labor movement for it had successfully isolated itself as a political force inside the AFL. Whether the organized labor movement in the United States would have withstood the test of war, remaining true to its anti-militarist traditions, if the Socialist Party had a constructive policy of functioning inside the AFL as an organized political tendency, or had the revolutionary dual unionists of the I.W.W. chosen a policy of “boring from within” the AFL, is a purely speculative question. All we can say with certainty is that the SP policy of “non-interference” in the affairs of the union movement and the attitude of dual unionists who wanted to destroy the AFL reduced to a minimum any opportunity for a successful struggle against the pro-war Gompers leadership within the “house of labor.”
Although organized labor resistance to militarism waned in the years 1915–1917, the pacifist movement, nonetheless, gained momentum. Unfortunately, the pacifist movement in this period was of a middle class nature consisting of religious organizations, women’s leagues, liberal intellectuals, etc. It fought a losing battle for U.S. neutrality and, occasionally, some of its leading members were attracted by such preposterous projects as Henry Ford’s famous peace mission to Sweden.
Just prior to U.S. entry into the war the Emergency Peace Federation was organized out of the American Neutral Conference Committee which included among its leaders, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, George Kirchwey, and Jane Addams. This new organization included a large number of socialists and made a highly concentrated effort to attract segments of the labor movement. An important conference called by the Federation in May 1917, one month after the declaration of war, was attended by Morris Hillquit, John Haynes Holmes, Rabbi Judah L. Magnes, Lillian Wald (of the Henry Street Settlement), Edward J. Cassidy (President of the Big Six Typographical Union) and about 35 others likewise prominent in socialist, pacifist, reform and labor movements. They agreed upon an “immediate program” of the Federation which previewed an interesting shift in the pacifist movement. With war now a fact in the United States the Federation program reflected an interest in broader social problems. It was concerned with questions of political democracy, war aims and terms of peace, and was inspired by the Russian Revolution. Impelled by the need to further broaden the social outlook of the peace movement, the Federation was instrumental in organizing the First American Conference for Peace and Democracy held in New York on May 30 and 31, with a second major conference held in Chicago. These conferences revealed the growing strength of the anti-war movement, the increased prestige of the Socialist Party within it, and its evolution as a movement with political perspectives adopting the Russian peace program as its own.
The New York Conference was climaxed by a jam-packed rally in Madison Square Garden and a call for a “People’s Council.” Many local “councils’ were organized. And with a significant use of language a “Constituent Assembly of Peoples Councils” was called, to be held in Minneapolis the first two days of September. Minneapolis was chosen as the city most likely to be safe from government persecution because of its Socialist administration. Its meeting rights were denied, however, by the governor of Minnesota and the delegates to the Council moved to Chicago. After succeeding in holding its main sessions there, the Assembly was broken up by troops sent by the Illinois governor. At the session held, however, a program was projected advocating: repeal of the conscription law, the defense of civil liberties, rights of national self-determination, a democratic control of foreign policy and a referendum on war, safeguarding labor’s rights, taxing the wealthy for the war and an international organization for maintaining world peace. A permanent People’s Council was set up with headquarters in New York.
Exactly how powerful this Council movement was is difficult to estimate. Its leaders claimed that its affiliated organizations – Socialist locals, labor councils, farm organizations, reform groups – represented well over two million members. This figure may be exaggerated but there is no question that the pacifist movement, which had been restricted in policy and membership before the war had grown to mass proportions and evolved a radical, though by no means revolutionary, social outlook. Scott Nearing, chairman of the People’s Councils, correctly referred to it as the “clearing house for the liberal and radical elements in American life.” A measure of the strength of the Council movement and its influence in the labor movement was the hysterical reaction of the government and of Samuel Gompers who now sat high in the government war councils.
Gompers, in collaboration with a number of the pro-war socialists who had deserted the party before and after the St. Louis convention, organized the American Alliance for Labor and Democracy. It was to counter the influence of the Socialist Party and to fight possible contagion of the peace movement in the ranks of organized labor. Intended as a demonstration of organized labor’s loyalty to imperialism the Alliance called its first national convention in Minneapolis to coincide with the planned Constituent Assembly of the Peoples Council. The Minnesota governor did not deny the American Alliance its meeting rights.
Gompers explained at the 1917 convention of the AFL:
I wasn’t going to run away. I was going to be there where they were. The psychology of the time and the situation demanded that there should be a clear cut distinction between what the People’s Council represented and what the American trade-unionists represented, and because the mind of the people of the United States was focused upon Minneapolis we decided the conference should be held there.
Meanwhile the Left Wing writers of the Socialist Party were also expressing their dissatisfaction with the peace movement and the People’s Council. Fraina wrote of the People’s Council:
The Socialist Party in its support of the People’s Council has again made a tactical error of the first importance. Indeed, the tragedy of the situation is seen in the circumstance that our party has practically lost its identity nationally as a force against war. All its antiwar activity is virtually centered in the People’s Council, an organization that does not accept revolutionary action, and the conservatism of which, moreover, is strengthened by the party bureaucrats dominant in its management.
... The People’s Council does not square with our general revolutionary aims, nor does it even adopt temporarily radical actions against the war. The party should immediately separate itself from this bourgeois concern.
Many of the specific indictments of the Left Wing against the People’s Council and against the party role in it were, in a limited sense, correct. The Council was neither revolutionary nor anti-capitalist and the moderate leadership of the party spent, perhaps, an inordinate amount of time and energy in it. Moreover, the People’s Council, although it had some support in the labor movement was not a working class organization. In the long run, a movement such as the People’s Council, if it does not win to it the organized working class, the only class capable of leading a successful revolutionary struggle against imperialism, may boil for a while but it will, eventually, only evaporate into steam. And this is what did happen to the People’s Council. But the People’s Council, for all its weaknesses in composition, compromises and hesitations was nevertheless a mass movement of social protest, moved by a genuine sympathy with the Russian Revolution – which it could not understand, and an aversion to war. It was responsible for an awakened political consciousness of thousands, with a radicalizing effect on American workers and liberals. By abstaining from it and condemning it, by not trying to make its views felt within it the Left Wing helped to assure the dissolution of a promising but politically limited mass movement.
The attitude of the Left Wingers would have been correct were they discussing a comparable organization in revolutionary Russia. And that was one of the fundamental weaknesses of this Left. It functioned on the American scene as if it were involved in a direct and immediate revolutionary struggle for power. It could not understand the level of American politics. It adopted an uncompromising, rigid political attitude, in disregard of the stage of development of the American working class and ignorant of the power of American capitalism. In this sense, Gompers understood the class struggle better than Fraina.
In the next issue we will discuss the reasons for the sectarian malady of the Left: What there was in the composition of the Left and its political environment and background that gave rise to self-destructive attitudes and activities. As part of this discussion we will deal with the theory of “mass action,” the Left and the labor movement, its view on reforms and elections; also, the effect of the Russian Revolution on the Left and the labor movement. Finally, we will present a detailed picture of the actual organization of the Left as an organized faction with its fusions and splits leading to the formation of two Communist parties.
* * *
Footnotes
1. The Left Wing was particularly strong in the following states: Montana, Nevada, Arizona, West Virginia, Ohio, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Texas, Tennessee. In 1912 the S.P. in Montana received 13.6 per cent of the vote; in 1916 it was down to 5.4 per cent. In Ohio it dropped from 8.9 to 3.4 per cent; Washington from 12.4 to 5.9 per cent; Oregon moved down from 9.8 to 3.7. These ten Left Wing strongholds alone (there were others) account for a drop of approximately 100,000 votes from 1912 to 1916.
2. John Reed was a socialist in 1916 and collaborated with many leading party members though he did not formally join the organization until 1917.
3. If there were room for only one name in this discussion of the pre-history of the Communist movement it would be reserved for Louis C. Fraina. It was Fraina (better known later as Lewis Corey) who, as much as any individual, was responsible for the organization of the Left Wing of the Socialist Party. To those who are not at all familiar with the early socialist movement this may appear surprising; but only because the Stalinists have had considerable success in obliterating his role by ignoring it. In the latest Stalinist monumental history of the American Communist movement (William Z. Foster’s 600 tedious pages) Fraina is never once discussed! That is comparable to discussing the steel strike of 1919 without mentioning Foster. On the other hand where he has been mentioned by other “historians” it is usually with condescension at best or venality at worst. The most venomous account of Fraina, perhaps, is to be found in the pulp writings of that sickening personification of moral decay, Benjamin Gitlow, according to whom, Fraina was practically a sex-fiend, certainly a lunatic – and, worst of all, a factional opponent of Gitlow in the Communist movement.
Fraina was a very young man when he came to the Socialist Party in 1915 leaving the Socialist Labor Party behind him. By 1917 he was a leading figure in the Left-Wing. He edited the first national publication of the Socialist Propaganda League, The New International, he was on the editorial board of the superb Class Struggle, was editor of the Revolutionary Age which was to become the national publication of the powerful, organized Left Wing of the Socialist Party in 1918. He earned these posts while still in his mid-twenties.
The articles by Fraina on the war, his analysis of modern imperialism, his understanding of the Russian Revolution marked him as a man who earned his place. There were other men of theoretical talent in the Left Wing such as his co-editors on The Class Struggle, Louis Boudin and Ludwig Lore, but Fraina could hold his own with the best of them. In addition to his intellectual abilities, however, Fraina was an “organizational man,” obviously driven by a passion for organizational leadership. He constantly debated at local branch meetings and spoke at mass rallies. With a sharp tongue, a deft literary style and a genuine intellectual gift to draw from, Fraina rightfully rose from obscurity to national prominence in the socialist movement.
Fraina moulded the political views of the Left Wing as much as any other personality – but it was not an unmixed blessing. He brought with him from the SLP many of its ultra-leftist notions. While Fraina helped to lead the Left Wing in a Marxist direction on international class struggle issues, on problems related to the class struggle at home he must bear his burden of responsibility for the incredible stand of the early Communist movement on trade unions, elections, reforms, etc.
Fraina also suffered from a lack of moral fibre. His demise in the Communist movement was a tragic fall of an individual whose character proved no match for his ambitions or his talent. Some of the details of Fraina’s history will be discussed in the course of these articles.
4. In an article in The Class Struggle Boudin estimates that there were 75 Left-Wingers, over half of whom voted for the Majority Resolution.
5. In 1915 the Socialist Party had 79,000 members and the foreign language federations accounted for about 15,000 members. By the end of 1917 the party had well over 80,000 members with the federations claiming more than 30,000 members.
* * *
A. In the printed version “glorified banner,” but this was corrected in a note in the following issue.
 

us Jacobson: Reflections on Fascism and Communism



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Reflections on Fascism and Communism
(1983)

Originally published in Socialist Perspectives, Edited by Phyllis Jacobson and Julius Jacobson, 1983.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.





Julius Jacobson edited Anvil and the Marxist Journal, The New International. He is an associate author of The American Communist Party: A Critical History (1919-1957), Beacon Press, 1957, and edited The Negro and the American Labor Movement, Anchor Books, 1968 and Soviet Communism and the Socialist Vision, Transaction Books, 1972. He was the editor of New Politics, a journal of socialist thought, in which many of his articles appeared. Julius Jacobson died in 2003.





“Stalinism is the most successful variant of fascism.” With that pronunciamento, made at the American Workers and Artists for Solidarity rally, Susan Sontag became the eye of a political storm. Oscillating between the penitential and accusatorial, which charged the atmosphere and added a touch of theatre to the event, her mea culpas and belated revelations about the unrelieved malevolence of Communist societies met with boos and hisses from a good part of the audience at Town Hall. And hardly had the meeting been adjourned when dozens took to their typewriters, providing several publications with an editorial glut. Unfortunately, the polemical torrent has been reduced to a trickle, which is both telling and sad because Sontag’s concerns are neither trivial nor arcane. They involve basic evaluations (re-evaluations for Sontag) of myth and reality in the Communist world past and present; questions of history, politics, social and moral values relevant to the fate of us all and of special significance for those who consider themselves of the left.
It was not only declared at the meeting but made explicit in many of the letters to various editors (at least a majority of those published) that Sontag’s equation of Communism and fascism was prima facie evidence that she had defected from the left to join forces with the neo-conservative right. Jessica Mitford, for example, found that “the logical conclusion implicit in Susan Sontag’s speech” is “first strike, anyone?” Gary Wills didn’t go so far as suggesting that Sontag’s equation implies nuclear holocaust but was content to charge her with borrowing from the anti-Communist arguments of the Readers Digest and of having become a sort of latter-day McCarthyite: she aims “to shame the Left for having believed in the authenticity of anti-colonial movements, the untenability of Chiang’s position, the nationalist tensions between China and Russia, and the fictive character of Senator McCarthy’s ’investigation.’ Another letter writer shot from the hip: if Sontag visits Miami’s “little Havana” she will be “flanked by ex-National Guardsmen from Anastasio Somoza’s regime; and that they will give her a cocktail party funded from the drug money that also feeds the Cuban terrorists.” A Chicago union functionary rebuked The Nation for printing Sontag at all, advising that weekly to “leave anti-communism and Soviet-baiting in the paws of yahoo scribblers for ultra right magazines.” An equally elegant indictment was handed down by another moralist, Abby Hoffman, who believes that “Sontag’s song would have been best sung in chorus with Bob Hope and Frank Sinatra, not from the stage of Town Hall.” And again we have the image of Sontag as a one-person-nuclear-threat from another correspondent, who didn’t like “reviving the rhetoric of the Cold War, escalating the military budget” and warned that “increasing nuclear tensions do nothing to help the people of Poland, Afghanistan, etc.” and concludes: “Why not give peace a chance?” An irate black woman delivered the following low blow: “I would opt for Joseph Stalin over a Strom Thurmond or a Jesse Helms any day. Under Stalin I could only vote for one ‘president.’ Under. Thurmond or Helms, none.” (Of course, under Stalin she might be dead.)
Thus for many, Sontag, through her equation, becomes a nuclear menace, spiritual heir of the infamous Wisconsin McCarthy, consort of American racists and Latin American killers, perhaps even a scribbler. To be fair, not all the critical responses were on this primitive level; some were better reasoned. There were also letters of support, only a few of which were interesting. However, a splendid article-length comment by Jacobo Timmerman, titled Moral Symmetry, appeared in the March 6, 1982, issue of The Nation. And in her moving essay on life in South Africa, Living in the Interregnum (New York Review of Books, January 20, 1983), Nadine Gordimer concludes with a thoughtful discussion of the issues raised by Sontag.
Special mention must be reserved for Alexander Cockburn in whose Village Voice columns muddied political waters were so roiled that they occasionally emitted a whiff of old fashioned Stalinist vilification. In a discussion of the Costa Gavras film, Missing, he gratuitously entered Susan Sontag’s name and formulation:
“Is it so much the spirit of our times that the unspeakable or the unjust can never be faced: that the US contrived the overthrow of Arbenz; promoted the execution of a million Indonesian communists; murdered Vietnamese by the hundreds of thousands; tolerated and sustained torture and butchery in Latin America?
“All is forgiven, because all is forgotten. À la Sontag, communism becomes fascism and vice versa. Between the two goes the US, treading the middle way, supporting El Salvador generals for a half-century and then feeling especially virtuous for forcing some National Guardsmen into the dock for murdering the nuns. It doesn’t take much to purge the imperial conscience.”
Note the insidious weaving, à la Vyshinsky, of Sontag’s name and point of view with moods, tendencies, even culpable regimes, prepared to tolerate, forgive, forget, perhaps be complicitous in, the torture, execution, butchery of millions in Indonesia, Vietnam and Latin America. At least there are no “fascist mad-dogs.” [1]
If the equation Communism equals fascism implies that “all is forgiven, because all is forgotten” vis-à-vis the crimes of American imperialism, the formula must also imply that where the crimes of Stalinism have been forgotten, as in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, there, too, “all is forgiven, because all is forgotten.” The Communism equals fascism formula would then be transformed from an intended equivalency of evil to an apologia for both Communism and capitalism, with Susan Sontag thereby becoming less a convert to the right than an unmitigated fool.
Has Sontag moved to the right? Is she the latest recruit to the French “New Philosophers” as Cockburn also intimated? Little in her remarks per se supports the charge. On the contrary, Sontag clearly separated herself from the Janus-faced right which laments the plight of the Polish people and simultaneously supports or rationalizes oppression and terror in rightist dictatorships. The meeting, she noted, was not only being held to support the “democratic workers’ movement in Poland” but “to stake out a different kind of support for Poland than that tendered by, say, Reagan, Haig and Thatcher.” Answering her critics in The Nation, she wrote of the “democratic movement in El Salvador whose struggle to overthrow the tyranny backed by the American government I passionately support.”
For many of her critics, this is not enough to validate her democratic credentials. All they heard was her now total renunciation of the Stalinist church and that remains an unforgivable political heresy for those to whom unambiguous opposition to totalitarianism as a social system becomes a confession of right wing guilt. It is to commit the sin of “fanatical anti-Communism” (no one ever speaks disparagingly of “fanatical anti-fascism”), as if to pin such labels on accused heretics absolves the accuser from the responsibility to answer arguments rationally or to review one’s past allegiances and present commitments in the light of history.
Perhaps, when all is said and done, Sontag will move to the right. It is certainly true that many who discard all illusions about Stalinism are so traumatized by their new awareness that they lose the ability to distinguish between the perverse “false consciousness” of Stalinism (or “Communism”) [2] and the political and moral values of authentic radical and socialist movements; not only is Communism now evil but the whole notion of socialism becomes Utopian at best or criminal at worst.
In any case, Sontag’s political evolution is of far less interest and importance than the respective merits of the two contradictory formulations made at the Solidarity rally – the first, of course, is Sontag’s view that Communism is successful fascism; the second formulation, made by her most vigorous critics, places an equal sign between Sontag’s position and capitulation to the right. The latter position is indefensible, and what it suggests will be discussed later. But if many of Sontag’s critics reject her view unfairly, that does not make her position, as presented at the meeting, unimpeachable. Sontag, or others who accept her equation, are obliged to make clear, at some point, on what level the equivalency of fascism and Communism is made. Is it an assertion of an ideological and class affinity of Communist and fascist societies? Or is it only intended to summarize, in an immediate descriptive and human sense, the similar levels of violence and oppression both use to achieve and retain power?
 
The Equation Viewed Sociologically
Anyone who tries to identify Communism and fascism in a precise sociological sense would be hard-pressed to make a convincing case. On that level, differences and contradictions do exist that are serious and politically relevant.
Historically, fascism is the brutal response of a beleaguered capitalist class threatened by a profound economic and social crisis and menaced by a rebellious working class. Seeking stability, fearful for its very existence, the ruling class can no longer tolerate even the limited freedoms of bourgeois democracy. It seeks salvation, instead, in a semi-autonomous state which suppresses traditional liberties, tames the working class and even circumscribes the rights of the capitalist class as a whole, as it continues to protect much of the power and privileges of private capital.
“Communism” (or bureaucratic collectivism, i.e., Stalinism as a social system), on the other hand, can be defined as a society in which politics transcends economics; where the means of production are owned and controlled by the state and the state is owned and controlled by a single party. The viability of this society depends on its ability to destroy the owners of private capital as an economic class and a political force (possibly permitting agrarian and minor vestiges of a market economy), to suppress all opposition and, above all else, to prevent or contain any manifestation of economic or political independence by its working class. Democratic rights, cultural autonomy and intellectual freedom are inimical to a ruling class which consists not of representatives of the working class or of bankers and industrialists but of the leading luminaries of the all powerful Communist Party and its subordinate government administrative and military bureaucracies.
These different class structures imply differences in social cohesiveness and suggest the theoretical limits to internal change in each society. Take Spain and Russia as prototypical systems. Franco’s mission in the thirties was to preserve the Spanish bourgeoisie from the threat of godlessness, anarchy and socialism. He serviced his class well. But neither the Falange in particular nor fascism in general had a quintessential, permanent relationship to capitalism. Without capitalism there can be no fascism, but the converse is not true. In Spain, in Germany, in Italy, capitalism has survived and, arguably, benefited from the fall of fascism.
In Russia – and Communist societies in general – the same dichotomy between class and governing authority could not exist for any extended period, for there the Communist Party is the counterpart of both the bourgeois class and the fascist state. To challenge the Party is to challenge the ruling class and the converse is true.
In Russia the politically organized ruling class operates on a sophisticated level of class consciousness. It sees more clearly than many of Sontag’s critics that any attempt to deprive the Party of its authority is at the same time, consciously or not, an attempt to undermine Communism as a social system. The Party can ease its terror but it cannot surrender what it euphemistically calls its “leading role.” In all economic planning and state organs, in the military, in the judicial system, in the state-owned company “unions,” etc. the Party must be eternally (sometimes murderously) vigilant in guarding and enhancing its supremacy.
There was not the same class rooted compulsion for Franco to weave Spain’s social fabric so tightly. The fact is that after 35 years of fascist rule, the Falange was not able either to absorb or fully neutralize other potentially competitive institutions, bureaucracies and political tendencies – e.g., the church, state sponsored “unions,” monarchists. This looser social organization of fascism compared to totalitarian Communism left Franco comparatively vulnerable to lateral pressures as well as to more basic resistance from below. By the seventies many a Spanish bourgeois had come to view fascism as an economic encumbrance and a political liability.
Spanish fascism, its power eroded for decades by internal stress and resistance, was toppled in a massive popular upheaval which raised the spectre of socialist revolution but, unfortunately, fell short of achieving a fundamental change in class rule. A parallel move to dispossess the ruling Party in Russia, unlike in Spain, would automatically raise the level of confrontation from one evoking the mere spectre of socialism to a social revolutionary struggle aimed at expropriating the ruling class. (Here it best be noted, at least parenthetically, that to describe Communism as more total in its social controls than fascism is not to picture the latter as benign. A particular fascist society can be more loosely controlled from above than a particular Communist state and, at the same time, be more cruel.)
The notion of Communism as not merely a variant of fascism but the “most successful” variant, when permitted to stand by itself, is also flawed in that it suggestively imputes to Communism a homogeneity and invincibility that is simply not the case. Just as Spanish, Italian and German fascism rarely operated as a single unified force, Communism in power reveals anything but a spirit of mutual accommodation and dedication to an internationalist ideal. The historical circumstances (e.g., national and cultural traditions, internal opposition, unique economic needs, etc.) of the rise to power vary from one Communist country to another, leading to antagonisms and sometimes combustible contradictions within the Communist world.
Even a brief look at the different sources of power in Russia, Poland and China shows that on a meaningful historical level, Sontag’s formula has more shock value than educational merit.
In Russia, the Stalinist ruling class emerged out of the ashes of the Russian revolution, not as a mythic phoenix, but as a brutal form of historical retribution for the inability of Russian socialism to withstand the corrosive and corrupting impact of years of civil war, hunger and isolation. In the twenties, Stalin, and the Communist Party he already dominated, instinctively moved to fill a threatening void. And fill it they did, with terror, slave labour and graves. Factories were also built but the foundations for this industrialization (and collectivization) were the bones and blood of millions upon millions of victims. (It was an industrialization that was about as “socially progressive” as the growth of German industry from 1933-1939. Hitler, too, reduced unemployment.)
The current Russian ruling class, then, emerged from within at a time when no traditional class appeared to have the vigour and resources for reorganizing society.
Poland was different. There, without a mass base, with a large percentage of its cadres systematically murdered by Stalin and Hitler during the war years, the Kremlin picked up the Polish Communist Party by its emaciated neck and returned it in Russian tanks to Warsaw, where it was enthroned as a new ruling class before whom the Polish masses were ordered to kneel and say their Hail Josephs. But potential discord is built into the ambiguous relationship between an imperialist power and its colonial compradors, torn between dependence on and fear of their foreign benefactors, on the one hand, and allegiance to their own national class and personal ambitions on the other. And Poland provided excellent soil for the seeds of discontent to germinate. In addition to the Poles’ traditional animus toward things Russian, there were the more recent bitter memories: the Nazi-Soviet pact, which gave the green light for the Wehrmacht’s blitzkrieg; the Russian massacre of 10-15,000 Polish officers in the Katyn forest in 1941; the enslavement and physical liquidation of countless thousands of Polish socialists, Communists, Bundists, of nationalists and of Jews; the slaughter of Poles by Germans in the 1944 Warsaw uprising under the watchful eyes of a nearby Russian army led by Marshal Rokossovsky who was ordered to allow Warsaw and its citizens to burn before launching a Red Army assault to “liberate” the city.
While the Polish ruling class is a feeble and unreliable ally for the Russians, in other Communist countries the Kremlin has deadly enemies, above all, in China. There, the Communist Party did not move in to fill a threatening social vacuum as in Russia and it was not artificially imposed as in Poland. It was a genuine mass movement which conquered a strong foe (a foe backed by the most powerful country in the world, the US) after 20 years of civil war. Mao used Stalin’s techniques – bloody purges, genocide, gulags – to consolidate the rule of the Party, but emulation is not obeisance. The Chinese Party could afford to and does operate independently of the Kremlin, motivated more by its own national class interests, including territorial ambitions, than by concern for long range international, ideological and class concerns.
The similarities, then, in class rule in Poland, Russia and China provide no greater impetus for collaboration than the common class denominator in capitalist counties has served to save mankind from the slaughter of capitalist wars.
Had Sontag coupled her formulation with an acknowledgment of this diversity and rivalry within the Communist world, some of her critics might have been a bit less indignant. Her failure to do so created the impression that Communism is a massive international conspiracy, which conjured up a rerun of McCarthyite hysteria.
This disorder and disarray within the Communist world also suggests that Communism is not quite as “successful” as Son-tag might have us believe. Volcanic pressures from below have erupted throughout Eastern Europe and exist within the mother country as well.
Sontag’s Communism-equals-successful-fascism formula seemed confined to an equivalency between the two as state powers. How does one compare fascism and Communism ideologically when out of power? Can Communists be equated with fascists? Can Communist and fascist controlled organizations be coupled and is there an identity between fascist and Communist parties as opposition movements? The answers provide clues to understanding the essence of each movement and how radicals and socialists can most effectively counter the influence of both.
To present Communism as simply a variant of fascism runs the risk of obscuring important ideological distinctions. Fascism occasionally borrows some of the terminology of populism, even of socialism: it is against the “Big Bankers,” “the monied interests,” etc., but its propaganda is more heavily weighted with appeals that are blatantly primitive and base. It plays on and promotes racial prejudices and chauvinism. It is the force of “national salvation” committed to a holy war against Communism and Marxism.
The ideological trappings of bureaucratic collectivism are another matter. Stalinist barbarism is adorned with a human face; a mask it must wear. Brezhnev cannot burn socialist libraries in Red Square; he can only choose selectively what appears on Party bookshelves, censor others and consign the rest to oblivion. The zeal with which Stalinism strives to preserve its false socialist image flows from its efforts to seek a popular mass base in the working class and, generally, among poor and exploited peoples. It also seeks a special place of respect and authority among intellectuals. Here, Sontag’s equation, when offered without qualifications, can be misleading and dangerous for those of us who are committed to fighting Stalinism not only on an intellectual level but in real political life. For the endemic need of Communism to find a mass base in the working class, particularly where it is not in power, and to present itself as a force for social justice, puts Communist organizations into direct competition with authentic socialists and radicals. (The armies of fascism-also seek proletarian recruits but not in the same way and seldom with any degree of success; their cadres come primarily from the middle class and the military, with shock troops provided by declassed and marginal elements.)
Thus, in trade unions, civil rights organizations, the feminist and peace movements, etc., where our paths cross with Communists and their sympathizers, it behoves the socialist left to reach out to those activists whose acceptance of or sympathy with Communism may be subjectively motivated by idealistic sentiments and passions similar to those that move radicals and socialists to an uncompromising rejection of Communist totalitarianism. This paradoxical relationship of the anti-Stalinist (or anti-Communist) left to Communists was properly understood and acted upon in decades past, when Communist parties were even more intransigent than they are today.
A nostalgic example, at least for this writer: on the agenda of local left-wing socialist meetings, there was often the quaintly worded subject of “opponents work.” This never referred to work among or within fascist organizations – what could be accomplished there? – but most often to efforts made to win over Communists and their sympathizers within Communist front organizations and sometimes to more clandestine operations within the Communist Party itself or its youth affiliate. It was understood that for all the moral equivalency and political symmetry that could be drawn between Communist and fascist societies, on an individual, human level fascism and Stalinism were not equal. The recruits that the socialist left found in Stalinist parties and their peripheral organizations could never have been drawn from the Silver Shirts, Coughlinites, the Liberty League or the KKK.
We have noted the difference between Communists and fascists as individuals. But what does it mean to sum up Communism as “successful fascism” with respect to organizations controlled by Communists? It is inconceivable that any radical or socialist would suggest a positive approach to, say, some component part of the Moral Majority. It is, or should be, no less far fetched for the same radical or socialist to reject dogmatically involvement in any organization controlled by Communists, presumably agents of “successful fascism.”
Communism draws on the terminology and traditions of Marxism (at the same time violating both); it speaks of peace and social justice (as it mass produces nuclear weapons and jails peace activists); its manifestos reject imperialism and denounce racism (as it overruns weaker nations and practices genocide). But it is the surface propaganda and appeal of Communism which concern us at the moment. What counts here, as has been noted before, is that Communism, when operating as an opposition force in bourgeois society, is driven by an inner dynamic to win the allegiance of the broad mass of people. It is driven, above all, to establish itself as a force within the organized labour movement – the trade unions. Consequently, Communists, when out of power, can be responsive to the needs and interests of workers in given situations up to the point where working class gains might conflict with Communist political objectives. By contrast, fascism lacks this incentive of its allegedly successful twin and operates outside of and in violent opposition to the union movement.
 
The Equation Viewed on the Human Level
I have noted A few of the theoretical and practical political problems raised by the fascist-Communist equation when offered as a precise, historical equivalency. But how does one determine in human, moral terms if Hitler(ism) was more/less evil or more/less inhuman than Stalin(ism)? By numbers killed? Hitler destroyed 6 million Jews and millions of others in the death camps, and the figure would soar if we added all the others murdered in the 12 year history of the Third Reich. What about Stalin’s toll? In the decade after Stalin emerged ascendant in the late twenties, there was the forced collectivization in the Ukraine with death as its major harvest. Additional millions were killed in the purges and in an unprecedented concentration camp system. All in all, it is cautiously estimated that in the longer span of Stalin’s rule there were 15 million corpses to testify to the achievements of a man and a Party speaking in the name of socialist brotherhood and singing the Internationale.
Are we to measure the humanity or inhumanity of each system by an average-per-year body count?
Is it a matter of comparing the techniques of mass murder? Hitler used the unimaginably grisly method of the gas chamber and the ovens. Stalin relied on more traditional techniques of starvation, torture, executions. Is there a basic moral difference?
Is there a moral choice to be made between the imperialist ambitions of a Hitler that turned to dust and the reality of Stalin’s expansionism? Through the use of military force, sometimes “legitimized” by fraudulent elections, Russia subjugated Eastern Europe and the Balkans. (The three culturally distinct Baltic nations had been absorbed in 1941 as an integral part of Imperial Stalinist Russia.)
The level of cruelty that Hitler would have used to contain liberation movements had he succeeded in subjugating Europe is not difficult to imagine. But the methods by which Stalin and his successors crushed national resistance movements is a matter of record – armed intervention and unleashing the terror apparatus of Quisling parties. There were Communist tanks against the rebellious stone throwing workers of East Berlin in 1953. The Hungarian socialist revolution of 1956 drowned in blood by Russian storm troopers. The tragic repetition of Hungary in Czechoslovakia 12 years later. There was Poland 1956 and 1970 and 1976 and 1982.
On this count, are the sins of Stalinism to be viewed tolerantly relative to what one might imagine would have occurred under the reign of a triumphant Nazi Germany?
We need not limit ourselves to comparisons of Hitlerism and Stalinism. How does the Russian invasion of Hungary measure up to Mussolini’s bombs dropped on Ethiopian villages? (Let us not forget that the Italian army at the time was fuelled, in part, by Russian oil.) Which act was more acceptable in its perfidy? What of Stalinist Cuba, where the state jails its critics, has executed opponents when it felt the need to do so, denies workers the right to strike, prohibits the formation of opposition parties, supports every imperialist outrage committed by the Russian bureaucratic ruling class? Is a Cuban gendarme, humiliating homosexuals as he herds them through public avenues en route to a “rehabilitation” centre, more acceptable than his fascist counterpart because he is decked out in a Guevara beret? The poet, Armando Valladares, was imprisoned for 22 years (the last six on a starvation diet that crippled him) because he criticized the Maximum Leader. Is that more moral than the barbaric treatment of opponents in Spanish prisons during El Caudillo’s reign?
What about the horrors of Maoism? Its persecution of an entire nation, the widespread use of torture and public executions by “cultural” killers? And isn’t the evidence there, for all willing to see, that while Mao’s successors have reduced the deceased Chairman from god to fallible, even miserable, human dimensions, the Chinese people remain the victims of a totalitarian ruling Party that cannot abide political liberties? Is Communist China’s denial of basic human rights a lesser or greater evil than the outrages that were committed in, say, Franco’s dungeons?
What are the comparative grades for the Cambodian Khmer Rouge and the Chilean dictatorship? In Cambodia the Communists beat, stoned and shot to death a significant portion of their own population. The Chilean dictatorship tortured and killed thousands upon thousands of opponents real and alleged. Is one preferable to the other? To be sure, the Reagan “intellectuals” make a choice. They prefer the Chilean, Salvadoran and other right wing dictatorships, especially those, no matter how barbaric, that are allies of the US. No one on the left should succumb to the same immoral approach by apologizing for, or minimizing, the venality of Communist dictatorships. The simple human realities of each system make it impossible to decide which is more, or less, brutal. There can be no scorecard. Let us say that, on balance, it is a draw, that on this level fascism and Stalinism meet as equals in the inferno of authoritarian/totalitarian repression.
In several other respects – political, cultural and psychological – there is more than a modicum of merit in the Communism-fascism equation. They share common enemies and deeply rooted phobias. Neither fascism nor Stalinism can coexist internally with any institutional manifestation of working class independence, neither can permit genuine trade unions, nor can they tolerate an uncensored press, legal opposition parties, freedom of speech or any of the civil and political rights to which all are entitled and which are the very soul of socialism. Sexism is an essential feature of fascism; similarly, there is no Communist state that has overcome sexual repression, or is interested in doing so. (Women in Russia are allowed the right to hard labour for meagre wages, along with their domestic duties. But a list of women holding important positions in what are, at least theoretically, decision-making bodies, would hardly fill a 3 x 5 index card.)
Also freedom of cultural expression and experimentation are clearly unacceptable to any modern ruling class which demands absolute political obedience. Instead, “art” is put into the service of the state and what emerges as a substitute are heroic novels, odes to leaders, lifeless romantic portraits, posters of muscular workers fulfilling production quotas, hideous totalitarian architecture (to borrow Norman Mailer’s term). Modernism and innovation are “decadent” or “bourgeois” or “anti-social,” always dangerous and, as genuine artistic expression, driven underground in Communist as well as fascist societies. Finally, psychologically, the impact of Communist Party rule on the individual can hardly be less devastating than it is in fascist societies. A quantitative comparison of the extent to which individuals are alienated in authoritarian and totalitarian states is obviously impossible. On the other hand, one need not be a trained sociologist or psychologist or Marxologist to understand that in fascist and Communist societies, where the individual is deprived of any authority at the point of production or on any level of the political process, where self-expression is repressed, sometimes criminalized, where work is hard, luxuries scarce, where the state attempts to regulate personal lives from thought processes to sensual pursuits, that in both societies, more or less equally, the individual is beset by a degree of loneliness, frustration and fear that many in the Western left fail to grasp.

Neither Sontag nor many of those who booed her may be aware that comparisons of fascism and Communism have a long and interesting history, as old as the anti-Stalinist left. In the thirties and forties it was all part of the larger “Russian Question,” the nature of Stalinism in and out of power, debated by social democrats, anarchists, revolutionary Marxists. Some came to the conclusion that Russia was a form of “industrial feudalism,” others thought it “state capitalist,” there were those who believed Russia was dominated by a new reactionary “bureaucratic collectivist” class and still others who clung to the notion that Russia was a “degenerated workers state.” In the course of those polemics, parallels between fascism and Stalinism were debated with considerable vigour. Norman Thomas wrote a book, Red Fascism, Trotsky found a political-symmetry between fascism and Stalinism, Franz Neumann discussed in depth what he believed to be their similarities, yet they and other radicals, some of whom saw an identity of the two systems, not mere parallels, were not therefore expelled from the radical community, cast into the nether world of reaction, by those who disagreed.
Why, then, should Sontag’s borrowed use of an old, if controversial, concept within the socialist movement have so shaken her audience? Obviously it was a political response. But more than that, it was also a response to Sontag’s “style,” a reaction to someone who came to address the rally with hostile intent. Here was a meeting to support Solidarity, not to apologize to the Russians, yet the manner in which Sontag addressed the gathering smacked of a prosecutor holding her listeners complicitous in the crimes of Communism. If there was any doubt that Sontag meant her formula to provoke, not influence, it was put to rest by Sontag herself in an interview with Charles Ruas (NY Times Book Review, 24 October 1982) when, referring to her role at the Solidarity rally, she recognized that “I said something I wasn’t supposed to say, and I knew what I was doing. I knew I would he booed and I would make some enemies there. The idea of it is you were supposed to be a good guy and be mobilized for the pro-Poland rally on February 6 and the anti-nuclear rally on June 12. I didn’t want to do that anymore.”
If Sontag didn’t want to be a “good guy” any more where Poland is concerned, why did she accept the invitation to speak in support of Solidarity? She clearly had no intention of seeking any rapport with her audience. The torch of her new-found enlightenment was used as a club, its flame emitting more smoke than illumination. Her presentation was predicated on a total misunderstanding of the current state of the left. There was not the slightest suggestion of awareness that the audience at the Solidarity rally was representative of an American left far more conscious of the nature of Stalinism than earlier left-wing movements, as evidenced by its readiness to rally against Communist oppression. [3]
Consider that, in the late thirties, the American Communist Party had perhaps 100,000 members and controlled a vast network of social, cultural and political peripheral organizations. Its influence in the trade union movement was strong and on the rise. If Stalinism did not look like the wave of the American future, it nonetheless made more than ripples in political waters. Its members not only enjoyed the sense of belonging to a Party that could make a practical difference at home, there was also the psychological uplift provided by the reality of power in the Soviet Union of which they were all made to feel somehow a part.
In contrast, the anti-Stalinist left was pathetically weak in numbers and influence. The Socialist Party was little more than a sect, and the revolutionary anti-Stalinist left – the Trotskyists – was a sect. I can bear witness that to be in the latter was a lonely existence. For it was a sect with the towering mission of building the vanguard party that would lead the masses in struggle against the bourgeois state, with the simultaneous task of destroying the influence of Stalinism, an ideology Trotsky aptly called the cancer of the labour movement. Thus a puny David taking on two Goliaths. To survive politically and psychologically, idealism had to be reinforced with a powerful sense of history and tempered by a sense of irony and good humour, since, while we may have had the correct program, they – the Stalinists – at least in comparison to us, had the masses.
It was a time when the Stalinists could fill Madison Square Garden while the forces of revolutionary socialism had to settle for a New York City-wide rally drawing, at best, 300 friends, relatives and “contacts” to Irving Plaza.
And now? While radicals today cannot fill the Garden, they did manage to fill Town Hall in defence of Solidarity. How large a hall can the Communist enemies of Solidarity fill in New York? How many will demonstrate in the streets on behalf of the Polish junta? Reflect for a moment that in New York City, the bastion of American Stalinism in its halcyon days, Communism as a conscious, organized political force has been reduced to virtual nothingness. Now they are immobilized. And it will not do to ascribe this impotence to fear of exposure, persecution, repression, etc. It reflects a profound crisis in a Communist world that would still like all to see it as far more “successful” than it is. There is no reason to help it out in the image-making department.
Compare the attitudes of the left today with those of the New Left in the late sixties and early seventies. Neither the Prague spring of 1968 nor the summer roll of Russian tanks which overwhelmed it aroused more than a desultory note of disapproval in the left. Bear in mind that during those epic events Dubcek never kneeled before a Pope, nor were there ties to a Catholic Church for Stalinist apologists to exploit propagandistically. The Revolution was not avowedly anti-Communist; it was actually led by a wing of the Party and it aspired to “Socialism with a Human Face.” Thus, whatever liabilities the New Left of that period might have found in the equivalent of a Polish revolution were absent in the Czechoslovakian. Still the New Leftists offered little support.
In 1982, there was an outpouring of radicals to demonstrate solidarity with Solidarity, and the left-wing press took up its cause despite the fact that socialism is not inscribed on its banners and the revolution is clearly anti-Communist. Moreover, the role of the Catholic Church and the image of Walesa genuflecting before the Pope has not proved to be the liability it would most certainly have been for a potential radical audience in the sixties. Here, too, the differences are instructive, revealing a left today that is more mature, with wider concerns and fewer illusions about the nature of Communism than the New Left of the earlier decade, again indicating a degree of failure, not success, of Communism. This represents an historic shift whose significance and worth are apparently lost on someone determined to let the world know that she will no longer be a “good guy.”

But the overt hostility to Sontag and to the notion that Communism can be equated to fascism was more than a backlash against brusquely presented, uncongenial views. The intensity of the resentment and the political content it was given show that old barriers, although lowered, have yet to be scaled by the left on the road toward the full realization that the Polish people are the victims of a social system (call it Communist or Stalinist or bureaucratic collectivist) that is totally retrograde. One might have hoped that the cracks in the Communist world would prove wide enough for all on the left to see that in these totalitarian animal farms, freedom is terror and Communism is anti-communism. Yet, there are those who, even while deploring the Kremlin’s role in Poland and the anti-dissident campaign in Russia, continue to talk about basic reform “from above” in Communist states whose rulers “above” are preoccupied with the task of smashing recalcitrants “below.” Above all, what clouds the perception of this segment of the left is the somewhat less than grand illusion that somewhere, somehow, even if only remotely, there is something fundamentally progressive about Communist societies. At the very least, they are more progressive than capitalism. Called into play by some is a ritualistic reliance on “nationalized economy” to give weight to shibboleths about Russia being “socially progressive.” But a “nationalized economy” divorced from popular control and under the aegis of a political tyranny should have no greater charm for a socialist than a privately owned General Motors.
In and of itself, a nationalized economy is neither reactionary nor progressive; it depends on who controls the state. Nor can a nationalized economy determine the methods and the pace of industrialization. Where the economy is nationalized, only the state – whether controlled from above or, democratically, from below – can decide when and how to accelerate economic growth. This is crucial to our discussion because it is in Russia’s forced industrialization in the thirties and its aftermath that so many seek validation of the “socially progressive” credentials of the Stalinist economic system. By attributing industrial growth to the imperatives of the nationalized economy rather than to the Communist Party’s conscious policy of consolidating its supreme political-economic hegemony, the horrors of Russia’s forced industrialization are minimized in favour of a dazzling display of economic growth statistics. Behind the statistical curtain can be seen:
An upheaval that inflicted more suffering than any bourgeois industrial revolution, with millions of peasants, workers, and kulaks the inevitable victims of Stalinist industrialization.
An upheaval in which the primary target was not the “remnants of capitalism” but the “remnants of socialism.” The leaders of the Bolshevik revolution, its cadres, and all socialist and anarchist tendencies had to be liquidated and the road closed to any revival of Soviet democracy.
... An upheaval in which the beneficiaries were: the Party, whose totalitarian supremacy, under the aegis of Stalin, was established by the industrial counterrevolution and which became a new exploitative, economically privileged class that knew how to enjoy the perquisites of power (today, the Stalinist nouveaux riches have their dachas, chauffeur-driven limousines, the finest food from special commissaries where they do not have to queue up, and enough pocket money left to buy wardrobes of designer jeans on the black market); the military, for which the planned economy allocates whatever is necessary – at the expense of the consuming public (as in the US) – to build enough nuclear warheads to end all debate in all places for all times. For the masses, the benefits of Stalinist industrialization are more visible in the euphoria of some in the Western left than in their cupboards.
Homage is paid to Stalinist nationalization and industrialization for having raised Russia out of the cultural darkness of tsarism. Since no nation can reach modern industrial status if its workforce can neither read nor write, illiteracy had to be, and was, overcome. That was good. But how do we factor into our judgements the quality of that education – what the newly literate are permitted to read and allowed to write? And how are interpretations and evaluations affected by the fact that while the Party-state was obliged to raise literacy rates, the same state in the interests of the same nationalized economy was methodically fulfilling its parallel historic mission of jailing, torturing, and murdering countless thousands of the most literate and educated members of society – its poets, novelists, journalists, historians, teachers, philosophers. This massacre of the intelligentsia had nothing to do with an abstraction called “Nationalized Economy.” It had everything to do with a particular nationalized economy in the service of a concrete totalitarian state which fears and despises the most literate and intellectual beneficiaries of its own compelling need to improve educational and technical skills. Extermination of vast numbers of the intelligentsia was a precondition for Stalinization of the nationalized economy.
This war against the intellectuals, though less bloody than in the past, exists in permanence in totalitarian systems. For hose who grow too educated, read too much, write too much, the labour camps will never be closed and psychiatric cells have been opened.
Another pseudo-Marxological boast: Russia’s nationalized economy is free of capitalist “anarchy of production,” “irrationality” and “internal contradictions,” etc. etc. Of course, Russia is not plagued by capitalist contradictions and crises. Neither were paleolithic cultures nor slavocracies in antiquity nor feudal societies in the Middle Ages. How could it be otherwise where there are neither private owners of large-scale industry and capital nor a market in the bourgeois sense? No capitalism, no capitalist crises. That is not to say that totalitarian economies are free of built-in contradictions. Basic to socialist theory, a nationalized economy requires conscious democratic control and planning to realize its maximum social and economic potential. This socialist conception has never been tested. But it has won negative confirmation in the abundant evidence that totalitarian economic planning inexorably leads to mismanagement, inefficiency, imbalances, fraud, corruption, waste, shortages, demoralization, and loss of incentives; for the workers, denied any voice in economic planning, there is the certainty of alienation, exploitation and depressed wage levels.
To accept the notion that a socialist economy can coexist with political dictatorship is to deny the centrality of democracy to socialism. Yet, for Marx, “the first step in the revolution by the working class is to raise the proletariat to the position of the ruling class, to establish democracy.” For Engels, it is after “the proletariat seizes political power” that it “turns the means of production into state power.” And it would be good if all in the left accepted Lenin’s stricture that “whoever wants to approach socialism by any means other than that of political democracy will inevitably arrive at absurd and reactionary conclusions.”
These pithy declarations of democratic socialist principles are unacceptable to some in the left. An editorial in In These Times (December 22-January 11, 1983) is proof of Lenin’s warning that those who deny the indivisibility of democracy and socialism will arrive at conclusions that are “absurd” and “reactionary.” The editors note their “more than deep embarrassment” caused by the denial of civil liberties in “Eastern European Communist countries and in Third World socialist nations.” Never mind for the moment that “deep embarrassment” is a rather feeble term of compassion for the victims of totalitarianism. The editors proceed to prove that they are not really that embarrassed:
“Some democratic socialists attempt to resolve the contradiction by insisting that any regime that denies the right of free speech, free assembly, the right to form unions and strike, and the right to form political parties and freely contest for power is not socialist. We understand the motivation for this denial, but it doesn’t make sense to us.”
From this inventory of freedoms denied in Communist countries, one might think that the conclusion would be: Communism is fascism, à la Susan Sontag. But, no, the Communist countries are socialist despite the lengthy list of derelictions. Why? Because they, the Communist leaders, say so. Even the head of the Polish Junta is taken at his word:
“Whether we like it or not, Poland’s General Wojciech Jaruzelski talks about ‘the great collective duty’ of ‘strengthening the Socialist state.’ We may say, no, that’s no socialist state, but the words ring hollow in most people’s ears. The Communists can no more be denied their connection to socialism than can we. And because they have actually taken power, they appear in many people’s eyes to have a better claim to it than we.”
There is something unreal about all this. It is as if a hardened criminal – we’ll call him Yuri – had just been found guilty of the following crimes: he garrotted his grandparents, slaughtered his mother and father, strangled his children, terrorized his neighbourhood and hired thugs to invade adjacent turfs. Brought before the judge, he is asked if he has anything to say before sentence is passed. Yuri looks directly into the eyes of the judge and speaks: “Your Honour, my grandparents were socialists, my parents were socialists, my children were Komsomols and I am a Communist. And it was my collective duty to ...” Fortunately for Yuri, the judge is no ordinary bourgeois jurist. He, the judge, is also a socialist! He even writes theoretical tomes reconciling socialism and despotism. Yuri is chastised by an embarrassed judge. But Yuri, who cannot be denied his socialism merely because of his criminal record, is freed. How can one socialist confine another, especially Yuri, who, given his socialist ancestry, may even have a better claim to socialism than we?
The editors have a simple way of overcoming their embarrassment about the denial of freedom in Communist countries:
“We can no longer rely simply on the equation of the principles of freedom and equality with socialism, because any fool can see that ‘real, existing socialism,’ [the current Kremlin jargon for its system] while achieving a greater degree of equality, has stopped far short of the degree of freedom now possible.”
Any fool should see the absurdity of trying to reconcile the embarrassing realities of the Communist world with socialism by simply redefining socialism to include all who say “We are Communist” or “We are socialist.” One may come to the conclusion that socialism has proved to be a utopian dream – there are many neo-conservatives who would agree – but to say that a society that cannot abide democracy can still be socialist makes as much sense as saying that a wooden object that has neither roots, nor trunk nor branches, is a tree. A truncheon, perhaps, but not a tree.
Much of the In These Times editorial is a poor echo of the sophisticated apologia for Stalinism advanced by the prolific Isaac Deutscher, who argued with great polemical skill that the dictatorship and much of its terror were historically necessary to consolidate the “social conquests” of the October Revolution. There is this important difference. Deutscher accepted the implication of his views. He defended Stalinism in its post-war expansionism, and with few tears and no equivocation he supported the Communist suppression of every major effort by the oppressed people in the empire to free themselves of the Stalinist yoke. In post-war Europe, he saw the Russians bringing socialism to Eastern Europe “in the turrets of their tanks.” In Hungary 1956, he wrote, the Russian invaders tried to “wind up with the bayonet, or rather with the tank, the broken clock of the Hungarian Communist revolution.”
By contrast, today in the left, even among those who hold to Deutscherite conceptions, the cruel logic of ideology has been overwhelmed by a deeper sense of decency, given the mounting evidence of the repressive nature of the Communist regimes. Nevertheless, the dilemma persists for those on the left who support Solidarity, on the one hand, and on the other perceive Russia as an imperfect socialist society.
It is barely conceivable that the editors of In These Times – perhaps the most widely circulated, influential publication on the left – would support the Russian-dictated suppression of democratic resistance movements in Eastern Europe. There can be no question however that these definitions and redefinitions of socialism have the potential of undermining the support they have given to Solidarity. The editorial in In These Times reflects these contradictory pressures. [4]
Inhibiting many on the left from acknowledging the reactionary character of the Communist systems is the fear that to reject Stalinism totally means, at best, to join the camp of capitalism as a liberal reformer or, at worst, to become an apologist for or supporter of the reactionary anti-Communism of the Reagans and Thatchers. (Nobel Prize winner Garcia Marquez admitted in a recent interview that he voices his criticism of “communistoids” – the term is his – only privately so as “not to play into the hands of the Right.”) This assumption is reinforced by the political and moral devolution of so many theoreticians and intellectual luminaries of the anti-Stalinist left of years past. Sidney Hook, Irving Kristol, James Burnham, Max Shachtman are only a few names that come to mind of former left-wing and revolutionary socialist opponents of totalitarianism whose radicalism succumbed to their anti-Stalinism. They threw in their lot with “the West” – capitalism – as the only force capable of stemming the Communist tide in Vietnam, El Salvador, Chile. But it was not anti-Stalinism that proved to be sufficient cause for their capitulation to the West; the causal link between what they were and what they became was their abandonment of an independent socialist perspective. For some, socialism had become a force for evil, for others it was simply irrelevant to the struggle between East and West.
Those on the left who are persuaded that uncompromising anti-Communism leads to reaction have more in common with the League of ex-Bolsheviks for Nixon and Reagan than they realize. Coming from opposite ends of the spectrum, they join in a mutually shared pessimism: a frozen conception of a world divided between just two camps – Communist and capitalist. Implicitly and explicitly, they deny the historical viability of socialism.
It is awe for “nationalized economy,” misdirected fear of aiding the right and the downplaying of democracy which lead so many in the left, including enthusiastic supporters, of Solidarity, to adopt positions on questions of peace, political strategy and, most recently, the historic role of American Communism which are inimical to the cause of peace, of socialism and of the historical truth.
 
Peace
One of the more commonplace and sophomoric arguments is that for the sake of peace we must show prudence and judiciousness in our criticisms of Communism lest we play into the hands of Cold Warriors in Washington and arouse the ire of the Kremlin. Seldom has so urgent a cause been so abused as by those who continue to pluck at these time worn strings. Would those who orchestrate or sing this tune not be jarred if the lyrics were revised to read: for the sake of peace we must show judiciousness and prudence in our criticisms of capitalism lest we play into the hands of the Cold Warriors in the Kremlin and incite the wrath of the Reagan Administration?
It is impermissible to dismiss negative accounts about Communists per se as just so much grist for the Cold War mill. Anti-Communists become Cold Warriors when their revelations about Communism are used to serve reactionary domestic and global objectives. When Jeane Kirkpatrick and her right-wing advisors from Social-Democrats USA decry Communist practices it is invariably for the larger purpose of presenting a Pinochet as a worthy ally or of justifying the sending of arms and military “advisors” to the Salvadoran junta. In this context, anti-totalitarianism becomes transparently hypocritical and fraudulent. On the other hand, to speak the truth about Communism and to be as forthright in exposing the crimes of capitalism provides the basis for the most effective struggle against the militarism and imperialist ambitions of both power blocs.
By the same token, it is wrong to dismiss Communist criticisms of Western capitalism or American foreign policy solely on the ground that they are always presented in the service of reactionary Communist interests. But, if to recognize that an Andropov, for his own reasons, can tell the truth or part of the truth at least some of the time about economic and social conditions in the West does not make one an apologist for Stalinism, why do so many in the left assume that whoever does not automatically dismiss righting motivated accounts of the unbearable quality of life in Communist countries is an apologist for the bourgeois right or a “fanatical anti-Communist’’? It is a disturbing double standard.
If, in this country the left is urged, even by friends of Solidarity, to guard against militant anti-Communism for the sake of peace, should the same advice be given to dissidents in Communist countries with respect to their governments? In Russia, too, Cold Warriors hold rather high positions. Should dissidents limit their struggle against totalitarianism for the sake of peace? Remember, the Polish upheaval has provided the Reagan Administration with obvious propaganda advantages and a pretext for demanding a huge increase in the US nuclear arsenal (which the Kremlin claims to be just cause for expanding its nuclear weaponry). Therefore, if in the West the cause of peace requires toning down anti-Communism, in the East it suggests abandoning struggles for human rights and national independence. Put another way: if the cause of freedom in Poland upsets détente, arouses Cold Warriors in the White House, incites the Kremlin, escalates the dangers of nuclear holocaust, then, for caution’s sake and in the interests of human survival, is it not better to have the Jaruzelski solution to the Polish crisis than to have Solidarity pursue a life-threatening struggle for justice? This logical construct is vulnerable only in that its premise falsely denies the indivisibility of truth, peace and opposition to both power blocs.
 
Strategy
Sontag’s harsh retrospective and current judgements clearly upset those who still cling to the notion that Communism should not be attacked as vigorously as capitalism because “the enemy of my enemy is my friend or ally.” This strategy is commonplace in bourgeois diplomacy, openly stated by Reaganite neo-conservative ideologues who refuse to mount attacks on rightist dictatorships – from Argentina to South Africa – because “the enemy of my enemy is my friend and/or ally.” Guided by the same opportunism-cum-strategy, some of Sontag’s critics, even among those prepared to denounce the Kremlin for its role in Poland, remain chary of fundamental attacks on Communism as a social system for fear of providing aid and comfort to the immediate enemy, American capitalism. Apply this thought process to Poland and we wind up with bizarre conclusions. There, the immediate enemy is the Soviet Communist Party; the Reagan Administration is also the enemy of the Soviet Communist party; ergo, Solidarity must be urged to seek ties to the Reagan Administration or, at the very least, to maintain a cynical silence about US supported violations of human rights in other parts of the world (exactly what Kristol, Podhoretz & Co. urge).
 
Compassion
One also senses that compassion for the Communist victims of McCarthyism and the haunting memories of such outrages as the execution of the Rosenberg’s clouds the objectivity of many radicals, inhibiting them from making the necessary distinction between a Communist as victim of bourgeois reaction and, simultaneously, proponent of a social system as vicious and repressive as fascism.
 
American Communism: The Search for Roots
For the New Left of the sixties and early seventies, at least for a number of its more articulate and sometimes outrageous spokesmen, history was garbage and all those over 30 suspect. If history is garbage there was no need to study it and if all over 30 were to be discounted, there was no incentive to seek ancestral roots. The defiant symbolic act inevitably grew in importance at the expense of developing theoretical conceptions, historical discoveries or visions of the future. As a result, a movement with marvellous potential that reached its peak strength during the soul-searing horror of the Vietnam War foundered on the rocks of its own intellectual limitations. Repression took its toll, true enough, but its bloodiest wounds were self-inflicted, a lack of theoretical motivation and clarity – not the least of which was its failure to take a clear stand against all oppressive societies.
By contrast, the left today has taken a stand on Poland in healthy contrast to the New Left’s relative quiescence vis-à-vis the Prague Spring. And consistent with its concern for theory and history many in today’s left are trying to find a place for themselves in the continuum of American radicalism. It is a splendid quest that deserves far better than what it has thus far produced.
In their genealogical excavations, a number of radicals exploring the past have dug up the old American Communist Party. It is not being put on display as the most inspiring ancestral find but, it is argued, how unworthy of affection and emulation could the old Communist Party have been if its members participated in the great sit-down strikes of the thirties and the formation of the CIO? There was Gastonia, Angelo Herndon, rent strikes, the Scottsboro “Boys,” the Abraham Lincoln Brigade. There was pain, suffering, martyrdom; the human aspects of the Communist past no historian can overlook. All true, but in the hands of some left-wing historians and researchers, the political role of the Party in its “heroic” period has been so misstated and misunderstood that what emerges at times are not historical evaluations but silly, sentimental romances. (Perhaps the most hilarious example is Vivian Gornick’s 250-page caricature, The Romance of American Communism, which appeared a number of years ago and received plaudits from some surprising sources.)
Any party or movement, present or past, must be judged by its ideology, its choice of models, its internal life, its relation to other parties, how its activities affect class consciousness. Certainly, one cannot find sustenance or make an historical generalization about the early Communist party on the basis of isolated party activities, divorced from a wider and deeper political context. “Loyalty” and “courage” may be, in the abstract, splendid virtues. And a militant strike moves all socialists. But the “loyal” and “courageous” Communist cadres sent to Harlan County by the Party in the thirties to promote class struggle activities (and the Party) could be the same comrades instructed by the same Party to break strikes in the coal mines in the forties, after the Wehrmacht attacked Russia. It is that reality which should clue us in to the basic role of American Communism. The same Party which declared that “The Yanks Are Not Coming” during the Nazi-Soviet Pact berated the Allies with equal vigour for not opening a Second Front immediately after Hitler unilaterally dissolved the treaty.
The Party which demanded self-determination for the American black belt in the early thirties was the same Party that, a decade later, denounced black and white civil rights leaders as tools and agents of fascism for trying to organize a March on Washington to protest discriminatory practices in the armed forces and in industry. In the early thirties the chant at Party-organized May Day parades was “Free Tom Mooney and the Scottsboro Boys”; ten years later, the same Party beamed with pleasure when the US government sent Trotskyists to prison under the Smith Act and interned Japanese Americans in prison camps. The Party of the thirties which damned the crimes of American capitalism was the same party whose leader, ten years later, wrote: “I extend the hand of friendship to J.P. Morgan.” The Party that tried to establish its credibility in the early organizing days of the CIO was the same organization which raised strikebreaking to an organizational and ideological art as it worked feverishly to force the trade union movement to surrender its precious hard-won gains on the altar of super-patriotism during WW II, on behalf of its Russian masters.
The Party that today decries America’s nuclear build up (not the Russian, naturally) is the same party that applauded the most heinous war crime of WW II – the US’s atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It was the same Party and had the same mission. In all those twists and turns, the Party remained consistent to what American Communism was all about. And what this movement was all about historically is something that so many on the left cannot accept. Its function is revealed by the one unifying, consistent thread in the Party’s maze-like history: an inflexible and absolute loyalty to the Soviet Communist Party from the late twenties until Khrushchev’s shattering revelations and the Hungarian Revolution in 1956. A subservience that was total. The American Party responded to American life (and to the international scene, of course) only as it was permitted or ordered to by the Soviet Party. It operated in the monolithic image of its Russian role model and mentor and brooked no public disagreement or internal debate.
Even in the early twenties, when there were interesting factional disputes, everything was finally settled by Comintern appointed “American Commissions.” As far back as 1926 the legendary Communist leader, William Z. Foster, said it all: “If the Comintern finds itself criss-cross with my opinions, there is only one thing to do and that is to change my opinions to fit the policy of the Comintern.” In 1929, the internal totalitarian lid was shut tight when the Soviet Party ordered the expulsion of the leadership of one Party faction led by Jay Lovestone. Although Lovestone had the support of at least three-fourths of the Party rank-and-file just months before his excommunication, only a handful left the party with him, testifying to the degree to which – even at that early date – ideological principles and independence of mind were overwhelmed by the “persuasive” force of the Moscow behemoth. [5]
In all the tumultuous events, here and abroad, from that year, 1929, until 1956, I have not seen or heard of a single article, a mere paragraph, not even one lonely word in any American Communist publication that took exception to or even remotely and tentatively questioned a single position or reversal of position adopted by the Soviet Party, neither in its public nor internal press. Now there’s Romance for you! The mathematical beauty of the precise meeting of minds, a unity of purpose delayed only for the time it took to make a transatlantic phone call or deliver a telegram from Moscow to New York.
Was not this need and talent of Stalinism to crush individuality, to build around its papal centre an aura of infallibility, to hold real, potential or invented deviationists in line with the threat of eternal damnation, to substitute rituals and slogans for study’ and reflection, to wed idealism to obedience and sacrifice to the cause of oppression all reminiscent of the techniques and psychology of fascist parties? Even where physical violence is concerned there are appreciable similarities between the two. Particularly during the Romantic thirties the anti-Stalinist left had to contend with Communist Party goon squads as well as the violence of fascist Coughlinite thugs.
There are other measures for judging the American Communist movement – the effect it had on its own members and sympathizers, and its impact on American radicalism as a whole.
From virtually year one of the Party (or Parties – there were two at the beginning) its ideological gymnastics turned the organization into a revolving door:
The agrarian radical of the early twenties attracted by the Party’s initially sane and positive approach to Midwest progressivism ran as from a disturbed nest of hornets when Moscow ordered a servile party to turn on LaFollette and his labour allies.
The Western copper miner, the Mesabi Range ironworker, the Detroit lathe operator, the New York garment cutter – thousands of them – deserted the Party that shifted from dual unionism to the opposite tactic of “boring from within” and then went back to “revolutionary” union antics only to revert to participation in the official labour movement (soon, as strike-breakers) – somersaults that had nothing to do with American conditions or the needs and interests of the working class.
Party propagandists ordered to pen mash notes to Socialists and union leaders who they had denounced only yesterday as “social fascists” and “labour fakers” eventually took their literary skills elsewhere, often to write their memoirs.
Activists who deified Stalin as the anti-fascist saviour joined the apostasy when anti-Nazi cartoons in the Daily Worker gave way to realistic depictions of Russian emissaries hugging Nazi dignitaries.
Thousands of faithful, seemingly unshakable in their belief in His infinite wisdom – whatever He did was good for Russia and whatever was good for Russia was good for the American people – fled the temple when Stalin’s pallbearers soon revealed that what they buried was more Satanic than godly; defections that swelled to a mass exodus when the Russian Wehrmacht blitzkrieged the Hungarian nation.
The above, of course, is only a random sampling of the reasons for disillusionment, but it is sufficient to illustrate that the history of American Communism, far from being a Romance, was a tragedy in that it exhausted the energies of vast numbers in a cause that was unjust and destructive.
The contradiction between the personal hopes and beliefs of so many caring men and women and the reality of what they were doing could not withstand the historical evidence indefinitely and when the shock of recognition came it was often with stunning finality. Literally hundreds of thousands of militant workers, intellectuals and young people were permanently scarred, politically and sometimes psychologically, by their association with the Party. A few who left moved in a socialist direction. Others, well trained by the Party, became prominent union bureaucrats. (Joseph Curran, for example, head of the National Maritime Union, was rewarded with the Stalin Peace Prize, in recognition of his special talent for cracking the skulls of union dissidents. A few years later, he applied those skills to breaking the heads of Communist and anti-Communist oppositionists in the same NMU.) Others remained politically alive in-liberal causes. More than a few shifted to political conservatism. But the vast majority, given over to weariness or cynicism, were lost to organized radicalism forever.
In any meaningful historical sense, then, American Communism was a major obstacle to the emergence of a significant socialist movement in this country, and it was a disaster for the broad labour movement and even for its own members and sympathizers. It was not a movement of the American left but a totalitarian incubus that fed on labour and progressive organizations, functioning in the left and against it.
And what is true of American Communism, past and present, can be more emphatically asserted about societies where the Communist parties hold state power. They do have characteristics paralleling fascism. They are systems, call them what you will, which can be defined first of all by what they are not: neither socialist nor left in even the broadest sense of the term. For if words, concepts, traditions and history have any meaning, to be “left” is to acknowledge the right to organized political opposition – socialist, Communist, anarchist, liberal, conservative – something that is anathema to Communist parties in power.
To be “left” is to recognize and resist economic inequities; yet, in Communist countries, gross wage differentials between workers and bureaucrats rival those of capitalism.
To be “left” is to fight racial bigotry and sexual exploitation; yet anti-Semitism is semi-official policy in Communist countries, and women have less responsibility and power than they do in Western capitalist states. To be “left” is to fight for the right of working people to form independent class organizations known in the West as unions; such independent organizations are denied even the right to exist (let alone the right to strike) in Communist countries.
To be “left” is to demonstrate against the imperialist adventures of one’s own country; to demonstrate against anything advocated by the ruling Party in a Communist country is an act of heroism – to resist Russian imperialist occupation, domination or outright absorption of weaker states can mean imprisonment, psychiatric punishment, even death. And on it goes: freedom versus anti-freedom, culture versus anti-culture, self-determination versus imperialism – the left versus the Communist right.
Certainly, “the left” is not a narrowly defined category, but neither is it so all-embracing as to include hardened tendencies, organizations or ruling powers committed to a denial of fundamental human rights. Someone who identifies with Solidarity but fails to see the basic similarities between a Jaruzelski and an idealized Castro is different from the person with a firmer and wider commitment to totalitarian ideologies and regimes. What is important, though, and this is the responsibility above all of the thinking, intellectual left, is to show that simultaneous support for Solidarity and for Castro is inconsistent, that even minimal endorsement of the latter (who supports the Polish junta and martial law, denies Cuban workers independent unions and denies the populace as a whole the democratic rights for which Solidarity still carries on its heroic struggle) undercuts the cause of freedom in Poland. To view a Castro, a Pol Pot, the Kim Il Sung dynasty, Chinese despotism or any Communist tyranny in a favourable light is about as politically “left” a stance as Irving Kristol’s embrace of the Chilean and South Korean dictators.

For the socialist left, Stalinism must be fought as vigorously as capitalism. The anti-Communism of the left has nothing in common with the attitudes of a Reagan or Kirkpatrick. Their purpose is the defence of capitalism, relying on military postures, and their alternative is a Latin American dictator, a Turkish tyrant or an Iranian Shah. Their anti-Communism has no place for a working class Poland. For them, the Jaruzelskis are the lesser evil to the Walesas. Their anti-Communism provides a diet on which Communism thrives; if righting anti-Communists did not exist, the Communists would invent them.
The anti-Communism of the socialist left is inseparable from its anti-capitalism. It is not only antithetical to everything the Cold Warrior stands for, it is also potentially more effective because it stems from an affirmation of peace, freedom, democracy, national rights – not only when it is convenient or for the sake of appearance – but genuinely and universally: in Poland and El Salvador, Cuba and Chile, Russia and the US.

Notes
1. In the finest tradition of Stalinist amalgams, Cockburn recently (Village Voice, January 4, 1983) linked Norman Podhoretz and George Orwell], “As far as I’m concerned, Podhoretz and Orwell deserve each other.” What moves Cockburn to couple a Reaganite reactionary with the author of Homage to Catalonia who fought alongside the revolutionary POUM in Spain? The answer might be found in his From Brezhnev to Andropov – Yuri-Communism: What Is Its Future? (Village Voice, November 23, 1983). From it one might conclude that it is Cockburn and Andropov who deserve each other.
2. The terms “Communism” and “Stalinism” are used interchangeably in this article. Russia, China, Cuba, Vietnam, etc., are all Stalinist countries in that they share the basic socio-economic class character of Russian society as it emerged under Stalin’s rule. However, the term “Stalinist” is so closely associated in the public consciousness with the extraordinary violence of Stalin’s dictatorship that there is an understandable resistance to using” “Stalinism” as a generic descriptive term. As difficult as it is for a communist to surrender the term “Communist” to the Stalinist enemy, it is best to do so for the sake of clarity. My own descriptive preference is for the term, bureaucratic collectivism, which sums up the view that Russia is neither socialist nor communist nor capitalist but a society where control of the “collectivised” means of production is exercised by a new exploitative ruling class whose “executive committee” consists of the Communist Party’s top bureaucrats.
3. The overall “left,” which I believe has moved closer to an awareness of Communist realities compared to the attitudes of decades past, is neither homogeneous nor organizationally identifiable. Some are members of pacifist organizations, others are affiliated to the Democratic Socialists of America, but the left as a whole is manifest more in a “literary” sense, revolving around radical publications such as The Nation, In These Times, Radical America, Working Papers, Mother Jones, Monthly Review and hooks published by South End Press and Monthly Review Press.
While the readership of these journals and books represents the large majority of the political left, moving in an anti-Stalinist direction, I am also aware of the smaller counter-tendency represented by the proliferation of tiny sects that have moved into the camp of Stalinism and neo-Stalinism. My argument is not with them for they strike me as impervious to reason, frozen in a state of intellectual rigor mortis for which I know no cure. Between these sects and the broad left there is the school of “official Trotskyism,” which I place in quotation marks, for it, too, is part of the counter-tendency, in my opinion, adopting positions which have as little relationship to the anti-Stalinist spirit and politics of Trotsky as the chauvinism of Stalin in the twenties had to the revolutionary politics of Lenin. Can one imagine a Trotsky wooing a Castro today?
It is with the broader “literary” left that I am primarily concerned here.
4. While the editors of In These Times have taken a position that in its clear implication is a retreat from support of Solidarity, that is not necessarily reflective of the majority of its readers or all its editors. In its January 19-25 issue, there is a number of very effective criticisms of the editorial, including a sharp rebuttal by dissenting Associate Editor, John B. Judis.
5. In the dark days of McCarthyism this subservience of the American Communist Party to its Russian overlords was cleverly and demagogically used by the Cold War philosopher, Sidney Hook, as the basis for his argument that Communism here was more a “conspiracy” than a “heretical” political movement. It was a clever twist of words and concepts that provided an intellectual rationale for repression, such as firing Communist teachers. Subservience, however, is not conspiracy; and to he a dupe is not to be a spy. Individuals were not forced to join the Party, membership was voluntary; and it is a strange conspiracy where thousands of alleged conspirators defected regularly.
 

y Finger: Julius Jacobson - Standing Fast (Summer 2003)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Barry Finger
Standing Fast
Julius Jacobson
(1922-2003)
(Summer 2003)

First Published in New Politics, vol.9, no.3 (new series), whole No.35, Summer 2003.
BARRY FINGER is a member of the New Politics editorial board.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.

JULIUS JACOBSON – JULIE TO HIS MANY FRIENDS and comrades – founder and editor for more than forty years of New Politics died on March 8th of cancer. He is survived by his wife and New Politics co-editor Phyllis, his son Michael, daughter-in-law Lynn Chancer, grandson Alexander ... and by generations of socialists and radicals who were first acquainted with and then educated to the ideals and values of democratic, third camp revolutionary socialism by a lifetime of his essays, letters and polemical exchanges. It has been said that twenty-five years in the life of a small magazine is the equivalent of an individual attaining the age of one hundred. By that standard this journal, for which Julie travailed to his last breath – tirelessly writing, cajoling recalcitrant contributors, searching for scarce funds, grooming new voices, and endlessly, relentlessly editing – has truly earned its place as one of the venerable mainstays of American radicalism.
As a socialist committed to keeping radical politics vibrant and relevant, Julie would have repudiated any tribute as an unforgivable lapse into sentimentality. Julie was remarkable for revealing so little of himself in his writings – his political passions and moral steadfastness, his rollicking wit and historical sweep, the vigor and brilliance of mind, of course, permeate his pieces, but of Julie the man, the historical personality, there is precious little. He was, in this manner, a scion of the movement that fashioned him – wary of the cult-breeding virus that arises from the association of socialist analysis with the projection of any individual personality. There is, therefore, only one way to write about him in accordance with how he led his life: to appraise his writing as if he were still alive and could read that assessment with his own uniquely critical, skeptical and combatative sensibility in anticipation of the almost certain sharp rejoinder to follow. This, certainly, will come. Still, in tow to the enormity and immediacy of this loss, one must be forgiven from straying, at least in part from his wishes.
One of a vanishing breed of working class intellectuals, the product of the heroic socialist struggles of an earlier age, Julie began life as the son of Eastern European immigrants, his father a (largely unemployed) stevedore. The family was immersed in the left-leaning, secular culture of immigrant Jewry. His parents read the social democratic Forward for the “news” but, the Yiddish language Communist daily Freiheit for what they believed was the emes, the truth behind the news. As a child, perhaps as early as the tender age of 9, Julie was recruited by his older brother, Leon, to the Young Pioneers, the pre-teen youth group of the Communist Party. Julie always insisted that political radicalization at such an early age was not the aberration then that it seems today. But as a teenager, in defiance of Leon, Julie jumped ship from the Communist Youth League for the Young People’s Socialist League (4th International). Julie’s new affiliations caused a political breach in the family that was never wholly repaired, though interestingly Leon later contributed drawings which peppered the first several issues of New Politics.
These were the waning days of the unified American Trotskyist movement – days of street corner agitators, of battles between the anti-Semitic followers of William Pelley, and the largely Jewish Bronx chapter of the YPSL, days in which Trotskyist meetings were violently disrupted by Stalinists; a few short years that formed an epoch in which capitalism seemed so rotted out that world revolution, “permanent revolution,” by the oppressed masses seemed the only realistic hope for humanity. It was a time in which the thoroughly Stalinized Communist Party was aligning itself with big city machines and “progressive” capitalists, where social democracy could no longer find its bearings. It was a time, the last time, in which an entire historical movement, revolutionary Marxism, could still be seen as concentrated both politically and morally in the remarkable personality of one intellectually incorruptible individual. And it was this Trotskyism that produced a youth movement far better skilled in matters of theory, history and tactics than the youth of any other group of its day. This youth movement was almost half of the Trotskyist movement of the late 30s, with a robust and vibrant internal public life, most of whose members gravitated around Max Shachtman.
 
Intellectual Armor and Historical Change
BUT IT WAS ALSO A PERIOD in which history began to deviate from the classical Marxist trajectory on which Trotskyism was based. New forms of property and of class rule were beginning to take shape, forms which were not anticipated by the old formulas. Trotsky’s attempts at reconciling the emerging historical data with his revolutionary theory were becoming increasingly tenuous, forced and unconvincing. He began to betray a doctrinaire, mechanical bent to basic theory that stood in stark contradiction to the unblinkered fearlessness with which he interpreted unfolding events. Unable to follow his insights to their unorthodox conclusions, Trotsky who, better than any other leader, understood the dangers of Stalin’s abandonment of international revolution in favor of building “socialism in one country,” intellectually disarmed his followers, in the end, by his failure to re-conceive Stalinism as a new form of class society. To that remnant of the movement that did not flinch from the full implications of what was transpiring in Russia – the Shachtmanites, who were exiled into a separate organizational existence as the Workers Party – was where Julie was to find his political home and where he would remain until its dissolution in the 1950s. This is where Julie’s political and literary skills were shaped and his flinty and unyielding polemical edge honed. This is where his lifelong fixation with the broader intellectual, political and cultural corruptions of Stalinism, of bureaucratic collectivism as it became known, was incubated and nourished. This is where the inseparability of socialism and democracy, which lent the struggle against both Stalinism and capitalism a theoretically unassailable basis and political program, became the touchstone of Julie’s politics.
It was also where Julie first met Phyllis, both teenagers in the Yipsel. Julie’s territorial domain at the time was the Bronx and the Manhattan party headquarters. But Phyllis came from Brownsville in the hinterlands of Brooklyn. Ordinarily such romances were doomed to heartbreak. Rare indeed was the relationship that could withstand the demands of a three-hour roundtrip subway journey from one end of New York City to the other. Legion are the tales of movement’s loves lost, crushed by the limitations of mass transit. This was a singular exception, a veritable legend of its time, whose details are still enviously recounted by aged veterans of the Trotskyist and socialist movements. In time this teenage romance was to blossom into a full political and intellectual partnership, a rounded friendship of shared passions – not only of politics, but of art and music, of travel and antiques, of fine literature and epicurean delights; of passions pursued inconspicuously on the shoestring budget of the skilled machinist Julie was to become. To be sure, there were plenty of lean years. But as a life together that of the Jacobsons remains a standing rebuke to those who would extol the supposed socialist virtues of humorless gray existence consumed by Jimmy Higgins drudgery and wanton self-deprivation much the way a contemporary sensibility is repulsed by the pretence that monkish austerity brings the members of a religious order closer to god. Julie never worshipped at any shrine, and certainly not that of working class squalor. He had nothing to prove.
When the country entered the war, the Workers Party industrialized, unionizing its cadres to position the movement for an anticipated upsurge in militancy following the war. Julie, although a skilled industrial worker at General Electric, was nevertheless drafted. He served at the tail end of the Battle of the Bulge, where he narrowly escaped death after a mortar shell pierced the boxcar he was traveling to the front in, killing half of the GIs inside. But even more riveting than this brush with death was another incident whose effects he would never shake off. While traveling to the front, Julie witnessed a large contingent of white soldiers firing as if in sport on an encampment of black American soldiers. The officers in charge displayed no interest, more accurately found it amusing, that their racist troops were engaged in target practice against their own countrymen. This episode of military lynching flagrantly contradicted the Popular Front nonsense that the Second World War was a conscious fight against fascism. That WWII was the “good war” was a proposition that Julie would never theoretically or practically entertain. It transformed Julie’s anti-racist commitments from the political realm to the visceral.
Julie also took part in the liberation of Paris in 1944. He made contact with French and expatriate Greek Trotskyists, most memorably one who went by the party name of Pablo, and managed to smuggle supplies of clothing, blankets, food and socialist literature to these beleaguered comrades. Shachtman sent word to Julie to be wary of Pablo, whom Shachtman believed to be seriously unmoored as evidenced not least by Pablo’s fanciful if not fantastical perspective at the time that the American troops were at the precipice of revolt. Years later – after subsequent rifts in the Fourth International, which had become, not least under the pernicious influence of Pablo, little more than a leftwing of Stalinism as far as the Workers Party was concerned – Pablo proved incapable of maintaining even the pretense of civility with Julie, despite their once warm wartime friendship.
Upon discharge, the Party maintained its industrial perspective. But Julie disagreed with this, objecting that the meager and thinning resources of the Party were inadequate to offer young workers a meaningful industrial alternative. Where Julie did see organizational prospects was not in the high schools or among “proletarian youth” but on campus, where returning GIs benefited from unprecedented educational opportunities. Julie abandoned his job as a machinist for General Electric and plunged himself into college organizing for the Socialist Youth League, which later stripped the SP’s youth group from its parent organization to form the Young Socialist League, and made a major contribution to the burgeoning of a campus Third Camp. The SYL had good-sized units in New York, Chicago and Berkeley and had groups in dozens of other cities and universities including Oberlin, Detroit, Los Angeles and Denver. It was in those years that Julie wrote the Youth Corner column for Labor Action and founded and edited the campus magazine Anvil that later merged with Student Partisan in 1950. Formally formed by the New York Student Federation Against War, its political tendency was generally that of the Independent Socialist League, which the Workers Party had now become, diversified somewhat by association with pacifist clubs and unaffiliated students sympathetic to the ISL’s anti-war and militant viewpoint. This remarkable journal, with a circulation of over 4,000, whose pieces were never unfortunately collected for reprint, contained essays by the likes of Richard Wright, Lewis Coser, Irving Howe, Hal Draper, Michael Harrington, Paul Goodman, Harold Rosenberg, George Rawick, C. Wright Mills, Isaac Rosenfeld, Harvey Swados and Dan Wakefield. It helped introduce an American audience to the writings of Simone de Beauvoir.
Julie contributed two pieces in particular that were symptomatic of later enduring themes. Do Communists have the Right to Teach? was an editorial in the inaugural issue. It was an attack on Sidney Hook, who, by that time, had become a sophisticated apologist for McCarthyism. Julie’s rebuttal remains a ringing and spirited endorsement of free speech and civil liberties noteworthy not only for the archivists – contrasting the consistent stand of independent socialists with that of the wavering liberal anti-Communist left – but for its eerie contemporary relevance. Julie’s implacable defense of civil liberties was extended and developed in forthcoming articles, written under his pen name Julius Falk (Falk being his mother’s maiden name), in the ISL’s journal, The New International. These concerns, that “the democratic principles of the Bill of Rights are often ground to dust in the social mechanism of bourgeois democracy,” were continuously revisited in the course of his political and literary career. In the penultimate article that Julie penned for the Summer 2002 issue of New Politics, Julie warned that unlike the 1950s witch hunts, that were made short shrift of by the Army and Eisenhower, the current “War on Democracy is recognizably a war by the ruling class and its State.”
 
War, Lesser Evilism, and the Russia Question
ANOTHER THREAD OF ENDURING relevance was laid out in War, Realism and the Lesser Evil. It remains to this day one of the most concise and concentrated statements of Third Camp foreign policy analysis, whose relevance outlives the particular context in which it arose. However, it too was set against a raw political backdrop that made liberalism suspect and radicalism subversive. In it Julie tackled openly and imaginatively the knotty maze-like logic of “lesser evilism” that seduced an army of retreating leftists into believing that they could lend critical support to the American Establishment while remaining in the ultimate service of socialism. This is a theme that continued and could not but continue to find resonance in his numerous subsequent anti-war polemics. But it is in Julie’s elegant parting thoughts that can be seen the animating impulse of a lifetime of socialist activism. It is a piercingly simple and yet more profound statement than can be found in the most pretentious of treatises on dialectical methodology, over-determination and universal schemata often associated with Marxism and a telling rebuke to the “end of (socialist) ideology” theories of then and now. “Nevertheless,” Julie concluded, “guarantees can not be given to those who ask ‘How do I know the Third Camp will succeed?’ We do know that neither capitalism nor Stalinism can succeed in solving a single basic social problem. We do know that the potential for socialism exists. More that that we do not need to know for making a political, realistic and moral choice.”
During the 1950s Julie turned over the stewardship of Anvil and Student Partisan to others to become editor of The New International. By the middle 50s, Shachtman was shifting rapidly to the right purportedly in pursuit of new opportunities for movement building. The Communist Party was in disarray, traumatized by Khrushchev’s revelations at the XXth party congress and the Hungarian revolt, and rent by an ensuing faction fight that could not be resolved within the framework of a unified organization. It was caught, as the ISL stated, between the Russian ruling class and the American working class. This raised anew the question of a broader socialist movement predicated on finding common ground for regroupment and unity with that wing of the CP that was beginning to find its own path towards recognizing the centrality of democracy for socialism. The search on the part of Shachtman and the majority for a minimum platform, understandable in the abstract as being inconsistent with the full position of the ISL, signified in practice an opening to the right. That is, the Shachtmanites became ever more unwilling to advocate – in a non-disruptive manner – for revolutionary politics and Third Camp socialism as they folded up shop inside the near moribund Socialist Party.
Julie, who had always maintained close personal relations with Shachtman, identified and exposed the regressive trends and interpretations in the latter’s writings that represented a rupture with the ISL’s historic past and which invited intellectual disorientation to envelope the movement’s remnants. Leninism, The Comintern and Putschism was Julie’s answer to Shachtman’s final article in the fall 1957 issue of the New International entitled American Communism, or a Reexamination of the Past. It unfortunately had to be privately printed and circulated, having been submitted for a scheduled issue that was never to appear. Painful as this was to Julie, it became increasingly apparent that Shachtman was beginning to manipulate the lesser evil comparison of democratic capitalism with Stalinism as a rationalization for abandoning socialist politics. That is, Julie would concede that democratic capitalism was a “lesser evil,” but insisted, in the WP-ISL tradition, that supporting Western capitalism against Stalinism could only perpetuate a Cold War symbiosis that undermined democracy globally. For a brief moment following the absorption of the ISL into the Socialist Party, it seemed that the latter might enjoy a revival, anticipating new support from the fallout from the CP and the merger of the AFL and CIO. But the old movement leadership, once inside the SP, began to move to the right and with few exceptions to the extreme right. They were shortly to plunge the organization into a series of disastrous and debilitating factional fights in their newfound zeal to abandon independent political action for a political realignment of the Democratic Party.
 
Developing a Third Camp Framework
STILL THIS INTERREGNUM was an intellectually fecund period for Julie. He produced a groundbreaking trilogy of articles, actually the material for a small volume, on The Origins of the Communist Movement in the US that appeared in successive issues of The New International during 1955 and 1956. And he extended his researches contributing as an associate author to the Howe and Coser volume on The American Communist Party in 1957, one of a handful of truly seminal treatments of this subject and the only one to refract the topic through the critical lens of Third Camp socialism.
Julie never entered the SP after the dissolution of the ISL, although Phyllis for a period was its Manhattan organizer. Yet it was quite clear to the Jacobsons that the newly regrouped SP would not be the antidote to the frailty of organized socialism in the US. The promise of radical renewal was to be found elsewhere, in the emancipation struggles of Southern blacks, in the emergence of a militant civil rights and civil libertarian consciousness in the North and in the small, spontaneous outbursts of peace and anti-war sentiment on campus all of which portended the birth of a new left. The immediate problem as they saw it was “not how to solve all the problems of socialist politics, theory and organization but rather ... how to establish a sphere in which these problems could be seriously discussed.” They proposed a new magazine which would grapple with the issues pioneered within the independent, Third Camp framework – the impact of totalitarianism on the concept of socialism, the post-Stalin changes in Russia, the meaning of socialist democracy and the dangers of bureaucratization, the relevance of socialist anti-militarism in a world living in the shadow of the bomb, the role of the modern working class, and the ubiquitous impact of racism on American society. But it would also be a journal in which the “sole criterion of editorial selection [would] be neither conformity nor heterogeneity, but rather the ability of articles to stimulate thought and debate, or to contribute in some way to thinking out acute questions of politics and theory. It can be taken as a principle that an article which stirs one to refute it is an article eminently worth printing – whether an editorial board or any editor agrees with it or not – far more than an article of impeccable sentiments which stirs no thought at all.” New Politics would be a journal to engage the left, not to hector or lecture to it from on high; a journal that would assist the left in resurrecting itself.
It was an idea met with the enthusiastic reception of leading American socialists, writers, university professors and trade unionists. Included among its original editors and sponsors were Hal Draper and Herbert Hill – who more than any aside from the Jacobsons themselves were to shape the journal – as well as such notables as Harvey Swados, James Baldwin, Dan Wakefield, Sid Lens, A.J. Muste, Norman Thomas, Herbert Gold, Bert Cochran, Patrick Gorman, Bayard Rustin and Michael Harrington. It was an illustrious list to be sure, but a list also all too typical for its time with its notable and jarring lack of women sponsors and editorial members. Not even Phyllis was recognized as editor until the Summer 1968 issue. Although its endorsers and contributors ranged from the reformist to the revolutionary, the journal clearly intended to stake out for itself an independent democratic Marxist presence in the intellectual life of the left. In this it distinguished itself from the other significant journals of the left at the time: Studies on the Left, with, what Julie felt, was a “clear enough pro-Eastern bias,” the social democratic Dissent and the anarchist-pacifist monthly Liberation.
The imprimatur of the Third Camp was immediately impressed on the journal by Julie himself in such remarkable essays as American Socialism and Thermonuclear War, The Limits of Russian Reform and Isaac Deutscher: The Anatomy of an Apologist. Some of these were later gathered, along with pieces of a similar Third Camp orientation by other New Politics contributors, in a volume edited by Julie, Soviet Communism and the Socialist Vision (1972). These remain signal contributions that can be reread profitably today as luminescent roadmaps of an independent socialist politics; one which eschews any accommodation with authoritarianism or “democratic capitalism” of that sort that all too often litters and neutralizes socialist politics. He insisted that the relevance of socialism is crucially and inseparably linked to a policy of peace and freedom. “Peaceful solutions can be offered short of freedom but they can not be socialist solutions (nor do I believe that they can assure peace) because socialism is freedom and a policy that denies freedom, denies socialism.” Put otherwise, these non-socialist “solutions” cannot really bring peace because they leave in place class systems with an inherent drive toward war.
With his extended discussion of Deutscher, Julie grappled with a strain of radicalism that was to make deep inroads into the more sophisticated interstices of the New Left and beyond. “Given his [Deutscher’s] views of socialism, which eliminate democracy as an integral part of socialism and given his conviction that only the inevitably (‘predetermined’) evolved system of Stalinism could bring this method about, there is no ground for repudiating Stalin’s methods other than an irrelevant squeamishness. Perhaps it was not necessary to slander the old Bolsheviks with the charge of being agents of foreign imperialism and on Hitler’s payroll, but whatever reasons might be advanced, from Deutscher’s point of view and analysis, if logic prevails, the old Bolsheviks had to be removed one way or another, since it can easily be established that their very existence was a serious menace to the consolidation of Stalinism politically and therefore an impediment to its historic ’socialist’ mission of raising Russia from the wooden plow to the tractor.” Deutscher created the “theoretical justification for terror whose practical significance” is extended, in echoes that reverberate even today, to justify the “use of terror and the liquidation of democracy and democrats” not least of all in Cuba, as it has in China and Vietnam.
Imbued by the animating impulse of socialism from below, Julie became an extraordinarily keen observer and consistently sympathetic ally both of the militant wing of the civil rights movement and of the rising tide of campus radicalism in the ’60s. His Defense of the Young, Coalitionism: From Protest to Politicking and the introduction to The Negro and the American Labor Movement (1968), which Julie edited, brought into sharpest relief the contrasting politics of the third camp with that of his old comrades. These he now condemned as having debased the ideals of socialism by shilling for the Democrats and becoming “paid political agents of the reactionary Meany leadership of the AFL-CIO” or who, in their more radical “democratic left” wing, having “grown tired, disillusioned and frustrated over the failure of independent socialist politics ... moved in an increasingly rightward direction, discovering en route all sorts of wondrous things in liberal (and not so liberal) institutions and values.” He indicted them for setting upon themselves the task of “impeding and reversing the radicalization of the young” and of “reducing the Negro-labor alliance to a fetishism.”
With respect to the latter, Julie was particularly merciless and impatient. “What,” he asked in the 1960s, “is either extreme or unfair in the demand that Negro workers who have so long been oppressed be partially compensated for the crimes against them (including crimes by racist unions which deprived them of a livelihood) by giving them preferential consideration in hiring practices?” The point can easily be extended to the demand for reparations today. The larger issue is that the blight of racism and inequality are not merely historic outrages, but ongoing offenses that demand pervasive institutional and social redress and compensation. Affirmative action was, in Julie’s estimation, a “small democratic step in the direction of social justice.” Those among the “Democratic Left” who so relentlessly insisted on a black-labor alliance never once outlined what the labor component of that alliance should look like. Could a militant civil rights movement be expected to accommodate itself to a conservative and bureaucratic trade union bureaucracy? And if so, at what cost? Julie warned that those who perpetually counsel the need for such an alliance, and who placed no preconditions that the trade union movement acknowledge and cleanse itself of racism, could no longer claim to be primarily concerned with advancing the cause of social reform. They had, in word and in deed, become brokers for the establishment within the civil rights movement, attempting to effect a non-disruptive framework, a pact of institutional quiescence, as a pre-condition for Democratic Party advancement. As for what cost, Julie was specific – “the abandonment of political independence and socialist opposition.”
Certainly, one of the most agonizing essays Julie was called upon to write was The Two Deaths of Max Shachtman in the winter 1973 issue. Shachtman had earned the admiration of a generation of radicals of previous decades by his political courage in engaging and opposing and, in Julie’s estimation – besting Trotsky, whom he “loved, respected and feared” and for his intellectual and political contributions to the understanding of Stalinism. In the 40s and early 50s, Max had had unusually warm – unusual for the difficult and ungenerous Shachtman, that is – relations with Julie and Phyllis. Among the most stunning and dramatic photographs of the Jacobsons in their young adulthood were some taken by Shachtman, who was not an infrequent diner at the Jacobson household. Yet with admitted trepidation, Julie passed the pronouncement that Max, the unheralded author and eminence grise of coalition politics and of the “realignment strategy” died in the most factual sense a renegade, “a man who reneged on his earlier, most fundamental commitment to social justice...” “Had he [Shachtman] been able to make contact with the young, who were fresh and receptive to new ideas, might he not have been able to guide some into the camp of revolutionary socialism?” “But why,” Julie characteristically asked, “should any of these young people have cocked an attentive ear to Shachtman’s revelations about Stalinism when they were accompanied by apologies for the American bombing of Vietnam and plaudits for some of the most reactionary elements in the trade unions and the Democratic Party?” In this essay, Julie put to rest for a decade any lingering need to further engage the self-entitled “Democratic Left,” including most of the comrades of his youth who had by then orbited themselves politically and morally miles away from anything that could reasonably be said to be socialist.
A few years later, Julie had occasion to analyze the neo-Stalinist mist that was fast enveloping the antiwar movement. In it he found the ultimate tragedy of the Shachtmanite legacy, reduced by his epigones to simple anti-communism, to be clear. “If the ideological force of Stalinism, in the left wing world is to be exposed and eliminated it can only be done by those who continue in a truly radical, socialist tradition; never by those who compromise with imperialism.” This theme foreshadowed Julie’s final project that began twenty years later, “The Soviet Union is Dead: The ‘Russian Question’ Remains.”
By the end of the 1970s, the Jacobsons had quite literally exhausted themselves. Putting out a quarterly journal on a shoestring and editing the journal as a two-person operation had occupied nearly every non-working minute of their lives. Julie’s business, he had operated a small machine shop – General Machines (one of whose workers invariably answered the phone by announcing, “General Machines, private parts here”) – was taken over by Bell and Howell. The shop, which had barely paid its bills, in part by having functioned as subsidized employment for numerous movement personalities over the years, was – at Julie’s insistence – fully unionized. Its remaining workers were absorbed as a pre-condition by their new employer with full seniority rights and appropriate union wage scales and benefits, a somewhat unusual procedure in such takeovers. With this transition, the first run of New Politics also came to a close, brought to that by a combination of editorial fatigue with the social isolation and subsequent disappearance of the New Left at the conclusion of the Vietnam War.
 
Restating Political Principles
IN THE INTERIM, the Jacobsons edited a volume entitled Socialist Perspectives (1983), which frankly hoped to contribute to a renewal of interest in socialist theory and ideology buoyed by the growing anti-nuclear, feminist and ecological movements during the Reagan years. It prefigured by some three years the forces that again led to the revival of the journal in 1986. When the journal was resuscitated, Julie made it explicitly clear from the outset that this was to be a journal of Third Camp socialism. Julie’s masterful and detailed analysis of the manifold meaning and implications of such politics was fleshed out in greater detail than ever before and Socialism and the Third Camp remains, along with Hal Draper’s The Two Souls of Socialism,” a classic exposition on the subject. He took on the specters that haunted such politics, the apparitions of past Third Campers, who had – so to speak – given up the ghost by their acquisition of a superior political “realism.” Where is the Third Camp to be found? In what social forces does it adhere? Does it have a concrete history? What of the Third Camp and bourgeois democracy? And what of it and lesser evilism? One by one he painstakingly attempted to dissolve the political gunk that had accumulated in opposition to these animating political ideals assembled over a lifetime of revolutionary experience. His conclusion bears restating.
For Third Camp socialists, political and social democracy and a belief in the ability and necessity of working people to govern their own lives are at the core of our socialism; we cannot recognize socialism in any other guise. This is not to suggest that Third Camp socialism is a sectarian and rigid dogma which provides a ’correct line’ on all political questions. The concept is broad enough to embrace a rich variety of views, strategies and programs. But what is imperative is the acceptance of democracy as a common denominator of socialism if we are to overcome the ’crisis of socialism’ over which we have agonized for so many decades. For the crisis is also in socialism, a crisis of self-definition of who we are and what we want. And since we are convinced that it is the responsibility of socialists to wave the banner of peace, freedom and democracy with one hand, then it follows that the other must be raised in a clenched fist as both affirmation of socialism and in defiance of all the little people in high places who control our lives; against those societies which oppress humanity and threaten its existence.
Some of Julie’s finest writings during the ensuing years dealt, necessarily and at length, with American imperialism. The winter 1991 issue, in which Julie analyzed the first Gulf War crisis, actually sold its complete press run. What he observed a decade ago about American foreign policy still rings, if anything, with added truth and a resilient poignancy after the recent carnage. “... (T)o be effective, and deserving of popular support, anti-war activists must make it unambiguously clear that resistance to an unjust war does not mean any support for the Iraqi dictatorship ...” “All of us active in the movement against war in the Gulf should make our own linkage between the struggle for peace and the struggle for democracy in the Middle East. We should urge the adoption of a foreign policy which encourages the development of democratic movements and democratic societies in a region now dominated by feudal monarchs, religious fundamentalists and dictators in the Arab world, and by racists and hardline hawks in Israel.”
Julie’s final project, which he considered the culmination of a lifetime of theoretical reflection rooted in political engagement, was to cast a cleansing light over the Stalinist shadow which had so infected and discredited socialism; to complete, as it were, the work of the Workers Party-Independent Socialist League. Of this project, three-fourths were brought to print: the introductory essay on the enduring relevance of the Russian question, a discussion of the USSR and the nature of the Second World War, and one on Stalinism and the demise of American Socialism. It was to culminate in a larger theoretical section on the Bolsheviks, Communist totalitarianism and Marxism that, sadly, was never completed. Still he left a tantalizing prospect of what was to have come. “What is involved is nothing less than the question of self-definition, of fundamental concepts of right and wrong, of what kind of movement for emancipation must be built and, last but by no means least, what vision we have of an emancipated society.”
 
Ideals and Commitments
IN THE LAST THREE YEARS, Phyllis was stricken with a series of debilitating strokes that left her severely compromised and in need of round-the-clock attention. Julie, unable to care for her himself, shifted his office to Phyllis’s nursing home room. There he carried out the day-to-day business of New Politics. That is where he did his note taking, his writing, his editing. That is where he contacted essayists to discuss their submissions. That is where he took his lunch and, many days, where he dined in the evening. He was Phyllis’ untiring nursing home advocate, overseeing her treatment and summoning specialists when he felt the home to be negligent. He shared his articles with her and took delight in showing her each ensuing issue of the journal. Except for his stint in the army, Julie never parted a day from Phyllis, and the last years were no exception. Julie refused trips to museums and could not bear to indulge himself even to take in a movie, for fear that his absence would frighten, alarm or disorient Phyllis. He abandoned his weekend cottage and his beloved fishing trips. On their anniversaries and on their birthdays, friends gathered with Julie in Phyllis’s room. When in his last few months he underwent chemotherapy, he would end his day, wan and ill, with a visit to Phyllis, fearing only that his ravaged appearance might shock her.
Julie spent his last months as he had his entire adult life – with enormous reserves of dignity, not a hint of self-pity and with his sense of humor and irony fully intact. He completed the final draft of his article just days before he died. For those who knew Julie, it was striking that only in the last few months were we aware of his having aged. Striking because it reminded us how indestructible Julie appeared, one of our generation out of time. If for us, the editorial board of New Politics, Julie seemed never to really grow old, there is an explanation, even if the truth sometimes lurks in clichés. Perhaps it is impossible to truly grow old, as Ignazio Silone suggested, when one remains as fully and truly faithful to the ideals and commitments of one’s youth as did our comrade.
 

s Jacobson: Isaac Deutscher - The Anatomy of an Apologist (November 1965)



Julius Jacobson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Julius Jacobson
Isaac Deutscher: The Anatomy of an Apologist
(November 1965)

First Published: November 1965.
Transcription, Editing, & HTML markup: Tom Unterrainer and D. Walters in 2009 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
Public Domain: This work is in the Public Domain under the Creative Commons Common Deed. You can freely copy, distribute and display this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. Please credit the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line as your source, include the url to this work, and note any of the transcribers, editors & proofreaders above.

Issac Deutscher published his biography of Stalin 16 years ago. Since then he has produced a small book on Russian trade unions, several collections of essays and lectures, a three-volume biography of Trotsky and scores of newspaper and magazine articles analyzing contemporary developments in the Communist world. Not only is Deutscher a scholarly biographer and active political journalist, he also has had experience in the Polish Communist and Trotskyist movements. This combination of qualifications has helped him gain a position of special eminence in the expanding world of Kremlinology.
Deutscher’s image of himself, skillfully conveyed in his writing, is that of the objective historian concerned with the larger movements of social forces, the broad sweep of events. He shows an edge of disdain for “political philosophers and moralists” who venture judgements (other than his own), who see only the horror of Stalinism at the expense of a larger historical perspective. (When asked recently whom he blames for the deterioration of Russo-Chinese relations, Deutscher answered: “I don’t blame either of them – I am an outsider, I simply analyze a process without apportioning blame or praise.”)
It is, perhaps, this affected detachment that has enabled Deutscher to elude any precise political identification. Many anti-Communist radicals take it for granted that he shares their antitotalitarian passions – and not without apparent cause. After all, did he not author a sympathetic biography of Trotsky? And didn’t his earlier political study of Stalin expose the Vozhd’s falsifications of history and the monstrosities known as the Moscow Trials? Because of all this, expressed in a brilliant literary style laden with Western culture, Deutscher was widely seen as a Marxist historian in the authentic socialist, anti-authoritarian tradition.
This view is belied by a more thorough reading of his work.
It is Deutscher’s position that the special circumstances surrounding the Russian Revolution – cultural and economic primitiveness inherited from Czarism, exhaustion after seven years of war and civil war, defeat of the revolution in the West – necessitated the suppression of proletarian democracy in order to safeguard the basic social conquests of the revolution. This, for Deutscher, was the positive function of Stalinism, a function it fulfilled with excessive, historically superfluous brutality.
Moreover, Stalinism, according to Deutscher, did not arise solely because of the revolution’s adverse context. There is also operative, in his opinion, a law of revolution which dictates that the heroic period following all great revolutions must succumb to moral and physical fatigue. It then becomes the responsibility of a small elite to establish its dictatorial rule over the masses in order to smash the old order and consolidate the revolution, thereby permitting the eventual realization of the revolution’s long-term social objectives.
Stalinist terror, then, for all its excesses, preserved the basic conquests of October 1917, just as Cromwell’s dictatorship over the nation consolidated the social rule of the British bourgeoisie. (The analogy is Deutscher’s.) This historical rationalization for Stalinism is not confined to Russia. There is also the parallel apologia for the Stalinist conquest of Eastern Europe. Where Napoleon brought the revolution to much of Europe on the points of French bayonets, so did Stalin bring the promise of socialism to other lands – “in the turrets of Russian tanks,” as Deutscher puts it.
It becomes clear enough that the democracy Deutscher foresees has little to do with political freedom. What he proposes has the character of a benevolent dictatorship. This is not merely a critic’s deduction. For, as if mulling over the consequences of his restrictive reading of democracy, Deutscher, later in this interview, notes of his promised democratic socialist Russia: “It may well be that what is coming won’t take the form of a multi-party system.“
This discussion will document the charge that Deutscher’s well-deserved reputation as a talented writer stands in marked contrast to his unwarranted reputation as an insightful analyst of specific events and changes in the Communist world. Here his performance is replete with distortions, a biased selection of material, quotation marks around dialogue he never heard, unfulfilled predictions, statements which contradict the facts and sometimes each other.
 
TO THE DEFENSE – IN TIMES OF CRISIS
In the United States we have liberals who extol academic freedom at the same time as they would deny Communists their right to teach. This is the mark of the Cold War “critic” whose liberalism collapses when confronted by threats to his basic social allegiances. It is also the mark of Isaac Deutscher. Often indignant over social injustice in Russia, he rushes to the defense of the “autocratic socialist” system whenever its viability is threatened. This happened during the June 1953 uprising of the Berlin workers; during the Hungarian Revolution and in the Polish upheavals of 1956–1957.
The Berlin barricades had hardly been overrun by Russian tanks on Stalinallee when Deutscher rushed into print with an article in the English paper, The News Chronicle (July 13, 1953), repudiating the action of the Berlin workers:
“The Germans who on June 16-17 descended on the streets, assailed the People’s Police and met Russian tanks with a hail of stones, may have had their genuine and long suppressed grievances which demanded an outlet. Nevertheless, their action had unfortunate consequences in Moscow. It compromised the men who stood for reform and conciliation. It gave fresh vigor to the die-hards of Stalinism and other irreconcilables ...”
Thus, the German workers not only committed a disservice to themselves, they compromised the movement for reform throughout the Communist world. They should have been more patient and trusted Deutscher’s assurances that there were men in Moscow now who were prepared to right justifiable grievances. Reform would come – from above and all in good time.
Deutscher describes the socialism he sees in Russia and East Europe as “autocratic” socialism (as contradictory a phrase as “totalitarian freedom”). However, the terror, by “raising Russia from the plough to the tractor,” planted and nourished the seeds of its own destruction, since terror becomes an obstacle to the continuing economic growth of an industrialized nation. The institutions of terror are dismantled and liberalization effectuated, though slowly and somewhat unevenly. Thus, democracy will come to Russia primarily from above, with the Party of socialist terror transformed into an instrument of socialist democratization. In an essay written in 1957 for his Russia In Transition, Deutscher wrote that in the immediate post-Stalin period political relaxation “could come only through reform from above” and that “reform from above could be the work of Stalinists only.” By 1957, Deutscher still feared that “a spontaneous mass movement” for freedom might only “become a factor of social disruption and chaos.” Mass pressure on the Kremlin could acquire “a very stormy momentum” not in accord with Deutscher’s delicate historical timetable, and the whole process of democratization reversed. History cannot be rushed. (It puts one in mind of those who urge gradualism and moderation in the American South. There, too, we are told that history cannot be rushed by impatient Negroes who want their Freedom Now.)
However, the “democracy” that Deutscher sees as the glorious culmination of reforms from above in Russia is somewhat lacking in democratic content. In a recent, remarkable interview appearing in The Review (Vol. V No. 3, 1963) published by the Imre Nagy Institute, some details of his vision of a democratic, socialist Russia are revealed:
“To speak about tolerating Socialdemocracy in Russia is a completely unreal question. In abstracto, I would say that after nearly fifty years, the Russian Revolution should be able to tolerate any party. But after nearly fifty years, a Social Democratic party can hardly exist in Russia. It is just as if you wanted to resurrect in the England of today the parties that existed before the Wars of the Roses! Social democracy makes sense only within the capitalist order, because the “ideological” difference between the Social democrats and the Communists is or was whether capitalism can be overthrown only by revolution, or whether it can be transformed peacefully into socialism. If what you [the interviewer] have in mind is freedom of debate, freedom of criticism, freedom of expression, freedom of association, well, I think this is what Communism must accept, will accept, and is driven to accept! ... I believe that Russia is ripe, or nearly ripe even for a multi-party system. By this I do not mean anything like a reproduction of the multi-party systems of the bourgeois West, but a political regime, in which there would be room for various trends and various programmes all based on the foundations of the revolution ...”
There is no room in Russia for bourgeois parties (since, obviously, they could not be “based on the foundations of the revolution” according to Deutscher in an interview from The Review, Vol.V, No.3, 1963), no room for a Russian equivalent of the British Labor Party or other social democratic parties, no room for “anything like” the multi-party system of the bourgeois West, and if, as is clearly implied, there is room only for various “trends ” based on his vague “foundations of the revolution,” what remains of his envisioned freedom of debate and criticism that is politically meaningful? Indeed, one of the “foundations of the [socialist] revolution” is precisely the right of opposition parties to exist and legally challenge the leading position of the party in power.
Deutscher overlooked a number of facts. The Berlin revolt, spearheaded by the building trades workers, began as a protest against a decree on May 10, 1953, increasing their production norms by 10%. This new oppressive order was put into effect several months after Stalin’s death, at a time when Deutscher assured readers of his Russia: What Next? (1953) that the new day of liberalization from above was already under way in the Communist world.
It is also important to note that on July 29, the intensified production quota was cut down and on July 31, two days after Beria’s fall (whose execution, according to Deutscher, was symptomatic of a new Stalinist resurgence brought on by the Berlin revolt), German reparations were sharply reduced. These concessions won by the German workers could hardly have been gained so readily had they passively awaited the benefits of Deutscher’s promised liberalization from above.
Partly to justify his opposition to the Berlin workers, Deutscher has written articles on Germany which, despite his talents, are simply bizarre. In 1962 (Observer, January 28, 1962), he wrote that Malenkov and Beria “advocated a unilateral Russian withdrawal” even if the Americans would not pull out of West Germany! Moreover, Malenkov and Beria “took it for granted that this (Russian withdrawal from East Germany) would mean the end of Communist rule in East Germany ...”
Deutscher’s fantasy includes “the partly hypothetical interpretation” that after Khrushchev was in power, and the rift with China already of several years duration, Khrushchev was “seeking to provoke Ulbricht into switching his allegiance” from Moscow to Peking which would permit Khrushchev to carry out “a withdrawal to the Oder and Neisse with relatively little loss of face.” [1]
There is method to Deutscher’s fantasy. He is not only minimizing the force of Russian imperialism, but is trying to bolster his thesis that it is self-defeating for those under the Russian yoke to defy the Kremlin. That is why he wrote, nine years after the Berlin events, that “the Berlin rising of June 16-17 saved Ulbricht.” It is now 12 years since the uprising and Ulbricht is still there although the German workers have made no break for freedom since 1953, not even during the Hungarian Revolution. How long must they be penalized for having flouted Deutscher’s dictum that they can be delivered from oppression only by their oppressors?
In October 1956 – the month of the Hungarian Revolution – an article by Isaac Deutscher described Kremlin-satellite relations as follows:
The Soviet worker [!] has begun to “finance” in all earnestness the industrialization of the underdeveloped communist countries; and he “finances” it out of the resources which might otherwise have been used to raise his own standard of living.... Here indeed two aspects of de-Stalinization – Russian domestic reform and reform in Russia’s relationship with the entire Soviet bloc – can be seen in actual conflict with each other. [Partisan Review, Fall 1956]
These euphoric lines about Russian benevolence (and sacrifices by Russian workers, no less) were written by Deutscher just before the Hungarian Revolution. They were in keeping with his glamorized view of Stalinist conquest of Hungary and Poland expressed earlier in Stalin: A Political Biography: “In Poland and Hungary the Communist-inspired land reform fulfilled, perhaps imperfectly, a dream of many generations of peasants and intellectuals” (p. 535). Now compare the quotation from Partisan Review (and from Stalin) with the following, written when the smoke of revolution was still smoldering in Budapest and the countryside.
“Yet the Poles and Hungarians struggled for political freedoms as well as for national emancipation, and they rose against the Stalinist police state through which Russia had dominated them. Last but not least, they revolted against an economic policy that had sacrificed their consumer interests to industrialization and armaments and had plunged them, into intolerable misery” (All emphases in quotations in this chapter have been added unless otherwise noted).
One could have bought, on the same day and from the same newsstand, both the Fall 1956 issue of Partisan Review and the November 15, 1956, issue of The Reporter. In the former he would have read with relief, or amusement, Deutscher’s statement that the Russian “workers” and a benevolent Kremlin were sacrificing themselves for the sake of raising the living standards in underdeveloped Communist nations.
Then the reader could have opened the pages of The Reporter and there have learned from the same Isaac Deutscher that the people of Poland and Hungary were in revolt because they were plunged into intolerable misery by a Russian-dominated police state.
Deutscher’s evaluation of Russo-satellite relations in his later Reporter article was not in the spirit of self-correction. He seldom admits to errors of judgement or analysis. Nor should the reader confuse his sudden compassion for the Hungarian people with support of their revolution. In the same article in which he admitted to the misery which provoked the Hungarian people to armed insurrection, he condemned the revolution itself. There he wrote that the revolution began as an effort to “regenerate the Communist revolution” but subsequent Hungarian Stalinist provocation and armed Russian intervention permitted anti-Communists to win the initiative in Hungary, at which point “a Thermidorean situation arose.” Of course, there was no Communist revolution in post-war Hungary for anyone to regenerate; only a dictatorship imposed by force of foreign Russian arms. But we will let this pass for the moment. More relevant at this point is Deutscher’s summary judgement which appeared in his Russia In Transition:
“... it may be said that in October–November, the people of Hungary in a heroic frenzy tried unwittingly to put the clock back, while Moscow sought once again to wind up with the bayonet, or rather with the tank, the broken clock of the Hungarian Communist revolution. It is difficult to say who it was who acted the more tragic, and the more futile or hopeless role” (p. 26).
The Hungarians, driven to heroic frenzy by justifiable grievances, were unwittingly turning back the clock of revolutionary progress as the insurrection moved into its counter-revolutionary “Thermidorean” phase; while the Russians sought to rewind the clock with bayonets. Not content with paradoxical clocks, Deutscher also repeated, in more civilized and temperate manner, some of the most malicious Communist canards against the Hungarian revolution.
“The ascendancy of anti-Communism found its spectacular climax with Cardinal Mindszenty’s triumphal entry into Budapest to the accompaniment of the bells of all the churches of the city broadcast for the whole world to hear. The Cardinal became the spiritual head of the insurrection. A word of his now carried more weight than Nagy’s appeals. If in the classical revolutions the political initiative shifts rapidly from Right to Left, here it shifted even more rapidly from Left to Right. Parties suppressed years ago sprang back into being, among them the formidable Smallholders’ Party” (The Reporter, November 15, 1956).
More slander could not be compressed into so few lines.
Deutscher notwithstanding, one of the more illuminating aspects of the Hungarian Revolution was the rapidity with which the persecuted clerical Prince of this overwhelmingly Catholic nation was eclipsed by a revolution which he could neither fully accept nor reject nor even understand. (Incidentally, does Deutscher think that winding up the clock of progress means keeping priests in jail regardless of charge or guilt?) Upon his release from prison, Mindszenty baptized the Revolution with the cold water of doubt, equivocation, confusion and contradiction. He realized that there could be no return to the old order (and, perhaps, he did not want it) so he told the people that he was in favor of a “classless society” and supported “justified historical development.” Yet, he could not speak in or accept the Marxist idiom so repugnant to him, so he spoke also of the need to return to “private ownership” but immediately qualified this with the stipulation that it would be private ownership “restricted by the interests of society and justice.” Listen for a moment to how Deutscher’s confused “spiritual head” addressed his revolutionary flock with the artificial voice of Christian charity and tolerance, so out of keeping with the temper of an embittered, imprisoned people locked in deadly combat with their jailers:
“Private revenge has to be avoided and eliminated. Those who have participated in the fallen regime carry their own responsibility for their activities, omissions, defaults, or wrong doings; I do not want to make a single denunciatory statement because this would retard the start of work and the course of production in the country. If things proceed decently according to promises made, this will not by my task” (La Revolte de la Hongrie d’Apres les Emissions des Radio Hongroise, October-November 1956, Editions Pierre Horay, Paris 1957, p. 179).
Do these lines sound like the militant call to arms of the ascending “spiritual head” of a “counter-revolution,” or are they the irrelevant pieties of a man soon pushed offstage into the wings of history by a revolution which gave him no more than an enigmatic nod?
The slander spread by Stalinists that Mindszenty finally presided over the Revolution was motivated by such malice that Jean-Paul Sartre – hardly an enemy of Communism – was moved to write the following:
“As regards Cardinal Mindszenty, the Stalinist press has made him into its bugbear, but it is not enough to reproduce the words of an old man worn out by suffering and strongly motivated by his resentments, to discover behind him an army of fascists ready to act. Which are the forces he relied upon or was believed to rely upon? He had been isolated from the world for 8 years, then suddenly freed. Can we believe that he had a clear idea of the situation? The Communist press wanted to see a deep connection between his dreary voice which drawled over the radio waves and the slaughter that went on in the sewers. Those who believed this were moved by emotion. Only Stalinist paranoia prevents them from seeing the truth; that is, that this old, isolated priest and those headhunters are separated by an immense gap.” (Temps Modernes, November–December 1956/January 1957, Whole Nos. 129–131)
The Revolution did move in October-November – steadily leftward, in a socialist, and therefore anti-Stalinist and anti-capitalist direction. The opposition of the revolutionary Workers Councils – the backbone of the Revolution, something which escaped Deutscher – to anything resembling a capitalist restoration in Hungary is, or should be, known to all. On October 28, the Workers Committee of Gyor declared: “We do not wish to return to the old capitalist system. We want an independent and socialist Hungary.” On the same day Radio Miskolc broadcast a revolutionary manifesto demanding “a new provisional government, one truly democratic, sovereign and independent, fighting for a free and socialist Hungary, excluding all ministers who served the Rakosi regime.” Two days later, Radio Szombathely broadcast the demands of the National Committee for County Vas: “... we want a free, independent, and Socialist Hungary headed by the government of Imre Nagy.”
These are a minute sampling of the demands made early in the Revolution. Had things shifted to the right by early November? The record is no less clear. On November 2, the Workers Councils of Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen County declared: “We will not return the land to landlords, nor the factories to the capitalists, nor the mines to the mining barons, nor the Army command to the Horthyist generals.” When the Russians called upon the armed Hungarian forces in Dunapentele to surrender, the revolutionary military command answered: “Dunapentele is the foremost Socialist town in Hungary. The workers will defend their own from fascist excesses ... but also from Soviet troops ... There are no counterrevolutionaries in the town ... .” The Revolutionary University Students Committee proclaimed: “We want neither Stalinism nor capitalism. We want a truly democratic and truly Socialist Hungary, completely independent from any other country.” In November, the Armed Revolutionary Youth called “For a neutral, independent, democratic and Socialist Hungary!” At approximately the same time, it became known that the Revolutionary Committee of Hungarian Intellectuals believed that “all of the factories and the mines are the property of the workers.”
One of the most moving Hungarian appeals was transmitted by Radio Kossuth on November 7, the anniversary of the Russian Revolution. It was directed to the Russian soldiers:
“Soldiers!
Your state was created at the cost of bloody fighting so that you could have freedom. Today is the thirty-ninth anniversary of that revolution. Why do you want to crush our liberty? You can see that it is not factory proprietors, not landowners, and not the bourgeoisie who have taken up arms against you, but the Hungarian people, who are fighting desperately for the same rights you fought for in 1917.”
Ordinarily, Marxists, socialists and democrats consider the legalization of Stalinist-repressed parties as one of the major achievements of the Hungarian Revolution and evidence of its radical maturity. It is interesting that Deutscher mentions by name only the “formidable Smallholder’s Party.” He conveniently overlooks the names of socialist and radical organizations which also sprang back to life. He also distorts the picture by describing the Smallholders Party as “formidable,” which was not exactly the case in October–November 1956. Moreover, he ignores the change in this Party (it had liberal and conservative wings before its suppression in 1918) which so sharply illustrates the progressive force of the revolution. In a speech to the reconstituted Smallholders Party on October 31, Bela Kovacs, one of its leading members and a minister in the Nagy government, noted:
“The Party has full rights to reassemble, but the question is whether on reconstitution the Party will proclaim the old ideas again. No one must dream of going back to the world of Counts, bankers and capitalists: that world is over once and for all.”
This is hardly the voice of bourgeois reaction, encouraged by a Thermidorean counter-revolution.
Deutscher also subjected anti-Stalinist militants of the Polish 1956 October to his unique style of abuse. In an interview conducted by Aleksander Ziemny which appeared in the Polish weekly, Swiat, October 7, 1957 (An Evening at Deutscher’s), he accused the liberalized (i.e., “revisionist”) Polish press of opening its pages to “writers who try to justify the mistakes of pre-September regimes.” To realize the enormity of this charge, one must understand that “pre-September regimes” refers to fascistic Polish regimes before September 1939! Of course, Deutscher does not – he cannot – name any Polish anti-Stalinist writers who were justifying anything that smacked of Pilsudskyism; just as he could give no documentation for his charge that a reactionary Church hierarch had become the spiritual head of the Hungarian Revolution. In the interview, he went on to speak contemptuously of the rebellious Polish youth who were attracted to Marxism because they viewed it as a “religion of social justice.” Instead of viewing Marxism in this humanist light, and acting accordingly, Deutscher urges them to spend their time studying the “scholarly treasures” of Marxism. This quietism which he advocates is logically followed by his rebuke to those young Poles who don’t realize, as he does, that “de-Stalinization is the work of people brought up in the Stalinist school – and with this fact one has to come to terms regardless of any subjective speculation.” As for Polish rebels who preferred self-reliance to Deutscher’s promised reform from above, he found many of them guilty of “cocky and loud-mouthed criticism.”
Deutscher’s real function as critical-rationalizer of totalitarianism did not escape Polish anti-Stalinists who followed his work. In a sharp rebuke to Deutscher for his advocacy of quietism [2], as against militant, active opposition to Stalinism, one Polish writer, Andrezj Braun, wrote a polemic in Nowa Kultura (March 7, 1957), which accurately accused Deutscher of proposing “a position alien to action” which “would mean here [in Poland] agreement with all the evil around us.”
 
DEUTSCHER AND MARGINAL SLAVE LABOR
There is a vast body of literature available on Russian concentration camps penned by former inmates, defectors from the Kremlin apparatus, and by scholars throughout the world. One student of Russian affairs, though, who has been reluctant to discuss the details of this singularly atrocious aspect of Stalinism is Isaac Deutscher.
Deutscher reserved his most detailed comments about the facts of the camps for a lesser work, Russia: What Next? It is worth quoting his discussion almost in its entirety.
“How much of Russia’s industrial expansion has been due to planning, and how much has been achieved by, for instance, the use of forced labor?
“It is important to make a distinction between the fundamental elements of the Soviet economy and its marginal phenomena. A few years ago the number of the inmates of Soviet concentration camps was most implausibly estimated by Western commentators at from 12 to 20 millions. If these figures were correct the whole Soviet experiment in planning would be only of negative significance to the rest of the world, for it would represent nothing but the recrudescence of slavery on a staggering scale. However, much laborious research and some evidence from inside Russia have reduced these speculative figures to more plausible proportions. Dr. M.N. Jasny, for instance, an able but also a most extreme Menshevik critic of Stalinist economic policies, has reached the conclusion that at the height of the deportations the total number of inmates to those camps may have amounted to three or four millions. Morally, this makes little difference: the use of forced labor is equally repugnant and its condemnation equally valid whether four or twenty million people are involved. But a more precise idea of the dimensions of the problem helps to bring the economic picture of the Stalin era into more realistic focus. It disposes of the theory that the Soviet economy could not function without forced labor.
“In an economy in which the total number of workers and employees is about 40 millions – it was over 30 millions before the Second World War – and in which further scores of millions work on collective farms, the labor of four million convicts is a marginal factor. The brunt of the industrialization has been borne by a working class which has been severely regimented, disciplined, and directed, but which is essentially a normal working class” (pp. 71–72).
Having duly registered his repugnance at the fact of slave labor, Deutscher promptly extenuates it out of any significance. The fact that slavery might account for a mere 10% of the labor force is morally deplorable, at least repugnant, but of little historical significance because the economy could function without it. (The naiveté of this dissociation between slave labor and planning is truly remarkable. If the number, function and location of slave labor was part of some plan, how is it possible to know whether the Soviet economy could have functioned without it?)
Was Russia a modern slave state as some have called it? No, says Deutscher; it only had 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 slaves. Give him a minimum of 12,000,000 and he is ready to recognize Russia as “nothing but a recrudescence of slavery on a staggering scale.” But if the difference between 4,000,000 and 12,000,000 slaves is so decisive for his evaluation of Russian society, how then account for his Olympian dismissal of the “Western commentators” with their big numbers, without as much as a nodding analysis or refutation of what he claims to be the fundamental fallaciousness of their figures? Deutscher prefers the 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 figure mentioned by “most extreme Menshevik,” Naum Jasny. [3] While Mr. Jasny is a Menshevik, he is not a “most extreme” (or an average extreme) Menshevik. Deutscher tacks this on for a clear enough purpose: if even a “most extreme” anti-Communist downgrades the number of slave camp inmates then surely he is closer to the mark than those who see much larger figures. If Deutscher were more concerned with truth than scoring an apologist’s point, he might have bothered to investigate Jasny’s method of arriving at his figures. In this case, he would have been obliged, also in the interest of truth, to report some basic flaws in Jasnys’ article.
One of the most glaring defects in Jasny’s calculations is that they were based on an economic report of 1941 – 10 years before his article appeared and 12 years before Deutscher’s. In the period immediately before, during and after the war, there were vast numbers, possibly millions, of East Europeans, Baltic peoples, national minorities in Russia, those from the Balkans, in addition to Russian soldiers who had to be re-educated after their contact with Western decadence, who were shipped off to slave labor camps. These numbers do not enter Jasny’s estimate. If we were to add the post-1941 recruits to slave labor armies, the figure would swell enormously. While Jasny did not estimate the number of those who flooded the slave labor camps after 1940, he did acknowledge that they arrived en masse.
Deutscher also fails to mention Jasny’s reservation that his estimated figure “does not include children, full invalids, people too old to work, etc. I have no evidence by which to estimate them.” Since Jasny is interested in arriving at the truth, he footnotes this failure to include children, invalids and old people in his estimates by noting that one of David Dallin’s [4] sources – a former chief of police of a large concentration camp – testified that only 50% to 60% of the inmates in his camp were engaged in productive labor. The rest were invalids, in hospitals, engaged in various services, etc. If this was typical of the Russian slave labor camps, then Jasny’s figures would indeed have been a serious underestimation.
Deutscher’s cursory discussion of slave labor camps is typical of his method. By omission and commission he misinforms his readers about the tangible realities of virtually every sensitive area of contemporary Russian life. In a 1959 lecture, printed in his collection The Great Contest, Deutscher could say that today the Russian worker “cannot be punished for minor industrial offenses or branded as an enemy of the people when he tries to speak out for himself.” This was said at a time when thousands of Comrade Courts had already been set up on factory levels and were zealously exercising their explicit authority to punish minor industrial offenders. At the same time many constituent union Republics had already adopted their “anti-parasite” laws – soon extended to all of Russia – for the purpose of inflicting major punishment for minor sins. Sentences of up to five years of prison, exile or “corrective” labor were given to industrial offenders, to those who believed that they could “speak up” for themselves, and for other “anti-social” behavior (e.g., writing poetry).
When glamorizing Russia’s economic growth, Deutscher (in The Great Contest) asserts that in 10 years, i.e., by 1969, Soviet standards of living “are certain to have risen above Western European standards.” Or he writes of the “new deal for the working class” with its “promise” of a 30–35 hour work week sometime in the sixties. He discourses about the Kremlin’s “continuous efforts to increase the output of consumer goods faster than had been planned and to mitigate the appalling housing conditions.” Deutscher is always guaranteeing the future to the Russian people (on condition that they don’t get too rambunctious and upset his calendar of reform). Why doesn’t he support his optimism with some facts about living standards today? What is the average wage? What is the price of milk, butter and meat? What are housing conditions actually like and how much will they improve if housing plans are met? He seldom deigns to report and analyze such “details” of Russian life. And on the rare occasions he does discuss facts, he usually accepts Russian sources at face value.
When he writes of Russian legal reforms, he usually produces an abbreviated rosy progress report without any detailed study of the statutes, debates and actual practice of the law. Surely, the large number of death sentences meted out for “economic crimes” deserve a serious, thoughtful article.
What about the charges of Russian anti-Semitism? Deutscher is certainly familiar with the facts from his reading of the Russian press. How do systematic anti-Semitic acts, sponsored by the “reformers” in power, fit his theory of Russia’s organic evolution to socialist democracy? Instead of an honest confrontation with reality, Isaac Deutscher informed a London audience, at a time when Russian anti-Semitism was already well documented, that the resurgence of Communist internationalism “must provide a source of hope to Jews of all political convictions” (quoted in Leopold Labedz’s excellent article on Deutscher in Survey, April 14, 1962). This news will hardly console the families of several hundred Jews who have since been executed in Russia.
 
HISTORICAL NOVELIST WITH THE KEYHOLE VIEW
Deutscher’s journalistic output reveals his talents as an historical novelist. He pretends access to closed councils of the Russian Communist Party, reports dialogue (quotation marks and all), discloses the inner psychic drive of Kremlin leaders in a manner that would put a Freud to shame. The unconscious yearnings of a Khrushchev or a Mikoyan – private thoughts which they could not even admit to themselves – are laid bare by Deutscher’s scalpel-like pen. To give Deutscher his due, his literary skill makes his little stories and vignettes spring to life; they are a veritable tour-de-force.
Below are selections from his writings about the Twentieth Congress, an event that easily lends itself to fictionalized dramatization.
Here is how Deutscher discussed Mikoyan’s speech at the Twentieth Congress in The Reporter (March 22, 1956):
“when Mikoyan urged the Congress to wage a ‘merciless struggle’ against ‘bureaucratic centralism’ and for a full reinstatement of Lenin’s ‘democratic centralism,’ he consciously borrowed these terms, as well as many other ideas and formulas, from none other than Trotsky, who coined them. And it was in an almost characteristically Trotskyist manner that Mikoyan hinted at Lenin’s testament ...”
How does Deutscher – here the psychological dramatist – know that Mikoyan “consciously borrowed” from Trotsky? He doesn’t. But it makes exciting reading and serves his political purpose to write such nonsense. And what, incidentally, are the other ideas “borrowed from Trotsky”? But never mind, here is more insight gained from Mikoyan’s speech and its reception:
“When Mikoyan finished, the Congress gave him an ovation such as it accorded no other leader, except Khrushchev and perhaps Bulganin. But while Khrushchev and Bulganin received the homage due their offices and ranks, Mikoyan was applauded for what he had said and for the manner in which he had said it.”
It is as though Deutscher were equipped with some ultrasonic applausograph device which not only measures the volume of clapping (from the Kremlin to Surrey!) but discloses the different motives behind each thunderous ovation. In the above quote, for example, Deutscher’s applausograph tells him that Mikoyan and Khrushchev received the same stormy ovations. But it was the same in volume only. For the applausograph is so sensitive that it revealed that Mikoyan was cheered “for what he had said” and “for the manner” in which he said it, while the same volume of applause for Khrushchev shows up on the applausograph’s screen as only respect for his high position. The marvels of (political) science! Of course, this reading fits in well with Deutscher’s political predilections. If Mikoyan is the real de-Stalinizer who “consciously borrowed” ideas from Trotsky, and is applauded for his views, it becomes confirming evidence of irresistible reforms from above. [5]
What raises Deutscher’s applause-analysis from the implausible to the absurd is his sentence which immediately precedes the above quotation.
“While many delegates certainly understood what Mikoyan was driving at and how far-reaching were the implications of what he said, the less informed missed the nuances and believed that Mikoyan merely toed the Khrushchev line, or that Khrushchev was in full agreement with Mikoyan.”
If the import of Mikoyan’s near-Trotskyist speech was missed by a number of delegates, that makes them near-idiots, and if Mikoyan’s differences with Khrushchev could only be detected by “nuances” that makes Khrushchev a near-Trotskyist. And how does this mesh with the applausograph’s recording? If the “less informed” – how many were there? – thought that Mikoyan and Khrushchev were in “full agreement” why should their applause for Mikoyan have a special significance as against their applause for Khrushchev?
There is more to the Mikoyan saga:
“Mikoyan’s speech is a remarkable political and human document if only because he himself had been an ardent Stalinist at least since 1922 ... and Khrushchev and Kaganovich owed their careers entirely to Stalin; Mikoyan had risen in the party in Lenin’s day, and his mind had been formed in Lenin’s school.”
These two sentences are to soften one for what follows:
“His speech was something of an old Leninist’s recantation of the part he had played in helping Stalin to ascendency. It was not a recantation in the familiar Stalinist style, but a seemingly genuine confession, if only implicit of grim and grave errors, and of a desire to undo some of the still rampant evils of Stalinism.”
The “ardent Stalinist” since at least 1922, becomes an “old Leninist” in just three miraculous sentences! This complex creature of Deutscher’s imagination offers the world a confession which is “seemingly genuine” although it is “only implicit.” How genuine was Mikoyan’s “desire to undo some of the still rampant evils of Stalinism” was exhibited seven months later when this penitent ardent Stalinist-old-Leninist-semi-Trotskyist played a special role in the slaughter of Hungarian revolutionaries.
The chief antagonists of the Twentieth Congress, our raconteur has told us, were Khrushchev and Mikoyan. The former feared too open and rash a break with Stalinism; the latter insisted upon it. Of this alleged controversy, Deutscher writes:
“That Mikoyan was permitted to state his views from the platform of the Congress is in itself an important precedent. Again, this is no evidence yet of any real reinstatement of Leninist ‘inner party democracy.’ In Lenin’s day, when there was disagreement in the Central Committee over an important issue, it was customary for the majority to express its views in the official report of the Congress, while a spokesman of the minority came out with a frankly controversial ‘counter-report.’ Mikoyan, it may be surmised, may have intended to come out with such a counter-report, but the Central Committee refused to permit at this stage any open clash between two members of the ‘collective leadership.’ A compromise was reached, under which Mikoyan was allowed to state his views in a positive form, without making it explicit where and on what points he dissented from Khrushchev.”
With this, Deutscher has taken us right into the closed sessions of the Russian Politburo. He speculates (“may be surmised, may have intended ...”) that Mikoyan considered coming before the Congress with a minority report. This speculation is only an immodest way of saying that he, Isaac Deutscher, has no evidence that this was actually the case. This doesn’t inhibit him from discussing his speculation in the very next breath as though it were a fact and telling us precisely how this surmised report was actually disposed of by the Central Committee. It is typical of Deutscher’s leap from the speculative to the assertive. It is not enough for him to tell us what the response to this surmised counterreport might have been on the Central Committee. With the storyteller’s skill, he takes us into the closed chambers of the Central Committee to tell us precisely how it decided to handle this breach in its ranks, how it effectuated a compromise and exactly what Mikoyan was permitted to do.
Deutscher, who has taken us on a guided tour of Mikoyan’s subconscious, is a novelist with a keen sense of balance. What is performed with Mikoyan’s psyche cannot be left undone with that of his (alleged) antagonist – Nikita Khrushchev. Thus, the Dostoievskian touch is supplied for him, too, in another chapter of his writings, also dealing with the Twentieth Congress. In Russia In Transition, he writes of Khrushchev:
“How is it, one must ask, that a man of so sturdy a character, of a mind so inherently independent, and of so eruptive and untameable a temper could at all survive under Stalin, and survive at the very top of the Stalinist hierarchy? How did Khrushchev manage to control himself, to keep his thoughts to himself, and to hide his burning hatred from Stalin? How did he behave under the dictator’s scrutinizing gaze when the dictator snarled at him: ‘Why do your eyes look so shifty today?’
“... in this miner and miner’s son risen to his present position one can still feel something of that tenacious, patient, yet alert and shrewd spirit which once characterized the old Russian worker when from the underground he bored under the Czar’s throne. To that spirit are now joined new mental horizons, a new capacity for organization, and an unwonted modernity. As one watches Khrushchev (even, as I have watched him, with a certain bias against him) one comes to think that he is probably still the Russian (or the Russo-Ukrainian) worker, writ large – the Russian worker who inwardly remained true to himself even in the Stalinist straitjacket, who has over the years gathered strength and grown in stature and grown out of the strait-jacket. One might even say that through Khrushchev the old repressed socialist tradition of the Russian working class takes a long-delayed and sly revenge on Stalinism.
“Yet, Khrushchev also makes the impression of an actor who, while he plays his own part with superb self-assurance, is only half aware of his own place in the great, complex, and somber drama in which he has been involved. His long, aggressive monologue is a cry from the heart, a cry about the tragedy of the Russian revolution and of the Bolshevik Party; but it is only a fragment of the tragedy.” (p. 34)
Khrushchev reminds Deutscher of the old Russian worker who bored under the Czar’s throne! He conveniently forgets that Khrushchev never bored under any throne; that although he was 23 years old at the time of the revolution he did not participate in it and did not join the Communist party until 1918. And his record in the Party? Deutscher knows it all too well, But he cannot tell it here for how would it fit into the picture of a man inwardly “true to himself,” with “so sturdy a character” and of a “mind so inherently independent.” He does not tell us that from the very beginning Khrushchev lined up with the Stalinists in the Party. That for his voluntary services to the Stalinists in the early twenties, he was promoted by Kaganovich and later taken under Stalin’s wing; that during the purges in the thirties, this Khrushchev was responsible for the deaths of thousands of real and imagined enemies of the Stalinist regime; that he was in charge of the purges in the Ukraine and soon became Party Secretary of the Ukraine and made a full member of Stalin’s Politburo in 1939. And he does not see here the assassin of the Hungarian working class. [6]
Khrushchev’s speech was a “cry from the heart, a cry about the tragedy of the Russian Revolution and of the Bolshevik Party.” This, however, is only “a fragment of the tragedy.” The other tragic fragment is soon unearthed:
“He himself [Khrushchev] did not expect to burst out with this cry. Only a few days before he made the secret speech, he did not know that he was going to make it; or any rate, he did not know what he was going to say.” (p. 35)
How does Deutscher know that Khrushchev did not know that he was going to burst forth this cry from the heart? The lyricist’s intuitive insights? How does this insight jibe with the story about Mikoyan’s alleged “counter-report” mentioned earlier? In that tale, the Central Committee refused to let Mikoyan make a report “counter” to Khrushchev’s, which can only mean that the Central Committee knew about Khrushchev’s report in advance and that certainly Mikoyan – Khrushchev’s antagonist, remember – had a preview of it.
Moreover, a few pages after Deutscher reveals Khrushchev’s tortured and indecisive frame of mind, he springs the following on us:
“Khrushchev builds his case against Stalin on three sets of facts: on Lenin’s denunciation, in his testament, of Stalin’s ‘rudeness and disloyalty’; on Stalin’s role in the purges; and on the faults of Stalin’s leadership in the war. Under each count of the indictment he treats the facts selectively so as to turn the evidence against Stalin rather than against the Stalinist faction.” (p. 42)
A legitimate and obvious point. But how does this “selectively” prepared speech correspond to the picture of Hamlet-Khrushchev torn by indecision, not knowing if he should make the speech, or what kind of speech it should be, until a few days or a few moments before his “impromptu” revelations?
Not content to lead us into closed Party meetings and take us on psychic tours of the Kremlin leaders, Deutscher probes and lays bare the mass psychology of the Russian people. To sell his readers on the Seven Year Plan, he assures them that “the new Plan undoubtedly gives the Soviet people the exhilarating sense of a tremendous social advance.” We suspect that Deutscher was more exhilarated than the Russian people. But if he can be so all-knowing about the emotional responses of the entire Russian people in some instances, he can also admit to a revealing ignorance of mass psychology at other times – an ignorance which he insists is not unique to him. Thus, in an article which tries to discuss the ill-fated super-collectivization in China in an objective tone, he confesses his ignorance of how the Chinese peasants might react to this “blow that Mao has struck against private property and the traditional way of life of rural China.” And what Deutscher claims not to know, no one can know, not even those in Peking: “It is difficult not only for outsiders and foreign travellers, but even for the rulers in Peking to judge what is going on in the hearts of a mass of half a billion people.”
How can Deutscher know what is going on in the souls of 200,000,000 exhilarated Russians and be so dense about the collective inner mind of 500,000,000 Chinese victims of a brutal collectivization program?
 
DEUTSCHER AS ANALYST AND PROPHET
As this is written, Khrushchev has been removed and Mikoyan’s position is not certain. Less familiar names have come into new prominence: Brezhnev, Kosygin, Podgorny, etc. We await one of Deutscher’s romans de séance to disclose what these gentlemen really mean when they say things they don’t really mean, or only half mean; whether they are; sincere, genuine, corrupt; whether they “cry from the heart” and what makes their psyches tick.
While awaiting the benefits of his psychological wizardry, it can be reported that Deutscher did not wait more than 48 hours after Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev (a man “of so sturdy a character, of a mind so inherently independent, and of so eruptable and untameable a character”) crumbled under a single blow from his colleagues, to predict one new (and certain) political course to be taken by his successors. In the October 18, 1964, issue of England’s Sunday Telegraph, he assures us that “they will certainly soon go to Peking on a pilgrimage of penance and reconciliation, just as Stalin’s successors went to Canossa – to Belgrade – in 1955. They will carry with them an offer to resume Soviet economic aid to China, the aid which Khrushchev had stopped abruptly and totally.”
Three months have gone by and the certain pilgrimage to Peking has not come to pass. Instead, there is the clinking of ideological armor as Moscow and Peking have renewed their duel over conflicting national and international interests. This prediction, almost immediately repudiated by events, leads us into a discussion of Deutscher’s worth as a prognostician and prophet, and what his analysis and predictions reveal of his political bias.
In both areas – as analyst and prophet – Deutscher has exhibited a degree of vanity as unmerited as it is extreme. In Russia in Transition, he boasts in his preface:
“Readers will find here developed even further the views I have expressed in my Stalin, A Political Biography (1949) and more particularly in my Russia: What Next? (1953). This last book appeared shortly after Stalin’s death and forecast explicitly and emphatically the whole chain of events, with all its twists and turns, which is now commonly described as de-Stalinization.
“... Readers are invited to check in every case the date of the original publication and to judge for themselves to what extent events have confirmed or refuted my analyses and anticipations.”
One difficulty in picking up this gauntlet and checking his “analyses and anticipations” is that critical and climactic paragraphs in Deutscher’s writings are peppered so often with such phrases as “it may be surmised,” “seems to have been,” “not quite groundless,” “it may be assumed,” “it is probable,” “it will almost certainly follow,” “it has so far proved,” “were apparently,” “it cannot be ruled out,” etc. We are not abusing the idea of caution. But if similarly massive dosages of hedging phrases were employed by a less skillful writer, his reputation would soon be confined to a small circle of tolerant family friends. Actually, these qualifying phrases are often used by Deutscher for either an unwarranted suggestion of democratization in the Russian camp or to rationalize a particularly obnoxious move by the Kremlin.
There is another difficulty in checking Deutscher’s analyses and anticipations. That is: which analysis and which anticipation about the same event? There are so many of them, inconsistent and contradictory, which undermine his self-claimed infallibility. They need to be sampled for what they show of his analytical talents and of his need to say different things at different times (sometimes at the same time) to shore up his defense of the totalitarian road to socialism.
Who stands for what, and what are the factional line-ups in the Communist world? This is one of Deutscher’s favorite subjects. The trouble is that his answers depend on which of his articles one happens to pick up, which page one happens to read and what he is trying to prove at the time.
Analysis: Who is Malenkov?
Version A: The De-Stalinizer and Precise Executor of Trotsky’s Will (all quotes in Version A are from Russia: What Next?).
“He [Malenkov] has come to the fore in the role of the rationalizer striving to put in order the Stalinist legacy and to disentangle its great assets from its heavy liabilities.” (p.152)
“... Russia’s urge to shake off the worst of Stalinism has become so strong that it compelled Stalin’s arch-devotee [Malenkov] to become the liquidator of the Stalin era.” (p.156)
“The masters of terror were themselves terrified, and the mass of the Soviet people must have been thrilled by the mere thought that henceforth they might be free to defend their rights against their persecutors. Malenkov’s government explicitly assured them of this.” (p.177)
“Malenkov’s first preoccupation was to free Soviet foreign policy from its irrational Byzantinism and to make it more worldly and subtle.” (p.186)
Version B: Opposed to Drastic de-Stalinization.
Several quotations in Version A originally appeared in an article in The Reporter, April 14, 1953. In using the article for his collection, Russia: What Next?, he omitted the following:
“Malenkov has come forward not as one of a triumvirate but as the autocrat’s autocratic successor.” [This version of Malenkov the “autocrat” was in turn contradicted by the same Deutscher who wrote in Russia In Transition (1957) that “it is nearly four years now since the USSR has ceased to be ruled by an autocrat.”]
In The Reporter (August 8, 1957), in the course of an apologia for the Khrushchev regime, Deutscher disposes of the now disgraced Malenkov in the following fashion:
“[Malenkov] favored a pro-consumer line in economic policy and a relaxation of tension in foreign policy; but he was opposed to drastic de-Stalinization and probably also to decentralization of industrial management.”
Analysis: Mao-Tse-Tung: Who and What Is He?
Vesion A: Anti-Stalinist and Socialist Democrat.
“... Mao’s words are giving a new and powerful impulse to de-Stalinization. He has come to the rescue of the intellectual opposition in Russia ... Now Mao tells the Russian workers that they have the right to strike, that if he downs tools not he but the bureaucrat must be blamed ... Mao’s address ... represents a most radical repudiation of Stalinism.
“Mao attempts in effect to redefine the whole concept of proletarian dictatorship and to restore to it the meaning Marxists generally gave to it before the onset of the Stalin era ... the collectivization of farming is progressing by slow degrees and subtle transitions; and confiscation of property and the use of coercion are avoided.” (New Statesman, June 29, 1957)
Version B: The Stalinist.
“The initiative to call this dramatic and bloody halt to de-Stalinization (the execution of Imre Nagy) has come from Peking – Mao Tse Tung has been the chief promoter of the drive against revisionism. Hesitantly and at first reluctantly, Khrushchev has toed Mao’s line.” (The Reporter, July 10, 1958)
“... there exist also undeniable affinities between Maoism in power and Stalinism, affinities rooted in the contradiction between the socialist strivings of the revolution and the primitive pre-industrial structure of society. [7] And so, despite all his deviations from Stalinism and a momentary determination to transcend it, Mao has not been able to go beyond Stalinism; and when he attempted to do so, he retraced his steps in a panic, and came to the fore as the defender of Stalinist orthodoxy. (New Left Review, January-February 1964)
Analysis: Molotov: Architect of Anti-Stalinist Foreign Policy or Symbol of Stalinist Diplomacy?
Version A (before he was purged by Khrushchev): Architect of Anti-Stalinist Foreign Policy and Nice to Neutrals.
“In Stalin’s day Moscow had only derision for the advocates of any ‘third force’ and treated them as hypocritical agents of the Atlantic bloc. In the last few months both Moscow and Peking have heaped praise on Nehru; they no longer treat India and the so-called Colombo grouping of nations as ‘puppets of western imperialism.’ On the contrary, the neutrals are now spoken of with sympathy and respect. ‘He who is not with us is against us’ seems no longer to be a guiding principle for Molotov or Chou-En-Lai; they have abandoned the slogan to certain politicians and diplomats in the West.”
Version B (after he was purged by Khrushchev): Symbol of Stalinist Diplomacy and Nasty to Neutrals.
“Molotov, indeed, viewed suspiciously the nations that remained neutral in the cold war, and he treated the governments of India, Burma, Indonesia, and Egypt as mere stooges of western imperialism.”
Version A (before he was purged): Force for World Peace.
“The cease-fire in Indo-China that was arranged last July in Geneva throws new light on Soviet foreign policy. This is the second armistice agreement concluded since Stalin’s death in March, 1953, the first being the agreement on Korea. Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov may be regarded as the prime mover of both.”
Version B (after he was purged): Isolationist Boor.
“Molotov was almost a symbol of the isolationism of the Stalin era, with its obtuseness and lack of sensitiveness to the outside world; this was reflected even in his lack of fluency in any foreign language.”
Version A (before): Polite and Flexible.
“Freed from the paralyzing fear of Stalin, Molotov surprised the western ministers by a tactical elasticity and politeness of manner of which they had held him to be incapable.”
Version B (after): Rude and Aggressive.
“Molotov carried a rather short stick during most of the time when he spoke so rudely, but he found soft speech uncongenial even after the stick had become much bigger.”
Deutscher’s Version A can be found in The Reporter of September 23, 1954, the contradictory Version B, in the same magazine, June 28, 1956.
Analysis: Nikita Khrushchev: The Logic of His Actions: Toward Stalinism or Away From It?
Version A: Toward Stalinism.
“But Khrushchev has probably achieved more than he intended. He meant to defeat his rivals and to deprive them of all influence, but not to stage a purge in the old Stalinist style. Now, however, the logic of his actions drives him to do precisely this.” [The Reporter, August 8, 1957]
Version B (9 months later): Away From Stalinism.
“He [Khrushchev] has won [against the same Kremlin rivals as in Version A] at a price that makes it extremely difficult for him to use power in a tyrannical and autocratic manner.” [The Reporter, May 1, 1958]
Analysis: Is the Path Back to Stalinism Still Open or Barred?
Version A: The Path Back is Barred.
“... the Soviet Union today is in every respect a much freer country than it was five years ago, and it can hardly be robbed again of its newly won, though very limited, freedoms.” [The Reporter, May 1, 1958]
“The road back to Stalinist orthodoxy and discipline is barred, because that orthodoxy and discipline belong to an epoch which has come to a close.” (Russia in Transition, p.55)
Version B: The Path Back is Open.
“The trend against de-Stalinization, which began after the Hungarian rising in October 1956 and continued with the drive against “revisionism” and the revival of the anti-Titoist campaign, has now reached a decisive point. Even now the Soviet bloc has not lapsed back into the full darkness of the Stalin era, but once again the phantom of the Stalinist terror and the threat of the purge haunt heretics from China to East Germany.” (The Reporter, July 10, 1958)
Analysis: Has Stalinism Atomized the Russian Working Class?
Version A: Yes (they are hardly capable of formulating demands).
“The workers have not yet been free enough to voice such demands (for equality) or to make their voices heard. They may not even been capable of formulating demands as people accustomed to autonomous trade union and political activity would do ... It is more than thirty years since as a class they had ceased to have any political life of their own. They could hardly recreate it overnight, even if those in power had put no obstacles in their way.” (Russia In Transition, pp.11-12)
Version B: No (the traditions of the Revolution are alive).
“With public ownership of the means of production firmly established, with the consolidation and expansion of planned economy, and – last but not least – with the traditions of a socialist revolution alive in the minds of its people, the Soviet Union breaks with Stalinism in order to resume its advance toward equality and socialist democracy.” (Partisan Review, Fall 1956)
Analysis: What Does the Intelligentsia Want?
Version A: They Dreamed of Overcoming the Social Inequalities of Stalinism (when Stalin was alive).
“The only relatively free debate which occurred in mid-century Russia was concerned with the ‘transition from socialism to communism.’ To outsiders this was bizarre scholastic quibbling over esoteric dogma; and this in part it was. But to those engaged in it the dispute offered an occasion for dreaming aloud, dreaming about the day when the nightmares of the present would dissolve, when the State with its all too familiar terrors would wither away, after all, when the social inequalities of the Stalin era would be overcome, and even the mastery of man over man would become a memory of the past.” (Russian In Transition, p.99, based on articles written in 1951)
Version B: Now They Want To Preserve the Social Status Quo (under Khrushchev).
“The men of the intelligentsia have been intensely interested in political ‘liberalization,’ but socially they are conservative. It is they who have benefitted from the inequalities of the Stalin era. Apart from individuals and small groups, who may rise intellectually above their own privileged position and sectional viewpoint, they can hardly wish to put an end to those inequalities and to upset the existing relationship between various groups and classes of Soviet society. They are inclined to preserve the social status quo.” (Russia In Transition, p.11)
Analysis: The Role of the Russian Military – Bloody Conquerors or Militant Reformers?
Version A: Bloody Conquerors.
“The day on which a Russian Bonaparte rises in the Kremlin may see the end of all self-containment, for the Bonaparte would disperse the party secretaries and ride in blood and glory to the English Channel.” (Russia: What Next? p.207)
Version B: Militant Reformers.
“It was no accident that in June 1957 Marshal Zhukov threw his weight behind Khrushchev. Perhaps more strongly than any other group, the officers’ corps had resented the Stalinist purges, and it was convinced of the urgency of economic and administrative reform.” [8] (The Reporter, November 19, 1959)
Version C: Opponents of a Tough Line.
“... Khrushchev himself adopted a tough line in foreign policy and spoke in a voice that sounded almost like Molotov’s ... Zhukov, who had backed Khrushchev against Molotov, was in no mood to go on supporting him when he began to speak in Molotov’s voice.” (The Reporter, November 14,1957)
Analysis: Dmitri T. Shepilov (Molotov’s momentary successor): Was His Middle East Course a Notable Success or a Fiasco?
Version A: A Notable Success (when Shepilov is in power).
“... Shepilov insisted on the need for Soviet diplomacy to encourage neutralism and to treat India, Burma, Indonesia, and the Arab states with the consideration and respect due to independent nations. He castigated Molotov’s tactical rigidity and lack of initiative. He carried the day within the Central Committee. His was to some extent the initiative for Khrushchev’s and Bulganin’s visit to India; he undertook to test his line in Egypt, which he did with notable success; and he had the satisfaction of being able to listen to Molotov’s ‘self-criticism’ at the Twentieth Congress of the Soviet Communist Party.” (The Reporter, June 28, 1956).
Version B: A Fiasco (after the purge of Shepilov).
“This was his (Shepilov’s) first trip abroad in his new capacity. He was in fact the initiator of the Soviet diplomatic offensive in the Middle East. Consequently, by dismissing him the Soviet leaders have acknowledged that this offensive has ended in fiasco.” (The Reporter, March 7, 1957)
“What Malenkov’s government is carrying out now is precisely the ‘limited revolution’ envisaged by Trotsky.” (p.215)
Having sampled some of Deutscher’s “analyses” let us look at a few of his “anticipations.”
Anticipation: In Russia: What Next?, the book that “forecast explicitly and emphatically the whole chain of events” following Stalin’s death, he contemptuously dismisses those who predict dissension:
“In the weeks before and after Stalin’s death, the newspapers were full of speculation about the secret rivalries in the Kremlin, the many-sided plots in which now Beria was supposed to be trying to oust Malenkov and Molotov, now Malenkov and Beria were supposed to oust Molotov, while in still other versions Bulganin and Beria were preparing a coup against all the others. There were probably a few sparks behind this tremendous output of journalistic smoke.” (p.12)
To ridicule someone else’s prediction is a prediction in its own way. When Deutscher sneers at the journalists’ prediction of dissension as little more than a “tremendous output of journalistic smoke” he is denying the essential validity of their speculation of a struggle in which, specifically, Beria, Malenkov, Bulganin and Molotov were trying to oust one another.
What is the proven reality? Beria, Malenkov, Molotov and Bulganin were all purged, the first executed, the others disgraced.
Anticipation: The End of Extracted Confessions.
“Officials who had the extraction of ‘confessions’ on their conscience must have read with a shudder the communiqué about the release of the Kremlin physicians. The shudder must have been felt in every dark office of the political police throughout Russia, Every man, high and low, in the service must have wondered whether, if he ever again tried to extort confessions, he would not be made to pay for it with his head or at least his freedom.” (Russia: What Next?, p.177)
Since writing these words in praise of the Malenkov government, Beria was framed up and shot, and confessions were extorted from Malenkov, Molotov, Kaganovich, Shepilov and Bulganin (the latter confessed twice; his first was not satisfactorily self-flagellating) and others. The world awaits Khrushchev’s.
Whether the confessions were extracted by physical torture or not is hardly the point. Even under Stalin, not all confessions were obtained through torture. The important point here is that Khrushchev succeeded in extracting ridiculous public confessions from real or imagined rivals in the Kremlin.
Anticipation: No Group in the Central Committee Would Have Dared Defy the Army.
“For some time past Marshal Zhukov had been a virtual umpire vis-à-vis the opposed factions; and he now threw his decisive weight behind Khrushchev. Whatever various groups at the Central Committee may have felt about it, none dared to defy the Army.” (The Reporter, August 8, 1957)
What is the proven reality? This analysis could not withstand the test of the next few months when the officer corps was clearly put in its hierarchical place by Khrushchev, General Secretary of the Communist Party, who not only defied the army but ousted Zhukov from political leadership and chose his own military chieftain.
Anticipation: If There Is Not “Collective Leadership” the Army Is Certain To Take Over.
“Malenkov, Khrushchev and Molotov would have to shelve their own differences and actually exercise ‘collective leadership’ in order to hold their ground jointly vis-à-vis the army. If they fail to do so, and if they try to preserve the party’s corporate predominance vis-à-vis the army and at the same time give free rein to their competition for autocratic party leadership then the outcome of this double contest cannot be seriously in doubt. A deep cleavage in a leadership not based on a democratic rank and file is a standing invitation to the army to step in and ‘safeguard law and order.’”
This prediction was made 10 years ago in an article in The Reporter (February 2, 1954). Since then:


Malenkov, Khrushchev and Molotov failed to shelve their differences.
Competition for autocratic leadership of the Party continues.
The Communist Party has preserved its corporate predominance vis-à-vis the army.


Anticipation: The Old Bolsheviks Will Be Rehabilitated Soon.
“The inescapable conclusion is that the defendants in those trials, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, Bukharin and others (perhaps even the absent and impenitent Trotsky) were innocent of the crimes attributed to them. The Soviet leaders have so far still hesitated to say this in public clearly and frankly. But the logic of de-Stalinization will soon compel them to muster courage and to carry out this most difficult act of rehabilitation.”
This anticipation is now six years old. We know that Deutscher has a broad historical view, but how soon is soon?
Deutscher’s most persistent and fundamental prophecy was his repeated forecast of a democratic flowering of Russian political, intellectual and cultural life. However, the Russia of today is so far behind his calendar of change that even he was obliged to admit to error. “I say frankly, I was mistaken on one point – I expected ten years ago that there would be more political freedom in Russia than there is now.” In the same (1963) interview he notes “the slow pace in intellectual, literary, cultural affairs, in the moral political atmosphere. I would have expected by now an open political debate to be possible in Russia. In this respect I was mistaken.”
It was an unusual concession on Deutscher’s part, but then he goes on to say: “I have misjudged the pace but not the direction that events have taken.”
It is this writer’s opinion that Deutscher has misjudged pace, direction, events and all. And these errors – reflected in his selective research, inconsistencies, half truths and apologetics – are encouraged by theories which we have touched only lightly here. It remains, then, to discuss Deutscher’s writings on the social nature of the Russian state, his comparison of Stalin to Cromwell, his “law of revolution,” industrialization as a force for democratization, the role of ideology and consciousness. What is involved is nothing less than a discussion of whether basic socialist concepts continue to have meaning in the modern world.
 
DEUTSCHER VERSUS TROTSKY
It is sometimes thought that Deutscher’s views on Communism are akin to Leon Trotsky’s. This misconception is due partly to Deutscher’s sympathetic three-volume biography of Trotsky, but it is also promoted by the surface resemblance of Trotsky’s definition of Russia as a “degenerated worker’s state” to Deutscher’s characterization of Russia as a form of “autocratic socialism.” The similarity is more terminological than political. For whatever this writer believes to be the flaws, inconsistencies and dangerous implications of Trotsky’s theory, it seldom served to compromise his opposition to the Kremlin. His politics were infused with a democratic, revolutionary consciousness absent in and alien to Deutscher. For Trotsky, the Kremlin was a totalitarian regime, “symmetrical to fascism.” He shared none of Deutscher’s illusions that a democratic socialist society could emerge from a totalitarian incubus. On the contrary, Trotsky believed that the socialist regeneration of the October Revolution was contingent on the ability of the Russian people to destroy the Stalinits political system. Where he viewed the liberation of the working class as the job of the working class alone, Deutscher assigns a major share of this mission to the autocratic masters themselves. It is the difference between one who would have hailed the Hungarian revolutionists and one who rationalized their “historically progressive” Stalinist assassins.
This difference was obliquely acknowledged by Deutscher himself in a remarkable passage in the last volume of his Trotsky biography (The Prophet Outcast). Trotsky wrote that if the Marxist program proved impracticable it becomes “self-evident that a new minimum program would be required to defend the interests of the slaves of the totalitarian bureaucratic system.” Deutscher comments:
“The passage was characteristic of the man: if bureaucratic slavery was all that the future had in store for mankind, then he would be on the side of the slaves, and not of the new exploiters, however ‘historically necessary’ the new exploitation might be. Having lived all his life with the conviction that the advent of socialism was a scientifically established certainty and that history was on the side of those who struggled for the emancipation of the exploited and the oppressed, he now entreated his disciples to remain on the side of the exploited and the oppressed, even if history and all scientific certainties were against them. He, at any rate, would be with Spartacus, not with Pompey and the Caesars.”
Here, Deutscher is not simply noting – and admiring – Trotsky’s idealism. He is also summing up the difference between himself and a revolutionary who identifies with slaves even should this fly in the face of “history and all scientific certainties.” For it is in deference to the alleged imperatives of history that Deutscher has fashioned his apologias for totalitarianism.
 
THE LACK OF A COHERENT FRAMEWORK
Deutscher’s reputation as a creative or original thinker has grown far out of proportion to his intellectual contributions. He has advanced no coherent conception of the Russian system and, in place of debate, he perfunctorily dismisses views which are uncongenial, to his teleological vision of Russia’s drive for socialist self-fulfillment.
In The Prophet Outcast it did appear that Deutscher would break tradition and confront the arguments of those socialists who have long maintained that the Russian system is a new form of class exploitation – a bureaucratic collectivist totalitarian society antithetical to both socialism and capitalism. According to this theory, the nationalization of industry is an economic form whose progressive or retrograde character depends on who “owns” the state that controls the nationalized economy. In summary fashion, the view is developed as follows: While economics is primary under capitalism, there is no simple one-to-one relationship of economic and political power. Fundamentally, the social power of the capitalist class inheres in the private ownership of the means of production in a profit-motivated market economy, but these narrower economic concerns can bring the capitalist class (or sections of it) into sharp conflict with a national (capitalist) political administration. In a nationalized economy this limited autonomy of (sometimes antagonism between) economic forms and political institutions is largely dissipated. Politics and economics tend to fuse in a state that owns, controls and plans the economy. Given this relationship, to describe a collectivized economy as being “economically democratic” but “politically dictatorial” becomes an illogical and reactionary notion. For the only manner in which a collectivized system can manifest any economic democracy is in the democratically organized political controls of that economy. A socialist state, then, presupposes the conscious political rule of the broad mass of people which can be established only through political democracy – the exercise of free elections, competing political parties, right of recall, genuine trade unions, guaranteed civil rights, full cultural freedom, etc. Conversely, in a state where the bourgeoisie has been expropriated and the economy nationalized but where the people are subjected to the domination and whims of a totalitarian ruling party, we are confronted with a new form of political, therefore economic, class oppression.
In The Prophet Outcast, Deutscher presents a detailed review of the bureaucratic collectivist position, attributing its origins to the Italian leftist, Bruno Rizzi, and its further development to a group of former American Trotskyists, led by Max Shachtman [9] and James Burnham. After his summary, one had reason to expect that Deutscher would try to expose what he believes to be the fallacies in their arguments. Not only does he fail to give battle or at least provoke a skirmish, he doesn’t even make contact with the enemy. Instead, he tries to dispose of the theory in a couple of sentences. In one sentence he writes:
“Implicitly or explicitly, they (Burnham and Shachtman) attacked national ownership of industry and national planning, saying that these served as the foundations for bureaucratic collectivism and totalitarian slavery.”
This is absolutely untrue. Deutscher simply transformed the idea that the value socialists give to nationalization should depend on the political nature of the ruling powers to read that nationalization per se is evil. I know of no socialist with the bureaucratic collectivist view who doubts that nationalization and planning, as the economic corollaries of a socialist society, are a necessary, but insufficient, condition for socialism.
His other sentence meant to be damaging to the bureaucratic collectivist view is:
“Burnham, Shachtman, and those who followed them, found themselves rejecting the Marxist programme point after point.”
Even if this were true, it is hardly a refutation of their views. In any case, it was not true. The bureaucratic collectivist view of Russia which so heavily accents the indivisibility of socialism and democracy is wholly in the Marxist-Leninist tradition and was presented in that light. It was Marx who wrote that the “first step in the revolution by the working class is to raise the proletariat to the position of the ruling class, to establish democracy.” Engels explained that to accomplish the socialist revolution “the proletariat seizes political power” and then “turns the means of production into state property.” And it was Lenin who wrote, as if anticipating Deutscher, that “whoever wants to approach socialism by any means other than that of political democracy will inevitably arrive at absurd and reactionary conclusions.”
If Deutscher discusses neither seriously nor competently views which he finds distasteful, and if he doesn’t present any developed, coherent picture of Russian society, that does not mean he avoids all characterization of the Russian social system. In fact, his characterizations of Russian society during the Stalin era are somewhat less than enlightening. In Stalin’s defense of the nationalized forms of the Russian economy, Deutscher saw the progressive, Marxist aspect of Stalinism. In Stalin’s terrorism, he recognized aspects of barbarism. To define Russian society under Stalin, Deutscher simply adds socialism to barbarism and there you have it – Stalinism was a form of socialist barbarism. In his words, Stalinism was “the mongrel offspring of Marxism and primitive magic.”
Deutscher’s more recent contributions to an understanding of Russian society after Stalin are hardly more illuminating. In an article explaining The Failure of Khrushchevism (published in The Socialist Register, 1965) we are informed that what was a “mongrel offspring” only yesterday and which, I believe, he still considers a form of “autocratic socialism” is today a society free of the maledictions of “class” conflict. In that article, comparing the extent of police persecution under the Czar to police persecution today, Deutscher finds that “evidently the antagonism between rulers and ruled is now different in kind, and less fundamental, for it is not a class antagonism.” I doubt that the Russian poets and writers recently sent to Siberian camps would be considerably warmed by the thought that their persecution is less fundamental than the Czarist exile of Dostoyevsky to the same wintry region. But how less fundamental is this admitted antagonism between rulers and ruled? And if the antagonism is not a class conflict, what sort of antagonism is it? Is it possible that in the three decades of barbaric and autocratic rule, the barbarians and autocrats in the Kremlin have not been able to develop the necessary degree of social cohesion to justify their definition as a ruling class?
This disavowal of class conflict in Russia means, among other things, to displace the responsibility for conformity in Russian life from the shoulders of the rulers to those of the ruled. The conclusion is made by Deutscher, himself, in the same article: “It is not so much police persecution that has prevented any progressive Soviet opposition from crystallizing and acting on a national scale.” Instead it is the “apparent inability of those below (i.e., the masses) to exercise control” because they have not been able to overcome the stultifying effects that years of Stalin’s rule “have left in their political thinking and social initiative.”
How can Deutscher blame the Russian people for their oppressive circumstances? How can one so carelessly sweep under an historical rug the fact that, despite unquestioned relaxation, Russia is still governed by a single party with opposition parties excluded by law, that fundamental criticism if made publicly incurs the risk of jail or a madhouse, that free trade unions are prohibited and strikes outlawed, that cultural experimentalism is treated as subversive and criticism made abroad as treason; that tens of thousands of Russians have in recent years been sent to labor camps, jail or exile as “social parasites,” etc. In fact, in “The Failure of Khrushchevism” Deutscher admits that in Russian universities a number of clandestine opposition student groups were organized, “membership of which has been punished as high treason.” He also admits that “there has been no lack of industrial strikes, local street demonstrations, even food riots” in Russia, though he does not reveal that they were violently suppressed by the rulers of a country in which there “is not a class antagonism.”
 
STALINISM AND BOLSHEVISM
The study of Lenin and Bolshevism has become a national industry. At least half a dozen well-published volumes on these subjects have been dumped on the market recently, ranging from Robert Payne’s hard-covered comic book called The Life and Death of Lenin to Louis Fischer’s ponderous misunderstanding of The Life of Lenin. Although the quality of these works varies, they usually share in their estimates of Leninism as a totalitarian doctrine, of the Bolshevik Revolution as a minority coup d’état and of the emergence of Stalinism and its concomitant barbarities as the natural heir to Leninism and the Russian Revolution. [10]
While Isaac Deutscher shows nothing but contempt for many of these Sovietologists he has far more in common with them than he would like to think. For Deutscher, too, believes that in basic respects Stalinism was continuous with Leninism, though his judgements and political conclusions may differ. To the bourgeois critic of Bolshevism, the insistence that Stalinism flows from Leninism is used to expose the dangers of socialism; for the right-wing socialist critic, it reveals the pitfalls of revolutionary socialism. But for Isaac Deutscher, who accepts the socialist legitimacy of the Russian Revolution, his qualified acceptance of the Leninism-Stalinism sequence is used as a qualified historical justification of Stalinism.
The relationship between Leninism and Stalinism is not an academic question. At stake is the political and moral worth of socialism itself. For if anything remotely resembling Stalinist terror can be proved to be a necessary accompaniment of socialism then socialism itself becomes an unworthy and evil objective.
However, nothing in Deutscher’s discussion of the Leninist-Stalinist relationship is sufficiently convincing to weaken one’s socialist convictions.
In his Russia: What Next? Deutscher demonstrated the terrible confusion that follows from arguing that the basic social conquests won by the Bolsheviks were continued and guarded by Stalinism:
“Stalinism developed out of Leninism, preserving some of the features of Leninism and discarding others. It continued in the Leninist tradition; but it also stood in a bitter and unavowed opposition to it.”
To stand in bitter and unavowed opposition to a tradition and at the same time to continue that tradition is another of Deutscher’s dialectical acrobatics. The proposition imposes the responsibility of clarification which he attempts later in the same book:
“In one fundamental respect Stalin did, of course, continue Lenin’s work. He strove to preserve the State founded by Lenin and to increase its might. He also preserved and then expanded the nationalized and State-managed industry, in which the Bolsheviks saw the basic framework of their new society. These important threads of continuity between Leninism and Stalinism were never cut.”
So there are threads (at least) of continuity. The first is that Stalin tried to preserve and strengthen the state. The question remains, however: what was the nature of that state? The term state is an abstraction, and the truism that all rulers try to strengthen their states hardly suggests a common bond or continuity between capitalist and socialist societies or between Leninism and Stalinism. The second thread that Deutscher spins (Stalin “also preserved ...“) is Stalin’s loyalty to nationalized property. No one can question this. Both Lenin and Stalin believed in the basic importance of state-managed industries. But why is this a continuity with Leninism or the Leninist tradition which implies ideas, principles, programs and methods which defined Lenin and his followers?
Deutscher cannot tell us concretely how Stalin preserved the Leninist state if only because in passing he does accurately note some of the essential elements of this same Leninist state:
“But Leninism also committed itself in 1917 and afterward to respect, to guard, to promote, and to extend in every possible way the political freedom of the working classes, who should have been the real masters in the new State. This was the meaning of ‘proletarian democracy,’ which should have supplemented, or rather formed the basis of, the dictatorship” (emphasis added).
Deutscher was never more correct. Leninism meant the political freedom of the working class and the “meaning” and “the basis” of proletarian democracy (or proletarian dictatorship) is that the politically free working class should be “the real masters in the new state.” In what respect then, did Stalin continue the Leninist state if he destroyed its very basis – proletarian democracy?
We should also point out that immediately after the passage informing the reader that Stalin preserved, in one fundamental respect, the Leninist state, Deutscher continues:
“But when Stalin took over the State its direction was in such a condition that it could be preserved only by being politically refashioned almost into its opposite.”
The picture is now complete – and utterly incomprehensible. For in a dozen pages Deutscher has flung the following contradictory propositions and conclusion at his readers without the slightest display of self-doubt:


Stalinism continued in the Leninist tradition; Stalinism stood in bitter opposition to Leninism.
 
The Leninist state was inseparable from proletarian democracy; Stalin politically refashioned the Leninist state “almost into its opposite.

 Conclusion:
 
Stalin, in a “fundamental respect” preserved and extended the Leninist state.
 


BOURGEOIS AND SOCIALIST REVOLUTIONS
Deutscher’s apologia for communist totalitarianism is firmly woven into an elitist philosophy which rejects the socialist conception that the broad mass of people can emerge triumphant from a revolutionary struggle, retaining its élan and ability to manage its own affairs. Instead, he promulgates a virtual law of revolution according to which “each revolution begins with a phenomenal outburst of popular energy, impatience, anger and hope. Each ends in the weariness, exhaustion and disillusionment of the revolutionary people.” While the people are exhausted,
“the Party of the Revolution knows no retreat. It has been driven to its present pass largely through obeying the will of that same people by which it is now deserted. It will go on doing what it considers to be its duty, without paying much heed to the voice of the people. In the end it will muzzle and stifle that voice.”
Moreover,
“The rulers acquire the habits of arbitrary government and themselves come to be governed by their own habits. What had hopefully begun as a great warm-hearted popular venture gradually degenerates into a narrow and cold autocracy.” (Stalin: A Political Biography, pp. 173–175)
Thus a “narrow and cold autocracy” would have arisen in Russia under the best of post-revolutionary circumstances; backwardness, primitivism and isolation only served to accelerate the degenerative process and to foreshorten the Revolution’s heroic period. It becomes utopian sentimentality not to realize that the “Calendar of Revolution” (one of Deutscher’s favorite expressions) required the rule of a dictatorial elite to govern Russia in the long-term interests of the people and to prevent the revolution from shifting into reverse gear. The weight of historic evidence is certainly on Deutscher’s side. The great revolutions of the past were made in the name of popular causes and gathered enormous mass support. Yet, in each case, in England, in France as well as in Russia, a victorious elite emerged which violated the revolution’s proclaimed democratic principles and institutions and eventually repressed the revolutionary peoples themselves.
If Deutscher is correct, that this is an inevitable historic pattern from which not even a socialist revolution can be excepted, then again socialism must be rejected as a hopelessly archaic, Utopian and dangerous package. For the very heart of Marxist politics is its reliance on the ability of the working class to regulate its own affairs.
Related to this law of revolution is the grand parallel Deutscher finds between the Russian Revolution and the English and French bourgeois revolutions. The parallel is repeated in each of Deutscher’s books and in many of his essays. In the French Revolution, above all, he finds “the passions, the spirit, and the language of the Russian Revolution. This is true to such an extent that it is absolutely necessary for the student of recent Russian history to view it every now and then through the French prism.” (Russia in Transition, p. 143)
Deutscher sees the French and Russian revolutions as having established the power of socially progressive forces. Both revolutions revealed initial egalitarian, democratic impulses and mass enthusiasm. But given the force of the law of revolution, neither the Jacobins nor the Bolsheviks could possibly meet the expectations of the multitudes they inspired and led. The frustrated French plebeians grew as disillusioned with the intangible results of their sacrifices as the Russian working class grew apathetic and even hostile toward a Bolshevik party that could provide it with none of the material benefits for which so much blood was shed. Consequently, the popular, democratic phase of the French Revolution, which reached its apex with the Jacobin triumph in 1793, inevitably succumbed, first to the Thermidor and then to Bonapartism. Similarly, the analogy goes, the Russian Revolution reached its inspirational heights in the first years of Bolshevik rule only to give way to one-party dictatorship and then to one-man tyrannical rule. The analogy continues: although Napoleon crowned himself Emperor, he neither wanted to nor could reverse the rising power of the French bourgeoisie established in the heroic period of 1789–1793; on the contrary, Napoleon defended the basic social objectives of the French Revolution at the necessary expense of its egalitarianism. Similarly, Stalin dissipated the egalitarianism of Russia’s October Revolution, emerging as a personally fiendish dictator who nevertheless defended the socialist interests of the very working class he brutalized by preserving, consolidating and extending nationalized urban property within and without Russian borders.
Therefore, in Deutscher’s view, “the Russian counterparts to the Jacobin, Thermidorean and Bonapartist phases of the [French] revolution have in a curious way overlapped and merged in Stalinism.” Thus Stalin becomes a curious sort of socialist Napoleon, and his political personality is even more complex since he also emerges in Deutscher’s writings as a barbaric kind of socialist Robespierre. (Or, depending on the specific national-historical focus of the analogies, Stalin is, always in a qualified and curious way, reminiscent of Cromwell, Bismarck, a blend of “the Leninist and Ivan the Terrible,” among other star billings including the Emperor Constantine.)
Deutscher acknowledges that there are limits to the analogy. In the first paragraph of his essay, Two Revolutions, wholly concerned with an analogy of the French and Communist revolutions, he counsels his reader that “in drawing any analogy it is ... important to know where the analogy ends.” And he hopes not to “offend badly against this rule.” This promising beginning is followed by a series of comparisons between the two revolutions, some interesting, others preposterous, but no indication of where the analogy finds its limits. Yet, it is the incongruities far more than the similarities which sharpen the socialist image by way of contrast. What these differences reveal is that the Russian (socialist) Revolution represented a much sharper and more profound break with the past than was the case with the French (bourgeois) Revolution. It is worth noting some of the important differences:
a) The revolution of 1789–1793 brought the conflict between bourgeois and aristocrat to a head and out of that contest the supremacy of capitalism was hastened and assured by the shattering of feudal restrictions to free competition, to the development of manufacturing, to the right to exploit both labor and partitioned lands; it relieved the bourgeoisie of the burden of intolerable tithes and discriminatory taxation and permitted the realization of the bourgeoisie’s dream of a French nation state. However, vast as these changes were, the French Revolution meant the triumph of one prop ertied class over another propertied class. By contrast the Russian Revolution witnessed, for the first time, the economic and political expropriation of property-owning classes by a propertyless working class.
b) The French bourgeoisie had established its economic and political beachheads within the old regime long before the call for the Estates General. “Creeping capitalism” was an irrepressible fact of life throughout the reign of Louis XVI. Bolshevism, on the other hand, could not establish any beachheads under Czarism (nor could socialism assert its authority within the framework of American capitalism in the future). For, under socialism, the individual worker remains propertyless but his class becomes the owner of the means of production through its political control of the state. It is patently impossible, then, for socialism to grow within capitalism since the working class cannot win political control of a nationalized industry in this or that sector of a capitalist economy.
If one accepts just these obvious differences between the two revolutions, the whole elegant structure of Deutscherism begins to sag, since one of its major underpinnings – his use of the analogy of bourgeois and socialist revolutions – turns out to be a numbing hallucination. There can be no curious sort of merging of Jacobinism-Thermidoreanism-Bonapartism, or their alleged “counterparts,” in a socialist society. While Bonaparte deprived the bourgeoisie of many of its political rights, he nevertheless contributed enormously to the consolidation of capitalism in that he continued to battle the remnants of feudalism, created more congenial conditions for the expansion of capital and in his wars of conquest performed similar services in foreign lands bringing them into greater harmony with the needs of French capitalism.
But – as Deutscher’s use of the analogy suggests – how could a socialist Bonaparte or a semi-socialist semi-Bonaparte deprive the working class of its political power and at the same time perform services for that class comparable to what Napoleon did for the French ruling class when the working class can be the ruling class only if it has political power? Deprive the workers of political power and they are once again an economically exploited class.
c) The French revolution – as with all bourgeois revolutions – was fought and won primarily by classes alien to the bourgeoisie. What there was of a French bourgeoisie was weak and vacillating though, for a brief period, sections of the Third Estate did develop a Messianic vision and fanaticism in the course of their struggle against the nobility. Left to their own resources, however, their triumph would have been much longer in coming. To break the back of the aristocracy, the bourgeoisie was obliged to form temporary and uneasy alliances with elements it feared and upon whom it would turn in fury. The necessary violence with which the aristocracy was defeated within France and the armies raised to resist foreign invasions in defense of the bourgeois revolution were primarily the achievements of the revolutionary Jacobin left whose mass base was largely found among those insurrectionary plebeian elements who had far less to gain than the bourgeois class in whose historic interests they fought. Indeed, in the years immediately following the fall of Robespierre, with the victory of the revolution more or less secure, the Jacobin left and its plebeian supporters were subjected to a white terror at the hands of conservative bourgeois and aristocrats in tacit alliance that far outdid the violence of Robespierre’s Committee of Public Safety.
This contrasts sharply with a socialist revolution, which can be fought, won and sustained only by the working class and its natural allies – or not at all. The armies of socialism cannot possibly be recruited from the bourgeoisie, while the armies of the bourgeois revolution had to be plebeian in composition.
d) The decisive function of politics in a socialist society and the above-noted necessity for the self-mobilization of the oppressed implies a fourth difference between socialist and bourgeois revolutions: the role of consciousness. To achieve power the working class must be moved by an awareness that is on a qualitatively higher plane than that required of a bourgeois class (which had the economic leverage of expanding capitalist enclaves within the old feudal order). And the organized leadership of a socialist working class must be moved by an ideology that is clear, consistent with its objectives, sensitive to the needs of the working class and whose aims are never hidden from the people. On the other hand, the social rule of the capitalist class is not dependent on a comparable sustained high level of class consciousness.
Deutscher would rather not dwell on the importance of consciousness as a socialist criterion since he is anxious to pass Russia off as a form of socialism at the same time as he recognizes the absence of popular direction of Russian society and has repeatedly asserted that the people are lacking in class consciousness and must relearn the habits of political thinking.
e) The success of a bourgeois revolution is not contingent on the support of the majority of people; a bourgeois government represents the interests of a minority class which may or may not have majority support. A socialist revolution, on the other hand, must have the support of the majority of urban and agrarian wage earners or feel assured of such support in the course of a struggle for power. Napoleon could force bourgeois change down the throat of European society with bayonets; socialist revolutions and socialist societies cannot impose socialist systems on a hostile majority, either at home or abroad, with tanks, bayonets and armies, as Deutscher tells us Stalin did in Russia and Eastern Europe. Where Deutscher does point to dissimilarities between the French and Russian revolutions, they are seldom the basic ones and, more damaging, they are often used to demonstrate either implicitly or explicitly, the social superiority of Stalin as against Robespierre, and of Stalinism against the French Thermidor. An example from The Prophet Outcast:
“Another difference is even more important: Thermidor brought to a close the revolutionary transformation of French society and the upheaval in property. In the Soviet Union these did not come to a halt with Stalin’s ascendancy. On the contrary, the most violent upheaval, collectivization of farming, was carried out under his rule. And it was surely not ‘law and order,’ even in a most anti-popular form, that prevailed either in 1923, or at any time during the Stalin era. What the early 1920s had in common with the Thermidorean period was the ebbing away of the popular revolutionary energies and the disillusionment and apathy of the masses. It was against such a background that Robespierre had sought to keep the rump of the Jacobin Party in power and failed; and that Stalin struggled to preserve the dictatorship of the Bolshevik rump (i.e., of his own faction] and succeeded.”
First of all, the Thermidor did not bring to a close the revolutionary transformation of French society. It only brought to a close the Jacobin chapter in that transformation. In fact, the victory of the Thermidoreans over the Robespierrists assured the continuation of the basic social-economic changes in France. While the Robespierrists were committed to bourgeois property rights they also advocated democratic political and economic policies – such as universal suffrage and price ceilings – which galled the more conservative bourgeois elements, many of whom fell under the guillotine of Robespierre’s “reign of terror.” In bringing Robespierre to account after Thermidor, the bourgeoisie rejoiced not because the revolutionary transformation of French society and the “upheaval in property” ground to a halt, but because the bourgeois upheaval in property would be less constrained by restrictions imposed by the plebeian-based left wing of the revolution. In this decisive sense the Thermidoreans, despite their lessened vigilance vis-à-vis the aristocracy, were the continuants and consolidators of that revolution and those upheavals destined to establish the supremacy of bourgeois property relations.
By placing a period to the French upheavals in property after Robespierre’s fall and by implicitly (and falsely) equating the essence of the Russian Revolution with such upheavals as “collectivization of farming,” Stalin and Stalinism emerge as superior creatures (even if, admittedly, somewhat odious) ‘ in Deutscher’s analogous heap. Stalin “succeeded” where Robespierre failed, and Stalin carried out revolutionary upheavals where the Thermidoreans supposedly brought them to a halt.
Shortly after this revealing comparison, Deutscher gives forth in the same intellectual spirit with both a similarity and a difference between Stalin and Robespierre.
“The historically far more justified charge that Trotsky could have levelled against Stalin (i.e., that Stalinism represented the Russian Thermidor) was that he instituted a reign of terror like Robespierre’s, and that he had monstrously outdone Robespierre.”
That Stalin monstrously outdid Robespierre in the use of terror will be challenged by no responsible person. That Stalin’s reign of terror was anything “like Robespierre’s” is to monstrously abuse Robespierre and history.
There has been a tendency, perhaps, for socialists to overdress Robespierre in revolutionary democratic robes, to glamorize the man and the faction he led. Robespierre’s terror was not only directed against the aristocracy and the Gironde. It moved against his opposition on the left, Hébert and the Enragés, using false accusations, drumhead trials and the guillotine in a violent and futile effort to consolidate Robespierre’s power. Despite the similarities, to place Robespierre’s terror in a “like” category with Stalin’s terror is somewhat like comparing a gourmand to a cannibal because both are meat-eaters.
The fact is that the brunt of the French terror was felt by the aristocracy, by those who speculated in the welfare of the people, by bourgeois elements who grew to fear the sans-culottes more than the nobility and by those who gave aid and comfort to foreign armies fighting on French soil. Now, if Stalin’s terror was “like” Robespierre’s, only more thorough, then it would seem that Stalin’s terror was primarily and more effectively, directed against comparable elements in Russia – against Czarist restorationists, agents of foreign imperialism, swindlers, etc. But this was not the case, of course. Stalin’s terror was directed against workers, peasants, intellectuals, socialists, as well as against the top and secondary leadership and tens of thousands of rank and file members of the Communist Party. How was this like Robespierre’s terror?
 
APOLOGIA FOR FORCED INDUSTRIALIZATION
Deutscher does believe in democracy and he does look forward to socialist democracy in Russia. At least he has so assured us in his writings. But when it comes down to the here and now, who one should support, which system is progressive, democracy becomes a secondary consideration, And in any conflict between democracy and what he believes to be the needs of industrialization in a nationalized and collectivized economy the former is denied any decisive merit, This is borne out, above all, in Deutscher’s treatment of “primitive socialist accumulation” in which his value judgements are evident.
The Russian economy, weak to begin with in 1914, was shattered by more than seven years of war and revolution. The defeat of the revolution in the West was an even heavier blow to the industrial needs of the Soviet regime. Confronted with famine, apathy and mounting hostility, the Leninist Party led the country into the New Economic Policy (NEP) period which was highlighted by a general relaxation of economic controls. Forced grain collections were eliminated and the market in the agrarian section of the economy was re-introduced to encourage the farmer to produce. This served to stabilize Russian society; anti-government violence subsided in the countryside, more food was produced by the profit-motivated farmer and famine was thereby averted among urban consumers.
The blessings of NEP, however, were of short duration and never unmixed. It was initiated by an already bureaucratized party that counterweighted economic relaxation with still tighter Party political controls. With the declining caliber of the party and Stalin’s ascendancy, it served the latter’s purposes to give the NEP, originally designed as a temporary stopgap, a more permanent place in Party ideology. A new class of more prosperous farmers (kulaks) was advised by the Stalin regime to “enrich yourselves.” This, of course, they tried to do, one technique being to withhold produce from the once again hard-pressed urban consumer in the late twenties. The farmers sought not only to keep the price of their produce at a profitable level but were incensed over the prospect of their profits being wiped out by the rising price of urban manufactured goods produced by an inefficient and neglected Russian industry. By 1929, Stalin was confronted by a hungry proletariat, a weak industry, an insurrectionary peasantry and a rising class of capitalist-oriented kulaks. Stalin set about to strengthen the Communist party and his position in it with a radical and sudden departure from the policies of 1923-1929. This was to be the period of forced collectivization and forced industrialization.
These objectives could be achieved by Stalin in only one way: through the most massive, systematized and historically unrivalled application of mass terror. Forced collectivization required a veritable civil war in which millions of peasants were killed by gunfire, famine and the rigors of labor camps. Industrialization was advanced in similar fashion. The political auxilliary of these new economic policies was the consolidation of totalitarianism, one-man dictatorship and mass purges.
The human misery wrought by Stalinist industrialization and collectivization is detailed by Isaac Deutscher. But for all his lamentation over Stalin’s barbarities, Deutscher’s final political judgement is essentially indifferent to totalitarianism’s deprivation of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. In his balance sheet of history, forced collectivization and industrialization are in the historical black, so to speak, since Stalin preserved and extended the “socialist” nature of the economy. It was Russia’s “Second Revolution” which, we are told, could only be carried out brutally and required the extirpation of democracy.
The logic of Deutscherism is inescapable. Given his views of socialism, which eliminate democracy as an integral part of socialism, and given his conviction that only the inevitably (“predetermined”) evolved system of Stalinism could bring this good about, there is no ground for repudiating Stalin’s methods other than an irrelevant squeamishness. Perhaps it was not necessary to slander the old Bolsheviks with the charge of being agents of foreign imperialism and on Hitler’s payroll, but whatever reasons might be advanced, from Deutscher’s point of view and analysis, if logic prevails, the old Bolsheviks had to be removed one way or another, since it can easily be established that their very existence was a serious menace to the consolidation of Stalinism politically and therefore an impediment to its historic “socialist” mission of raising Russia from the wooden plow to the tractor.
More generally, Deutscher has created a theoretical justification for terror whose practical significance today lies in its contribution to totalitarian tendencies which seek, on similar grounds, to justify the use of terror and the liquidation of democracy and democrats in Cuba, China, North Vietnam and elsewhere on the ground that such terror is historically conditioned and necessary for the sake of social progress.
A basic merit of industrialization in Deutscher’s view is that it provides the economic catalyst for Russia’s evolution from authoritarian socialism. This optimistic vision is presented in Marxistical terms, although what emerges is a crude form of economic determinism that shares nothing with Marxism.
In the Marxist view, political institutions, philosophical ideas, legal concepts, national customs and habits are shaped and influenced by the material conditions of life. These material factors include: a) all the limitations and propensities inherent in natural conditions – climate, waterways, topography, etc. – and b) the level and form of economic activity. Since the conditions of nature are relatively constant, it is to the variable factor, economic conditions, that the historian must turn to understand the complexities of social evolution. The changes in the level of productivity, the means whereby the product is exchanged, the economic relations into which men are obliged to enter with other men, become the underlying sources of social transformation.
Marxism did not limit itself to promulgating a philosophical view of the world. It sought to examine concretely the economic relations men entered into with one another; to establish the causes and consequences of economic conflict; to learn what is needed to permit man to overcome the limitations of nature. In the class struggle, Marxists found the “locomotive of history”; in the capitalist mode of production they found inner contradictions which would lead to the expropriation of the capitalist expropriators; and in the growth of the productive forces Marxism saw the prerequisite of man’s emancipation from exploitative class society.
It is in this latter condition for freedom – the growth of the productive forces – that the modern authoritarian socialist finds it possible to mask economic determinism with a protective Marxist cloak. Did not Marx find that capitalism, as against feudalism, was a progressive form of society because it meant a vast growth of the productive forces? And if capitalism was an historic advance because it meant the triumph of the machine process over feudal agrarianism, is not Stalinism a progressive form of society because in Russia it transformed an agrarian economy into a highly industrialized one and created a large industrial working class? In the words of the dean of authoritarian socialism:
“In spite of its ‘blood and dirt,’ the English industrial revolution – Marx did not dispute this – marked a tremendous progress in the history of mankind. It opened a new and not unhopeful epoch of civilization. Stalin’s industrial revolution can claim the same merit.” (Stalin: A Political Biography, pp.342-343)
There is so much wrong with this analogy between Stalinist industrialization in modern times and the growth of the factory system more than a century ago, that we must limit ourselves here to itemizing a few critical observations:
a) The victory of capitalism was achieved at the expenseof a retrograde feudal society. The victory of Stalinism had as its precondition the defeat of a socialistic Russia.
b) For all of its hesitations and misgivings about democracy, for all of its violence against the working class, even in its earliest days, the victory of the European bourgeoisie over the nobility witnessed an extension of individual rights and political freedom which was unthinkable under feudalism. And what the bourgeoisie would not willingly concede to the nation in the way of democracy could often be won by democratic forces within the framework of the bourgeois social order. What is disastrous for Deutscher’s analogy of capitalist and Stalinist industrialization is that the latter was effected under the auspices of a totalitarian force which can remain in power only as long as it can prevent the emergence of democratic institutions.
c) One progressive contribution of capitalism was the creation of a large, socially homogeneous industrial proletariat which is, in the Marxist view, the indispensable agent for liberating society. This class, unique to capitalist society, was “freed” from any ownership of the means of production but it was, of necessity, also freed from the political servitude of feudalism. This political freedom is atypical of Stalinism’s working class and would be inimical to its totalitarian collectivized economy. The Russian working class is not the same as the industrial proletariat described by Marx.
d) To increase the wealth of nations there was no alternative to a capitalist reorganization of society. The economic basis of socialism had to be developed and a working class of weight and experience had to appear. It has yet to be proved that despite the degree of Russia’s economic backwardness, and given the economically advanced character of the capitalist world, the only way to modernize Russia was through its Stalinization.
Moreover, Stalinization in Russia cannot be considered in isolation. It meant the corruption of the world Communist’ movement, reducing foreign parties to little more than adjuncts of the Kremlin. It meant sacrificing socialist principles and national revolutionary ambitions throughout the world for the sake of securing the degenerated Russian Communist party in power. Before dismissing the possibility of Russia industrializing in a democratic manner, one must consider the very real possibility that a genuinely communist, i.e., revolutionary socialist, movement in Germany might have taken power in 1932 which would have changed the political map of Europe and provided the technological assistance for which the Bolshevik leaders of 1917 thirsted.
e) The most telling difference between Marx’s treatment of England’s industrial revolution and Deutscher’s view of Stalinist industrialization is the following: Marx never used his view of capitalist industrialization to underplay the attendant horrors of British exploitation on the ground that England’s economic growth was largely contingent on the sun never setting on its empire; in Deutscher’s hands, by contrast, the alleged progressiveness of an industrializing nationalized economy is used to cloud reality and to cast Stalinist imperialism in a progressive mold.
But, it is said, forced industrialization is a thing of the past, and even if it was a nasty business, look at how it has . transformed Russia and improved the living standards of the Russian people today. However, even where these highly touted economic advances are concerned, we are less impressed than Isaac Deutscher and the whole coterie of Stalinoid aficionados of the statistic whose spirits soar with every new orbiting Sputnik or rise in the production of steel or pigs. The growth is certainly real, but the important thing for socialists, apart from the question of who controls the expanding economy, is to know who are its beneficiaries. One thing is certain – those benefitting least are the workers and peasants. The truth of the matter is that by American standards the vast majority of Russian wage-earners would qualify for assistance under the Washington Administration’s anti-poverty program and be eligible for supplementary relief from local welfare agencies.
In February of this year the USSR Central Statistical Administration, reporting on the final year’s achievement of the Seven Year Plan (1959-65), stated that the “average monthly earnings of workers and employees in the national economy increased from 90 rubles in 1964 to 95 rubles in 1965 or by 5.8%.” The higher figure means an average weekly wage of approximately $25.00 on the basis of the dollar-ruble exchange rate. What about the many fringe benefits that Russian workers are said to receive? The following figures given in the report reveal how modest they really are: “If the payments and benefits received from public funds are added in, the average earnings increased correspondingly from 121 rubles [in 1964] to 128 rubles per month [in 1965].” Even if these figures are not exaggerated the combined wage and public fund benefits would come to about $33.00 per week, or slightly over $1,700 a year.
What does the Five Year Plan (1966-1970) recently adopted at the Party’s 23rd Congress hold in store for the workers in Deutscher’s socialist Russia? Premier Kosygin’s report to the Congress on the Five Year Plan Directives lets us know: “The average monthly wages of production and office workers will go up during the five years by an average of not less than 20% and by the end of the new five-year plan will amount to about 115 rubles; if payments and benefits from the public consumption funds are included, the total will reach approximately 155 rubles per employed person.” In other words, after another five years of reaping socialism, the average workingman can look forward to a total income from pay and benefits of around $40 per week. And these are figures for urban industrial and white-collar workers. If we averaged in agricultural earnings, the figures would be still lower.
While this will be the average income (if the goal is fulfilled), whole categories of workers will receive considerably less. According to the section of the Five Year Plan concerned with “Raising The Material Well-Being and Cultural Level of the People” we are informed of the Party’s ambition “to raise the minimum wage in the (national) economy to 60 rubles a month.” Sixteen dollars a week – by 1970! As this is to be the minimum wage if the Plan is successfully completed, it is reasonable enough to assume – and there are statistics to bear it out – that today there are categories of unskilled workers who receive no more than $13 to $14 a week. How much culture and well-being can be raised on this pittance? While there has been some levelling of income in Russia, it is nonetheless the case that in Deutscher’s socialist economy there are top academicians and administrators who receive up to $10,000 a year (apart from such little extras as dachas and chauffeured limousines). Between high and low earnings, then, there is a differential of 14:1 compared to a spread of 5:1 in equivalent categories in Western bourgeois countries.
In Russia there is an income tax. It is not high by American standards, but high enough given the low wages. It begins with incomes of only 60 rubles a month and discriminates against the poor since it is not a highly graduated direct tax system. Instead, a family of four earning 50 rubles above the 60 ruble exemption pays 10% of those 50 rubles while a top administrator who earns 800 rubles above the 60 only pays 13%. A continuing major source of revenue is the turnover tax which continues to add about 30% to retail prices. This, too, discriminates against the poor who must pay the same 30% on the price of goods as the affluent professional or bureaucrat.
The situation for Russian worker-consumers is even more morbid than the above figures suggest since the prices they must pay for basic necessities of life are outlandish. The prices of butter and meats were raised 25 to 30% in 1962. The increases have not been rescinded. A pound of salted butter costs $1.75 in Moscow, and the average buyer must work well over three hours to earn enough for the purchase. In New York the comparable figures are $0.75 a pound and 19 minutes worktime for the average factory worker. The price of beef is approximately the same in Moscow and New York, but the Moscow worker must work five times as long as his New York counterpart to make the purchase. The story is the same for such items as sugar, bread, potatoes, eggs and milk, where the Muscovite must work from 400% to 1900% longer than the New Yorker to purchase these necessities. It is the same in clothing where, for example, an average Russian worker must be prepared to spend five weeks pay for a suit of moderate quality that would require 23 hours worktime for a New York worker. Other Moscow figures: four weeks work for a radio set, two months for a TV set, while even the lowest priced car is for bureaucrats only since it would require three to four years of worktime.
The statistics on food costs are based on state-fixed prices. However, since there is a continuing shortage of these basic goods, the consumer is often obliged to buy on the open market where farmers sell their goods for considerably higher prices. (It is true that on the positive side of the economic picture are the considerably lower rents in Russia compared to the United States. On the other hand, the Russian family gets considerably less for its money. Russian dwellings are notoriously inadequate in quality and terribly overcrowded with a total floor space per person of 100 square feet (10’ x 10’) including kitchen and bathroom.)
Compare these economic facts of Russian life with Deutscher’s “certainly]” of surpassing Western European standards (by 1969) and consider the moral enormity of a view that considers Russia to be reaping the benefits of socialism (as far back as 1959).
 
APOLOGIA FOR IMPERIALISM
Deutscher’s obscuring of the full scope and criminality of Stalinist industrialization is matched by his presentation of Russia’s postwar conquest of Eastern Europe as if it were merely a distorted and unsophisticated application of the Marxist concept of the socialist revolution in permanence. In his introduction to The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology, published less than two years ago, he found that just as Stalin was the manager of the ideas in domestic affairs developed by the man he murdered, so was he the executor of Trotsky’s will to world socialist revolution:
“... his (Stalin’s) single-country socialism was indeed, as Trotsky maintained, a pragmatist’s utopia. The Soviet Union abandoned it to all intents and purposes towards the end of the Second World War, when its troops, in pursuit of Hitler’s armies, marched into a dozen foreign lands, and carried revolution on their bayonets and in the turrets of their tanks.”
This socialism by foreign tanks and bayonets is one of Deutscher’s pet themes that deserves a more detailed view. In discussing the battle of the Vistula, which witnessed the decisive defeat of the Red armies at the gates of Warsaw in 1920, Deutscher wrote (in The Prophet Armed) that the battle “did not change the course of history, as its contemporaries believed – it only delayed it by a quarter of a century.” In other words, Stalin succeeded in Poland where Trotsky and Lenin failed a quarter of a century earlier! Of course, as Deutscher knows and acknowledges, the earlier Russian invasion of Poland took place under entirely different circumstances and with altogether different motives than Stalin’s military conquests.
In 1920, the Red Army invaded Poland as a continuation of a war which had begun as a defensive operation. Large sections of the Ukraine had already been occupied by Polish troops who amused themselves by inflicting all sorts of atrocities upon the Ukrainian people. The enmity of the Ukrainian peasant to Pilsudski’s troops facilitated the Bolshevik military victory in the Ukraine, and when the Red Army reached Polish borders it pursued the retreating Polish armies into Poland proper. This military venture, however, was undertaken against the advice of Trotsky, who did not believe that Russian bayonets were a proper substitute for an absent socialist consciousness of the Polish people. Lenin and the majority of the Bolsheviks did order the continuation of the war into Polish territory but even for them a victorious Red Army was not intended as an occupying force to stuff freedom down Polish throats with Russian bayonets. They were convinced that the Polish people would respond favourably to the Red Army; and perhaps an even greater consideration for the Bolshevik majority was its conviction that a Red Army on the Polish-German border would provide a moral and political impetus to the developing revolutionary consciousness of the German working class. In any case, the 1920 Polish adventure came to be looked on by Lenin and his party as a mistake for precisely those reasons advanced by Trotsky at the time of his minority opposition to the war – socialism cannot be advanced in foreign countries on the points of bayonets.
By contrast, the Russian occupation of Poland in 1945 did not follow the expulsion of Polish troops from Russian soil. (The fate of the Polish armies had been sealed five years earlier in the aftermath of the Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939.) And Stalin’s conquest of Poland had nothing to do with an anticipated rise of Polish socialist consciousness and nothing to do with providing the catalyst for a revolutionary upheaval from below of the West European working class.
Deutscher is actually aware of how removed his concept of socialism by foreign bayonets is from revolutionary socialist principles. He has written, for example, that “it had been a canon of Marxist politics that revolution cannot and must not be carried on the point of bayonets into foreign countries,” and that this canon “also followed from the fundamental attitude of Marxism which looked to the working classes of all nations as to the sovereign agents of socialism and certainly did not expect socialism to be imposed upon peoples from outside.”
Deutscher, with his foreign “socialist” bayonets, is privileged to violate what he recognizes to be fundamental Marxist attitudes. But he has no right to do so and simultaneously pose as a Marxist.
What term other than imperialism can more accurately describe the foreign politics of a country which, by the use or threat of armed force, imposes its will and, at times, its social system on weaker nations? This imperialism may not be generated by the economic drives peculiar to monopoly capitalism, but imperialism, generally defined, is not unique to capitalism. Caesar’s marauding imperial legions were not driven by a need to offset a falling rate of profit. Russia is a modern case in point of a non-capitalist imperialism. It was not impelled to export capital in postwar Europe. It merely exported its social system at bayonet point.
Deutscher frequently waxes wroth over the manner and consequences of Russian “expansionism.” But he is incapable of presenting a clear, consistent repudiation of this imperialism given his view that the Kremlin was exporting revolutionary progress along with some unsavory practices. Even his criticisms of Communist methods often prove to be disarming preludes to contradictory political conclusions rationalizing some of the cruder aspects of Stalinist imperialism. In his Stalin, where we find the most explicit and detailed apologetics, he wrote: “Between the two wars [World War I and II] nearly all those peoples [of Eastern Europe] had been stranded in an impasse; their life had been bogged down in savage poverty and darkness; their politics had been dominated by archaic cliques who had not minded the material and cultural retrogression of their subjects as long as their own privileges had been safe. That whole portion of Europe had emerged from the Second World War and from the hideous ‘school’ of nazism even more destitute, savage and helpless.”
This grim, sweeping canvas of Eastern Europe is drawn in somewhat exaggerated strokes, particularly if one includes Czechoslovakia. But there is method in Deutscher’s levelling postwar Eastern Europe to one pathetic, helpless, savage mass. He is actually preparing us for East Europe’s postwar liberation – by Stalin – who apparently was not a savage! by the Russian Communist Party – which we all know was neither a clique nor archaic! by Russia – which had so firmly established itself as a culturally enlightened nation!
In his words, following his chilling image of pre-Stalinist East European barbarism: “It may well be that for its peoples the only chance of breaking out of their impasse lay in a coup de force such as that to which Stalin goaded them.” Apart from the suggestion that Stalinist conquest of East Europe, with its executions, purges, deportations and overall savagery, provided the “only chance” for freedom, there is the insidious suggestion that Communist regimes were not actually installed by the Kremlin but by Czechs, Poles, Hungarians, etc., merely spurred on by Stalin.
Moved by his own rhetoric, perhaps, Deutscher next reveals more of his hand. “In Poland and Hungary the Communist-inspired land reform fulfilled, perhaps imperfectly, a dream of many generations of peasants and intellectuals. All over eastern Europe the Communists, having nationalized the main industries, vigorously promoted plans for industrialization and full employment such as were beyond the material resources and wit of native ‘private enterprise.’ ...”
The new Peoples’ Democracies “did much to calm nationalist vendettas and to promote co-operation between their peoples. In a word, they opened before eastern Europe broad vistas of common reform and advancement. It was as if Russia had imparted to her neighbors some of her own ways and methods of communal work and social organization. Considering the vastness and the radical character of the upheaval, it is remarkable that Stalin and his men brought it off not without terror, indeed, not without indulging in a long series of coups, but without provoking within the Russian orbit a real civil war such as that waged in Greece.”
Thus Deutscher’s vision. Ours is somewhat less euphoric. In Russia’s postwar aggrandizement we see armies of occupation; the threat and the use of force; trumped-up elections; mounting hatred by peasants, workers, intellectuals; political suppression; bureaucratic inefficiency in industry; low living standards; national indignities. We also see the mass graves of Hungarian revolutionaries – workers, peasants, intellectuals, children – who chose the path of armed resistance since they could nowhere find on totalitarianism’s political map the “broad vistas of common reform and advancement” conjured up by Deutscher.
To soften the imperial edge of Russia’s foreign policy Deutscher has offered some extraordinary explanations for Russian expansionism, including the theory that Stalin imposed Communist satellite regimes on Eastern Europe virtually against his will. In discussing the Teheran, Yalta and Potsdam agreements, Deutscher, in his Russia: What Next?, wrote:
“It may, of course, be argued that Stalin’s behavior during the war was nothing but make-believe, and that all his solemn vows of non-interference in the internal affairs of neighboring countries were dust thrown into the eyes of his Allies. On the other hand, Stalin’s deeds at the time lent weight to his vows ... The point is that both Churchill and Roosevelt had solid evidence that Stalin’s policy was, in fact, geared to self-containment. They saw Stalin acting, not merely speaking, as any nationalist statesman would have done in his place – they saw him divested, as it were, of his communist character. He was approaching the problems of the Russian zone of influence in a manner calculated to satisfy nationalist Russian demands and aspirations and to wreck the chances of communist revolution in those territories.”
If we believe Deutscher, Stalin was committed to a policy of Russian self-containment and shrank from the prospect of imposing Communist regimes in Eastern and Central Europe. What kind of governments did Stalin want in Eastern and Central Europe? Bourgeois governments! At least so Deutscher tells us: “He (Stalin) expected, of course, that victorious Russia would enjoy a position of diplomatic and economic preponderance in neighboring countries, ruled by ‘friendly governments,’ to quote the insipid cliché then fashionable. But he also expected that those governments would remain essentially bourgeois.”
If Stalin preferred friendly bourgeois governments why did he impose Communist regimes on Eastern Europe? Deutscher is quick to answer:
“... at least three factors combined to undo Stalin’s policy of self-containment: genuine revolutionary ferment abroad; the revolutionary urge in Stalin’s own armies; and the jockeying for position among allies rapidly turning into potential enemies.” (Russia: What Next?, p.106)
The first of Deutscher’s three factors is patently false since the regimes the Kremlin imposed on Central and Eastern Europe could in no sense have been a response – either positive or negative – to internal Communist ferment. In Czechoslovakia, Poland, Rumania, etc., Communist parties existed in varying degrees of strength, but in no case, except Yugoslavia, were these parties in a position to take power relying solely upon their own resources. It is Deutscher himself who wrote (as we have quoted above) that Eastern Europe had emerged from the war and from the hideous school of Nazism “even more destitute, savage and helpless” than before the war. By what dialectical contortion is it possible to find, at the same time and the same place, both a state of barbarism (and helplessness) and a state of “genuine revolutionary ferment”? The contradiction is too apparent to dwell upon. The only consistent element is that Deutscher uses each part of his contradiction for the same purpose of rationalizing Russian imperialism.
The second reason offered for Stalin’s abandoning his alleged non-imperialist policy of self-containment – that it was a response to a global revolutionary urge welling up in the ideological breasts of Russian army personnel – is even less serious than the first. It is incredible to think that if Stalin really wanted to maintain capitalism in Eastern Europe after the war, he would succumb, on such a decisive matter, to the allegedly internationalist Communist aspirations of army officers. If these idealistic Communist generals could passively abide Stalin’s murderous purge of the armed forces in the 1930s and then swallow the Nazi-Soviet Pact, is it conceivable that they would be put in a mutinous frame of mind by Stalin’s supposed policy of self-containment?
The third reason given – that Russia abandoned its pre-war policy of self-containment because former war-time allies were becoming potential enemies – has merit. But this is in no way reduces the fact and culpability of Communist imperialism. (One can also point to Washington’s need for political or strategic defense to explain American intervention in Guatemala, Cuba and Vietnam. That would hardly vindicate Washington or absolve it of the charge of imperialism.)
Life and politics are complicated enough in the modern world without needlessly adding to them such exotic political motivations as Deutscher claims to find behind Russian expansionism. What the Kremlin successfully sought was to plunder the economies of East Germany, Central and Eastern Europe. It robbed these countries of enormous wealth (called reparations in the case of East Germany), forcibly imported thousands of workers and technicians to help rebuild Russia’s war-torn industry, and dictated terms of economic trade most favorable to Russia. Thievery was not Russia’s only objective. The Cold War was under way before the smoke of World War II had lifted in Europe and Asia. Only two great and inimical powers emerged from the war, the United States and Russia, and the Kremlin instinctively sought to secure its position, politically and militarily, in Europe. In addition, to achieve its immediate economic, political and military objectives, Russia was obliged to frustrate, whenever possible, the independent revolutionary potential that inhered in the anti-Nazi resistance movements throughout Europe.
Stalin understood that these ambitions and needs could not be met in deals with bourgeois governments, but through the direct annexation of foreign territories or the imposition of Russian-dominated Communist regimes wherever this could be done with some show of plausibility (such as trotting out old Czarist claims to parts of Poland) and a minimum risk of war with the United States. To believe that Stalin, out of conservatism or a dogmatic allegiance to his theory of socialism in one country, was reluctant to fulfill these imperialist ambitions is to be guilty of misreading history or of underplaying the venality of Stalinism or, as in the case of Deutscher, to be guilty of both.
A recent example of Deutscher’s apologia for Russian imperialism was his performance at the nationally televised Teach-in held in Washington, DC, in May 1965. There Deutscher rejected the reciprocal responsibility of Washington and Moscow for the Cold War, arguing, instead, that it was the exclusive, initial responsibility of Western imperialism. Evidence offered of Russia’s pacific intentions included his claim that Russian armed forces had been reduced to “less than three million men by the end of 1947.” This is an example of a man shaving a statistic to fit a theory, since by the end of 1947 Russia’s armed forces were closer to 4,000,000 than 3,000,000 men. But even accepting Deutscher’s pared figure, approximately 6% of the adult Russian male population was in the armed forces. The actual figure is closer to 8% and both figures are considerably higher if computed on the basis of able-bodied men under the age of 60, and further increased if we add the well-equipped armies of secret police and other paramilitary organizations.
Considering that this commitment to the forces of destruction was made by a country horribly drained of economic and human resources we have a better measure of Russia’s post-war militarism. And we get a clearer image of Deutscher’s design when we remember that he conveniently omitted from his picture of Russia’s military posture such factual details as the strength of Stalinist armies maintained in subjugated, occupied countries: 22 divisions in East Germany, two divisions in Poland, two in Hungary, two in Rumania, troops in Austria, Finland, Port Arthur and the Baltics (gobbled up in 1940) and other thousands of supply troops in these areas and in Russia to keep the imperial fighting legions in combat readiness.
In the same Washington speech and in the same spirit of apologetics, Deutscher went on to claim that the Kremlin never did “threaten to overrun Europe” and, what is more, “I don’t think that the attack on Stalin’s government on the basis of its alleged threat to peace of the world was ever justified.” One difficulty with the first statement is that Stalin did, in effect, overrun one-third of the continent outside of Russian borders – East Germany, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Hungary, the Baltics; and that Stalin had designs on West Germany is part of the historic record. That Russia did not directly threaten the rest of Western Europe does not mean that such fears had no basis in reality. As for his denial that Stalin’s government “was ever” a threat to the peace of the world, it is at such variance with history from the time of the Nazi-Soviet Pact (was this not a threat to world peace?) until Stalin’s death, that it is perhaps best to let the remark speak for itself.
 
THE RESTORATIONS BUGBEAR
An age-old device of apologists for reaction is to defend what exists, wicked as it is acknowledged to be, lest sudden upheaval bring on something worse. Deutscher is an old hand at the game. Whenever Communist imperialism has been threatened by revolution he admits that life was bad for the people but it would have been worse if the insurgents won. We would have had, among other things – bourgeois restoration! Accordingly, in The Prophet Unarmed, written shortly after the Hungarian Revolution, Deutscher wrote: “Eastern Europe (Hungary, Poland, and Eastern Germany), however, found itself almost on the brink of bourgeois restoration at the end of the Stalin era; only Soviet armed power (or its threat) stopped it there.” (p.462) This is Deutscher – parentheses and all.
Earlier in this essay, in a summary of the actual program, objectives, leadership and conduct of the Hungarian revolution, we refuted Deutscher’s slander against the Hungarian people. Here let us look at Deutscher’s more general bugbear of “bourgeois restoration,” a hoax so untenable that he can do no more than mention it in footnotes and in passing although the thought is of the greatest theoretical and political significance.
Consider some relevant facts about Hungary. There, as in other Eastern European countries, the bourgeoisie was never strong. Much of Hungary was controlled by foreign capital. In part to protect what it could of its industry from this predatory grip of foreign financiers, the pre-war Hungarian governments nationalized a good deal of the native industry, thereby further undercutting the power of Hungarian capitalists.
During the war, Hungary was a German ally. As a result, about one-third of Hungarian industry fell into the hands of German capitalists and the Nazi state. Excluding land and buildings, around one-fourth of Hungarian wealth was German controlled. With Germany’s defeat, the power of Hungarian capitalism was further weakened since much of her industry, left ownerless, had to be taken over by the state. Other industries, owned by Hungarians who collaborated with the Nazis, were also taken over by the state.
That Hungary was a German ally became the legal basis for Russia to occupy that country. As conquerors, the Russians proceeded to destroy what was left of the Hungarian bourgeoisie, dismantling, looting and taking over outright ownership of considerable sections of Hungarian industry. When the Russians installed their puppet Communist government, the two forces combined to uproot and decisively destroy the residues of capitalism.
How can capitalism be restored in Hungary in light of the above? Capitalism requires capitalists. Who are they? Even if they could be brought back from the beyond how could they divide a nationalized Hungarian industry, much of it built during the past 20 years?
Capitalism in Hungary is dead. It is merely Deutscher’s Frankenstein, created to frighten the unthinking and to shore up his opposition to the Hungarian Revolution.
In The Prophet Outcast, Deutscher even tracks down bourgeois elements still operating in Russia itself! It is a discovery pertinent to our discussion of his apologia for Russian imperialism as can be seen in the first sentence of the following quotation:
“The Stalinist state [Russia], by promoting or assisting for its own reasons revolution in eastern Europe and Asia, created formidable counter checks to its own bourgeois tendencies. The post-war industrialization, the immense expansion of the Soviet working class, the growth of mass education, and the reviving self-assurance of the workers tended to subdue the bourgeois elements in the state; and after Stalin’s death the bureaucracy was compelled to make concession after concession to the egalitarianism of the masses. To be sure, the tension between the bourgeois and the socialist elements of the state continues; and, being inherent in the structure of any post capitalist society, it was bound to persist for a very long time to come.” (p.308)
After nearly 50 years of revolution, civil war, nationalization, collectivization, industrialization, terror, purges, slave labor camps, deportations and war, to discover bourgeois elements in Russia strong enough to produce tension in their conflict with the “socialist elements of the state” is no less astounding than if Deutscher had announced that he had unearthed descendants of the Lost Tribes of Israel boring from within the Kremlin walls. (We assume that Deutscher has more in mind than peasants who prefer to work their own private plots to working on the collective or state farms, and that he will not bring up the Liberman plan as an example of bourgeois forces or plots in Russia.)
Yet 17 years ago, Deutscher wrote on the same subject in an altogether different vein:
“Finally, the whole structure of Russian society has undergone a change so profound and so many sided that it cannot really be reversed. It is possible to imagine a violent reaction of the Russian people itself against the state of siege in which it has been living so long. It is even possible to imagine something like a political restoration. But it is certain that even such a restoration would touch merely the surface of Russian society and that it would demonstrate its impotence vis-à-vis the work done by the revolution even more thoroughly than the Stuart and the Bourbon restorations had done. For of Stalinist Russia it is even truer than of any other revolutionary nation that “twenty years have done the work of twenty generations.” (Stalin: A Political Biography, p.569).
If Deutscher knew before 1949 that capitalism was reduced to impotence how can he find significant struggles with bourgeois elements after nearly another 20 years of that revolution (which presumably does the work of another 20 generations)? It all depends on what Deutscher wants to prove at a particular moment. In the earlier quotation from Stalin he is trying to demonstrate Stalin and Stalinism’s superiority to Hitler and Nazism, for which he finds evidence in the permanence with which Stalinism has destroyed capitalism, whereas Nazism proved to be a savage historic interlude that neither fundamentally nor permanently altered the German bourgeois order. In the more recent quotation, Deutscher reincarnates tension-producing bourgeois forces to show, among other things, the basically progressive feature of Russian expansion in Eastern Europe, since this expansion, he says, served to “countercheck” the alleged bourgeois elements in Russia itself.
 
DEUTSCHER: THE BERNSTEIN OF TOTALITARIANISM
The conception of a society’s democratic evolution through its massive industrial growth is not the original “socialist” contribution of Isaac Deutscher or the lesser apologists for totalitarianism. It is reminiscent, above all, of the Revisionist school which first made itself felt as a force in the socialist movement before the turn of the century. Under the tutelage of Eduard Bernstein, this school advanced the concept that capitalism would bow peacefully before the requirements of its industrial development, furthered in its natural evolution by reforming pressure from the mass of people, and finally emerging as a full-fledged democratic socialist society.
Where Marx saw industrial growth and concentration of capital sharpening the antagonism between capital and labor, Bernstein saw the opposite tendency in the growth of vast cartels and the credit system. In Bernstein’s estimate, the expansion of the modern corporation entailed the emergence of a new middle class of property-controlling shareholders which would continue to grow at the expense of the social power of the industrial magnate. This new middle class would be able to adjust itself to the needs of an expanding economy and, through the continued growth of trusts and the liberal use of credit, overcome the anarchy of production and eliminate economic crisis.
Economic growth and diffusion of wealth via the growth of the trusts would encourage the adaptive new middle class to discard the laissez-faire doctrine that that government is best which governs least. Government would learn to perform the role of mediator and benevolent regulator of society, and the middle class could permit, might even encourage, the extension of progressive social welfare legislation and political democracy. In the meantime, the working class through its political parties, trade unions and cooperative societies would assert itself as a democratizing influence on society as a whole.
Revisionism gained considerable strength in the German socialist movement after Engels’ death since its predictions of growing prosperity, democratic reform and peace corresponded to the experience of the past thirty years: after 1871, Germany’s industrial indices pointed upward; the ten-year periodic crises predicted by Marx did not occur; the Social Democratic party gained many adherents and victories at the polls; cooperative societies sprouted all over the nation; democratic and social reforms were effectuated; and there had been no major European conflict since the Franco-Prussian War.
Indeed, the case that Bernstein made for evolutionary socialism was a thousand times stronger than that presented by modern authoritarian “socialists.”
Bernstein’s basic revision of Marxian socialism, similar to Deutscher’s, was in his substitution of automatic laws attendant to industrial expansion for the mobilization of the mass I of people as the catalyst of social revolution. The working class would not have to emancipate itself; socialism was free to come from above (although Deutscher pays occasional lip service to the necessity of a developing socialist consciousness of the Russian people as a precondition for full democratization of communist society).
This schema had its predictable political effect. Since the laws of capitalist development insured its socialist negation, these laws were not to be interfered with by extremist anti-capitalist activities and there was no longer the need for a socialist party to wage a revolutionary struggle for political power. The socialist movement, perforce, need only be a responsible movement of reform. And, since Germany was the advanced capitalist vanguard of Europe, Revisionism, despite the pacifism of its leading personality, prepared the German socialist movement for its chauvinist course a decade later (just as Deutscherite revisionism, despite its predilection for the Marxist idiom, prepares sections of the left-wing world for totalitarian rationalization).
In place of the adaptation of a corporate middle class to social progress, the Revisionists adapted themselves to bourgeois parliamentary democracy.
Where the Bernsteinites followed their theories through politically to the advantage of capitalism, their modern methodological cousins come to the aid of Stalinism. If Russian totalitarianism is the precursor of socialism, then despite its moral shortcomings, Stalinism must be defended against all comers, be they the forces of Western capitalism or the rebellions of its oppressed.
Most striking – and damning – in the parallel between Bernstein and Deutscher is the consistent application of their respective theories to the point of crass apologetics for the imperialist ambitions of Kaiserism and Communism.
In his book, Evolutionary Socialism, Bernstein described Germany as a nation “which has indeed carried out, and is carrying out, its honourable share in the civilising work of the world.” This civilizing function of German colonialism was spelled out:
“If we take into account the fact that Germany now imports yearly a considerable amount of colonial produce, we must also say to ourselves that the time may come when it will be desirable to draw at least a part of these products from our own colonies. However speedy socialists may imagine the course of development in Germany towards themselves to be, yet we cannot be blind to the fact that it will need a considerable time before a whole series of other countries are converted to socialism (emphasis added). But if it is not reprehensible to enjoy the produce of tropical plantations, it cannot be so to cultivate such plantations ourselves. Not the whether but the how is here the decisive point. It is neither necessary that the occupation of tropical lands by Europeans should injure the natives in their enjoyment of life, nor has it hitherto usually been the case. Moreover, only a conditional right of the savages to the land occupied by them can be recognized. The higher civilisation ultimately can claim a higher right. Not the conquest, but the cultivation, of the land gives the historical legal title to its use.”
Bernstein’s brief for German imperialism is clear and direct. Deutscher’s rationalizations for Stalinist imperialism, wary and subtle. But the basic similarities are there.
In the earlier period, socialists were cautioned against excessive denunciations of Germany’s overseas adventures because her fate was related to the rest of the world: so long as “it will need a considerable amount of time before a whole series of other countries are converted to socialism” it was neither realistic nor desirable to demand that Germany abandon her imperialist policies. Similarly, today, the distance of Western countries from socialism is used to excuse Russian imperialism: so long as Western powers pursue a colonial policy, socialists have no right to demand of Russia that she voluntarily relinquish her East European sphere of influence and thereby weaken her status as a world power.
For Bernstein, the “right of savages” to their land is “conditional” upon the “higher right” of a “higher civilization.” Whoever has followed the authoritarian apologia for Stalinist imperialism knows that it is largely based upon almost identical reasoning: instead of the lower order of savagery, there is the lower order of capitalism whose national entities cannot be given priority over the higher right of a superior “socialist economy” brought by Russia to all of Eastern Europe and the Baltic lands at the point of Russian bayonets; the Polish bourgeoisie may have had a formal legal title to Poland but it is Russia which Deutscher implies had the historical legal title.
At least the gentle Bernstein was concerned with the method of German expansionism (“not the whether but the how” of colonialism is the “decisive point”) and his inexcusable defense of German imperialism was a defense of a culturally superior country’s exploitation of lower, sometimes savage, societies. The modern authoritarian revisionist, on the other hand, does not find the methods of Stalinist expansionism the “decisive point,” and no one can refer to pre-war Poland and Czechoslovakia as primitive societies; on the contrary, Poland had as great a cultural heritage as its Russian “liberators” and Czechoslovakia a more advanced technology.
The analogy between Bernstein and Deutscher, between Revisionist and modern “authoritarian socialism,” does not hold at every point. There are differences as well as similarities and the differences are illustrative, in their own way, of the intellectual and moral debilitation of the socialist movement today. One dissimilarity is a matter of deception. The earlier Revisionists presented their views as a criticism of Marxism; the authoritarian Revisionists feel compelled to pass off their apologias as the last word in Marxist thought.
The paramount difference can be found in a conflicting evaluation of democracy. To the extent that the socialist movement accepted the Revisionists’ reliance on the economic dynamism of modern capitalism, circa 1900, its revolutionary militancy was subverted and its capitulation to reaction potential. But the early Revisionists did not look upon political democracy as a luxury, expendable for a few decades or so. On the contrary, the primary practical concern of the Revisionists was social reform and political democracy at home; these, in fact, were the fetishes of Revisionism which induced Bernstein to shock the socialist movement with his famous cryptic declaration that for him the movement and the present means everything and the socialist future nothing. The modern authoritarian socialists, on the other hand, have adapted the Revisionist concept of a progressive, self-evolving economic system, but they have muted the Revisionists’ immediate concern with democracy. This emasculated Revisionism is then drawn to a consistent and pernicious conclusion and placed to the intellectual advantage of a politically uncivilized totalitarian regime. Bernstein’s dictum is, in effect, transposed by the authoritarian revisionists to read: the present is nothing and everything must be subordinated to Russia’s predestined socialist end.
Deutscher endows Communist ideology with the power to propel autocratic socialism onto democratic paths. Presumably, the distorted socialist trappings adorning Communist ideology and the circulation of selected, sometimes censored, socialist classics serve to effect a democratic transformation as industry continues to expand and undercut the economic rationale for totalitarian practices. However, the socialist texts and slogans are only a light travelling case in the Party’s intellectual baggage. While the Kremlin is obliged to incorporate much of the Marxist idiom in its propaganda, its major ideological thrust is, and must be, designed to tear the heart out of socialism in order to justify, morally and politically, the continuation of one-party rule with its concomitant suppression of democracy, denial of civil liberties, etc.
Nevertheless, there is some truth to Deutscher’s claim. For reasons which we need not elaborate here, the Kremlin is obliged to bring millions into contact with socialist ideas. This is one of the internal dilemmas – or contradictions – of Communism, since reading Marx and Lenin undoubtedly serves to heighten awareness of the contradiction between Communist reality and socialist theory. This nourishes democratic, oppositional moods from below which is an altogether different proposition from Deutscher’s vision of an ideologically fed, self-reforming ruling Party. There is reason to believe that those who are influenced by the socialist aspects of Communist ideology will be driven into more active forms of opposition to the Kremlin hierarchs.
 
REFORM AND REALITY
Yet there is reform in Russia, and here the authoritarian “socialist” believes he has his trump as he plays the relaxation of terror and improved living standards to prove that his theories and predictions are in harmony with reality.
Reform is a fact in post-Stalin Russia and a welcome one. But to welcome reforms is not necessarily to welcome the society within which they are achieved. The Kremlin’s political relaxation does not imply relaxation of socialist opposition to the continuing totalitarian system in Russia.
The reforms are welcome for their own sake and for the additional specific reason that they are in part a response to pressure from below. In this we find confirmation of a fundamental humanist assumption that man is moved by an elemental instinct to gain and enjoy freedom and a further repudiation of the melancholy view that totalitarianism reduces man to an isolated atom, incapable of expression, pliant, terrified, demoralized, inept, adaptable. This theory received its most heavy-handed elaboration in the writings of Hannah Arendt. But it is also explicit and implicit in Deutscher’s elitism that the Russian people lost the ability to think and act as a result of Stalinist terror and therefore had to rely on dispensations from a self-reforming ruling circle.
We also welcome the reforms because we have learned from history that they do not always pacify a dissatisfied population but rather encourage people to demand more and act in their own behalf. In Russia we have reason to hope that this process will assume revolutionary proportions as the spiralling demands for reform rise above the theoretically permissive limits of a totalitarian society, drawn at the point where institutionalized democratic forms begin.
Also encouraging are those changes which are not strictly reforms in the sense of a direct and immediate alleviation of the hardships of life for the majority of people under totalitarianism. We have in mind, above all, the so-called economic reforms inspired by Yevsey Liberman, designed to streamline the nationalized economy through providing greater local autonomy for economic managers, money incentives and bonuses to managers and workers based on plant profit instead of production and permitting prices to shift in response to changes in the market. (The Liberman Plan has nothing to do with a reintroduction of capitalism as some writers think.)
Raising totalitarianism’s economic efficiency does not inspire any hosannahs in this corner, even if some economic benefits eventually filter down to the producers. But the struggle of economic administrators to overcome Party resistance to the Liberman proposals reflects a growing cleavage in Russian society between the men of the Party apparatus and the technicians and economic managers who are more concerned with efficiency and their own authority than with ideology and Party controls, although the division is not always clear and political and economic authority overlaps.
Since one-party control is the natural state of affairs in a totalitarian society, any move by any other segment of that society, be it the economic managers, the scientists, the military, the governmental administrators, to encroach upon the supremacy of the Party in a particular sphere places enormous stress on the monolithic character of the system. In this sense, the new authority which the economic managers have gained with the Liberman proposals tends to loosen important strands in the totalitarian fabric. And this we welcome most heartily; not because we think that economic managers are liberal or progressive, but because it tends to encourage resistance from below to the overall repressive policies of both the Party leaders and economic managers on top. Also, as competition of various bureaucracies with each other and with the ruling Party intensifies, each may feel obliged to seek wider support in lower social and political echelons thereby further weakening the system as lines are drawn more firmly and larger numbers become more directly involved in the struggles.
For all the changes and reforms in Russia, the system remains totalitarian. The Party is still firmly in control and not a single democratic institution is even on the horizon. Only the Communist party is permitted a legal existence. The law, despite additional reforms in the past year, remains, in the sum of its theory and practice, the most reactionary of any advanced Western nation. The “trade unions” despite a greater degree of automony have not lost their essential Stalinist function of supervising and disciplining the working class in the interests of Party control and greater productivity. Strikes are forbidden and the few recent spontaneous strikes we know of have been brutally suppressed. The manifestations of anti-Semitism have abated somewhat but are far from eliminated. Culturally, Party policy after Khrushchev still belongs to the dark ages despite concessions forced out of the regime by a restive and emboldened younger generation.
Russia remains a society where the people have less freedom and less to eat than in any industrialized capitalist nation. If it should be accepted in the left-wing world that such a nation can be defined as socialist in the spirit of Deutscherism, then socialism will have been crowned with the thorns of reaction and its humanist and democratic soul crucified on the cross of nationalisation and ideology.
November 1965

Notes
1. This view of Malenkov and Khrushchev prepared to sacrifice Communism in East Germany does not prevent the same Deutscher from writing the exact opposite elsewhere. Thus, in The Great Contest when discussing Eastern Europe (he explicitly includes East Germany as a part of Eastern Europe) he wrote: “To be sure, Stalin’s successors cannot and will not preside over the liquidation of the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe” (p. 52). As we shall see, such blatant contradictions are an integral part of Deutscher’s special style of apologetics for totalitarianism.
2. As expressed in an earlier article by Deutscher in Nowa Kultura.
3. Deutscher did not footnote his source. It had to be uncovered. Naum Jasny’s article appeared in the October 1951 issue of The Journal of Political Economy, published by the University of Chicago Press. Deutscher does not mention that in the August 1952 issue of the same journal there is a critical review of Jasny’s essay by A. David Redding, which, in this writer’s opinion, was as effective as Jasny’s subsequent rejoinder was unconvincing.
4. In David Dallin’s The Real Soviet Russia (Yale University Press, 1944) and his Forced Labor In Soviet Russia, co-authored with Boris Nicolaevsky (Yale University Press, 1948), the number of camp inmates is placed within the 7–12 million range on the basis of exhaustive research and painstaking analysis.
5. Malenkov also addressed the Twentieth Congress. His speech, we can be sure, was not given a stormy ovation since he was already in disgrace and his confession in preparation. But according to Deutscher, in the same article quoted above, “it was in Malenkov’s heyday that the Stalin cult was in fact undermined.” If this is the case, what is to stop one from reading Deutscher’s applausograph as follows: the delegates to the Twentieth Congress applauded Khrushchev (the man who wanted to compromise the fight against Stalinism) as much as it applauded Mikoyan (practically a Trotskyist in his assault on Stalinism) and barely acknowledged the existence of Malenkov (in whose heyday the Stalin cult was undermined) because they wanted to call a halt to de-Stalinization!
6. In the New Statesman, April 17, 1964, Deutscher draws a more accurate portrait of Khrushchev that reads like a point by point refutation of his earlier glorified sketch.
7. Apart from the obvious contradiction in these two versions, there is a deeper, more fundamental methodological contradiction. Deutscher believes that because of Russia’s backwardness and isolation, political repressions were inevitable there. Now, China today is more backward, economically and culturally, than Russia of the late twenties and thirties, and was even more primitive seven years ago. How was it possible, then, for Deutscher to find a free, democratic socialist welfare state emerging in China in 1957 when, by his own reasoning, the “affinities between Maoism in power and Stalinism” should have been even closer than today? If there is a “contradiction,” as he calls it, between democratic socialist strivings and “China’s primitive pre-industrial structure of society” in 1964, how could that contradiction have been overcome seven years earlier?
8. There may be no logical contradiction between these two versions, since it is theoretically possible that a Russian general riding over Europe in blood and glory would also try to institute reforms at home. But it is only theoretically possible. Any such adventure, as Deutscher must understand, would bring on a full-scale atomic war. To think that in a total atomic war, a Russian Bonapartist regime either could or would want to ameliorate the harshness of Russian life is to lose contact with the realities of this world. The more obvious contradiction is in Version C where Marshal Zhukov, the chief “Bonapartist” contender who would ride in blood and glory (in Version A), turns out to be a bit of a pacifist who resented Khrushchev’s adoption of Molotov’s hard and militaristic foreign policy.
9. There is a note of special pique in Deutscher’s references to Max Shachtman. One reason may be that Shachtman is the individual most responsible, in this country, for developing the theory of bureaucratic collectivism. Another explanation may be found in the fact that Shachtman is the author of a series of brilliant polemics directed against Deutscher and his theories. Needless to say, Deutscher never replied.
10. In this writer’s view, the Bolshevik Revolution was by far the most inspiring and democratic social revolution in all history. Its scope had no precedent, its heroism and aspiration not matched until the Hungarian Revolution of October 1956. The Revolution’s relevance for socialists today is – or should be – in the evidence it afforded that even in backward Russia, the majority of the politically conscious and oppressed could be persuaded (not coerced) – even if only briefly – to accept the leadership of a sophisticated revolutionary socialist party which hid neither its program nor its aims. Never before did the majority of the class in whose interests a revolution was organized prove to be its major, active supporters and soldiers. This is not to deny that either Lenin or Leninism or the Soviet regime in its first years are deserving of critical review. The mistakes were many from the standpoint of revolutionary democratic socialism, but that is the subject for another article.
 




The New York teachers’ demand for a $1,050 annual raise is actually their rock bottom requirement for keeping pace with the rising cost of living.
In the past ten years teaching has been reduced from a relatively well paid profession to an underpaid and overburdened drudge. A few pertinent facts:
Until December 1 the pay schedule for teachers was the same as it had been in 1928. This, despite a rise of 50 per cent in the cost of living between 1939 and 1946 (according to the latest conservative estimates of the Bureau of Labor). Since the first of this month, teachers have received a $250 annual raise in income but this is pathetically small when compared with their real wages which have been almost halved.
An additional $350 cost of living bonus was granted but there are two hitches in this statistically impressive gain. First, it is only a temporary raise and not an increase in basic pay rates. Secondly, it must be remembered that the 1928 pay schedule worked on the assumption that teachers would be tax exempt. In 1938, however, this exemption was removed and teachers had to pay a rising tax deduction on a constant salary. The $350 temporary bonus therefore barely covers the tax-sliced take home pay of the teachers.
The problems of students are intimately bound up with the economic conditions of teachers. For low pay cuts the efficiency of teachers and lessens the attractiveness of the teaching profession. As a direct result of the inadequate pay rates there has been a steady deterioration in the quality of classes. The shortage of teachers in the school system has led to a situation where teachers are unable to pay individual attention to their students. During the month of September alone more than 800 teachers left the school system and no replacements have been made. The total annual reduction in teaching staff has been estimated at around 2,000 in New York City alone. This decrease will be greater proportionately in the coming period unless something is done to make more attractive the pay scales of the teaching profession.
In a recent three-year survey by the National Council of Teachers of English the low scholastic level of students of English was attributed to the overcrowded classrooms. It was discovered that English teachers were forced to handle as many as 220 students a day, assume a number of extra duties even though the recommended maximum number of students is 150 a day.
This fight, it should be added, is being conducted not only by New York teachers but also by teachers throughout the rest of the country. In a number of cities there have been successful strikes by teachers – in Minneapolis, for instance. In a number of other cities throughout the country teachers are still on strike, fighting for demands even more modest than those sought by New York teachers.
In view of these circumstances it is the obligation of all high school students and student organizations to support the legitimate demands of the teachers for pay rises. The Socialist Youth League stands squarely behind their demands.
 




Every socialist knows that in a real socialist country the greatest effort would be made to guarantee the education of its youth. Education would, of course, be free with the greatest latitude allowed the individual student in choosing his curriculum and developing his ideas. The individual student in a socialist land will be an economically secure individual, which will relieve him from worry about immediate needs and will give him more time to study.
For women, education under socialism will have an added significance; to place them on an equal social and intellectual level with men. What socialism means for the student then is summed up in a few phrases: education for an increasing proportion of the population, experimentation and freedom of thought as opposed to regimentation, an economically independent student and an extensive co-educational school system.
That Russia is already a socialist state, has for a long time been the claim of the Kremlin. That this claim is a monstrous lie has for as long a time been the claim of revolutionary socialists.
 
The Russian Attitude
Nor is it mere speculation that the Russian government has failed to provide proper education for its youth. The facts are there for anyone to read directly from Russian sources. Russian laws and statements related to education are, from the socialist point of view, self-condemning; by their own words and deeds the Kremlin leaders point to themselves as a class which prohibits a widespread, not to speak of socialist, education of its youth.
Let us examine these points to see how education today is more the antithesis than an example of a socialist society.
1) Education for an ever increasing proportion of the population: In all of Russia with its nearly 200 million, there are only 550 thousand high school students. After ten years of supposed “socialism” in Russia there is this pitifully small number of high school students! This is a fact, not invented by the author, but found in an article by Sergei Kaftanov, the Minister of Higher Education in the USSR. In this article, published in the October 1946 issue of a bulletin put out by the National Council of American Soviet Friendship, Kaftanov writes: “A student body of 550 thousand attended 806 institutions of higher learning in the Soviet Union in the academic year 1945–46.”
And what about future plans for Russian youth. Kaftanov informs us: “During the next five-year period the number of students in the higher schools is to be increased to 674 thousand.” What sort of socialism is it where, with millions of youth deprived of a high school education, only an additional 124 thousand can hope to be admitted during the next five years?
 
No Intellectual Room
2. Experimentalism versus regimentation – The position of Russian youth today in the schools is analogous to the social status of the Russian worker. Just as the Russian workers are held in a tight exploitive grip of the state, so are the students deprived of any intellectual elbow room by the school authorities. There is no real learning in Russian schools, for that requires investigation, debate and exchange of opinions between the students and with their instructors. In Russian schools, however, that is strictly taboo. The very fact that there is not one student organization in Russia that has not been initiated or wholly approved by the Russian state is indicative of the lack of freedom and thinking in the schools. In an article from Pravda, August 2, 1943: “Practical experience of the best teachers long ago refuted all the talk that compulsion or punishment was harmful.” Sounds as if Pravda were quoting a Nazi expert on education! The essence of Stalinist school methods can be seen in a series of twenty regulations first printed in Vchtelskaya Gazeta – official publication of the Department of Education of the S.U. (reprinted in the January 1944 issue of American Teacher). Just a few of the 20 rules:
Rule 3 – “Obey unquestioningly the order of the school and the teacher.”
Rule 9 – “Arise and stand at attention upon the entrance either of the teacher or the director of the school and on their exit from the class.”
Rule 12 – “Be respectful to the principal and the teacher. In meeting the principal and the teacher away from the school, greet them with a polite bow, boys removing their hats.”
“Compulsion,” “Punishment,” and bowing before the teacher in the manner of a serf before a lord, these are the self-proclaimed earmarks of education in Russia. This despotic educational policy is not accidental. It is a necessity for the bureaucratic class in Russia to keep its youth intellectually sterile and to train them to take orders. A progressive educational method might produce a generation that doesn’t remove its hat to a director and might question, doubt and act accordingly.
 
Militarization of Education
Militarism is playing an ever greater role in Russian “education.” Not only is more emphasis placed on military drill during school hours, but male students are required’ – not asked – to spend many hours in the Russian equivalent of the ROTC. Also, a number of military schools have been opened almost exclusively for the children of the wealthier classes in Russia. At these academies youngsters from the ages of 8 are dressed in uniforms and taught all the aspects of modern warfare in a manner strangely’; reminiscent of Mussolini’s corps of 8-year-old soldiers.
3. Economic status of the student – By and large the bulk of high school and university students do not suffer from want, for the simple reason that Russian schools above the 7th grade are open only to those who can afford it. In Russia one must be able to afford a “socialist” education. In two Russian decrees (Oct. 3rd and 12th, 1940) free education above the seventh grade was abolished. Students in secondary schools must pay 200 rubles annually in urban centers, and 150 rubles in rural districts. College students must pay 400 rubles in the city and 300 in rural areas. The tuition in music and art schools was set at 500 rubles.
Almost immediately after the decrees were passed 600,000 of the poorer students were forced out of the schools and universities. Because of the small income of the average family in Russia they cannot secure anything more than the most elementary education for their children. The managers and officials, however, who receive many times the income of the Russian worker find no difficulty in sending sons to a smart Suvorov Military Academy or their daughters to an exclusive ballet school. The ruling class is worried about the low level of production and shortage of labor power. One way of forcing Russian youth into the mines, factories and fields is to make schooling financially prohibitive. There is another more direct means of forcing youth into industry – the labor draft. From July to mid-August of this year hundreds of thousands of 14-year-old boys and girls were forced into the grey uniform of the labor reserve. The plan is to give most of these children a two-year course in a factory trade or railroading after which they will start work in their trade. (N.Y. Times, Nov. 13, 1946)
4. Co-education in Russia – Russian women today are assuming more and more the social status of women in bourgeois countries. No longer are women being educated to think for themselves, and actually to be, the intellectual and social equals of men. Instead, they are being taught that their role in society is to work and bear children for the state. The latest abortion and divorce laws bear this out. But there is no evidence so striking as the end of co-education in the Russian schools. Extensive co-education has always been an inherent part of progressive educational methods. However, in Russia a decree was issued in August 1943 abolishing co-education. (Vchitelskaya Gazeta, Aug. 1943) All children from the ages of 7 up are to be separated according to sex, and a special curriculum arranged for girls along the lines of domestic virtues. In explaining the significance of this new policy a school director in an official report wrote:
“A girl as a future mother must know how to care for children and how to educate them. Whatever is said about the various duties of men and women in the education of children, mother is always mother ...”
The degeneration of education is not an isolated phenomenon. Rather, it is an integral part of the pattern of life in contemporary Russia. The needs of the bureaucracy conflicts with the needs of its youth. The former requires a large military and labor force and a constantly increasing population which is well schooled in acquiescence; a thinking, educated section of people is a threat to any despotic rule.
 




There is a marked recession in the “youth consciousness” of the American people. In daily conversations, in the press, even in labor organizations, and strangely enough even on the campus, we no longer hear the “student and working class youth” discussed to any significant degree as a category with unique problems.
Primarily responsible for this apathy is the unquestionable improvement in the status of young people today. Whereas 15 years ago there were 5,000,000 unemployed youth, today the total number of unemployed workers is barely half that figure. Also the wage differential between young and adult workers has been pared down considerably.
When a high school grad did get a job during the depression he made 10 or 12 dollars a week. Today it is a commonplace for a 19 or 20-year-old, in terms of real wages, to get twice that. The result is that the young workers who feel that they have found a relatively safe and permanent niche for themselves identify their problems with those of the older workers in the shop.
In the high schools and colleges it is pretty much the same story. Students are lulled by a sense of security. They have jobs, careers and professions mapped out for themselves never doubting that their ambitions will be realized. The fact that the Stalinist American Youth For Democracy with its superficially progressive program has been unable to become a real force on the campus is indicative not only of the bad politics of that organization but reflects also an unhealthy lethargy among students.
 
Purpose of Column
The purpose of the subsequent articles in this column will be many fold:

To show that whatever validity there is to this sense of 	security, it is only a temporary phenomenon. That the depression is 	inevitable and that the first and hardest hit category will be the 	youth.
 
That despite the “prosperity” young workers and 	students are still living under considerable handicaps. Segregation 	in the school system, racial quotas in schools and industry, child 	labor, inadequate educational and trade facilities are still some of 	the chief characteristics of life for American youth; conscription 	will be another problem shortly.
That youth in foreign lands face even greater obstacles, 	giving us a telescopic view of what is in store for American youth 	under capitalism.

The overall purpose of these articles is to reawaken consciousness of the special needs of young people and they will be addressed, above all, to the young readers of Labor Action, so that they may become acquainted with the program and activities of the Socialist Youth League, Youth Section of the Workers Party. The readers are encouraged to participate in this column through questions and discussion articles.
 




The vicious racial quotas and segregation system in Southern schools is. slowly becoming more characteristic of the “progressive” Northern institutions. While not as open or common as in the South, discriminatory practices are being tacitly introduced into schools and colleges above the Mason-Dixon line.
In New York four fifths of the universities ask prospective students about their racial, religious and national status. That this is not merely for identification is made clear by a number of facts published by the American Jewish Congress. For example, among most New York medical colleges a racial quota has been established which effectively excludes all but a small number of Jews. The following comparative table of Jewish students in these colleges is significant:



Year


Total
Enrollment


Jewish
Students


Percentage




1920


533


241


45.2




1925


513


176


34.3




1930


556


168


30.2




1935


519


129


24.8




1940


574


108


18.8



Not even one-half the number of Jewish students were admitted in 1940 as compared with 1920. There was no corresponding decline in applicants.
 
Fewer Jewish Youth Admitted to Schools
The inability of Jewish students to enter New York medical colleges is an even more graphic illustration of growing discrimination. Between 1920 and 1925 the average student body of N.Y.C. medical colleges consisted of 46.8 per cent Jews. The 1936–40 average for N.Y.C., with its 2½ million Jews, reveals that only 21.8 per cent of the students are of Jewish extraction though the number of applicants have remained more or less constant.
This latest anti-Semitic trend is not limited to New York Schools. It is increasingly becoming the national pattern. This too can best be illustrated by’ a simple fact: between 1925–40 there has been a 77 per cent decline in the number of Jewish students admitted into medical schools.
Jewish youth is not the only minority group which feels the sting of growing discrimination in medical schools. Facts have been published showing that Italian and other national minorities suffer as well.
Discussing the racial quotas, Dean Hopkins, former president of Dartmouth and of indisputable Aryan background, said that racial quotas are “in the interests of the Jews themselves.” Now, who can doubt the word of such an eminent educator? Unquestionably those who have been schooled in Nazi racist theories will find a kindred spirit in Dean Hopkins.
 
Segregation of Mexican Youth in California
In an article in the New York Times December 10th it was revealed that children of Mexican descent in a Southern California county were segregated from children of “pure” stock. The county school authorities tried to explain this discrimination as justified because of language difficulties suffered by the young Mexicans. What could not be explained so easily was the fact that the segregation was in actuality determined by nationality and not by language handicaps. If this condition is permitted in this one county in Southern California it may well become the example and inspiration for the rest of the state.
*
The Socialist Youth League does not condemn racial quotas and segregation merely, because quotas are not met or segregated pupils are not given an adequate education. Our objections are more basic than that. Even if the quota were more than proportionate to the population and students in segregated schools received twice the care of others, it would not basically affect our attitude.
The idea and the actuality of quotas and segregation in the long run is more important than the way in which this policy manifests itself. It is only a short and logical step from racial quotas (even if proportionate) to more general and vicious forms of racial and religious discrimination and persecution.
No educational system can be democratic and no nation can be a democracy where color, race and religion is a more important school requirement than ability and need.
 




President Truman has fired the initial volley in a new drive for universal military conscription. Last Thursday, the President appointed a nine-man committee, dubbed it the Advisory Commission on Universal-Military Training, with the responsibility of “studying the basic needs as well as various plans for universal military training in relation to overall planning for the national security.”
More than half of the commission is composed of capitalist politicians, advisors and an industrialist. The rest of the committee consists of an editor and three educators, including the notoriously reactionary Rev. Edmund A. Walsh from Georgetown University and Dr. Compton, president of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who played a key role in the recent atom bomb tests at Bikini Atoll. Men like Charles E. Wilson, president of General Electric who represents Big Business and whose company police slugged dozens of veterans in the recent GE strike in Philadelphia are “studying the basic needs” and “various plans” for American youth!
 
Sugar-Coated Draft
As socialists we are against union leaders participating in plans to conscript youth in a capitalist army. Nevertheless it is significant that Truman hasn’t seen fit to name one representative of America’s sixteen million organized workers to a commission studying the conscription plan “in relation to overall planning to national security” – perhaps because many unions have come out in opposition to military conscription.
The tentative plan for universal military training is in a sense a retreat for the American capitalist class. It is a watered down and sugar-coated version of the suspended draff laws. Opposition to the draft among the people is so. strong that the capitalist politicians as a matter of expediency suspended the draft laws before election time. They decided a volunteer army was after all the best thing. But American youth didn’t flock to the recruiting stations as expected. The bunk about “education in the army” and the flag-waving campaign to suck in volunteers failed.
Now, however, that the votes have been collected and the next election is still two years off, and the volunteer method is obviously inadequate, the capitalist politicians have assumed the offensive again. They know that the suspended draft laws will be a bit too much to push down the people’s throats, so their offensive is limited. Instead of an 18-month draft, the tentative army proposal being studied by the commission is for a minimum of six months training.
An attempt to make conscription even more palatable motivated the president’s informal talk Friday to his advisory commission. With a liberal dosing of hypocrisy, he emphasized all the moral “needs” for conscription. The plan, we are told, is to teach young people how “to get along with one another, informing them of their physical makeup (!) and what it means to take care of this temple which God gave us.” As if this isn’t enough, early in his speech Truman injected the following:
“I have been interested in the physical development and the mental and moral development of young people ever since I was graduated from high school. I have been somewhat of a student of history, and I have discovered that great republics of the past always passed out when their peoples became prosperous and fat and lazy and were not willing to assume their responsibilities.”
Who can doubt the President’s talents as a historian or his good intentions to keep us from becoming “prosperous, fat and lazy”? However, there doesn’t seem to be much danger of 60 million American workers and their families becoming “fat or lazy” and certainly not “prosperous.” As a matter of fact, if the proposed plan were directed against those sections of the population which actually fitted the description, no socialist could strongly oppose it. For who but men like the Charles E. Wilson Family would be affected by it?
 
War Department Elated
Then to make conscription really savory, the President noted with his usual graceful style, “I want that word military left out” as “incidental to what I have in mind.” As the saying goes, Mr. Truman, we come from Missouri. The military aspects of the training program are so “incidental” that the War Department is reported as elated with the plan, and will probably drop its plea to continue the draft.
At the end of the speech, Truman lets the cat out of the bag when he tells us what “we” want in this world. “We do want an interchange of ideas and of merchandise and of everything of that sort.” At last we find something in the speech with which we can agree. It is not clear to us where the “ideas” come in, but it is easy enough to see how and why men like Truman and Wilson are interested in universal military training as it relates to an “interchange of merchandise and of everything of that sort.”
The new program will, and can only be, old garbage in new pails.
*
Distribute Leaflet at AYD Rally
Despite rain and snow, about fifteen members of the New York SYL distributed leaflets at a city-wide inter-racial rally of American Youth for Democracy. The leaflet took the AYD to task for its avowed support of the “Roosevelt policy” pointing out that Roosevelt never disassociated himself from his Jim Crow party brethren. The leaflet also indicated that it was necessary for unions and progressive organizations to organize independently of either capitalist party to conduct an effective struggle against Jim Crow.
A number of very excellent contacts were made. We wish to inform those AYDers who were so greatly agitated by our leaflet, that they will see us again.
 

