




Workers’ struggles are erupting in some of
the formerly most stable heartlands of Western Europe. Faced with
recession and a major employers’ offensive, fightback is
increasingly the only answer, report Lee Humber and Gareth
Jenkins



France hadn’t seen anything like it for years. Thousands of
angry workers at Air France burnt tyres, fought the police and shut
down the company for over a week. In the end the bitter strike in
late October both forced the government to abandon a planned layoff
of 4,000 workers at the state owned airline, and also led to the
departure of its chairman Bernard Attali.
As the American bosses’ magazine Business Week said in November, ‘The Air France strike may
have done more than that... It could mark a troubling and costly
turning point for Europe. All over the Continent, workers who have
merely grumbled about snowballing layoffs and wage cuts ... suddenly
are waxing militant.’
Behind this strike and the other examples of a new militancy
stirring across Europe lies the worst recession since the Second
World War. With no end to the crisis in sight and no clear strategy,
weak and often divided governments are being forced into hesitant
measures to try and reduce workers’ living standards and attack
wages. Workers have responded wherever governments have attacked.
After the Air France strike, French unions called a massive Paris
march on 18 November bringing out employees from many state owned
companies targeted for privatisation like Groupe Bull, SNECMA and
Aerospatiale. In Italy strikes are commonplace with, in the last
months, cab drivers protesting against new taxes, Turin rail workers
barricading their station and disrupting services across the breadth
of northern Italy and a four hour general strike on 28 October
involving 14 million workers.
In Germany too there were wildcat walkouts in mid-October in the
Ruhr steel industry, with steel workers blocking motorways to protest
at planned attacks on wages and conditions. The metal workers’
union, IG Metall, with 3.3 million members, has vowed to fight German
bosses’ plans to end wage contracts without negotiation.
Faced with a situation where governments all over Europe are
attempting at least to push through cuts in public spending and hold
down wages, and at most attempting full blown austerity programmes,
the role of the union leaders is very important. In Spain, where
Felipe Gonzalez won a fourth general election in a row, his Socialist
Party (PSOE) has been intent on incorporating union leaders from the
main Socialist UGT union – traditional Gonzalez allies – and the
Workers’ Commissions (CCOO) who were formerly Communist Party
influenced, into negotiations for a social contract.
Last year in Italy leaders of the biggest trade union
confederation, the CGIL, agreed to an austerity package enforcing a
wage freeze and numerous attacks on union organisation. In Britain
the TUC has consistently been key to holding back workers’
struggle. Their diffusion of the anger that exploded last October
over plans to close down the coal industry is an example.
But over the last few months the situation has begun to change
with increasing examples of independent rank and file activity
winning victories and forcing the union leaderships to take a more
radical stance. This is true where union organisation is strong, as
events in Britain around the Timex dispute and the UCH occupation
have demonstrated. But it is also true where union organisation is
relatively weak. A recent Financial Times report pointed out
that:
‘Weak unions are no guarantee of industrial harmony.
France ... has the lowest rate of unionisation in the OECD, but
Michel Giraud, labour minister ... says he would like to be able to
consult with stronger unions, because they would be more receptive to compromise.’






Italy




The general strike of 28 October was fuelled by massive anger
over cuts in pensions, education spending and funding for
transport in the wake of mass privatisation plans.
Unemployment is rising. The big Fiat car company is planning to
shed 20,000 jobs, the steel industry at least 12,000 and the
chemical industry is closing many plants.
The four hour general strike reflected both this anger and
disillusionment with the official trade union leaders.
They called the strike to defend the agreement they had struck
with the government last year which froze wages, attacked public
sector workers’ conditions, approved tax increases and decreased
democracy inside the unions.
Although this was hated by most workers, many took the
opportunity to express their anger against the government.
Sections of the left were divided over support for the strike
and in some areas – including Milan, Turin and Genoa – Cobas,
sections of the umbrella organisation for various rank and file
movements, and the social centre movements held separate
demonstrations. In other areas they called an alternative strike
day to coincide with protests by teachers and students.
The left wing organisation Rifondazione Comunista was
also divided. Although the leadership is with the rest of the
trade union leaders, the rank and file often differ.
Many, especially the student membership, are drawn towards
alternative trade unions, through impatience with the conservatism
of the old leaders.
There is a danger with this lack of unifying leadership on the
left of the right making ground.
The fascist CISNAL union has been on the streets with
megaphones and leaflets talking about the government’s attacks
on pensions and calling for the return of the Scala Mobile,
a sliding scale wage agreement torn up by the government recently.
The first round of the mayoral elections showed a victory for
the left PDS, but also a dramatic rise in the fascist MSI vote.
The most encouraging and exciting aspect of this increasingly
volatile and unstable picture is the continued, angry and often
quite spontaneous workers’ activity.
During the last few weeks pensioners, school students,
teachers, public sector workers and agricultural workers have all
taken to the streets.






As the article continues, and our eye witness reports
demonstrate, ‘At local level, the vacuum left by weak unions is
being filled by ad hoc, and often aggressive, “coordinations”
– growing fast in Italy and France.’
The employers need the official leaderships to help them push
through job cuts and austerity packages. The weakness and divisions
in the unions in countries such as France and Italy make it harder
for their leaders to contain the anger and bitterness that has welled up.
What worries the bosses deeply is that governments may be forced
to try and push through the sort of large scale austerity programmes
they hope will end the recession without the cooperation, or
influence, of the official trade unions. In both Spain and Belgium
leaders of the trade unions, under threat of protest from below, have
consistently balked at agreeing far reaching austerity packages. As
economic and political problems worsened throughout this year the
government in Italy reneged on the austerity package it agreed with
the unions in 1992, precipitating the general strike of 28 October.
Attempting large scale attacks on workers without the cooperation of
union leaders could be very risky for Europe’s ruling classes.
In Britain, in contrast, there has not yet been the level of
confrontation seen in Europe. One reason why is because British
Tories have not yet dared to try the all round offensive that the
French and Spanish governments have initiated in response to the
crisis. And the weight of the TUC inside the working class movement
has meant that it has so far been able to prevent the action needed
to stop attacks on workers. Apart from the one day civil service
strike involving around 200,000 civil servants all over Britain, the
struggle beginning to hit Europe has not so far been evident here.
But the TUC cannot keep the lid on indefinitely.
Socialists cannot be complacent about the alienation from union
leaders and official unions many workers in Europe feel. In the
absence of a strong left alternative and faced with general attacks
on their standards of living, workers can also look to the right.
Many politicians are aware of this and have courted right wing
parties and espoused right wing arguments. Chancellor Kohl’s
proposal to appoint Steffan Heitmann as President of the Republic
with his track record of racism and sexism was a conscious effort on
the German leader’s part to keep the right wing vote as he
approaches 19 federal, state and local elections in 1994.
This can open the way for the extreme right to grow as we have
seen most obviously in France, where Le Pen’s fascist National
Front is now well placed in local government. In Italy too, the far
right has made gains. The Northern League is a real presence in the
north, and the Norebe elections in Naples and Rome gave the open
fascists over a third of the vote.
But the far right has little to offer once workers begin to take
the sort of action they are taking. During the Air France strike, for
example, Le Pen, the strongest of the Eurofascists, was completely
marginalised. The workers’ struggle now beginning to erupt across
the continent is the clearest sign yet that workers are not willing
to pay the cost of the recession. The confidence gained from the
victory at Air France can spread like wildfire across Europe igniting
the anger that lies waiting in workplaces and in working class
communities all over, and drive back the employers’ offensives.
 
Fear has changed sides
Talk of another May 1968 in France is more than just wishful
thinking. The strike at Air France follows a number of strikes and
demonstrations since the summer in response to the five year plan put
forward by Edouard Balladur, leader of the right wing RPR-UDF
government. The main features of this plan are that the bosses are to
have their tax burdens cut, some 21 industries are to be privatised
and there is to be a shake out of civil servants’ jobs. At the same
time, workers are going to have to pay more contributions to sickness
and unemployment benefit and to pensions.






Belgium




The Belgian government, a coalition of Christian Democrats and
Socialists, is pursuing similar objectives to the French. The
Dehaene plan is to cut wage costs in order to improve
competitiveness. In particular it aims to worsen the rights of
young workers to holiday pay and job protection, to increase part
time work and temporary contracts, to lower wages, to make the
working year more flexible and to cut benefits.
The scale of this attack has forced the trade union
bureaucracies to react. The FTGB (based in the French speaking
south and linked to the Socialist Party) walked out of
negotiations and called a weekday demonstration of some 70,000
people in Brussels. The more conservative CSC (based in Flanders
and with links to the Christian Democrats) has been continuing
negotiations but, under pressure from militant sections who have
been urging the union to break away from the Christian Democrats,
is now beginning to move into action.
The two federations have called for joint action and a campaign
of strikes. A warning strike in November is to be followed by
rolling strikes on three successive Fridays across the ten
provinces. The climax will be a general strike across the whole
country on 10 December, when the European council meets.
The ‘warning’ strike was hugely successful, particularly in
the French speaking south of the country. This has increased
tension between the coalition partners in the government, with the
markets nervous about the stability of the franc if the plan does
not go through.
Belgium has the highest level of unionisation in Europe. That
gives the unions enormous power. At the same time the leaders can
use these demonstrations and strikes simply to try to improve
their bargaining position. Conflict between the trade union
machines can also waste the potential.
But one should not conclude the trade union bureaucracies will
ensure struggle goes down to defeat. There are other struggles
hotting up in the steel and paper making industries. Mass trade
union action has shaken the ruling class to its foundations
before, as happened in the insurrectionary general strike of 1961
and the wave of strikes in 1982.
With the crisis in the 1990s that much deeper it does not
require much bureaucratic mass action to tip society into a crisis
in which ordinary workers can begin to take the initiative.




Germany




Top German economists are in no doubt about what Germany needs
to get out of its recession. As one of the country’s so called
‘five wise men’, Professor Herbert Hax, put it, ‘Work is
[only] in short supply at current wage rates ... We must make sure
we do not price ourselves out of the world markets.’
Sections of the German ruling class are calling for a more
determined government led general offensive against workers’
wages and living standards. With forecasts of no recovery before
1997 and unemployment predicted to rise to over four million by
the end of the year, bosses are increasingly worried both about
economic stagnation and social unrest as a recent report on Europe
wide unemployment made clear. Some, most notably the opposition
Social Democratic Party, are calling for the sort of social
contract in cooperation with union leaders that other countries,
such as Spain, are attempting. But this will prove very difficult
given the prospect over the next months of state, federal and
local elections, when political daggers will be drawn. In this
atmosphere consensus will be difficult to achieve.
More importantly, German workers have already shown themselves
willing to defend their wages and conditions with militant action,
the recent strike by steel workers being the clearest example of
this. Chancellor Kohl’s calls for belt tightening fall on deaf
ears and are more likely to stoke up resistance than convince.






The government is out to attack working hours, making them
more flexible. Instead of being calculated on a 39 hour week, length
of work will be calculated in relation wholly or partly to the year.
So that will allow Renault to enforce a 45 hour week in the winter
without having to pay overtime and 36 hours in the summer on short
time. The bosses can also demand weekend work and get rid of two
consecutive rest days.
This shake up also allows the bosses to turn full time into part
time work, enforce Sunday working for certain kinds of service jobs
and restrict trade union rights of representation. The whole package,
together with increased postal costs, fare and petrol rises, is a
massive attack on workers’ income and conditions.
The government’s five year plan and its budget demanded
‘sacrifices from all’, but the effect has been to spread the
anger to all. Ever since the end of the holidays there have been
dozens of strikes and demonstrations against the bosses and the
government, including workers in factories under threat of closure,
bank workers and underground workers in Paris and post office workers
in Toulouse who were out for four months.
This has forced the trade union leaderships into action, in
particular the Communist led CGT and more surprisingly the right wing
‘moderate’ union, FO. In late September the CGT mobilised 45,000
workers for demonstrations across France, while 35,000 railway
workers demonstrated in Paris early in October. Six days later the
combined forces of the CGT and FO called out 100,000. Sections of the
Socialist trade union, the CFDT, joined in and the CFDT itself was
compelled to call out 20,000 workers, with 30,000 teachers
demonstrating in Paris two days later.
Students too have been affected. In late November over 20,000
students marched through Paris protesting against the appalling
facilities in French universities. Importantly, this was the first
time since 1971 that the pro-Communist and pro-Socialist wings of the
UNEF students’ union have joined forces.
White collar workers not normally associated with militant trade
unionism (such as bank employees and shop workers), have routinely
been involved which explains the role of the right wing union FO.
The strike at Air France came after 5,000 jobs had already gone
without any resistance over the last two years at the state owned
airline. The new restructuring plan of Air France boss, Bernard
Attali, anticipated a further 4,000.
His plans have been destroyed. What made the strike victorious was
the militant tactics and the spread of solidarity. The strike started
with the freight workers and later spread to maintenance workers.
Four thousand invaded the runways – something that had never
happened before, even in 1968. The management thought that sending in
the dreaded riot police would isolate and demoralise the strikers.
The effect was the exact opposite. The strike spread like wild fire
to other sections who might ordinarily be expected not to join in:
white collar workers, pilots and air hostesses.
The strikers themselves made the point that the management had
spent years dividing the workforce but that it only took a few days
of struggle to recreate solidarity in one of the most hierarchical
enterprises in Europe.
This kind of solidarity and militancy not only frightened the
management and government into submission. With Attali ousted the
role played by mass meetings (between 800 and 1,000 attended)
produced a rank and file confidence and independence which scared the
trade union leaders. The refusal to bow to the bureaucrats’ demand
for a return to work after the government’s surrender was because
the strikers wanted the restructuring plan to be not simply suspended
but withdrawn altogether.
The Air France victory has upped the level of struggle generally.
Further action at the domestic subsidiary of Air France, Air Inter,
included runway invasions, sit-ins and blocking the departure lounge.
And the long running disputes at the computer manufacturer Bull and
the aluminium giant Pechiney are increasing in intensity. Elsewhere
in Europe there have been ‘copycat’ strikes of airport workers.
Fear, as one Air France striker said, has changed sides. It is now
the bosses who are terrified at what their austerity plans will do. A
winter of discontent is setting in and it won’t just be France that
is affected.
Thanks to: Pat Collins, Magdalena Collins, Nicki Sellars and
Jackie Leeder



Spain




Following his record breaking fourth general election victory
in a row, Felipe Gonzalez has immediately moved onto the offensive.
Gonzalez began a purge of the remnants of the left within his
own party at the same time as he ruled out any collaboration with
the United Left. Instead, he has sought alliances with the right
wing Basque and Catalan nationalist parties in order to keep his
minority government in office. Indeed, the PSOE has moved so far
to the right that it has just recruited the former deputy leader
of the Spanish Tory party.
A series of economic proposals introduced include a three year
pay freeze for all public employees; encouragement to the private
sector to keep wages below 1.5 percent; new laws to make it easier
for employers to get rid of workers – including the relaxation
of the rules for redundancy pay for those with permanent
contracts; new, even tougher anti-trade union laws to weaken union
activity; and the reduction of existing pensions and new
regulations designed to make entitlement to a state pension more difficult.
Yet another round of privatisation is proposed, including what
is left of the state run petrochemical industry and the telephone
company. This will lead to heavy job losses.
However, the government cannot put through these proposals
without the cooperation of the unions and it is for this reason
that Gonzalez has resurrected the idea of a social contract
between government, unions and the Spanish CBI.
So strong has been union opposition to the proposals that the
government has been forced to back down on a number of the worst
elements of the ‘contract’, including proposals to reduce
pension rights and to cut back on unemployment benefit, which had
met with the approval of the employers. Union leaders had promised
an autumn of strife unless the proposals were dropped and, while
this is a major victory on one front, it still leaves other areas
of conflict to be resolved. Whatever the deals made by union
leaders, they will still have to sell them to their members – by
no means an easy feat, given the pressure from below and
inter-regional rivalries between union leaders themselves.
This pressure has been manifested most vividly in the
occupation of the SEAT factory in Barcelona which owners
Volkswagen want to close. Nationwide demonstrations and protests
over a range of issues also continue to harass the government.
Whether this sort of action turns into the PSOE’s ‘winter
of discontent’, or into a successful campaign of resistance to
government proposals, will depend very much on the levels of rank
and file pressure.



 



Doctor Faustus
by Christopher Marlowe
The story is a legend from the middle ages: a man sells his soul
to the devil in exchange for magical powers. In its original form the
contract is a straightforward struggle between good and evil.
But the story’s appeal changed with the growth of modern
society. Faust became a symbol of the aspiration to overstep the
limits laid down by traditional authority, to understand the secrets
of nature and to gain mastery over the world. Faustus is turned into
a rebel, but a rebel whose contract with dangerous powers destroys
him in the process.
Marlowe, writing his play in the 1580s and 1590s, was the first
modern writer to develop this side of the Faust legend. In part he is
still stuck with the medieval framework – there are good and bad
angels, real devils, magic and sorcery. But more importantly he
presents us with a character who rejects all the old authorities in
philosophy, medicine, law and theology as inadequate to what human
beings are capable of thinking and doing.
His pact with Mephistopheles is a chance to explore the limits of
knowledge and of the physical world. This was the age of the rebirth
of learning, of the conquest of the New World and of shattering
advances in science. Faust reflects all three. He wants to relive the
glories of the pagan world, gather together the riches of the world
and delve into the causes of things. He is a kind of glorified
Elizabethan adventurer.
But he is doomed – not just in the medieval sense of being
damned for all eternity with the pains of hell. He also begins to
realise that his appetite is larger than the means to satisfy it and
that the powers he summons up are not his to control. He ‘is like
the sorcerer, who is no longer able control the powers of the nether
world whom he has called up by his spells’, as Marx was much later
to describe the capitalist class.
It is this tension between aspiration and fulfilment that gives
irony to the dialogue between Faustus and Mephistopheles which
dominates the play. The devil never ceases to tell Faustus where his
ambitions will take him – and Faustus never ceases to disbelieve in
the devil until too late.
Staging the play always presents difficulties because it is an
uneasy mix of medieval and modern and because the text is corrupt,
some of it by a collaborator interested in injecting an element of
farce. This production cuts most of the tedious bits and settles for
a modern setting, with Faustus as a student living in a dilapidated
one bedroom flat. This ignoring of the historical dimension creates
some problems, particularly with the chorus, Faustus’s conjuring up
of the devil and the slapstick scene when Faust taunts the pope and
the cardinal (it would have appealed to the Protestant audiences of the day).
But the production works much better with the relationship between
Faustus and Mephistopheles, who is played magnificently as a cool and
calculating cynic. And the stage effects are superb, particularly the
parade of the Seven Deadly Sins. That alone is worth going for.
It is the energy and sweep of the poetry which drives the play
forward. The famous lines addressed to Helen of Troy: ‘Was this the
face that launched a thousand ships/And burnt the topless towers of
Ilium?/Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss,’ are only one
example of Marlowe’s mighty verse to enjoy.
Modern society from Marlowe’s time to our own has been haunted
by the Faustian dilemma of whether the limitless growth of human
power does not involve a devil’s pact with self destruction. This
production gets something of that across. See it while you can.
Doctor Faustus is at Greenwich Theatre, London, till 11 December.
 



The Cement Garden
Dir: Andrew Birkin
Once upon a time, before permissiveness, there was the family. Dad
sat at the head of the table and did the outside chores. Mum sat
beside him and did the cooking. The children were well behaved. Sex
did not exist. When did this happen? If at all, the family last
occurred in the 1950s.
This fantasy has had a bit of an airing recently. As their world
collapses round them, the lower middle classes seek refuge in a never
never world of family values. The Cement Garden, closely based
on Ian McEwan’s novel, shows what monstrous perversions lurk
beneath the surface.
The 1950s are suggested in the film through the style of clothes
and furniture. But the house is dilapidated, a square box surrounded
by a square garden, marooned in a concrete wasteland distantly ringed
by high rise flats. Family values are already threadbare – but the
threat is not from without. It is from within. Family values
themselves are the source of all perversions.
Children are taught to play their proper roles, with father and
mother as models. But when Dad dies of a heart attack, while
cementing over the garden, and Mum gradually fades away, the role
playing can become a bit too literal.
Abnormality flourishes in this thoroughly internalised world. The
younger brother, Tom, is dressed up as a girl as part of a game of
mummies and daddies. Jack and Julie, the eldest, adolescent children,
play the parts of father and mother – but not necessarily in the
‘correct’ order. Jack, with his long hair, moods and narcissism,
is much closer to being a ‘woman’ than his sister, who takes on
the responsibility of running things and so of being a ‘man’.
Above all, keeping things within the family makes the consolation
of sex a source of guilt and confusion. Jack slopes off to the toilet
for a wank instead of helping his Dad cement the garden and so is
‘responsible’ for his Dad’s death. Mum tells him that doing
‘that’ is the equivalent of losing two pints of blood. When she
dies peacefully in her bed, having long abandoned any attempt to get
out of the house, he preserves her at home – in concrete in the cellar.
This then becomes the family secret, protecting the home against
outside intruders, including Julie’s flashy, mature, businessman
boyfriend. And in inheriting the roles of father and mother looking
after the household, Jack and Julie also inherit their sexual roles.
Incest is the ultimate in keeping the family together.
The Cement Garden is not exactly a jolly little film, but
it is compelling viewing. In its cool, detached way, it is a splendid
satire on family values.
Far from being the squeaky clean world of morality and purity, the
family is portrayed as a putrefying mass of perversion, which no
amount of cement can keep from cracking open.
As they consummate their incestuous relationship, Jack and Julie
recognise that it is a fantasy to suppose they can exist in some
changeless world outside time. That recognition is a kind of death in
itself. They lie completely still in their parents’ bed,
illuminated by the flashing blue light of a police car.
Gripping though the film is in its claustrophobic intensity, it
leaves you with a problem. It too is caught up in seeing society as
nothing more than the family and outsiders. The only alternatives to
the hotbed of family perversion are a pre-Thatcherite businessman and
the state he calls in. Of course, the nature of the film prevents
these two from being anything more than ciphers. But it is difficult
not to worry whether these rather nastier horrors are let off too lightly.
As a satire against Tory fantasies about family values the film is
devastating. But it is a satire on a road to nowhere.
 



The Republic of de Gaulle
Serge Berstein
Cambridge University Press £30
General de Gaulle came to power in June 1958 because the French
Fourth Republic could not solve the Algerian question.
His authority rested on his past reputation and the fact that he
was an outsider to the discredited political establishment.
Now he was being recalled to his destiny, as the Gaullist myth had
it. De Gaulle exploited his mystique to impose a new constitution
which downgraded parliament and turned the hitherto largely
ceremonial office of president into a position of real power.
De Gaulle masked his authoritarianism by manipulating universal
suffrage. He got away with this because he imposed solutions which
French capitalism as a whole needed but which no fraction of the
ruling class had the confidence or support to bring about.
The first and most pressing problem was Algeria. De Gaulle played
to both ends of the spectrum. To the far right he let it be known he
championed an Algeria which would remain French. To the centre and
left he let it be known that the present colonial arrangements would
have to go.
De Gaulle tamed the army apart from a few extreme right wing
diehards he then smashed. He realised that whatever his personal
sympathies Algeria would have to be given its independence.
With the Algerian question out of the way by July 1962, de Gaulle
was well on the way to solving the problems of France’s place in
the international economy. Traditionally France had been a mainly
agricultural country, dominated by the small producer and reliant on
protectionist tariffs. The key was rapid modernisation of the economy
via the state.
The postwar Fourth Republic had begun this process of
modernisation. But its political structure acted as a brake.
The concentration of power in de Gaulle removed these constraints.
Economic planning was streamlined to create semi-monopolies (both
private and public) in key sectors like steel, aviation, chemicals
and cars. The currency system was reformed. Protective tariffs were abolished.
Though the working class bore the brunt of the costs of
modernisation, it took some time to become a real threat to the regime.
Partly this was because the composition of the working class
changed. But it was also because the left itself was in trouble. The
Communist Party was on the defensive from the fallout over the 1956
Russian invasion of Hungary. Its opposition to de Gaulle was blunted.
The reformists were still demoralised by the role they had played
in the Fourth Republic and like their counterparts elsewhere
mesmerised by the apparent ability of modern capitalism to overcome crisis.
The author of this book tends to accept the idea that France was
so transformed under de Gaulle that the working class became marginal.
So for him May 1968, with its ten million strong movement of
strikes and factory occupations, was not a reminder that the working
class was alive and kicking. Rather it is to be explained by the
inability of society to cope with the new aspirations it had
fostered. It could not be a ‘working class revolt’ in the Marxist
sense because it bypassed the CP and the trade unions.
De Gaulle survived the revolt but departed the next year. The
ruling class had discovered that the advantages of the Fifth Republic
now outweighed the advantages of de Gaulle himself.
 



CENTRISM is not something we’re terribly familiar with in British politics. We are accustomed to dealing with two currents in the labour movement – the majority one of reformism and the tiny minority one of revolutionary socialism.
Each is relatively easy to define. A reformist believes that change comes through parliament; a revolutionary that change can only come through mass activity from below. The two ideas are not compatible.
But what of a socialist who talks revolutionary politics but whose deeds are reformist? Such individuals are not uncommon and in certain periods whole working class organisations have been based on this kind of confusion. These we can label as centrist. The question then is what attitude should revolutionaries take towards them? The answer is not straightforward.
For one thing such organisations are inherently unstable and subject to contradictory pressures. Many rank and file members take the revolutionary talk for real. The leaders use the revolutionary talk as a smokescreen for reformist practice.
Depending on whether the class struggle is rising or declining, organisations are pulled to the left or to the right. Workers in these organisations may be groping towards revolutionary socialism; conversely, they may be falling back into the orbit of reformist politics in a period of defeat.
In short, centrism contains all the colours of the rainbow (in Trotsky’s vivid phrase). That alone makes it notoriously tricky to define and to deal with.
 
Third International
Historically, centrist organisations have emerged in periods of very sharp ideological crisis, when all the ideas in the working class movement are put to severe test. One such period was the First World War and its aftermath. The pre-war tradition of the Second International (with its faith in socialist advance via parliament) was discredited; the new ideas of the Third International (with its faith in soviet power) very much fitted the revolutionary mood sweeping across Europe.
But between discredited reformism and victorious Bolshevism a third camp came into being. Some of the pre-war socialist leaders had broken with out-and-out reformism as the mood of the masses had begun to swing against the war. These leaders were not internationalists; they did not believe (as Lenin did) in turning the imperialist war into a civil war. Their opposition was pacifist, a desire to turn the clock back to the era of ‘peace’ (ie normal capitalist exploitation) that had existed before the war.
These leaders were forced sharply leftwards in order not to lose supporters further to the left than themselves. But for all their revolutionary phraseology their instincts were thoroughly reformist.
The Third International had, as Lenin put it, become fashionable. The problem now was how to get revolutionary workers in centrist parties into the Third International while excluding their treacherous leaders.
It was in Germany that centrism achieved its most complete expression. The Independent Social Democrats (the USPD), led by such notorious centrists as Karl Kautsky, dwarfed the infant Communist Party. It talked left but acted right, simultaneously participating in semi-insurrectionary activity and the setting up of the bourgeois Weimar republic. This reflected the fact that in its ranks were many thousands of workers who had broken with reformism but still trusted their old leaders rather than the unknown quantity of the untried Communist Party.
The USPD were compelled to call a special conference in 1920 to discuss affiliation to the Third International. The 21 conditions (which the USPD leadership rejected) demanded that organisations wishing to join had to expel not only the right wing but also centrist leaders.
After a brilliant speech by Zinoviev, the president of the Third International, a majority opted for affiliation and the USPD immediately split. Its left wing formed a joint organisation with the existing Communist Party of some 350,000 members, making it the biggest and best communist organisation in Western Europe.
One point has to be underlined. Contrary to the belief of many on the left (Militant supporters notably), this evolution of the best elements of the German working class towards revolutionary politics was not dependent on the internal development of the mass parties. It depended on a pole of attraction external to reformist politics and organisations, that being the immense prestige of the Bolshevik revolution and the existence of an independent communist organisation (the Third International and its German section).
 
Intervention
Without that pole of attraction and without the conscious intervention of the Third International, it is unlikely that leftward moving workers would have completed the break with reformism. In the absence of an alternative, the power of the right wing to demobilise and confuse would have tied the left’s hands and pulled workers away from revolutionary politics.
The second case of centrism we have to deal with concerns a very different historical period. In this instance centrist groupings arose under the impact not only of working class victory, but of its opposite – the major setback the international labour movement suffered in the early thirties (principally, the catastrophic defeat fascism inflicted on the German working class).
The forces involved were much weaker. Two factors prompted the emergence of centrist groupings. First, there was the failure of reformism to deliver the goods. In Britain, MacDonald’s 1929–31 Labour government turned on its supporters to make workers pay for the crisis in capitalism. In Germany, the Social Democrats not only played a similar role in the Weimar republic. They also failed to mount any fighting campaign against the rapid rise of the Nazis.
Secondly, there was the lunatic policy of the by now thoroughly Stalinised Third International. The communist parties, in their ‘ultra-left’ phase, maintained that the social democratic parties were no different from fascist parties (on the grounds that both were a block on the road to revolution).
That meant that social democratic workers in Germany, who might have been won to a joint, successful struggle against Nazism, were written off as ‘social-fascists’. It also meant, as Trotsky pointed out, that if there was no difference between these twins, fascism must have already conquered. So for all its apparent leftism, the German CP was in practice passive and abstentionist.
The terrible consequence was that Hitler destroyed the working class movement in Germany without a shot being fired in its defence.
Under the impact of major ideological crisis, some minor working class parties began to move leftwards towards the kind of revolutionary internationalism that Trotsky and his small band of supporters represented.
Centrist groupings flourished – for example, the Independent Labour Party in Britain, which disaffiliated from the Labour Party in 1932. Disgusted by reformism, repelled by Stalinism, they flirted with Marxist ideas.
There were also similar German, Dutch and Norwegian groups, to name the most important, though in truth all were small. They were linked in a loose federation, a kind of centrist International, and later joined by the POUM in Spain, a centrist party that played a crucial role in the Spanish revolution – a role Trotsky submitted to searching criticism.
They were also confused. Some of their leaders were pacifist-inclined or couldn’t bring themselves to break with Stalinism or were reluctant to abandon their cherished parliamentary methods. Conditions were unfavourable at the rank and file level as well. In a period of defeat, the way forward for workers breaking with reformism and Stalinism was by no means clear (in the way it had been after the First World War). Nor was the pole of attraction (Trotsky’s isolated grouplets) very powerful.
Some of these groups were right-centrist, others left-centrist. Trotsky urged his supporters to take the latter seriously. If he couldn’t offer size he could offer a revolutionary tradition and clarity of ideas. He considered that, unlike reformist organisations, the weight of revolutionary politics inside these organisations might push them to revolutionary politics and the perspective of founding a new International.
He therefore set out either to win existing leaderships (as was the case in Holland) or to have his supporters enter openly and by dint of their theoretical and practical superiority take over from the existing leadership.
This kind of entry, it should be noted, was quite different from the entrism into reformist organisations he urged on his supporters a short while afterwards. Left centrist organisations might be secured for revolutionary politics almost in their entirety. They were too ramshackle for the old apparatus to maintain the centrist leaders’ grip on workers whose ideas were rapidly developing under the influence of revolutionaries within their ranks.
No such possibilities existed with mass reformist organisations. There the old apparatus had a firm hold over a majority of the membership. The purpose of entrism would not be to pretend that the organisations as a whole could be won to revolutionary politics but to detach a minority while it was moving leftwards under the impact of social crisis. Given that perspective, entrism was necessarily a short term tactic, to be completed before the gravitational pull of reformism reasserted itself and sucked revolutionaries behind it.
Needless to say, in both cases, Trotsky insisted on the need for absolute political independence for his supporters. At the same time, he had to overcome a sectarian inertia among those of his followers who failed to see that the radicalised workers of these centrist groups had to be won to revolutionary politics before reformism and Stalinism recovered credibility.
 
Militant
Trotsky had some success with left centrist groups, though less than he expected, which was not surprising in view of the increasingly unfavourable climate for revolutionary politics in the 1930s.
Still the experiment was worth trying. It yielded a very modest crop of new recruits and a rather richer crop of polemics.
Is it possible to generalise the characteristics of centrism? ‘Centrism’, wrote Trotsky, ‘is a general name for the most varied tendencies and groupings spread out between reformism and Marxism.’ Consequently, its ideas are a mish-mash, an amorphous amalgam of different political traditions reflecting the different pressures put upon it.
Thus a centrist shies away from the uncompromisingly sharp formulations of Marxism.
Conversely, a centrist borrows Marxist arguments in order to criticise reformism (for example, that reformists fail to appreciate the power of the state in preventing change via parliament), but fail to draw the obvious conclusion – that the state has to be smashed. Thus a centrist’s opposition to right-wing ideas and leaders tends to be more platonic than real.
A centrist can be hostile to reformism but because of the unwillingness to break decisively with reformism ‘is inclined to cringe before those who are more moderate, to remain silent on their opportunist sins and to cover their actions before the workers’. A centrist prizes ‘unity’ with reformist leaders above anything else.
Above all, in Trotsky’s characteristically cutting phrase, a centrist ‘views with hatred the revolutionary principle: state what is.’
Does any of this apply today? Since we are in a period neither of revolutionary upsurge nor of catastrophic working class defeat, centrism in its classic form does not present exist.
Yet elements of centrism certainly exist. The defeat of the miners has produced general shift to the right, with an accompanying boost for reformist politics of the Kinnockite variety. But it has also resulted: a move to the left by a much smaller layer of people disgusted at the antics of the trade union and Labour Party leaders.
However, although this layer has move to the left, it has not moved outside the orb of the Labour Party. It rejects Kinnock but not the Labour Party itself. It wishes to fight the system but thinks the Labour Party can be made to do that.
Undoubtedly it is people in this contradiction who find themselves attracted to Militant. Militant is the only group inside the Labour Party which offers any resistance to Kinnockism. And the arguments employed by Militant to justify this contradictory mood are undoubtedly centrist.
Militant fudge the nature of the Labour Party and of parliament. They obscure the revolutionary tradition which states quite baldly that neither can bring about socialism. They duck the Leninist notion that a revolutionary party must be built outside and independent of reformist politics
Militant are also reluctant to state what is. Any realistic assessment of the balance of class forces is jeered at as pessimism, lack of faith in the working class or the product of sectarian isolation. Hence Militant’s tendency to take the view that things are forever on the up, appearances notwithstanding. The implications for practice are drift into fatalism and a failure to prepare for confrontation (as in the example of Liverpool).
However, it would be foolish to see Militant as a fully blown centrist organisation. A better assessment of Militant would be to say that they are a group of revolutionaries who are submitting to centrist pressures that are making them lose their way. What we must do is try to help them find it again.
 



In 1981 Tony Benn was the hero of the left. He came within a whisker of defeating Denis Healey, the man who had initiated pre-Thatcher monetarist policy in Callaghan’s government, in the contest for the deputy leadership of the Labour Party. Those – like Neil Kinnock – who had claimed to be on the left but abstained in the final voting were branded as Judases. A new, revitalised socialist politics appeared to be on the verge of triumph. The end of the rotten, compromise politics that had so disfigured the 1974–79 Labour government was in sight.
Two years later, that very same Judas, Neil Kinnock, replaced Michael Foot as leader of the Labour Party. His left-wing opponent, Eric Heffer, was trounced. The majority of the left that had voted for Benn now voted for Kinnock. By early 1985, the conversion of the left was plain. Michael Meacher, once one of Benn’s closest colleagues and now in the Shadow Cabinet, was cooperating with Kinnock and distancing himself from Benn. Even Benn, still on the back benches, was making it clear he respected the current leadership. Barring accidents, Kinnock will be the next Labour prime minister.
What has happened? Is it, perhaps, the case that the surge of support for a radical alternative to the Labourism of the past is now spent and we are simply slipping back into the old routine? Or is it as many on the Labour left claim – that the left is continuing to advance, not as spectacularly as with Benn’s near triumph, but steadily, on a wider and surer basis, gradually replacing the old right-wingers with younger, more dynamic MPs? That may involve being less aggressive with one’s politics, but Kinnock, after all, is a unilateralist with leftish inclinations, whose position must be reinforced in order to end once and for all the domination of the old right.
These are important questions, and on how we answer them depends our view of the next Labour government. It seems undoubtedly true that the Labour Party is changing. Many thousands of activists were involved in extra-parliamentary campaigns in support of the miners’ strike and against rate-capping. Issues like feminism, anti-racialism and gay rights have made an impression on the party that would have been unimaginable a few years ago. The left has also transformed local government. The mood is more hopeful than it has been at any time since the early 60s, when the election of a new, dynamic leader of the Labour Party, Harold Wilson, seemed to open up new vistas of socialist advance and an end to thirteen years of frustrating opposition to the Tory government.
But to mention Harold Wilson is instantly to sound an ominous note. For the experience of the 1964 to 1970 Labour government rapidly killed off the aspirations many held that the march towards socialism would be resumed. Today’s Labour left are painfully aware of what happened to Wilson. But they are convinced that they have learnt the lesson and that history will not repeat itself. Are they justified? Or is it that the nature of the Labour Party itself, irrespective of the quality of its leaders or the sincerity of its rank and file, dooms any future Labour government to tread the same anti-socialist path as before?
 
The Labour left
Let us first establish what has happened politically to the Labour left before examining its hegemony (or otherwise) in the party. That the left is in retreat from its former positions has been evident for a long time – in fact, ever since the peace of Bishop’s Stortford was negotiated between the top party and trade union leaders in January 1982 after the bruising contest between Benn and Healey. Under pressure from the trade union leaders, Benn agreed not to stand again and talked of ‘unity behind the existing leadership and the existing policies’. [1] The Labour Coordinating Committee (LCC), which had been the principal campaigning body for Benn’s politics, decided to put themselves on the register endorsed by the 1982 conference, despite the fact that as part of the witch hunt against Militant it was also part of the general offensive against the hard, Bennite left.
Both during and after the disastrous 1983 general election, the retreat continued. Benn’s claim that 8½ million people had voted for real socialism was greeted by embarrassment (or rejection) by the rest of the left. Even Militant, which used the fact of gaining two MPs as evidence of left advance, showed signs of trimming their sails by running campaigns that studiously omitted any reference to their distinctive policy of nationalising the top 200 monopolies. [2] In the leadership elections later that year, the LCC endorsed Kinnock rather than Heffer. Even Meacher, Benn’s stand-in while Benn waited to get re-elected to parliament, was hardly reassuring:
Talk of the politics of betrayal (a word that I never use, and deplore) must be set behind us ... rejectionist attitudes towards the Parliamentary Labour Party, if they survive in some quarters, need to be revised. [3]
It could be argued that the retreat was merely tactical, involving little loss of principle and dictated by the need to bow before the anti-left storm raised by both the witch hunt of Militant and Labour’s hammering at the polls. And it is true that in 1984 the left made the running in generating support for the miners’ strike and for a spirited campaign against rate-capping, involving in both cases varying degrees of opposition from the leadership, including Kinnock. With the Labour left talking boldly of defiance of the law, there appeared to be no signs of retreat. But underneath, the retreat went on. At the Labour Party conference that year, no protest worth the name was raised against Kinnock (despite his clear sabotaging of the miners), or – and this was more significant – against Hattersley, whose speech on economic policy was in open, right-wing contradiction to conference policy.
By the beginning of 1985 a theory to justify retreat began to be pieced together. Tribune, in its New Year comment, took the plunge. Nigel Williamson, who had replaced the Bennite Chris Mullin as editor, began what has since amounted to a manifesto for the new, soft left with a revealing paragraph:
The next general election will be won or lost over the coming year. That statement may sound dramatic given that the election may not come until 1988, but one of the lessons of Labour’s 1983 defeat was that elections are not decided in the brief duration of a three-week campaign but are determined by the image which a party presents over a much longer perspective. [4]
Williamson then outlined four main reasons why 1985 would prove critical for the image of the party approaching the next election. First, there was the ‘unfinished business’ of the miners’ strike; secondly, there were the ‘government-imposed ballots’ trade unions had to hold on the political levy, thirdly, the reselection of the bulk of Labour MPs, and fourthly, the battle over rate-capping. In the face of these political battles, Williamson argued:
Given the scale of the problems, the maximum unity around winnable and realisable aims and objectives becomes essential. This does not mean that we sacrifice our principles on the altar of pragmatism, but it does mean that anyone who puts factional interest above the will to win does the Labour movement a grave disservice.
Ultra-Leftism, which is only interested in using the miners’ strike to attack Neil Kinnock, must receive just as short shrift as the antics of Right-wingers who cannot wait for Arthur Scargill and the Left to come a cropper. [5]
This apparently-even handed criticism of both the ‘ultra-left’ and the right meant, on the one hand, rejecting calls for a general strike (Benn, it should be remembered, had called for one) and, on the other, attacking the ‘new realism’ of many trade union leaders and their failure to offer any real solidarity with the miners. It also meant, in the context of rate-capping, criticising both those who urged defiance of the law ‘as some kind of litmus test of socialist commitment’ [6] and those (like Labour’s front-bench) who publicly attacked councils pursuing a fighting strategy.
Williamson’s ‘middle’ position between the hard left and the leadership led him to criticise Kinnock for allowing ‘his reservations about the conduct of the (miners’) dispute to obscure his commitment to the strikers’ cause.’ Nevertheless:
... hunting for heretics and purging doubters will achieve nothing and opposing Neil Kinnock for the party leadership would be a futile gesture which could only damage our chances of winning the next election.
The centre of gravity in the party has shifted to the Left in recent years. Neil Kinnock is the product of that and while it is depressing to see him siding with the Right so consistently, it should not be impossible to construct a majority Centre-Left coalition around the party leader. Such a coalition would reflect the wishes of the party in the country far more accurately than the Centre-Right forces which currently dominate both the National Executive and the Shadow Cabinet. [7]
Williamson concludes his comment with this warning and hope:
The Left will need to practise a self-denying ordinance on some issues. Neil Kinnock will need to develop the strength to stand up to the Right on others. If both can achieve that and meet each other half-way, the prospect of a Left-wing Labour government committed to real and radical reform after the next election would surely come a step nearer. [8]
The rationale, then, for this considerable shift of a significant section of the left from its former positions is based on two considerations. The major one (the one which frames the article) is the necessity to win the next general election. That means a scaling down of objectives in the interest of unity. The second is intended as an important qualification on the first. The purpose is not to win at any cost (what would be the point of retaining any socialist principles?), but to ensure that the leadership can be made to deliver some real changes when in power. Hence Williamson attempts to strike a bargain: if Kinnock will stop playing the right’s game, the left will forego the luxury of pure opposition and move in behind him.
The problem with Williamson’s position is the failure to see that the acceptance of the necessity of winning the next general election effectively ditches any qualification put upon it and makes the bargain one-sided. The point becomes clear when one considers two of Williamson’s own reasons why 1985 would be critical for Labour: the miners’ strike and the fight against rate-capping. Now that the first has ended in defeat and the second in collapse, what exists to put pressure on Kinnock to move left? In the absence of struggle at the point of production, the left is forced to manoeuvre on the terrain of electoralist politics. Since it has conceded that winning rather than sticking to its principles is the priority it is no longer in a position to put up very much resistance on the terrain of electoralist politics to which the right is so suited. Unity, therefore, is less and less on the left’s terms and more and more on the right’s.
If Williamson is blind to the problem, others on the left are not. Chris Mullin, the previous editor, sourly pointed out the reality of the shift away from principles:
There is every prospect that Labour will stumble into office at the next election. It will not be the Labour Party of Tony Benn – but that of Neil Kinnock, Roy Hattersley and Denis Healey.
And this will be backed up by a different kind of Parliamentary Labour Party. Outside the Shadow Cabinet the old-style, Gaitskellite, machine politicians who believed passionately in the Bomb and the Common Market have become almost extinct. Many have been replaced by what we might, a little harshly perhaps, describe as value-free thinkers – ambitious, clever young men (and a handful of women) who have achieved selection by chanting the slogans of the hour and who would be equally at home in a Kinnock, Hattersley or Benn government.
Their definition of victory is when they get the jobs. My definition of victory when something changes for the better. [9]
Mullin was equally perspicacious about the kind of pressures that make Labour leaders abandon their commitments:
I am sure [Kinnock] would genuinely like to remove nuclear weapons from British soil, but there is nothing in his record so far to suggest that he would stand his ground in the face of the unremitting hostility of those he has placed around him, let alone the pressure which the Americans would undoubtedly bring to bear. [10]
Mullin’s conclusion was unambiguous and correct:
It may be ... that many Labour Party members ... are prepared to pay almost any price for the election of a Labour government. If so, we should all be clear about the consequences. We will be electing yet another Harold Wilson government.
The only difference next time round will be that no one will have any right to express surprise or indignation at the outcome. The path that the Labour Party is now beginning to tread is well-trodden and everyone knows where it leads. [11]
In reply, Williamson did little more than repeat his earlier arguments about winning Kinnock for the left and ended by asking Mullin:
Do you honestly believe that a government led by Neil Kinnock would support American military global adventures as Wilson did in Vietnam? Do you really believe that Gerald Kaufman would introduce racist immigration laws like Labour’s 1968 Act? Are you seriously telling us that John Prescott would bring in anti-union legislation of the kind that Barbara Castle tried with In Place of Strife in 1969? [12]
Williamson will probably live to regret those rhetorical questions. Better Labour left-wingers – Stafford Cripps or Aneurin Bevan, for example – have performed worse volte-faces than the motley crew he mentions here. But on one point, implicitly, he scores: has Mullin, as a committed Labour Party member, any choice but to work flat out for a Kinnock government, despite knowing, as he does, to what that leads?
In Bennism without Benn, an article which appeared in the same month in which Mullin was castigating the ascendancy of the ambitious, value-free thinkers interested only in jobs under Labour, Patrick Seyd spelt out for New Socialist readers the extent of the new left’s alignment. Like Williamson he emphasised their desire for a middle way between the ‘ultra-left’ and the right, their attempt to detach Kinnock from the embrace of the right, and their search for unity and popularity rather than purity of position. He was cautious about the extent of the realignment, its coherence or leadership, but was certain of a shift at all levels of the party, from wards and constituency parties upwards.
However, on the question of leadership he does point to the emergence of an influential bloc on the NEC, all former hard left sympathisers. First, there is Michael Meacher, who, despite the disorganisation of the parliamentary left in the autumn of 1984, was elected to the Shadow Cabinet, where he took responsibility for Health and Social Security. Secondly, there is David Blunkett, who, as leader of Sheffield City Council and chairperson of the Local Government Campaign Unit, played a crucial role in the anti-rate-capping fight. Now that he has been selected as parliamentary candidate for Joan Maynard’s safe Sheffield Brightside seat his influence is likely to increase. Finally, there is Tom Sawyer, deputy general secretary of NUPE, who opposed the hard left’s call in December for a general strike, and whose distancing from Benn can be measured in words that echo those of Meacher’s quoted earlier:
We shouldn’t be searching continually for issues where there has to be a division or a split. The NEC, as the leading committee of a socialist organisation, should be a place where members behave as comrades. [13]
Seyd does not fully seem to realise the importance of this line-up between leading members of the new left in the PLP, the constituencies and the trade unions. Meacher, Blunkett and Sawyer increasingly tend to vote together, and although that is normally as part of the rest of the NEC left, where they tend to differentiate themselves is highly significant. Apart from the issue already referred to of the general strike, there has been the example of Meacher’s and Sawyer’s voting against Benn and Heffer on the question of NATO membership. Benn and Heffer proposed that in line with the Labour Party’s policy on nuclear disarmament Britain should reject membership of NATO (though just such a proposal had been defeated at Conference). Meacher and Sawyer rejected the move on the grounds of the danger of reopening the debate two or three years before a general election. [14]
But the trio also stand up to the right. Blunkett, for example, put an amendment, which excluded specific mention of Militant, to the witch-hunting document on Labour Party membership prepared by the right-wing. The amendment was carried; so we can thank Blunkett for the fact that in formal terms at least there is no NEC led purge on ‘extremists’. [15]
Sawyer is perhaps the least well known of the three. But as a trade unionist, with links to the rest of the trade union bureaucracy, he is in a position to indicate to the soft left just what forces they can rely on to back up their position. According to Seyd, the new left receives support from union leaders with real clout (Bickerstaffe of NUPE, Jimmy Knapp of the NUR, and – most important of all – Ron Todd of the TGWU), all of whom ‘opposed the TUC’s discredited “new realism” moves, but who are looking to Kinnock to win the next election at the head of a campaigning party. There is a shared emphasis on political, rather than industrial, action as the vehicle for change.’ [16]
Influential sections of the trade union bureaucracy, not of the right but of the centre-left, are setting limits on what can and cannot be done. The hard left may call for a general strike, but it is the trade union leadership which delivers. That dictates not only the industrial policy of the next Labour government but also, given the left’s increasing cooperation with the trade union bureaucracy inside the party, the limits of the left’s future protests against the effects (wage restraint, and the like) of that policy. The ‘shared emphasis on political, rather than industrial, action’ is an ominous indicator that the left trade union leadership will subordinate rank-and-file strength to the need to get the Labour Party elected at any price, thus paving the way to the kind of demoralisation that occurred under the 1974 to 1979 government when the left leaders did all in their power to police their members.
One final aspect of the left’s new mood of cooperation and unity which calls for comment is their ‘acute awareness that organisational reforms are essential if the party is to campaign effectively.’ [17] This may seem a minor point, and Seyd does not make much of it. However, in a party like the Labour Party, who controls the organisation controls the politics, whatever the constitution, conference or NEC may say. One of the less examined features of the recent changes in the Labour Party has been the upgrading of organisational matters. Robin Cook, Kinnock’s right-hand man and destined to do better in this year’s Shadow Cabinet elections because of support from both the Campaign and Tribune groups of MPs, has been pressing for some time for a major shake-up at Walworth Road headquarters (not without ruffling a few feathers). He has praised Ken Livingstone’s use of the techniques of the communications industry and has mocked the ‘delusion that we display the rugged honesty of our policies by indifference to their respective presentation.’ [18] The new general secretary, Larry Whitty (another Kinnock supporter), is also an organisation man.
Why organisation is not a neutral conductor of pre-existing policy comes clear when we realise that in effect the most important and powerful body in the Labour Party is not the NEC but the newly set-up Campaign Committee. The committee justifies its existence on the grounds of needing to get Labour’s message across as widely as possible – a point that the new left is anxious to stress. But if electoral victory is the name of the game then the left can hardly complain if the Campaign Committee, answerable in reality only to the leadership, ‘modifies’ conference policy – for organisational and communication reasons only, of course. Few besides Benn and Heffer appear hostile to this development. [19]
In 1981, the left argued that however good the policy coming out of conference was, the leaders could always subvert it because they were not accountable to the party as a whole; that was why it was important to subject the leadership to democratic control. By 1982, the left argued against this perfectly correct conclusion: it did not matter about the leaders because at least the policy, being under conference control, was good; therefore, do not submit the leadership to democratic scrutiny. Now the left is even abandoning policy to control by the Campaign Committee because of the paramountcy of effective communication to win the next general election. Step by step the left has retreated politically. At first, tacitly and unwittingly and then later, openly and proudly, the retreat has been justified by reference to the pressing need to return Labour to power. Thus the nature of the Labour Party itself, its basis in electoralism, sets even more restrictive limits to the socialist aspirations of the left.
When Chris Mullin talks of the disappearance of the old right machine politician, he is not altogether correct. It is true that last year their domination in the Shadow Cabinet owed more to luck than any other factor. There was no cooperation between the hard left Campaign Group of MPs and the more traditional left Tribune group (Tribune did not offer a slate), and the right picked up more support than their numerical strength warranted. Ronald Butt, the Times columnist, commented that ‘a Shadow Cabinet, two thirds of which are moderates, is not even truly representative of the Labour Party in Parliament, which is clearly left-wing,’ and speculated that the reason for this was that the left was reluctant to translate its conference success into a parliamentary triumph for fear of alienating the electorate. [20] Whatever the reason (and there may be no more than a grain of truth in Butt’s speculation), this year the new-found unity between Campaign and Tribune over a common slate [21] is almost certain to ensure that Michael Meacher will be joined by many of his co-thinkers, leaving perhaps only Healey and Hattersley as the major standard-bearers of the old right. The dream the soft left has of delivering Kinnock from the grip of the right looks like coming true.
The signs of a long-term shift in the left-right balance within the PLP have been evident for some time: Already, before the last general election, James Curran, the founding editor of New Socialist, could claim that were Labour to retain the same number of MPs as in 1979 the left wing of the PLP would increase from 31% to about 44%. [22] Although there is every reason to accept that this upwards trend has not been reversed, an examination of the current reselection process shows that no one should set too much store by the fact.
Under the new procedures reselection has to start not less than eighteen months and not more than three years after the last general election. The majority of reselection meetings for the 209 sitting MPs has just taken place (the remaining constituencies will pick their candidates in the autumn and winter of 1985 and spring of 1986). The changes resulting from selection have not been as dramatic as the left had hoped or the right feared. Expectations that right-wing MPs would get booted out in droves or retire en masse to avoid the indignity of being dumped have not been realised. Nor has the hard left benefitted.
When the furore over reselection died down right-wing MPs discovered that if they were prepared to massage their constituency parties rather than treat them with their customary contempt, they ran few risks of deselection. Also, the merest hint of standing as an independent acted as an adequate deterrent to most constituency parties discontented with their MP but mindful of the Tatchell debacle in 1983. Thus right-wing front benchers such as Peter Shore and Gerald Kaufman, both of whom were thought at one time to be under threat – survived the ordeal.
Even Frank Field, notorious for his advocacy of a ‘rainbow’ coalition with the Alliance parties (embarrassing even to his fellow right-wingers), survived. Although at one time he could only muster 25 supporters (with an equal number going to the then Militant contender) [23], in the end he won convincingly: 52 votes as against 21 for Cathy Wilson, a Militant supporter best known, as Tribune unkindly put it, ‘for having achieved Labour’s lowest ever parliamentary vote – 2.4% of the poll in the Isle of Wight.’ [24] Similarly, the right-wing MP for Swansea West, Alan Williams, survived a reselection battle against a Militant supporter, this time by the manoeuvre of a shortlist of one, a tactic which has been used elsewhere.
Where Militant was well placed and expected to make gains because they did not face the problem of challenging a sitting MP (because of retirement), they failed. In Glasgow Provan the Militant candidate missed selection to a safe seat by only one vote; and in Glasgow Pollok, where there was another left candidate, by nine votes to the right-winger. The Scottish LCC appears to have been instrumental in organising against Militant, and the three cases (of Birkenhead, Field’s constituency, and the two Scottish constituencies) show that in the final analysis the soft left was prepared to vote for the right-winger rather than the hard left candidate. [25]
Whether Militant will even finish up with the six candidates it had in the 1983 election is a moot point. In Brighton Kemptown, for example, where Militant seemed entrenched, their long-standing prospective parliamentary candidate was deselected (in favour of a ‘sensible’ left-winger). There have even been reports of moves from the Coventry South East constituency party to challenge the sitting Militant MP, Dave Nellist, though these appear to have come to nothing. On 29 March 1985, after more than 40 MPs had been reselected, Tribune could report, under the significant heading, ‘No Upsets So Far’, in the following terms:
Among the new prospective Labour candidates selected in place of retiring MPs there would appear to be a slight, though by no means decisive, swing to the left.
Among the marginal seats to have selected so far there is no sign of a political shift. [26]
Since then nothing has occurred to alter the picture. The only point of interest to note is the elevation of important leaders of the council left to prospective parliamentary position. David Blunkett, as we have already mentioned, is almost certain to become MP (in place of Joan Maynard); the same is true for Ken Livingstone, having displaced Reg Freeson for Brent East. John Austin Walker, the leader of Greenwich Council (second to last in London before giving in to rate-capping), stands a chance of defeating the SDP MP, John Cartwright, having staved off his Militant rival in the selection battle by two votes.
What we can conclude, then, about the future nature of the PLP is that the right-wing machine politician is not yet extinct though on the wane, the hard left (including Militant) will remain in limbo; and the soft is likely to become more, but not overwhelmingly influential. Kinnock is probably going to be surrounded by more congenial colleagues than the older right-wing MPs he inherited from the Callaghan era.
That means the new left will increasingly become responsible for the policies that Kinnock and his team are now formulating as the basis for the election campaign and the next Labour government. The important question is whether the left have finished up with the worst of all worlds, that of being in charge of right-wing policy.
 
The next Labour government
What Labour intends to do in office is already clear in outline. The prospect is far from inviting.
Much of what has been announced so far amounts to a very modest intervention in the economy. Hattersley has unveiled plans for a National Bank based on taking over a City institution and for a kind of indirect exchange control by taxing disproportionate investment abroad. The idea is to stimulate investment in the British economy in order to create jobs. But there is no intention of rolling back the years of unemployment; the aim is to cut the number out of work by one million in the first two years of a Labour government – in other words, to take us back to a position worse than at the end of the Callaghan era.
Lest anyone imagine that this is a right-wing policy foisted on the left, or merely the first stage in a longer-term operation, we should pay attention to Kinnock’s words at the TGWU biennial conference: ‘We are seriously seeking a modern system for full employment. That is not the full employment of the 1950s, 1960s or even the early 1970s – we know it’s not coming back in that form ... We need to reduce the numbers requiring work(?!).’ [27] No protest from Ron Todd, or any other prominent left trade union leader, is recorded. The abandonment of the traditional Labour aim of full employment is clear, and it comes from the man the left hope to rescue from the right.
If the prospects for the unemployed do not look too rosy under Labour, nor do wages or trade union freedoms. The policy document, A New Partnership – A New Britain, launched with a flourish in early August by Kinnock and Willis, proves to be far from new. The relationship between government and unions bears a strong family resemblance to the kind of compact or contract that every Labour government since the war has introduced to hold down wages. It is true, however, that legislation is firmly repudiated: ‘Statutory norms and government-imposed wage restraints offer no solution.’ [28] Hattersley has made it clear that Labour’s economic policy must be underpinned by some form of voluntary wages policy. But neither he nor anyone else has spelled out what happens if voluntary measures fail: would Labour resort to statutory limitations after all?
The signs are not good. Tony Benn apparently tried at an NEC meeting at the end of June to insert an amendment that statutory wage restraint ‘therefore will not be implemented’, which was defeated. [29] Ron Todd, however, appeared to offer some hope that not even voluntary restraint would be tried, when he refused categorically to offer ‘an open cheque’. But all the same he made it clear that as part of a package he would not rule out pay from the discussions he would be prepared to have with Labour leaders. [30]
On trade union legislation the document appears to stand firm: ‘... the next Labour government will repeal the present government’s divisive legislation and replace it with positive legislation.’ [31] Unfortunately it all depends what is meant by ‘positive’. It has now become clear that Kinnock wishes to retain some elements of Tory trade union legislation, though which ones has not yet been revealed. It seems reasonable to presume balloting is much to the taste of the trade union bureaucracy since it serves to reinforce their control over the rank and file. What seems likely is that the Labour government will repeal those bits of legislation irksome to the bureaucracy but retain those which reinforce their policing function over their members.
Many on the left still claim, however, that in one area of policy, defence, the leadership is sticking to conference policy. Kinnock, they say, is committed to unilateralism, and even the right wing is forced to go along with it. Unfortunately, on closer examination, the depth of that commitment is much shallower. To start with, the cancellation of Trident (which would, of course, be welcome) is a move that sections of the defence establishment are not totally hostile to. Its immense cost puts pressure on conventional defence. Kinnock has already made it clear that the pursuit of a ‘non-nuclear defence policy’ is intended to counter the threat ‘to our funding of our conventional defence industries.’ [32] That is far from being a commitment to a reduction of the military burden and to peace. Kinnock seems prepared to operate within the terms laid down by the requirements of the military establishment.
Secondly, opposition to cruise missiles inevitably involves opposition to American bases. Unilateral opposition to cruise entails a unilateral ending of American control over the bases where cruise missiles (under sole American control) are sited. However, Kinnock has made it clear that US nuclear bases will remain until they are negotiated out of Britain. [33] In other words, their dismantling is conditional upon agreement; there would be no unilateral abrogation of the American government’s right to use them.
Given the enormous pressure that the US would exercise (exploiting Britain’s retention of NATO membership), the excuse for stalling is already there. We might well finish up with the Greek government ‘solution’, which was that despite the pre-election pledge by socialist leader Papandreou, the US were permitted after negotiations to retain their bases till the end of the decade (in effect, indefinitely.)
Furthermore, interviewed in the European Nuclear Disarmament Journal Denzil Davies, the shadow spokesman on Defence, said he would accept an arrangement like Denmark’s whereby NATO nuclear forces could be moved into the country in a crisis. Tribune noted correctly that this was a shift in policy away from unilateralism. From a multilateralist right-winger like Davies the concession is entirely predictable; but the concession was defended by ‘unilateralist’ Kinnock as being no shift at all in party policy. [34]
That leaves Polaris. While it is true that the cancellation of Trident would produce unilateralism by obsolescence (Polaris’s life span only extends to the 1990s), it is not clear that the dismantling of Polaris would begin the day after the election of the next Labour government. In this respect the retention of NATO membership provides a crucial escape-clause. Responsibility to the nuclear club (and a desire to ‘influence’ it) would mean that Britain would retain its independent nuclear deterrent, putting Polaris into the negotiating package between the superpowers (something the Tories are not interested in). Thus getting rid of Polaris would have to wait until a satisfactory conclusion to arms negotiations had been reached.
Whatever the intentions of the non-nuclear defence policy the commitment to NATO is the determining factor that drags Labour back towards multilateralism. No wonder right-wingers like Healey and Callaghan could support the NEC statement on non-nuclear defence at the 1984 Labour Party conference. It is pure delusion on the part of the Labour left to think that Healey, as front bench shadow spokesman on Foreign Affairs, has been cowed into submission by the pressure of unilateralist opinion in the party. On the contrary, he knows that there are enough loopholes in the policy to avoid tying a future Labour government down to anything so inconvenient as a real drive to rid Britain of nuclear weapons.
The range of policies that is beginning to take shape – whether measures to stimulate economic growth, trade-union law reform, or defence policy – is in effect less radical than anything we have seen in a decade. The lessons of the past, that there is a yawning credibility gap between Labour’s promises and Labour’s performance, have been well learnt. But whereas once the left would have agreed with Benn that performance should match promise (these are ‘hard times for our people, and it calls for a hard response from a hard left ... Labour will never win power by keeping its head down ...’) [35], now most of the left accepts that what keeps Labour from power is too many promises. Therefore scale them down to what very modestly can be performed.
And Kinnock is certainly modest. He accepts high levels of unemployment, holding down wages, and, for all his passionate opposition to Thatcher’s devastation of the Welfare State, no full restoration of cuts in the health service. [36] If Kinnock is, as the left fondly imagine, dependent for the moment on the right (from whom one would expect such things), he is a very willing dependent. And the left, too, is a very willing dependent on Kinnock. If Meacher – as a typical member of the kind of left which hopes to displace the traditional right – refuses even before the assumption of office to join in criticism about the increasingly ‘anti-socialist’ nature [37] of the Labour Party’s evolving programme (expecting him to resign from the Shadow Cabinet would be asking too much), then the idea that as a government minister he will become more critical is quite unthinkable.
The left as a whole has kept silent about Kinnock’s championing of what Labour proposes to do. If it is prepared to tolerate anti-working class policies now, it will do so under a Labour government – and even be prepared to implement them. The left’s journey from rejection of the right and all its works to toleration of right-wing policies when carried out by kindred spirits has been long and stealthy; the final stage of the journey, substituting for and becoming the right, is not yet complete, and the idea would no doubt be repudiated as a vicious slander. Alas, the left forgets the history of its predecessors.
 
Kinnock’s forebears
If the revolutionary party is the memory of the class, then a reformist party represents its collective amnesia. Nowhere is that more evident than with the Labour left’s attitude to the leader. The parallels between Harold Wilson and Neil Kinnock are striking. Sometimes the sense of history repeating itself occurs to the soft left – only to be rejected. Ken Livingstone, for example, is quite aware of the way in which the fate of Wilson might prefigure that of Kinnock. In reply to a question from Tribune about whether he shared the interviewer’s belief ‘for which the politest thing I have been called is naive, that the next Labour government can avoid the mistakes of the Wilson and Callaghan governments,’ Livingstone replied:
Neil Kinnock would have to be the most breathtakingly stupid leader of the Labour Party not to have seen how those last two Labour Governments failed. He was there. He watched it.
Harold Wilson’s failure in the sixties was part of the formative years of Neil Kinnock’s political development. He had no illusions about it. He then watched the failure of the Callaghan Government.
I am not one of those people who writes off Neil Kinnock at all. If he has learnt the lessons of why those Governments failed, he can avoid repeating them. [38]
Stupid or not, Kinnock may indeed end up repeating the failures, but for reasons to do with the nature of the Labour Party and not with his inability to learn lessons.
Of course it would be foolish to deny the differences between Wilson and Kinnock. Wilson, for example, never laid claim to being a unilateralist. For most of his career he had few differences with the right-wing policies of the leadership. His left-wing reputation was founded on two issues: he had, along with Nye Bevan, resigned from Attlee’s government in 1951 over the introduction of prescription charges (though Paul Foot gives good reason for doubting the sincerity of his motives) [39]; and he had stood for leader against Gaitskell in 1960 after Gaitskell had been defeated at conference on the question of unilateralism. His prime reason for standing against Gaitskell had little to do with disagreement about the leadership’s policies; it was rather to do with his annoyance at Gaitskell’s unbending tactics which refused the kind of compromising unity Wilson preferred. As Miliband put it:
What separated him from Gaitskell and the latter’s friends (apart from the dislike, distrust and even contempt which they felt for him) was a matter of tactics and a certain style. Wilson had an infinitely greater sense of the complex strands which make up the political culture of the Labour movement, and he realised far better than did the ‘Hampstead set’ that the ‘unity’ of the Party, which meant in effect the neutralisation of the Left, could be achieved at a very small price, indeed at next to no price, provided the leadership was willing to wrap up whatever policies it thought suitable in language which would appeal to the Left. [40]
We shall have occasion to return to the question of style later. The left fell for Wilson because he appeared to be different. His promise of a new Britain ‘forged in the white heat of a technological revolution’ [41], coupled with his witty invective against the ‘Edwardian establishment mentality’ [42] symbolised by Sir Alec Douglas Home’s Tory premiership, seemed to open up new vistas for socialist advance under his youthful leadership.
The left hypnotised itself to ignore the real content of Wilson’s philosophy:
... what Wilson was attacking was not British capitalism as a system, but some facets of it, the ‘old boy network’, ‘candy-floss commercialism’, ‘parasitic speculators’, the ‘grouse moor mentality’, and ... what, in effect, he counterposed to this was not the vision of a socialist society, but of a renovated capitalism, freed from its aristocratic accretions, dynamic, professional, entrepreneurial, numerate and efficient. [43]
In other words, the programme Wilson offered was the modernisation of British capitalism and for it to be managed, not by the gentlemen amateurs who had traditionally run it, but by a new thrusting generation of technocrats and meritocrats.
The adulation that Wilson received from the left is difficult to believe. Even the hard left of the period was taken in. Michael Foot, who had been so critical of Labour policy that he had had the whip withdrawn in 1961 for opposing Tory defence estimate, argued that Wilson had:
not only qualities of political acumen, political skill and survival power which no one denies him. Other considerable qualities too for a Labour leader – a coherence of ideas, a readiness to follow unorthodox courses, a respect for democracy ... above all a deep and genuine love of the Labour movement. [44]
Clive Jenkins, at that stage in his career a militant trade union leader, wrote after the 1963 TUC that Harold Wilson was opposed to wage restraint. [45] Even those who claimed to be Marxist let themselves be duped. Tom Nairn, of New Left Review, wrote on the eve of Labour’s 1964 election victory:
There is no doubt that, relatively, with regard to the past annals of the Labour leadership, Wilson represents a kind of progress. Wilson constantly professes the habitual Labour contempt for theory – ‘theology’ as he calls it –– but has far more theoretical grasp than any previous leader. Unlike so many former left-wing figures who have moved towards power he has never actually renounced or broken with his past; he is likely to be much more open to left-wing ideas and pressures than his predecessors. In contrast to Gaitskell and Attlee, Wilson seems singularly free from the bigoted anti-Communism which has been a surrogate for thought and action in many social-democratic movements. [46]
This then was the shining knight of the Labour movement who, in his first period of office (1964–1970), broke every single commitment real or imagined. His respect for democracy, love of the Labour movement, refusal to be anti-communist, opposition to wage restraint etc., were demonstrated in his 1965 measures to hold down wages (repeated more stringently in 1966), in his vicious red-baiting attack on the seamen’s strike in 1966, in his deflationary measures affecting living standards, and in his total subservience to the American war effort in Vietnam. Not much of his reputation even for decency survived the introduction of immigration controls in 1968, aimed at Kenyan Asians.
Why assume that Kinnock will be any different? The problem has nothing to do with sincerity or intentions; it has to do with attempting to run an uncongenial political system. While possibly there is less adulation of Kinnock than there was of Wilson, the same blindness to the reality of the process affects the left. Just as Wilson’s rhetoric kept the left in a state of trance, so Kinnock’s style, enthusiastic but blurred just at the point where clarity is needed (he also keeps silent for as long as possible on tricky issues), bemuses the current left. The slickness and apparent novelty of presentation, for example, the American-style building of Kinnock (with wife) as pseudo-presidential material, means that the reality of policy can be left in mellow obscurity. Any hostages to Tory or media fortune are studiously avoided. Clause Four nationalisation is replaced by supposedly innovatory conceptions of co-ownership and participation at local level. The campaigning style of local government, with its clever use of advertising techniques, can be hawked around as the best way of involving the community in their own affairs; the fact that such techniques have not saved jobs or prevented further decline in services can be ignored.
In this concentration on image, style and presentation, the parallel with the Wilson years is informative. Paul Foot has pointed out the following difference between the 1959 and 1964 election campaigns:
The difference in the two campaigns was reflected in the manifestos and posters. The 1959 posters of old people in slums were replaced by gay young executives, forged in the white heat of the technological revolution. Labour’s education policy was based now on the need for more and more scientists. Labour’s housing policy switched its attention from council-house tenants and slums to house-buyers and mortgage-holders. [47]
The spate of glossy briefings coming out of Walworth Road suggest that the same professionalism and marketing emphasis will shape the next election campaign; but it will also be a retreat in terms of the policy presented in 1983.
The evolution of the left in the years of the Wilson administrations is instructive. Some left-wing MPs woke from their trance to see what Wilsonism meant in practice and from 1966 onwards (just at the point when Wilson gained the kind of majority that made back bench revolts useless), a hard core were in near-permanent opposition to the government. Powerless to prevent the government pursuing anti-socialist measures and faced with threats from Wilson of a general election or bids to replace him with a right-winger, the hard-left MPs persistently and pathetically continued to believe that Wilsonism was better than Gaitskellism, even though Wilson’s record could hardly have been worse than Gaitskell’s had he lived.
But if some remained in impotent opposition many others were coopted. It is difficult to believe now that people like Peter Shore, David (now Lord) Ennals, Shirley Williams (no less) and Jeremy Bray were all once bitter critics of Wilson’s pro-Vietnam policy, or that Reginald Freeson (now ousted by Ken Livingstone) and Dick Taverne (who was later the first ‘social democrat’ defector) were once determined opponents in 1966, along with Ennals, Williams and Bray, of the government’s immigration White Paper. Yet within two years they were all given jobs and absorbed into government.
It is easy to dismiss them as sell-out merchants. But the process of evolution from left to right is not simply attributable to defective morality or secret ambitions. Paul Foot well explained the process:
The offer such a job places a left-wing MP in an intolerable dilemma. In the first place, the logic of his place in Parliament tells him that he must accept a place in the Government. How, he argues, can he press for more left-wing policies from a Government, and then refuse to join the Government when offered a place in it? Moreover, particularly in offices like the Scottish office and the Ministry of Transport, the political complexion of an Under-Secretary can make a difference to a host of administrative decisions. As against that, the Minister is silenced on the broad issues. He has no voice in the Government, which never meets. And, when necessary, he can be hauled out to vote for the Cabinet’s policy. [48]
Can one doubt that both the present and future crop of new MPs will find themselves in the same dilemma? The logic that compels them to make their peace with Kinnock will compel them to accept government positions, despite qualms and criticisms.
The example of Labour’s best-known rebel (certainly one glorified in the left’s mythology), Nye Bevan, illustrates perfectly Foot’s point. Bevan had refused a position in the wartime coalition cabinet and maintained a lively left-wing opposition to the Labour right, but called upon by Attlee in the 1945 government to introduce the National Health Service, how could he refuse the responsibility of being the in minister in charge, a position which might otherwise have fallen into less capable and committed hands? The price paid was the silence on the failure of the Attlee government to advance beyond its initial commitments to that assault on capitalism for which the left yearned. The left was thus deprived of its most effective leader.
Indeed, his ministerial position led him to defend the Attlee government’s massive increase in armaments expenditure in 1950. He thus connived at the inevitable squeezing of funds to welfare that the increase in military expenditure dictated. If his resignation the following year over the consequences (prescription charges) was principled, it was nevertheless illogical in view of his earlier behaviour and did nothing to sort out the confusion of the Labour left. [49]
Bevan’s later volte-face on unilateralism was the product of the same dilemma. Having in 1955 so challenged Attlee’s leadership that the whip was withdrawn, he then startled the Labour Party Conference in 1957 by denouncing unilateralism as an ‘emotional spasm’ which would send a British Foreign Secretary ‘naked into the chamber’. But by then he was Shadow Foreign Secretary and probably reckoned that the chance of having some ‘Socialist’ influence on foreign policy was worth smudging on his principles. [50]
If Bevan succumbed, most of the present hard left will, and so too will the lesser fry like Meacher and co.
The problem lies not in the quality of Labour MPs, but in the parliamentary road. The idea that capitalism can be eliminated by a majority of MPs (say, 350 plus) is fantastic, however many millions have voted for them. The fate of every Labour government is witness to the real forces that oppose every tiny attempt to introduce the tiniest of reforms. Not only is there the undemocratic machinery of the constitution (the Lords, the Monarchy) which instantly puts obstacles in the way of socialist change. There are also the permanent civil servants and the great bureaucracies of state that blunt every anti-capitalist initiative. Then there are, as Harold Wilson rapidly discovered, the speculative pressures of the financiers, whose ability to engineer sterling crises instantly puts Labour; governments on the defensive.
Finally, of course, there are those forces – the police, magistrature, judiciary, armed forces – which Labour governments never touch (on the contrary they use them, as Attlee and Wilson both did, against workers), whose function is to perpetuate the daily round of capitalist exploitation when all else fails.
Sometimes, a few of the Labour left recognise the scale of these obstacles blocking the parliamentary road (revolutionaries do not possess a monopoly of virtue in this respect). No left-wing MP before Tony Benn perceived the problem as clearly as Stafford Cripps in the 1930s. In his pamphlet Can Socialism Come by Constitutional Means? he warned that ‘the ruling class will go to almost any length to defeat Parliamentary action if the issue is the direct issue of the continuance of their financial and political control.’ [51] And if the Conservatives thought of resorting to a military dictatorship in a constitutional deadlock between a majority Labour government and the House of Lords ‘it would probably be better and more conducive to the general peace and welfare of the country for the Socialist Government to make itself temporarily into a dictatorship until matters could again be put to the test at the polls.’ [52]
This gives an indication of what Cripps realised would be necessary for the kind of socialist transformation he (and the Socialist League) wanted. Cripps enjoyed much support among the hard left of his day. At the 1934 Labour Party Conference no less than 75 amendments to the NEC’s document For Socialism and Peace were tabled. For Socialism and Peace was itself the most radical programme ever adopted (it called for public ownership over a very wide range of industries and services and the immediate abolition of the House of Lords). [53] That fact alone demonstrates how left-wing the opposition to the NEC was.
Yet, although Cripps continued throughout the 30s to be a thorn in the side of the Labour leadership, with his attempt to push the Labour Party into a Popular Front alliance with the Communist Party and the ILP, he was unsuccessful in turning the Labour Party leftwards. He dissolved the Socialist League, and, after temporary expulsion, eventually followed his former colleague on the Executive Socialist League, Clement Attlee, into respectability. He joined Churchill’s wartime cabinet and ended his parliamentary career by becoming Attlee’s Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1947, in which post he brought not socialist but the most orthodox of economic policies.
What Cripps failed to see, despite his perception in the 30s that capitalism could not be fought with anything but the most determined opposition, was that his chosen instrument was the wrong one. The idea that the Labour Party would contemplate, let alone use, the kind of emergency powers Cripps deemed necessary was absurd. The Labour Party had been founded as a thoroughly constitutional party; it would never place Labour’s interests (Clause Four notwithstanding) above Labour’s respect for the political system.
Once that is understood, the trajectory of Cripps’ career can be grasped. Since there could in his view be no alternative to the parliamentarianism of the Labour Party, first the Socialist League and then any kind of socialist principles had to be jettisoned. Better, he must have thought, to be able to do a little via parliament than nothing (so it would appear) outside it.
This sentiment has been echoed since by many less perceptive figures than Cripps, and no doubt explains the motivation of Meacher, Livingstone, Blunkett, et al. What could be more sensible than to ensure that a Labour Party (which is united – never mind on what terms) at least gets rid of a hated Tory government? If that means softening bits of one’s ideas then only an incorrigible sectarian – one who prefers the purity of powerlessness to the muckiness of power – would refuse.
What the left forgets is that the consequences, from Cripps onwards, are plain: cooption. As we have seen this is no accident, something that can be avoided in the future by refusing to be like Wilson to avoid Kinnockism being a rerun of Wilsonism the left would have to renounce what makes both inevitable – dependency on the essentially electoralist nature of the Labour Party and its orientation on parliament. And that is precisely the one thing they will not let go of.
 
The hard left and the activists in the localities
So far we have concentrated on shifts at the top of the party, assuming that the public pronouncements of the soft left, and rightward shift of its best-known leaders, represent a very profound shift in the Labour Party as a whole. But perhaps, however marginalised the hard left appears to be, the effect is no more than a kind of optical illusion which flows from looking from the top of the party downwards. Benn, for example, denies that a basic rightward shift has taken place. ‘The top,’ as he put it when interviewed in Socialist Worker, ‘is always the last place to get the message. But at the bottom, that’s where radicalisation matters.’ [54] A similar sort of denial comes from Militant.
To test the truth of this, let us examine the witch hunt against Militant supporters as a test of the mood inside the Labour Party. For Tony Benn, as for Militant, the witch hunt is a measure of the weakness of the right: ‘I think the witch hunt is an indication of the strength of the left and not its weakness. You don’t have to witch hunt against a powerless little group of people.’ [55]
If Benn is right then clearly he has a powerful argument against those who claim that the vacillations and treacheries of the leadership prove that the Labour Party is unwinnable for socialism. If the party is basically on a left-wing course, despite what happens at the top, then there is no point in leaving.
But is Benn right? First of all, we have to understand that the present witch hunt is not like the witch hunt of 1981. Attempts by leading NEC right-wingers, Ken Cure, of the AUEW, and Charles Turnock, of the NUR, to repeat the same procedure have failed.
As Chairman of the Appeals Committee, Cure presented the NEC with a document on the ‘principles of democratic socialism’, which attacked the domination of the Labour Party by those whose educational advantages allowed them to manipulate the rules to their advantage. These people, the document claimed, had used their positions to criticise long-standing and valued members of the party, active, for example, in local government, and had led to the alienation of working-class members of the party and to Labour’s electoral decline. In particular, the document singled out Militant as the chief culprit in twisting the rules. [56]
What Cure was after, with this piece of red-baiting based on a spurious appeal to the working class, was a concerted, centralised offensive against the left of the type that a few years earlier had led to the arraigning of the editorial board of Militant and their subsequent expulsion from the party. In this he was stopped by leading soft left members of the NEC, who successfully led a move to exclude specific mention of Militant in connection with membership of the Labour Party, a move welcomed by Kinnock. Although predictably the Tory press claimed that this was yet another example of Labour’s capitulation to extremism, the reality, sadly, is rather different.
There is no doubt a witch hunt. There have been a significant number of expulsions – in Wales, the North East, the West Midlands and Nottinghamshire. There is also pressure on Militant supporters to stop selling their paper on pain of expulsion. And within NUPE and the TGWU strong currents to marginalise the influence of Militant exist (the influence is limited in any case). But this has not been a witch hunt initiated from the top. The soft left opposed Cure because they realised that a witch hunt on his terms be counterproductive.
The feeling is much more to let Militant invite expulsion by its own behaviour as the mood in the party develops that those who rock the boat get what they deserve. Thus the soft left can keep its conscience clean while doing nothing to oppose the anti-Militant mood. For example, Tribune printed a long article from the Isle of Wight Constituency Labour Party on why they had stopped sales of Militant their meetings. They claimed that Militant disrupted the work of the party by refusing to act under its discipline and so were responsible for the disunity that led to the disastrous drop in the vote on the Isle of Wight in 1983. The article concluded:
If tendency members ARE expelled here, it will be because they courted it and ignored the feelings of ordinary party members who have nothing in common with them.
We say to party members elsewhere, do not judge our actions as ‘witch hunting until you have had to live with a party totally dominated and controlled by a narrow, rigid faction whose aims and methods have nothing in common with the Labour Party, or with democracy, and whose tactics and slogans have progressively destroyed the Labour vote on the Isle of Wight.
The Isle of Wight Labour Party is determined to improve its electoral standing, whatever the cost may be. We have come to the conclusion here that we cannot even begin to make a start on that while we are saddled by the encumbrancy of the Militant Tendency, its pathetic ‘newspaper’, and its self-serving, self-pitying disciples. [57]
It is quite possible that this picture of the feeling in the Isle of Wight party is a total slander, though no rebuttal has been forthcoming. It is therefore more than likely that the unpopularity of Militant is widespread: it represents the unpopularity of hard socialist ideas in the face of the pressures of electoralism.
Tribune’s response is unpleasant but revealing:
The statement from the Isle of Wight Constituency Labour party printed on this page contains a powerful message for the party’s right wing: that Militant is a parasite which, if left alone, will wither, but if it is attacked, it will thrive and prosper.
While the Right on Labour’s National Executive Committee were witch-hunting Militant from pillar to post, the group increased its membership and grew in influence.
Furthermore, while it was under attack, the democratic Left was forced into the position of having to defend Militant, despite its profound distaste for its policies and methods of working.
In recent months, Neil Kinnock has persuaded the Right to leave Militant alone. As a result, the real political differences which exist between the tendency and the rest of the Left have been allowed to emerge.
Had the Right’s witch-hunt still been in full swing, none of this would have happened and Militant would probably have succeeded in seeing several of its members selected as parliamentary candidates by now. The lesson could not be clearer. All witch-hunters please note. [58]
In other words what we have here is a sober recognition that much the easiest way to ditch Militant is to use the feeling inside local parties rather than diktats from Walworth Road. This also means that one can, in a formal sense, be opposed to witch hunts – or even deny, as Peter Hain does, that they exist. [59]
This ‘popular’ drive to marginalise Militant (horrible though it is) belies the idea that a hard left current is on the offensive in the Labour Party. No doubt Militant continues to draw support from those who refuse to follow the drift rightwards of what Militant calls the trendy left. At the same time the ‘trendy’ left is clearly under no pressure from the hard left. Indeed, the evidence is rather that Militant is making concessions to the weight of feeling which Tribune has commented on. Take, for example, Militant’s model resolution against the witch hunt:
This CLP/organisation recognises that party unity around socialist policies is an essential condition for the defeat of the Thatcher government.
The witch-hunts and expulsions over the last six months have damaged the party and played directly into the hands of the capitalist press. Such attacks before the 1983 general election were a key factor in Labour’s defeat.
Unfortunately these attacks arise from an attempt by some sections of the party to create a smokescreen in order to abandon socialist measures and return to the failed and discredited policies of the past.
We therefore call on the NEC to maintain the Party’s commitment to socialist policies. The road of witch-hunts and expulsions on which they are proceeding will meet the whole-hearted resistance of the rank and file. We warn those leaders who condone these attacks that they will be held responsible for splitting the Party in the face of the enemy. All attacks, ‘purges’ and expulsions should be dropped by the NEC and the misnamed Appeals and Mediation Committee, which has undemocratically initiated countless ‘disciplinary enquiries’, should be abandoned.
Only if this is done can the ranks of the Labour movement be pulled together to campaign effectively against the Tory enemy and prepare the way for a Labour Government committed to socialist principles. [60]
The appeal to unity sounds fine and one likely to strike a chord with many Labour Party activists. But it ducks a crucial question. If ‘some sections of the party’ are using the witch hunt ‘in order to abandon socialist policies’, surely their continued existence in the Labour Party constitutes a hindrance to getting ‘socialist policies’ implemented by the next Labour government. In other words, shouldn’t they be expelled?
Now, if the witch hunt of socialists was a desperate rearguard action by the right in the face of the growing strength of the hard left in the party, Militant would not have to resort to pleading to be left alone as a quid pro quo for not attacking the right head on. The fact that Militant refuses rather coyly to specify who these sections are (do they include Kinnock, who is certainly responsible for abandoning socialist policies?) is proof of their lack of support and the need to retreat.
Similarly, Benn’s claim that hard left ideas are popular at the base of the party is undermined by his recognition that the party does not want ‘a challenge to the leadership’. [61] Perhaps Benn did not perceive the implications of this admission. If the party does not want to challenge the leadership, that means it accepts that those now articulating and promoting ‘anti-socialist’ policies, i.e. Kinnock and the Shadow Cabinet, should be trusted. That is no testimony to left-wing strength. It is rather a vote of confidence in those opposed in what Benn stands for.
If we wanted further proof of the mood in the Labour Party we need look no further than what has happened over reselection. If, as Tribune observed, there is no sign of a political shift among the marginal seats, one can only conclude that, despite the superiority of the new selection procedures (it is claimed they favour the hard left, who initiated them), other aspirations have taken priority. These aspirations reflect the need to build maximum electoral support in the next two to three years. The soft left embodies these aspirations perfectly.
On the one hand, there is the deep desire on the part of Labour Party activists to avoid the tarnished image of the traditional right-wing leadership, discredited by the experience of the 1974 to 1979 government. If the initiative is to be recaptured from the Tories, then a campaigning, radical image is an absolute necessity. On the other hand, it must be an image that appears credible, not one that appears unrealistic. In that respect, the soft left’s perception of the rate-capping campaign is revealing. What came to dominate (as victory over the government slipped out of sight) was the feeling that campaigning against government cuts as an exercise in changing public opinion was more important than victory or defeat. So when Blunkett talked of confrontation over the law as a pointless bid for martyrdom not many on the left felt that to be a betrayal. Equally, Ken Livingstone’s abrupt climbdown, although a shock to some, is unlikely to damage his reputation too much since the alternative to climbing down appeared impossible.
After the long years of Thatcherism, and the sobering effects of two lost elections, it is the soft left option, pragmatic and un-doctrinaire, that is winning the ranks of the activists – not the ‘sectarian’ hard left. The hard left’s argument that their views reflect that real state of opinion in the party does not stand up to scrutiny. The fact that the marginalisation of Militant requires no formal directive from Walworth Road and the fact that reselection shows no strengthening of the hard left’s position testify to the unpalatable reality that the kind of socialist ideas promoted in the party only a little while ago are now unpopular.
The fundamental split in the Labour Party is between those both at the top and at the grassroots who want the party to win at the polls first and foremost and those (a much smaller group) who assert that policy takes priority. Because the Labour Party is electoralist the advantage lies with the former. They put pressure on the latter to adapt to the prevailing ethos of unity, on the grounds that no member of the Labour Party could refuse to cooperate with the right for electoral victory just because correct policy is the priority. The spoken or unspoken accusation of treachery keeps the hard left in line at all levels of the party, the bottom as well as the top.
Unity is a splendid principle when it comes to working-class self-activity; it is a deadly trap when it conceals differences of principle in a reformist party. The dominance of the right and the soft left is not due to their skilful manoeuvrings, but sadly to the fact that most of those belonging to the Labour Party genuinely believe in the Labour Party and are hostile to persistent critics, not just of its leaders and policies but of its methods, however correct these criticisms are. The urge to bury differences on the grounds that we are all united in the Labour Party against the Tory enemy is a deeply rooted one.
This is not a counsel of despair or an argument for ignoring the Labour Party. It is rather to say that the key to winning the minority of socialists in the Labour Party away from reformism lies in convincing them that it is the struggle that takes place outside the arena of electoralism, in the workplace, that counts. Where workers gain the confidence to fight for themselves, there is socialist advance resumed.
 
Revolutionaries and the Labour Party
Are there any exceptions? Have socialists in the Labour Party who call themselves Marxists (unlike the Bennite hard left) held out against the accommodation to the right? Militant would answer yes.
Militant have good reason for calling themselves revolutionary rather than reformist. In all respects, except their adherence to the Labour Party, their programme and politics belong to the Trotskyist tradition. The fact that they have created a large (by revolutionary standards) and influential network of supporters who are well organised inside the Labour Party seems to suggest that, contrary to the argument running through this article, it is possible to survive unscathed inside a reformist party. Indeed, Militant would claim there are positive advantages to remaining within the Labour Party, for, as the left reformists make their peace with the right, only Militant remains to act as a pole of attraction to genuine socialists inside the party disgusted by the antics of the soft left. The socialist ‘sects’ outside the Labour Party debar themselves, it is claimed, from the opportunity.
We have already seen, over the question of the witch hunt, that there is good reason for believing that Militant has made concessions to the prevailing mood of unity. But it could be argued that those were purely tactical concessions. Unfortunately, it is clear that Militant have paid a price for their determination to remain inside the Labour Party, the price being major theoretical concessions which tend to cancel out any advantage they claim accrues from operating inside a reformist organisation. Of course, for reformists considerations of this sort are irrelevant (by definition, reformists believe in the parliamentary road, the conversion of the existing state machine to socialist purposes, etc.); for revolutionaries the case is different.
Ever since Lenin’s time, no one with revolutionary pretensions has believed that social-democratic or labour parties can bring about socialism. Instead, communist parties which reject electoralism and parliamentary cretinism are required. For revolutionaries to adhere to the Labour Party therefore seems contradictory. What justification would there be in the Leninist tradition? If pressed, Militant point to Lenin’s advocacy of affiliation to the Labour Party by the infant British Communist Party in 1920, especially as Lenin attacked those who were against affiliation as ultra-left abstentionists.
Yet Lenin’s case is less straightforward than appears at first glance. Lenin’s starting point is an attack on the view that the Labour Party is ‘the political expression of the workers organised in trade unions’:
I have met the same view several Times in the paper of the British Socialist Party [the BSP fused with other groups to form the Communist Party, but was already affiliated to the Labour Party]. It is erroneous, and is partly the cause of the opposition, fully justified in some measure, coming from the British revolutionary workers. Indeed, the concepts ‘political department of the trade unions’ or ‘political expression of the trade union movement, are erroneous. Of course, most of the Labour Party’s members are working men. However, whether or not a party is really a political party of the workers does not depend solely upon a membership of workers but also upon the men that lead it, and the content of its actions and its political tactics. Only this latter determines whether we really have before us a political party of the proletariat. Regarded from this, the only correct, point of view, the Labour Party is a thoroughly bourgeois party, because, although made up of workers, it is led by reactionaries, and the worst kind of reactionaries at that, who act quite in the spirit of the bourgeoisie. It is an organisation of the bourgeoisie, which exists to systematically dupe the workers ... [62]
Nothing has changed since Lenin’s time to modify this definition. The experience of Labour in power has merely confirmed what a thoroughly bourgeois party it is.
Why should Lenin have been so insistent on the point that the Labour Party is not the political expression of the trade unions? Maybe he was concerned about the implications of such a view for the tactic of affiliation. Fudging the nature of the Labour Party might shift the purpose of affiliation from that of seeking to build an open and independent revolutionary organisation outside the Labour Party to one of attempting to convert the Labour Party into being the true political expression of the workers. Manifestly this was out of the question; otherwise Lenin would have suggested dissolving the Communist Party into the Labour Party.
Affiliation for Lenin only made sense under the unique conditions of the British Labour Party – complete freedom to criticise the leadership. The implication of the tactic was that, faced with a choice between retaining affiliation at the price of losing that complete freedom to criticise and expulsion, the Communist Party (so Lenin maintained over and over again) should welcome expulsion: ‘that will have an excellent effect upon the mass of the British workers’, [63] ‘that will be a great victory for the communist and revolutionary working class movement in Britain.’ [64]
Because Lenin was concerned about the ultra-leftism of the best elements of the British Communist Party, he quite correctly attacked their rejection of affiliation as part of their infantile disorder of left-wing communism. By 1920 the international revolutionary tide was ebbing fast. Revolution and soviet power was no longer on the immediate agenda in Britain. The Labour Party had to be urged into office so that the experience of Labour in power could cure workers of their illusions in reformism. Standing on the sidelines, indifferent to the opportunities offered by bourgeois democracy or ignoring the Labour Party, the Communist Party would be deprived of any significant growth.
But just because Lenin bent the stick away from ultra-leftism he did not mince matters on the dangers of its opposite, opportunism. Hence his disagreement with the BSP’s view of the Labour Party; hence his total agreement with the one theoretical point on which Gallacher, the leading British ‘ultra-left’, was correct:
[he] fully realises that only workers’ Soviets, not parliament, can be the instrument enabling the proletariat to achieve its aims; those who have failed to understand this are, of course, out-and-out reactionaries, even if they are most highly educated people, most experienced politicians, most sincere socialists, most erudite Marxists, and most honest citizens and fathers of families. [65]
How does Militant measure up to the arguments Lenin used in connection with the tactic of affiliation? The answer is, not very well. For example, in Peter Taaffe’s long and authoritative article Marxism and the State [66], one will search in vain for any assertion that ‘only workers’ Soviets, not parliament can be the instrument enabling the proletariat to achieve its aims.’ Taaffe ably defends Marxists against the hypocritical bourgeois accusation that we are against democracy or rejoice in violence:
In supporting and defending ‘democracy’, the Marxists reject the hypo-critical idea of ‘democracy’ propounded by the spokesmen of capitalism. Democracy is not just a ‘nice idea’. Capitalist democracy is distinguished from other forms of rule by the bourgeoisie by the rights which the working class have conquered for itself: the right to strike; freedom of assembly and the press; the right to form political parties, cultural and sports associations; and of course the right to vote. These are the elements of the new society – that is, of a democratic workers’ state – which are maturing in the womb of the outmoded and decaying capitalist society. By using these rights effectively, the working class can strengthen itself, extend its power and organisations. This in turn can prepare the way for compelling capitalism to vacate the stage of history for a new socialist society. Rather than threatening democratic rights, Marxism advocates the retention and enormous extension of these rights as a pre-condition for the movement towards socialism. [67]
There is a telling elision in the argument. Of course revolutionaries welcome the relative freedoms of capitalist democracy and want them extended. But unless workers abolish the old state (including even its most ‘democratic’ – or rather, least authoritarian – element, parliament) and replace it by their own forms of democratic control, workers’ councils, then none of our current liberties, let alone socialist advance, can be guaranteed. On this point – the crucial lesson of the Bolshevik Revolution – Taaffe is silent. [68]
However, something has to be the agency of change:
Violence and civil war are as welcome to Marxists as the plague. Our policies, if taken up and implemented by the labour movement, could precisely avoid this catastrophe. We have proclaimed hundreds if not thousands of times that we believe that, armed with a clear programme and perspective, the labour movement could effect a peaceful socialist transformation. [69]
So what is the instrument of the labour movement?
In their desperate attempt to cast the left, and particularly the Marxists, in the role of ‘Totalitarians’, the bourgeoisie have continually sought to present us as ‘anti-parliamentarian’. However, in the pages of Militant, in pamphlets, and in speeches, we have shown that the struggle to establish a socialist Britain can be carried through in Parliament, backed up by the colossal power of the labour movement outside. This, however, will only be possible on one condition: that the trade unions and the Labour Party are won to a clear Marxist programme and perspective, and the full power of the movement is used to effect the rapid and complete socialist transformation of society. [70]
It is difficult to see in this anything other than a massive concession to the reformist idea that there is a parliamentary road to socialism. The most charitable construction that could be put on Taaffe’s argument is that he means something else. What he is really saying is that what counts is the long-term aim of winning the workers’ movement to Marxist ideas. In the meantime we should try the parliamentary road by electing Labour governments. Since, by definition, they lack Marxist ideas and leadership, they will fail to deliver the goods. That will have an educative effect on the workers’ movement, increasingly revolutionising it and directing it to the theoretical embodiment of revolutionary aspirations, that is, Marxism.
With this interpretation, give or take a few nuances, socialists inside the Labour Party would not disagree: while millions of workers place their faith in the Labour Party we have to travel that with them to prove in practice what revolutionary socialists say in theory, namely that socialism cannot come via parliament.
But to put such a construction on Taaffe’s argument is simply not tenable. For Taaffe goes on to elaborate in rather more specific detail what this combination of parliamentary and extra-parliamentary activity amounts to:
It is for this reason that Militant, in opposition to the programme of piecemeal reforms of the supporters of the Alternative Economic Strategy, have demanded that a Labour government introduce enabling legislation into the House of Commons to nationalise the 200 monopolies, with minimum compensation on the basis of proven need. Should the movement be restricted to Parliamentary struggle, as the right-wing have argued in the past? The rank and file of the labour movement has never evinced a tendency towards what Marx called ‘parliamentary cretinism’ THE STRUGGLE TO ENHANCE THE POSITION OF LABOUR IN PARLIAMENT HAS ALWAYS BEEN SUPPLEMENTED BY THE STRUGGLE OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT, both of the trade unions and of the Labour Party. [71]
It is simply not possible to argue that there is any fundamental difference here between a reformist view of extra-parliamentary activity and Militant’s. The key phrase is the one stressed above. Surely that puts the relationship between parliament and the struggle outside the wrong way round. The SWP, ‘a tiny ultra-left sect’, most assuredly does not suffer from ‘anti-parliamentarianism’ (in the positive sense); it would dearly love to have as many MPs in the Commons as Militant (if not more). But their purpose would be to enhance the position of working-class struggles outside parliament. Parliamentary ‘struggle’ would be subordinated to real struggle, not implemented (?!) by it’. [72]
Taaffe’s formulation recalls not the Leninist tradition but the centrist, Kautskyan tradition against which both Lenin and Trotsky fought so bitterly, though, to be fair, Taaffe has not gone as far as actually saying that: ‘the direct action of the unions can operate effectively only as an auxiliary and reinforcement to, and not as substitute for parliamentary action.’ [73]
The demand for enabling legislation recalls Cripps’ very similar demand in the 30s – indeed, Taaffe refers to it approvingly. Unless one really believes in the parliamentary road, such demands are unnecessary. It is one thing to call on a Labour government to nationalise large chunks of British industry – at a pinch, that could be justified as a propaganda designed to ‘expose’ Labour. But it is quite another to give chapter and verse about not only how many monopolies a future Labour government should nationalise but also what kind of compensation should be paid out. This is definitely to preach that parliamentary methods are the way forward. Whatever their intentions, the effect of Militant’s view of the transition to socialism is to reinforce reformist illusions.
However, despite these dubious departures from the revolutionary tradition, the consequences of their theory of the transition to socialism are likely to remain untested (unless one counts Liverpool Council) – their exclusion from crucial positions of responsibility in the Labour Party guarantees that. So Militant guards a certain flexibility. For many of their supporters the reformist implications are not clear; they remain convinced revolutionaries (and the Militant newspaper certainly preaches class struggle) who perceive no contradiction between their aspirations and the reality of working within the Labour Party.
However, that state of affairs cannot last indefinitely, and unless they are persuaded that there is a socialist alternative outside the Labour Party the sad consequence will be that either they move to the right as the supposed necessity of remaining in the Labour Party forces them to tone down their politics or they will be lost to Marxism altogether.
The problem is precisely the supposed necessity of remaining in the Labour Party. Militant gives no conditions of the sort spelled out by Lenin for leaving the Labour Party. At least, in public they do not. It may be that privately Militant retains something of Trotsky’s view that revolutionaries only go into a reformist party (in the last resort, as it were), to pull leftward moving workers out of it in order to construct an independent revolutionary socialist alternative. [74] How to pull out of a reformist party was for Trotsky part and parcel of how one went in. No such discussion is ever voiced in public by Militant, even guardedly.
This is doubly dangerous, first, because the longer revolutionaries remain in the Labour Party the more comfortable they grow within it (they start making concessions of the type we have already examined); and secondly, because if there really is an intention to leave the Labour Party the more difficult it becomes to pull any class-conscious workers with one, expectations having been build up that the Labour Party can be transformed into an instrument of socialist change.
If anything, Militant offers a justification for remaining inside the Labour Party whatever happens and in all circumstances. The justification hinges on the argument that because the Labour Party is the historic party of the working class (we have already seen what Lenin thought of that argument) workers will inevitably turn to it in a crisis. Whether right or left are in the ascendancy, revolutionaries have to hang on, come what may, waiting their turn.
The argument is misleading, and the conclusion does not follow. It is true, however, in this sense: very large numbers of workers identify with the Labour Party (largely in a voting capacity) as a party that either offers a better deal than the openly capitalist parties or is seen as corresponding to their interests as opposed to those of the bosses. It is also true that discontent feeds Labour’s popularity (though as Mitterrand’s France is currently proving, discontent can also feed right-wing and extreme-right parties).
But what does it mean to say that workers ‘look’ to the Labour Party? Because the dominant ideas in society are the ideas of the dominant class, revolutionary consciousness is restricted to a few workers. Reformism, on the other hand, because it fits workers’ day-to-day experience, is bound to prevail among broad layers of workers, and in so far as the Labour Party is the organised expression of reformism (with trade union leaders being the managers of discontent), so too will the Labour Party.
That workers break with openly capitalist ideas can only be welcomed (better a Mirror than a Sun reader); but it does not follow that workers identifying with reformist politics are in only the first phase of an automatic, inevitable transition to revolutionary politics. The reasons for identifying with the Labour Party can be to do with loss of confidence in self-activity as well as gain. There was a substantial swing to the Labour Party after the 1926 General Strike; but that represented a retreat into trust in parliamentary methods, direct action having apparently failed. Almost certainly, the revival of Labour’s electoral fortunes since the end of the miners’ strike shows similar complexity. Increased anti-Tory feeling is combined with a wariness about the virtues of industrial action. The miners’ strike proved to many that the Tories could be taken on and rattled; but the miners’ defeat reinforced the reformist illusion that the only way of crushing the Tories is at the ballot box.
Whether workers break from reformism to the left depends on there being a credible alternative to Labour. That used to be the Communist Party. But their politics were as rotten as reformist (and disastrous) for the socialists who looked to them as the Labour Party’s. One of the alternatives today is Militant. But by refusing to break with Labour, despite its evident drift to the right, Militant will channel disillusion back into the false expectation that a transformed Labour Party will bring about real socialism. If Militant are not prepared to risk war against Kinnock now, for fear of the consequences, it is difficult to imagine they will be in any better position to do so when Kinnock is actually in power.
If, however, Militant were prepared to join forces with other socialists outside the Labour Party, then a small, but credible socialist alternative could be created. In view of the demoralisation that will follow the anti-working class measures of the next Labour government, building that alternative is vital.
 
Conclusion
The evidence points to the gloomy fact that the next Labour government will be worse than the last. This has little to do with the subjective intentions of the participants or the quality of manifesto promises. Wedded to managing the system, Labour can only deliver reforms the system is prepared to tolerate. As the world economic crisis continues, the toleration of the crisis grows less. If the Tories are unable to help the system out of crisis, then Labour certainly won’t be able to.
In one unfortunate respect, however, Labour governments do have an advantage over Tory governments: they can use the trust of their supporters to press through anti-working class measures that Tory governments may not be able to as being too nakedly in the class interest of the bosses. Such, for example, is the reality of the Mitterrand government, which managed last year to make hourly wage rates rise more slowly than the rate of inflation – the first time since 1958, i.e. since De Gaulle seized power, and twenty-three years of right-wing rule followed. [75] Such, too, was the reality of the Wilson-Callaghan government of 1974 to 1979, which, despite the most radical manifesto the Labour Party has ever produced (it promised a ‘fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth in favour of working people and their families’) [76] presided over massive cuts in workers’ living standards. ‘Planning for wages’ under Kinnock can only be a continuation of what Thatcher has attempted (but failed) to do: cut workers’ wages sufficiently to restore capitalist profitability.
It would be nice to exempt those on the left of the Labour Party who have protested against every retreat by the leadership from complicity in this sad tale of betrayal. But it is not possible. Every left wing, whether or not some of its supporters succumb to the temptations of office and move to the right, tends by virtue of remaining in the Labour Party to give credibility to the idea that at some unspecified point in the future the Labour Party can be different. Since the party’s essentially electoralist nature dictates otherwise, the Labour left willy-nilly prepares for fresh defeats. The current Labour left will not escape the fate of its predecessors however much it thinks it can.
It is useless to repeat that a fully democratic constitution or the adoption of a proper Marxist programme would mark a fundamental break between the past of the Labour Party and its future (as Benn in the first instance and Militant in the second claim). The problem is the Labour Party itself. Clause Four has remained a dead letter; so will any other socialist nostrum.
Try as the Labour left might – by appeals to extra-parliamentary activity – they cannot avoid the fact that electoralism (which is the heart and soul of the Labour Party) constrains all who work in and for it to a strategy that places the cause of socialism in alien territory: the bourgeois institution of parliament. Once there it is subject to much more powerful forces than they, as believers in the parliamentary road, can muster in defence. And the tragedy is that the more far-sighted on the Labour left know it.
Yet they persist in demanding of all those whom they influence that they ‘strengthen’ the Labour Party – the very organisation that proves so deadly to workers’ socialist aspirations whatever the motives and intentions of its adherents.
But what’s the alternative to ‘strengthening’ the Labour Party, the Labour left ask? The alternative – outside the Labour Party – looks bleak; the politics of revolution, shrill and unrealistic. Yet if, us we have demonstrated, the fate of the Labour left is always either to be towed behind the right – sometimes willingly, sometimes reluctantly – or (in a few honourable exceptions) to retain a principled but powerless position, what advantage is there in remaining in the Labour Party?
If the left devoted its energies to building a socialist alternative to the Labour Party, one in which activists did not have to defend themselves constantly against the machinations of the right, did not get bogged down in manoeuvrings and resolution mongering, and just as importantly – were able to say openly and honestly that there is no parliamentary road to socialism, would not that strengthen socialist opposition to the kind of measures that Kinnock and co will direct against workers?
Otherwise the same scenario will be played out as in the 1974 to 1979 government. The watchword will be moderation, especially if the majority is small (or even, as it was in early 1974, non-existent). Measures directed at unemployment, welfare, education and so on will be moderate; wage demands will be kept moderate by trade union leaders, mindful of their responsibilities to ‘their’ government. Most of the Labour left will be persuaded to go along with this on the grounds that now is not the time to rock the boat (it never is).
Like the last Labour government, life will only get worse. As business is reassured by the moderation of Kinnock (and there are no wild flings at unilateralism), and the government’s determination as well as ability to resist pressure from below becomes clear, capital will resume its encroachments on labour. The Labour left, having already tolerated moderation, will be in no position to turn round and offer collective defiance. Some individuals will say enough is enough but their relative isolation will be sufficient to marginalise the impact of their protest.
The supposed superiority of being a socialist inside the Labour Party comes with a self-inflicted handicap that does not exist for those outside. The possibilities of activity on a clear and principled basis to fight Kinnock’s policies are that much sharper.
But, the Labour left will invariably add, will they be any more effective in view of the modest size of the forces outside the Labour Party? We, for our part, lay no great claim as to the nature of our influence and do not strut about in the caricature of Leninism, or vanguardism, that some on the Labour left sneer at. True, our aim is to build a revolutionary party based on uniting all those who want to fight capitalism and who recognise that the fight for socialism has very little to do with what goes on in parliament and everything to do with how workers go about their daily, humdrum battles against the boss and the bureaucrat at work. Not for one moment do we suppose that that is an easy task or that it can be done by incantation of Marxist rote.
To be a revolutionary is not to proclaim the revolutionary party as having been already built. A party with deep roots in every workplace and commanding a sizeable if minority influence is still a long way off. Nor does being a revolutionary mean declaring that the revolution will take place at 6 a.m. tomorrow morning.
But it does mean being clear about certain things, even at the apparent expense of foregoing the large audience available to socialists inside the Labour Party; and that is being clear about the fact that the Labour Party, whatever the intentions of sincere socialists inside it, is not marching towards the same goal as ourselves, while taking a better, broader and easier route – it is marching in the opposite direction altogether, away from socialism.
In any case, it is not true that socialists outside the Labour Party are deprived of an audience – or rather, it depends on how that audience is defined. If it is as Labour voters, then clearly to be inside the Labour Party makes sense. But we are entitled to ask, does not that bring us back to the old question of whether the key to socialism lies in voting, a question that can only be answered in the negative?
If on the other hand the audience is seen as workers who vote Labour, then the picture alters radically. However we define workers, their day-to-day economic activity is far more important than their occasional voting preference, though clearly that colours their thoughts and activity. But in their day-to-day economic activity, they find themselves in conflict with their bosses, testing their strength, winning battles (and often losing them), seeing what effect trade union and Labour leaders have on their expectations. Of that audience, socialists outside the Labour Party are not at all deprived.
Indeed, socialists outside the Labour Party are not tempted consciously or unconsciously to downgrade as extra-parliamentary the experience workers gain of their own strength, as if somehow it is the shadow to the real substance of parliamentary progress. The argument may be harder because the dominant generalisation by workers has been to rely on electing a Labour government.
Nevertheless it must be made. Dependence on Labour can only prove disastrous in the long run, and if the discontent that accumulates in consequence of every anti-working class measure Labour confusingly pushes as socialist is not totally to be captured by the right, then an alternative that does not subordinate a fightback against Labour to electoral calculations is vital. Not that a socialist alternative will be able to reverse the trend of Kinnockism, but it will at least be able, in its small beginnings, to prepare the ground for replacing Labourism with real socialism in the long run.

Notes
1. Quoted in Pete Goodwin, Is there a future for the Labour left? (London 1983), p. 12.
2. Ibid., p. 14.
3. Ibid., p. 16.
4. Tribune, 4 January 1985.
5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Tribune, 24 May 1985.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. New Socialist, May 1985.
14. Guardian, 28 March 1985. This point is also made in Seyd’s article.
15. Guardian, 8 January 1985.
16. New Socialist, May 1985.
17. Ibid.
18. Guardian, 3 August 1984.
19. See the paper presented by Benn and Heffer to the National Executive Committee and reproduced in Tribune, 31 May 1985. The relevant section goes as follows: ‘... a new campaign strategy, including some NEC, PLP and trade union members has been set up, from which other NEC members are excluded ... This committee has established its own sub-committees, still further distancing the NEC itself from real power.’ (My italics) Benn and Heffer then catalogue the extensive changes in party policy in economic strategy, attitude towards the Common Market and defence. None of this is surprising. What is revealing is the admission (a rather understated one) that the NEC has no real control over the leadership, the reason for which remains unexplored by the authors of the paper.
20. Times, 1 November 1984.
21. Guardian, 26 July 1985. The concessions the Campaign group is prepared to make is illustrated by the following. In January, when Roland Boyes refused to join in Campaign’s disruption in parliament in order to acquire debating time on the miners’ strike, Martin Flannery could think of no bigger insult than to say, ‘You’re nothing but a Tribunite’ (quoted in the Guardian, 23 January 1985). Yet Campaign insists on putting forward Tam Dalyell’s name for the joint slate, presumably because his persistence in exposing the government’s lies about the sinking of the Belgrano has resulted in deserved popularity. However, Dalyell is also on record (Guardian, 14 July 1984) as saying, à propos of the takeover of the Mirror, that Robert Maxwell was a ‘“remarkable and radical man” unjustly ignored by Harold Wilson. “He would have been a damn sight better at running the economy than Roy Jenkins.”’
22. Times, 16 March 1983. Adam Raphael made a similar prediction about the choice of candidates fighting marginal seats (Observer, 25 November 1984).
23. Guardian, 10 December 1984.
24. Tribune, 28 June 1985.
25. However, there is evidence that Militant itself is not above some dubious voting behaviour. Tribune (21 June 1985) reported accusations that at the Pollok selection meeting Militant supporters used their votes to eliminate the soft left-winger during a tie-breaker after the first round.
26. Tribune, 29 March 1985.
27. Guardian, 25 June 1985.
28. Quoted in the Guardian, 25 June 1985.
29. Guardian, 1 July 1985.
30. Ibid.
31. Quoted in the Guardian, 25 June 1985.
32. Guardian, 11 July 1985.
33. Times, 28 January 1985.
34. Both END and Tribune quoted in the Guardian, 21 June 1985.
35. Quoted in the Observer, 20 January 1985.
36. Kinnock told the COHSE conference (Guardian, 18 June 1985) that no miracle cures could be guaranteed for the NHS.
37. The phrase is Benn’s.
38. Tribune, 19 July 1985.
39. Paul Foot, The Politics of Harold Wilson (Harmondsworth 1968), pp. 90–94.
40. Ralph Miliband, Parliamentary Socialism (London 1972), p. 354.
41. Paul Foot, op. cit., p. 152.
42. Harold Wilson, The New Britain: Labour’s Plan (Harmondsworth 1964), p. 9. Rereading these selected speeches one fails to see how anyone could have been enthused by their banalities and evasions.
43. Miliband, op. cit., p. 355.
44. Quoted in Paul Foot, op. cit., p. 302.
45. Ibid., p. 303.
46. Ibid., p. 306.
47. Ibid., p. 147.
48. Ibid., p. 320.
49. The most prominent of the left MPs determined after his resignation ‘to do nothing that may impair this unity [of the party], weaken the position of the Government in the House of Commons, or handicap the Prime Minister’s exercise of his initiative in determining the date of the General Election’ (quoted in Miliband, op. cit., p. 314). In other words, so mindful were they of Labour’s precarious parliamentary situation that they backed away from a fight with the right.
50. Miliband, op. cit., p. 336.
51. Quoted in Miliband, op. cit., p. 197.
52. Ibid., p. 200.
53. Ibid., pp. 207–208.
54. Socialist Worker, 15 June 1985.
55. Ibid. Militant tries to have it both ways: when their supporters are not being attacked this proves that their arguments are making headway; when they are being attacked, this equally proves the strength of Militant’s ideas!
56. The full text appears in the Times, 1 March 1985.
57. Tribune, 19 July 1985.
58. Ibid.
59. See the interview with him in Socialist Worker, 3 August 1985.
60. Militant, 7 June 1983.
61. Socialist Worker, 15 June 1985.
62. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow 1960–1970), vol. 31, pp. 257–258.
63. Ibid., p. 261.
64. Ibid., p. 263.
65. Ibid., p. 80. This is a quotation from ‘Left-Wing’ Communism – An Infantile Disorder, a pamphlet often mistakenly used against socialists outside the Labour Party. Militant readers should ponder Lenin’s words very carefully.
66. Militant International Review, June 1982.
67. Ibid., p. 26.
68. No doubt Taaffe would reply that of course he is not opposed to soviets. But how would these forms of workers’ democracy, born of struggle, combine with existing forms of parliamentary ‘democracy’? Which would be legitimate in the event of conflict between the two? The questions are not academic; they were matters of life and death for the German Revolution of 1918 (see Chris Harman, The Lost Revolution – Germany 1918 to 1923 (London 1982).
69. Militant International Review, June 1982, p. 26.
70. Ibid., p. 28.
71. Ibid.
72. As Lenin put it in ‘Left-Wing’ Communism, ‘action by the masses, a big strike, for instance, is more important than parliamentary activity at all times’ (Lenin, op. cit., pp. 60–61).
73. Kautsky, The Road to Power (Chicago 1910), p. 95, quoted in Chris Harman, Party and Class (London), p. 50. Other quotations from Kautsky, giving a Marxist’ justification of parliamentary socialism, can be found in Harman, p. 49.
74. For an extended discussion, see Duncan Hallas, Revolutionaries and the Labour Party, International Socialism 2 : 16, Spring 1982, in particular pp. 12ff.
75. Financial Times, 26 June 1985.
76. Quoted in Henry Pelling, A Short History of the Labour Party (London 1982), p. 160.
 







The use of massive numbers of police to stop miners picketing has made the role of the state machine a live issue in the labour movement. Gareth Jenkins and Colin Sparks look at the arguments.



There is no doubt that the huge police operation against the NUM has been orchestrated by the government. It is clearly part of a strategy designed to smash the power of the NUM and weaken the working class overall.
Nor does it stand on its own as an example of increasingly authoritarian state powers. On the trade union question alone there have been more than 15 years of legal attacks which have attempted to make it more difficult for workers to win their demands. The most recent laws, the responsibility of Prior and Tebbit, have recently been tested by the NGA and by Eddie Shah as part of their attempts to win strikes. The courts have ruled in the employers’ favour, just the result the laws were framed to achieve.
But trade union legislation is not the only aspect of the strengthening of law and order. A minor civil servant, Sarah Tisdall, who passed on very low grade secrets to The Guardian newspaper, is locked up for six months. A new Police Bill is currently being forced through which will legalise many existing police practices like the arbitrary stopping and searching of ‘suspects’. Even the arts are threatened, with the ‘video nasties’ bill threatening to re-introduce wide powers of censorship.
 
Hard-won rights
An attack there certainly is, and it is an attack on the hard-won rights of working people. Any miner with lingering illusions about the neutrality of the forces of law and order will by now have had them quite literally knocked out of his head on the picket line. Experience will have taught him that in disputes between the boss and worker, the government, the police and the media (the army hasn’t yet come onto the scene) do not aim to keep the peace between the contending forces. They are unequivocally on the side of the boss.
But you can draw two distinct conclusions from this experience. One is that while the police do not behave neutrally they ought to, and would do if a democratic government, pledged to observe strict legality, were in control instead of the present viciously undemocratic Tory government. This is very much the current line of the Labour leadership.
Now, there is considerable truth in the assertion that the present Tory government is more vicious and anti-working class than any of its post-war predecessors. But it is not true that the Tories are departing from a tradition of democratic procedure which the Labour Party is committed to and abides by.
Take the use of the police to break strikes. The problem is not a new one. Just go back to 1977 and the Grunwick picket line. Large numbers of police were used to force the passage of scabs through a determined mass picket. But there was a Labour government in office at the time.
That, however, was small beer. The greatest example this century of the use of the police and the army for strike-breaking was during the General Strike of 1926. A whole apparatus called the Organisation for the Maintenance of Supplies, involving the civil service, the police, the armed forces and civilian scabs, many of them fascists, was set up in the early 1920s and honed into an instrument of strike-breaking over a period of years.
The OMS was set up by a Tory-Liberal government, but it was very much in existence during the period 1923–1924; indeed, plans for its strike-breaking role continued to be developed during this period. This was also the time of the first Labour government. Very far from using their control of the government to break up this scab organisation the ministers of the first Labour government quietly went about perfecting it.
In case it should be thought that this was simply due to the inherently treacherous nature of Ramsey MacDonald, then Labour leader, it should be remembered that even the allegedly ‘left wing’ Labour government of 1945–51 regularly used the police and army to break strikes. For example it used troops to break dock strikes in 1945, 1946, 1948, 1949 and 1950.
If we take the more general issue of anti-union laws, we have to recall that the ancestor of the Prior and Tebbit legislation was a plan called In Place of Strife dreamt up in the late 1960s by Barbara Castle and Harold Wilson, when the latter was prime minister of a Labour government.
To give these examples is not simply to prove that the Labour Party is as guilty as the Tories. It is to say something about the consequences of believing in the same state machine as your opponents. If you respect the constitution, you have no option but to employ its repressive powers if struggle from below threatens to undermine it.
That is the real meaning behind what people like Gerald Kaufman, the shadow home secretary say when they condemn police behaviour. He concentrates on the illegality of their action. The implication is that if only the state machine were reformed and the forces the state made properly accountable to the democratic control of parliament, then disputes between bosses and workers could be resolved and our liberties, freedoms and way of life preserved.
Now, the fact that the police depart from previously understood and agreed norms of behaviour is not to be underestimated. It has excellent propaganda value for revolutionary socialists, since it demonstrates vividly to millions of workers just how hypo-critical the ruling class are. They preach the need to abide by the law, to observe the democratic will of parliament, etc., etc., but are quite prepared to resort to measures of dubious legality in order to protect their interests.
However, at the end of the day, it is not the departure from legality that concerns us, but the forces of the state themselves (legal or not). For the other side of the Labour Party argument is the notion it should not just be the police that observe legality, but everyone else – including, of course, striking miners.
In other words, respect for legality, if carried through consistently, would disarm workers and deprive them of their power to make their will prevail over the employing class.
Essential to Labour Party thinking is the idea that the state is or ought to be neutral, and that it ought to stand above conflicting private interests in order to serve the good of all. This perspective is shared just as much by the left as by the right.
 
Workers’ state
Why should any of this be important! Isn’t this just the standard line about revolution: the state cannot be reformed but only smashed and replaced by a workers’ state? The point is that failure to understand this is to fail to understand the relevance of revolutionary politics now.
Because we denounce the fraud of bourgeois democracy our opponents accuse us of being anti-democratic. That is why, of course, the Tories, are currently presenting themselves as the democratic champions of a miner’s right to work.
As revolutionary socialists, we are for real democracy – ie for the mass of workers to have a direct control over the conditions of their lives that parliamentary democracy doesn’t even begin to touch. That is, we are for a democracy based on workers’ rank and file self-activity.
It is the only kind of democracy on which socialism can be built and can only come about as a result of struggle against the ‘democracy’ of capital, a struggle in which the rights of capitalists to their freedom has to be repressed (violently, if necessary). There is no other way in which workers’ democracy can be established.
That in turn means not just dispossessing the capitalists. If, after all, their power was simply themselves, we would have got rid of the tiny handful who economically control the system long ago. The power of the capitalists depends on their state (whether or not it has been given democratic parliamentary blessing). And their state depends not only on its physical power (the police, the army, as weapons of last resort) but on its ideological hold over backward workers, i.e. on workers who for one reason or another fail to identify with the interests of their own class.
Hence, in any struggle, the first problem is to win over these backward workers. Sometimes that is fairly simple. In other cases, at present with the miners, it is more difficult. But those claiming to be socialists who tut-tut at the ‘violence’ of mass pickets are in reality blocking the path to success.
In order to exercise real democracy, workers have to struggle, and struggle means something very authoritarian: workers imposing their will on the capitalist class to the extent of having unfortunately to impose their will on more backward workers.
This debate is not new. Lenin had to face it at the time of the Russian Revolution. His chief opponent was the formidable ‘Marxist’ theoretician and leader of the German Social-Democratic Party, Karl Kautsky – a man much more to the left than anyone on the left of the Labour Party today.
What Kautsky deplored was that workers set up their own soviet organisations which the Bolsheviks refused to subordinate to parliamentary institutions, that through the soviets workers decided things for themselves (they took the law into their own hands), and that they refused to let the capitalists and their agents have access to political power (they denied them their freedom and their civil rights). Kautsky found all this very undemocratic – and so it was in a sense.
But, as Lenin pointed out, democracy is not something abstract, existing in a vacuum. There is the democracy of a capitalist state (which is the democracy of a tiny handful to exploit the vast majority) and the democracy of a workers’ state (in which the vast majority through their own rank and file organisations force the owners of capital to give up their power and wealth).
 
Vital interests
Both depend on violence, but only a dishonest fool would pretend that the violence of the latter is as bad as, or worse, than the former. And certainly it is treacherous to talk about abiding by the rules of ‘democracy’, when it is this same ‘democracy’ which uses the most gigantic violence and swindles in order to preserve the vital interests of the ruling class.
In a passage that is relevant to the miners’ strike Lenin inveighed against Kautsky’s defence of law and democracy:
‘Mr Kautsky quotes from my speech of 28 April, 1918, the words: “The masses themselves determine the procedure and the time of elections.” And Kautsky, the “pure democrat”, infers from this:

‘“Hence, it would mean that every assembly of electors may determine the procedure of elections at their own discretion. Arbitrariness and the opportunity of getting rid of undesirable opposition elements in the ranks of the proletariat itself would thus be carried to extreme.”

‘Well, how does this differ from the talk of a hired capitalist hack who howls about the masses oppressing industrious workers who are “willing to work” during a strike? Why is the bourgeois method of determining electoral procedure under “pure” bourgeois democracy not arbitrariness? Why should the sense of justice among the masses who have risen to fight their age long exploiters and who are being educated and steeled in the desperate struggle be less than that of a handful of bureaucrats, intellectuals and lawyers brought up in bourgeois prejudices?
‘Kautsky is a true Socialist. Don’t dare suspect the sincerity of this very respectable father of a family, of this very honest citizen. He is an ardent and convinced supporter of the victory of the workers, of the proletarian revolution. All he wants is that the honey-mouthed petty-bourgeois intellectuals and philistines in nightcaps should first before the masses begin to move, before they enter into furious battle with the exploiters, and certainly without civil war – draw up a moderate and precise set of rules for the development of the revolution ...’
We are not, of course, living in a revolutionary period. But those words about workers ‘willing to work’ during a strike have a familiar ring. And there is a connection between a large-scale strike and revolution. A revolution represents the power of ‘a strike raised to the utmost degree in which workers can only win their demands if they take on and smash, via a mass revolutionary party, the state of their oppressors.
Since nowadays the state interferes in most strikes that is a vital lesson for workers to learn. They should not be bamboozled by the Labour Party, which is simply the alternative party in running the ‘democratic’ bit of the capitalist state machine, into believing that reform rather than revolution is all that is required.
What these believers in pure democracy forget is that getting rid of Tory MPs and replacing them by Labour MPs will not transform the state machine into an obedient servant of the popular will. It is not the case that the Tory government ‘interferes’ with the impartial workings of the police or the judiciary.
No doubt, the brutal and stupid Leon Brittan is very much behind the major police operation, but it is also true that, night after night, there have been senior police officers answering questions on TV who have expressed the same sentiments as him. The various court judgements that have attacked everything from civil liberties to trade union rights have been handed down by a variety of different judges. No doubt foul reactionaries inhabiting a Dickensian world. But they have not been briefed by Thatcher and Brittan. They did not need to be. They think the same anyway.
As soon as you study the question at all seriously a clear pattern starts to emerge. There is a layer of people who all act together to attack workers and any other group in society that presumes to defy order and start thinking for themselves. This layer is made up of judges, senior civil servants, police chiefs, army officers and the like: the people, in short, who run the state machine.
It is this state machine that is attacking us. The government is only part of that attack. It happens, in this instance, that the state and the government think alike, but the root of the attack lies in the state, rather than the government.
 
Anti-communist
It follows then, that the only way to stop these attacks once and for all is to change the state that organises them. That sounds like a tall order, and indeed it is, but it is a necessity if we want to change the world.
For what the believers in the effectiveness of pure democracy also forget is the nature of the economic system in which we live. A moment’s thought shows that, whatever the political pretence, the nature of capitalism deprives all but a few of any democratic control whatsoever over their lives. It is not just that civil liberties are limited, it is that the vast majority of us are compelled on pain of starvation to work in dull, grinding jobs.
It goes back to an old truth formulated by Marx and Engels and later developed by Lenin in opposition to those socialists who believed that a fight for real parliamentary, democratic control over the state could usher in socialism: that in even the most democratic of bourgeois countries there is still a dictatorship of capital over labour – with this difference: that the strength of working class organisation has forced capital to concede political rights. These are of course, welcome, but they are used the better to contain labour within the system.
 







The miners have since the national strikes of 1972–74 held a special place in the recent history of workers’ struggle. Gareth Jenkins looks at that history and strips away the myths.



When, in the mid-1960s, the National Coal Board reached agreement with the National Union of Mineworkers to introduce the National Power Loading Agreement (NPLA) no one could have foreseen the eventual consequences in the 1972 strike.
The agreement phased out the old piece-work system, which the NUM had long condemned. But what replaced it had no advantages in practice for miners. For, in destroying the vicious piece-work system, the new agreement also did away with the ability of well-organised pits to bring up earnings from a low basic level.
From a pre-war position of 84th in the earnings league table miners had climbed to near the top by the 1960s (in 1960 a Barnsley miner could earn £25 a week, which was twice the national average). The NPLA rapidly reversed these gains. In 1966 a faceworker at Houghton Main, Barnsley, got up to 120s per shift; by 1970 that had fallen to 89s 10d, the national rate under the NPLA.
But the high earnings enjoyed by miners before the NPLA had nothing to do with the NUM nationally (the NUM had a long-standing reputation for being on the right of the TUC). Throughout the 1950s the NUM never claimed an increase of more than 25s a year and never threatened to fight. Yet the strike record in particular areas was very high. The reason was obvious.
Now, if you could no longer earn a decent living by negotiating substantial bonuses around the local rate, then there was little point in striking. You became dependent on national and area officials to resolve problems – a point that delighted the NUM bureaucracy. The tradition of local militancy that had been the strength of the union became, due to the NPLA, its weakness as miners failed to look beyond their own pit.
But eventually, the accumulated bitterness spilt over into unofficial action in the autumn of 1969 over the NUM’s “moderate” pursuit of a claim for 27s 6d. If the dustmen could fight for and get an increase of 21s, so could the miners. The whole of Yorkshire came out, together with some pits in Scotland and South Wales, for a period of two weeks.
This new confidence set the mood for the 1970 claim. Against the national executive’s advice, conference decided on a £5 claim. When the NCB replied in September with an offer of £2 10s (their highest ever, but totally inadequate in the face of rising prices), the NUM were forced to ballot the membership on strike action. Since a two thirds majority was then required the executive were reasonably confident that they would not be forced into doing anything.
Despite a barrage of media abuse, the miners voted 55 percent for action – a majority, but not sufficient under the rules. The NCB gave another 10s and the executive recommended acceptance in a second ballot.
An explosion of rank and file anger – again, principally from Yorkshire – met this decision. Within a week, 3,000 were on strike. However, the Yorkshire militants were not prepared to leave it there. They organised to spread the action by the tactic that was used with such success two years later – the flying picket.
They would meet centrally early every morning and select key pits. Once these were brought out, the rest in the locality would normally follow suit. Despite some resistance (at Glasshoughton, Castleford, the right wing secretary called in the police), the tactic worked like a dream. By the end of the first week between 50,000 and 70,000 were out. The whole of South Wales joined in by the start of the second week. There were stoppages in Scotland, Kent and Durham, and work to rules in Derbyshire, Durham and Lancashire.
At its height, this unofficial action involved 100,000 miners in 140 pits. What killed it was sabotage by the Yorkshire area secretary, Sydney Schofield. At an emergency Yorkshire council meeting at the start of the third week he persuaded the substantial minority of pit delegates opposed to the strike to go back and break the majority mandate in favour.
The militants were forced to go back over ground already covered. The strike began to contract and eventually the NEC were able to use a national ballot to enforce a return to work.
 
Unofficial action
But the fact that defeat could be laid at the door of a single treacherous individual says something about the limitations in the unofficial action. The most serious was the failure to hold regular meetings involving more than the most committed to discuss tactics and to pump out propaganda. In short, a start on building independent rank and file organisation was neglected.
The need for independent organisation was shown in two ways. First, there was the trust in official machinery. The crucial area council meeting, where Schofield pressurised delegates into breaking the mandate, was only lightly picketed. Militants assumed that formal decisions would be respected (it was already known that a majority were in favour of strike action). But away from the pits delegates could be leant on by the bureaucracy.
Secondly, there was the behaviour of the leading left winger in the NUM, newly elected general secretary, Laurence Daly. He, too, bent under pressure from the milieu in which he worked. So, despite an election programme advocating “guerrilla” action, Daly had urged, in response to the militancy in 1969, that the time was not ripe (but would be in 1970); and in response to the militancy in 1970, he urged a return to work in the interests of “unity” in the union.
Miners were relearning for themselves how to struggle effectively. Mistakes were inevitable. But the question of rank and file organisation (and the failure to resolve it) was eventually of crucial importance – as the subsequent history of the left in the NUM showed.
There was gathering momentum for a decisive trial of strength between the miners and the coal board. Ironically, the NPLA was responsible for it. In curtailing militancy in its pit-bound form, the NPLA had also ended localisation. But, in unifying rates, the NPLA had also generalised the militancy.
The pay claim for 1971 was the largest ever put in (increases of between £5 and £9) and was answered by a derisory offer from the NCB. Since not even Gormley could sell a £1.60 offer to the members, the 1971 special conference voted for an overtime ban and a ballot on strike action.
The percentage in favour of strike action had been steadily growing over the previous years. On this occasion it went over the magic 55 percent mark required under the new rules for implementation, though only just (58 percent).
The strike began on 9 January 1972. The executive had no intention of pushing hard. For them it was no more than a bargaining counter for extracting fresh concessions from the NCB. They were determined to keep the strike as orderly and quiet as possible.
The rank and file militants had quite different ideas, and within days conflict erupted between the members and the leadership. The first clash came over the question of letting safety work continue. The NEC (including Dai Francis of the CP) tried to insist on letting it go ahead, but in the face of firm picketing only 46 out of 289 pits were manned by safety men. Despite howls of protests from the NCB about the long-term effect on the pits, not one was made unusable as a result of strike action.
The second clash came over the picketing of NCB offices. Miners were determined that the clerical members of the union working in the offices (often better paid than miners) should join the strike. Despite lurid press stories about “girls being jostled” and spat at, most NCB offices were closed and many of the women joined the picket lines.
These may appear side issues. The point was that in insisting that the stoppage be total, rank and file miners were also insisting on their control of the dispute, and not the leadership’s. It is impossible to go through the 1972 strike in detail. But what needs to be grasped above everything else is that the miners could not have won on their own.
The flying picket that they had used to spread the 1970 unofficial strike within their own ranks was now used to secure solidarity from other groups of workers.
Right from the beginning, every power station in the coalfields was heavily picketed, stopping essential supplies (even bread!). In most cases the miners got the support they needed. When, on 4 February, a miner was killed by a scab lorry (encouraged by the police to smash through picket lines), the funeral was joined by thousands of other workers – power workers, building workers, engineers, railwaymen and teachers.
The most celebrated trial of strength with the police to stop the movement of coal was the battle of Saltley gates, a coke depot just outside Birmingham. On their own, the miners would not have won. Every increase in the number of pickets was matched by an increase in the numbers of police.
 
Saltley Gates
For ten days the pickets from Barnsley were routed by the police, some injured. Even a thousand pickets could not prevent the police from letting scab lorries in and out of the depot. All that changed on 9 February when the Birmingham East District of the AUEW called for an all-out strike and demonstration by engineers the following day.
The many thousands of engineering workers that marched on Saltley tipped the scales decisively in favour of the pickets. A young AUEW steward vividly described what happened: “The marchers seemed to be endless, and soon the space in front of the gates was crammed full of engineers and miners from Yorkshire, South Wales, Staffs and even Durham and Scotland. We were soon to learn that 40,000 engineers had responded to the strike call and 10,000 had joined the march and picket. For the first time in my life I had a practical demonstration of what workers’ solidarity meant. We all felt so powerful. We felt we could rule the world.”
The chief constable, being a sensible man, knew when he had been beaten. Saltley was closed. But Saltley was not the only example of solidarity action by other workers. Lorry drivers, dockers, seamen and railwaymen all played a vital part in the struggle. Money flooded in. Shop stewards collected thousands of pounds. The explanation for the solidarity was that large sections of the working class saw in the miners’ struggles a chance to fight for their own interests against the Tories.
With power stations failing, many factories closed, and the strike rock solid, the Tories were forced to give in. On 15 February the government set up the Wilberforce enquiry. It represented their last chance. Had the NUM insisted on the full claim and ignored the enquiry (which they certainly had the power to), the government’s authority would have been shattered.
Within three days (surely a record) the enquiry reported. The NUM executive was as eager to settle as the government now was. The miners certainly got most of what they wanted, but the settlement contained two very dangerous clauses that were eventually to give the employers back the initiative that they had lost.
The clauses were of differing importance. The first was that the agreement would run for an unprecedented sixteen months. That meant it ran out at the end of February 1983 – and a battle which began in spring, when the expectation of warmer weather would make lack of stocks less vital, would have a lower chance of success.
More important, though, was the commitment from the union to future discussion about productivity. It was the crucial chink in the agreement that allowed the NCB to prepare for a future attack on jobs and conditions when the circumstances were favourable.
The NUM put the whole package to secret ballot. There was no discussion and the leaders advised relaxing the picketing. The left on the executive were not disposed to rock the boat. They kept quiet about the dangers inherent in the agreement – no doubt in the interests of “unity”. The acceptance, not surprisingly, was overwhelming.
The Broad Left emerged with increased credibility from the strike. McGahey crushed a right-winger in the vicepresidential elections, Scargill became president of the Yorkshire area and the national executive now had nearly a dozen Communist Party and left Labour members.
Even so, Gormley was also able to use the Wilberforce agreement to stitch up the 1973 claim. Consequently 1973 was as bad a year for other workers’ claims as 1972 had been good.
 
New battle
When the miners returned to battle in 1974, it was not a rerun of 1972. Apparently, the strike was even more successful. It did, after all, bring down the Heath government – something that had been avoided in 1972. On the other hand, it was a much more passive affair, with much lower rank and file involvement.
At a special delegate conference in October 1973, Gormley surprised the left by calling for a complete overtime ban, including weekend maintenance and safety work.
Gormley’s tactics had nothing to do with militancy. He intended the overtime ban as a substitute and not a preparation for strike action. He hoped that a long, drawn-out ban would defuse the undoubted militancy that existed.
The Broad Left did nothing to expose these tactics and fell in line behind the ban. Accepting from Scargill what they would not from Gormley, militants were lulled into a false sense of security. Few believed by the end of November that the ban would not work.
When the right pressed for a ballot in mid-December, to most militants it looked like a manoeuvre to end the action. The Tories, meanwhile, went onto the offensive. The fifth state of emergency in three years was declared just before Christmas, aimed at ensuring coal stocks till the spring. The evidence suggests that this was propaganda and that in fact stocks were not that low.
Whatever the reality, though, it had the effect of stepping up the miners’ action. The ballot right at the end of January 1974 produced a massive 81 percent in favour of striking. The result was all the more remarkable since up till two weeks before both right and left had encouraged members to believe that the overtime ban alone was sufficient to win.
Gormley did his best to sabotage the strike but did not dare call it off (“the members might walk all over us”, he declared). But he was determined to clamp down (in his own words, “to keep picketing under control”).
Pickets were restricted by the executive six to a line as permitted under the Tories’ anti-union legislation. Because of the low number of pickets supplies could be brought into power stations and steel depots. At Saltley, that proud symbol of rank and file solidarity in the 1972 strike, lorries queued up to get in and out.
According to the Sunday Times an NUM official admitted that fewer than 2,000 were involved in picketing (it had been well over 8,000 in 1972) and stressed that the union was “desperately trying to reduce the points of conflict, such as arose in 1972”. The Transport and General instructed its members not to cross picket lines. On the other hand, “normal quantities” of oil were to be allowed into power stations and steel works.
Once again, the left fell in line behind these tactics. The Communist Party secretary of the Scots miners uttered dire threats against any “outsider” found on the picket line. There was no attempt to defy the executive line and push for the kind of mass picketing that had characterised the 1972 strike.
One reason for the left’s caution was fear of harming Labour’s election chances. If you believe that working class advance is dependent on Labour coming to power: then you have to subordinate everything to that end.
When the Tories were (narrowly) defeated at the polls, the Labour government was in no position to refuse the miners anything. On 6 March the new employment secretary, Michael Foot, announced the settlement. Once again, the executive let the government off the hook.
The left had been insistent that the claim should be met in full and even added to. Now they rushed to defend what was offered. The faceworkers received the full amount, but both underground and surface workers fell well short.
The lack of rank and file involvement in the strike could be seen in the settlement. The most militant (the faceworkers) got everything asked for. But the most noticeable feature of the 1972 strike when the rank and file fought hardest for the lower paid surface workers was absent in 1974.
 
Special cases
Also because the NUM agreed to use Pay Board figures the only way in which it could argue that the miners should get more than was notionally allocated to them was to argue that they were a special case.
This was a departure from 1972. A high level of activity had taught many miners in 1972 that they had won because of general support from outside their ranks. If they were a special case, then everyone was a special case. But the low level of activity in 1974 strengthened the idea (dear to bureaucrats’ hearts) that victory was due to the brilliant way in which negotiators had used facts and figures to convince the other side. Once again the left inside the NUM fell in line.
Nonetheless the 1974 strike was seen as a political victory by workers over the Tories, and the miners’ strike was followed by action by many groups of trade unionists whose confidence had been boosted. The new Labour government painted a bright future for the miners. The government promised to expand production over a ten-year period.
The NUM executive were jubilant. There was, however, a small catch. The report stated: “Realisation of the potential output for which these plans provide also depends on realising the assumptions on which the plan is based that output per man shift (OMS) can be raised by some 4 percent a year.” That meant, for anyone able to do simple sums of matching rising production against rising productivity, a reduction in manpower of 35 percent. In agreeing to the deal the NUM signed away the rights of 85,000 men to their jobs.
The first test came with the NCB’s proposals for a scheme paying bonuses to men exceeding production targets. The advantage to management was that they could manipulate targets on different faces and in different pits according to whether they wanted them open or shut. Different levels of bonus payment would destroy unity.
The left countered with a scheme which would have paid average bonus rates according to national production targets. They defeated the NCB in the November 1974 ballot but at the cost of rejecting only one particular form of productivity, not the principle itself.
This left the way open for a counterattack by the right. If’ wages did not improve, the frustration would persuade miners that only productivity dealing could give them better wages. And with wages being held by the Labour government’s social contract that kind of right wing argument began to find an echo among miners.
The crunch came in 1977. The NUM conference rejected a fresh attempt by the right to introduce a productivity deal. The result was close – close enough for Gormley to put the deal to ballot though constitutionally his right to do so was shaky. The left’s response was pathetic. They resorted (in vain) to the bourgeois courts to protect union democracy and stop the ballot going ahead, in preference to relying on agitation among the rank and file to stop Gormley.
Even when the ballot confirmed the conference decision (55 percent against the deal in a record 80 percent turnout) the left still failed to learn the lesson. Gormley did not give up. He got the executive on 9 December to set aside the ballot decision and authorise area deals.
 
Incentive scheme
Once again the left (including Scargill) had recourse to the courts, which once again backed the right wing. Thereafter, the areas resisting incentive schemes gave up one by one. First the Scotland area executive voted 20 to 6 for a local deal (McGahey stated that he didn’t want Scotland isolated or their living standards to decline against other areas).
Then it was Yorkshire’s turn. Scargill refused to campaign to “influence” the decision (on the grounds that his views were known). The result was 26,451 in favour, 15,681 against. A mere two months before the opposition was more than double that figure. But by the time of the ballot (in January 1978) claims that bonuses would be up to GBP 20 and GBP 25 were having their effect.
The consequences of these area schemes are plain. Wide variations in pay (for example, the week ending 23 April 1983 showed North Yorkshire miners earning £90 a week average bonus as against £25 in Scotland) have weakened miners’ unity and have fragmented the fight against the NCB’s pit closure programme.
The broad left has paid a terrible penalty for its political failure. First it conceded the argument about creating a profitable industry. It is a more “radical” version – the subsidies, import controls, etc. which it expects from a Labour government – but there is still the basic acceptance of the same priorities.
It has been unable to dissociate itself from Labour attempts to modernise the industry – and therefore from Labour plans to impose productivity dealing. Ironically, it was “radical” Tony Benn (praised by Scargill as the miners’ true friend) who promoted the incentive scheme, which Scargill so eloquently denounced at the 1983 miners’ conference.
This leads us to the second aspect of the failure of its politics, one that can be clearly traced in the progress of Arthur Scargill from rank and file militant (who justifiably made his name in the 1972 strike) to president of the NUM.
The lesson of the 1972 strike – that only rank and file activity can beat the employer – came to be seen as secondary. Taking over the machinery of the NUM from the right-wing appeared more effective. Change from the top is the link between this and the delusion that with Labour running the British economy a start can be made on implementing socialist measures.
Thus as Scargill moved to becoming Yorkshire president, the rank and file organisation that had been the strength of the union in the area during the 1972 strike was allowed to decay. The Barnsley Forum, with its regular monthly meetings to discuss industrial, union and socialist politics, disappeared, leaving the left with a base of left officials only. Those educated by the struggle in 1972 and 1974 had nowhere to go.
Next came neglect of rank and file struggles. In the 1978 rescuemen’s dispute, Scargill used his powers of persuasion to limit the unofficial action and eventually got a return to work on little more than a promise to resolve the long-standing grievance. He “forgot” that the strength of the union is built out of the myriad tiny trials of strength that give workers the confidence to take on the big issues.
The year 1981 saw the Tories retreat hurriedly on the issue of pit closures. When they were announced the South Wales pits went into action, followed by Kent the same day. Fearing it had provoked more than it could handle, the government suddenly found the financial subsidies it claimed weren’t available. Within a day the NCB cobbled up a deal with the NUM. Even the concessions were insufficient to get the miners back to work despite pleas from Gormley and the national executive.
Yet although the strike was spreading, defiance collapsed in all areas (except Kent) by Friday. Now, it is not that Scargill failed to support the action. Quite the contrary. On Thursday 19 February he announced plans for a total stoppage in Yorkshire the following Monday quite correctly on the grounds that the guarantees were inadequate.
But the fact that Scargill stuck to that date instead of bringing it forward (some Yorkshire pits were already out following the South Wales lead) was instrumental in slowing the momentum of the action. Had he brought it forward, the weight of the largest coalfield in the country might well have been decisive in halting the NCB’s stealthy offensive against “uneconomic” pits.
The only conclusion is that Scargill was anxious to observe the constitutional niceties in the run-up to the presidential election so as to avoid offence to the middle ground.
The same constitutionalism came to the fore in the 1983 South Wales action to stop closures. The miners were persuaded to wait for the ballot rather than go out and picket – with disastrous results. Scargill’s justification was that if the strike situation in the South Wales area had been left as it was it would have “provoked near civil war. It would have divided the union.”
 
Rank and file
Consequently he preferred the ballot in the certain knowledge that the call for action would be lost: “It was better, in my view, politically... to have a temporary setback at the hands of the members than to have a defeat inflicted upon us in an actual conflict, official or unofficial, by the government and the Coal Board.”
In Scargill we have the curious spectacle of an undoubted left winger whose calls for national action fall on deaf ears (he has in fact led no strike since 1974). With Gormley it was the other way round. Here was a vicious right winger who in spite of his own deepest instincts led two national strikes to victory.
Yet it is not the case that there has been no militancy for Scargill to relate to. In the first five months of 1983 alone, there were 143 registered strikes, and in the autumn 13,000 Barnsley miners came out on unofficial strike. Lacking rank and file organisation Scargill has lost touch.
Neglect of these opportunities to build a national opposition to closures is something the miners are now paying for. Victory in the current struggle will owe nothing to Scargill’s politics and everything to the rediscovery of the rank and file solidarity that won the 1972 strike.
 



When Kingsley Amis died last year at the age of 73, the general verdict was that he had been the greatest comic novelist of his generation. After making his mark with Lucky Jim (1954) he never looked back, as one comic novel after the other flowed from his pen. Such was the continued acclaim for his work that in 1986 he won the Booker prize for The Old Devils. As a contributor to The Spectator put it, ‘He was above all quick-minded, verbally agile, terribly funny, a vigorous persecutor of bores, pseuds and wankers and a most tremendous mimic.’ [1]
Yet many have wondered just how funny and critical Amis, particularly the Amis of the later novels, really was. After all Amis became notoriously hostile to progressive causes and a political supporter of Margaret Thatcher. He was rewarded with a CBE in 1981 and knighted in 1990. Far from being a vigorous persecutor he seemed to have joined the ranks of bores, pseuds and wankers. The heroes of his novels appeared more and more to be the mouthpiece for Amis’s pet hates, uttering a never ending stream of extremely unfunny and narrow- (rather than quick-) minded attacks on gays, nuclear disarmers, women’s libbers, and so on. What, it might be said, is the point of reading these novels when a visit to the local pub and an interview with the bar bore would yield the same reactionary rant? Perhaps, though, this is too simplistic a dismissal, one which stems from confusing creator and character. Shouldn’t we instead put aside what we know about Amis’s personal opinions and value the novels for holding up a mirror to the unpleasant realities of our society? This is the view of the liberal minded literary critic Malcolm Bradbury:
In later works, like Jake’s Thing (1978) and Stanley and the Women (1984), he examined the growing gender conflicts between men and women and their impact on the family and on male psychology. And his prize-winning The Old Devils (1986) showed his cantankerously mortal sensibility, still sustaining what was now the long dark comedy of life into later years, in which the once angry young man had turned into a yet more angry and mortal old one. [2]
So, a justification for Amis’s novels can be to detach them from the ideology of their author and to read them against the grain – in much the same way as the novels of (say) Evelyn Waugh can serve as critical commentary on what they describe, despite their author’s intentions. Where Waugh can expose the limitations of upper class society (particularly, for example, the behaviour of top army brass in his war trilogy), Amis can expose sexist limitations in the drunken self indulgent middle class section of society he chooses to focus on as it advances into middle age.
Can this justification be sustained? Clearly it is possible to benefit from reactionary novelists and there is a long Marxist tradition which refuses to see good literature as simply the expression of a ‘correct’ political viewpoint. But in Kingsley Amis’s case the justification cannot be sustained. The case against Amis rests less on his manifestly reactionary views than on the limitations of the fiction itself.
Kingsley Amis was born in 1922 in south London, the only son of lower middle class parents. The Memoirs give some sense of his family and background – ordinary, suburban, with all the minor class and political prejudices one would expect. Though Amis recalls conflict over taste in music, there is little sense that this conflict challenged the acceptance of a mild, pervasive philistinism in respect of culture. The only other tension reported in the Memoirs is over sex, with young Amis being warned that masturbation would ‘thin the blood’ and cause insanity. Later, when he had left home and was in the army, his father tried to tell him off for having an affair with a married woman. [3] After a period of school in London and Wiltshire (where he had been evacuated to on the outbreak of war in 1939), Amis won a place at St John’s College, Oxford, in 1941. His university education was interrupted by service in the army between 1942 and 1945. The army made quite an impact on him, as it did on many others in that period. His Memoirs bring out the bewildering absurdity of it as an institution:
The British Army has been compared to many other institutions – school, lunatic asylum, prison and so on – but one parallel which has never been drawn before, I think, is with a society of the kind you read about in some science-fiction stories, a world much like our own in general appearance but with some of the rules changed or removed, a logic only partly coinciding with that of our own world, and some unpredictable areas where logic seems missing altogether or to point opposite ways at once. [4]
To get some sense of what the army meant to him politically one needs to look at the few short stories he devoted to the topic. [5] They provide graphic illustrations of the arbitrary power senior officers exercised and the pressure to conform at the expense of betraying one’s peers. The best of these stories is I Spy Strangers. It focuses on a mock parliament, in which soldiers play the political roles of Tory versus Labour (the soldiers representing Labour are real left wingers and on the whole sympathetically presented). This becomes real for a moment when the procedure used to clear parliament of unauthorised persons (I Spy Strangers) is used to expel the unpleasant, bullying major, who thinks he has a right to interfere when the argument doesn’t go his way. The story ends with a reference to the shock he and fellow Tories, believing they were born to rule, experience with the reality of Labour’s electoral landslide in 1945. This seems to be the extent of Amis’s radicalisation, though the sense of the army as some kind of science fiction conspiracy to puzzle and confound individuals could be said to have a wider resonance in Amis’s fiction. It is present in his two fantasy novels, The Alteration (1976), in which Amis imagines a situation in which the Reformation never happened in Europe and the Vatican rules the continent in a way strangely reminiscent of Stalinist Russia [6], and Russian Hide and Seek (1980), in which Amis imagines a future Britain under Russian occupation. [7]
Amis resumed his studies when peace came in 1945 and left Oxford, already married and with a family, in 1949. For the next 12 years he taught English at Swansea. Amis evidently disliked both the snobbishly aristocratic cultural ambiance at Oxford and the antiquated English syllabus he was forced to study (it is clear from the Memoirs that he did not much like teaching English either). Army experience – and age – gave him the confidence to stick two fingers up to the sacred traditions of high culture. He shared his dislikes, together with his love for jazz, with a fellow student and close friend, the poet Philip Larkin. But his rejection of what he saw as an effete Bohemian culture did not go much beyond swapping obscene verses with friends and mocking poets like Dylan Thomas, whom he met at Swansea. It was not particularly political. [8] There was, however, a more serious artistic side to this protest. Amis made his literary reputation initially, not as a novelist, but as a poet. He was part of the post-war revolt against Modernism, the movement which had dominated poetry in the earlier part of the century. The ‘New Movement’ in poetry (as it was called) rejected the internationalism and artistic experimentation of Modernism in favour of modest and ironic exploration of ordinary situations. Amis and Larkin were much the leaders in this. In Poets of the 1950s, edited by D.J. Enright, Amis claimed that ‘… nobody wants any more poems about philosophers or paintings or novelists or art galleries or mythology or foreign cities or other poems’; and Larkin, who was the acknowledged leader of the Movement, asserted that he had ‘no belief in “tradition” or a common myth-kitty or casual allusions in poems to other poems or poets’. [9]
The targets here are Auden and T.S. Eliot, as well as Dylan Thomas, whose densely surreal, oratorical and metaphor packed style was the dominant presence in post-war English poetry. The desire to move on was understandable – no artist can continue to repeat the old formulae – but the radicalism of this attack is debatable. It is one thing to want to puncture reputations (particularly Dylan Thomas’s); but rehabilitating the ordinary, the provincial and the commonplace (which is what the Movement was attempting to do) can quickly become philistinism, pure and simple. We now know, thanks to Andrew Motion’s recent biography of Philip Larkin, just how reactionary that philistinism was capable of being: Larkin emerges as a nasty little racist bigot.
A similar process can be seen in the way the early fiction of Amis developed. His first novel, Lucky Jim, which was dedicated to Philip Larkin, came as a breath of fresh air in the stale world of 1950s fiction, much as two years later John Osborne’s Look Back in Anger did the same for the staid world of genteel drama. It identified Amis as one of the ‘Angry Young Men’ of the period – irreverent and iconoclastic, in revolt against the establishment and its culture. Just as he rejected Modernist experimentation in poetry, so too did he in respect of fiction. [10] The determination to avoid experimental oddity shows in the lean and unpoetic ‘realism’ of Amis’s first novel, as well as his choice of central character, the anti-hero, Jim Dixon, who is a lecturer in mediaeval history at a provincial university. Jim is presented as an ordinary bloke with ordinary tastes, up against the snobbish, Bloomsbury style culture of his academic superior, Professor Welch. Jim is more at home in the pub than at the ridiculous musical soirées given by the Welches. He also competes for the favours of the girlfriend of the ghastly son of the Welches, the pseudo-artist Bertrand, whose affected speech provides much of the comedy of the novel. Lucky Jim is a satire on the aesthetic and artistic establishment of the day, its metropolitan entrenchment and contempt for anything provincial (at one point Jim is accused of being a ‘shabby little provincial bore’). [11] Down to earth reaction against pretentiousness, dilettantism and toadyism is seen as a good thing, whether that involves playing practical jokes on creeps, giving one’s opponent in love a good hiding, or confessing (as Christine, the girl Jim has set his heart on, does) to a liking for brown sauce – a liking at odds with the breakfast arrangements at the Welches.
In the end Jim gets the better of the twisters, snobs, bullies and fools by whom he is surrounded. He wins out in two ways. First, there is the public lecture he has been forced to give by Professor Welch, the subject of which is Merrie England. As a mediaeval historian Jim is expected to provide a eulogy for the past – in line with Welch’s contempt for the vulgar culture of the present (’sham architecture’ … ‘the Light Programme’ … ‘the Yellow Press’ … ‘the best-seller’ … ‘the theatre-organ’). [12] Instead of this he ends his disastrously drunken lecture with the exact opposite message: Merrie England was ‘the most un-Merrie period in our history’ contrary to what ‘the home-made pottery crowd, the organic husbandry crowd, the recorder-playing crowd, the Esperanto’ [13] crowd believe. Secondly, although he loses his lecturing job he gets Christine and a job with the girl’s uncle, Gore-Urquhart, in London into the bargain.
Jim’s triumph is meant to be the triumph of the ordinary and basically decent person over the pretentious hypocrites who occupy positions of social, moral or sexual authority. Even so, the novel’s praise for ordinariness and decency raise a number of problems. First, there is the question of the reaction against artistic pretentiousness: Jim’s notorious comment about ‘filthy Mozart’ [14] might be excused in the context but points to a strand of philistinism which remains unchallenged from within the novel. Secondly, there is what one might call Jim’s view of the world. He counters Bertrand’s right wing attacks on soak the rich policies with the comment, ‘If one man’s got ten buns and another’s got two, and a bun has got to be given up by one of them, then surely you take it from the man with ten buns’. [15] This redistributionism remains politically vague. Jim’s anti-Welchness never becomes a pro-Labour or socialist argument. What Jim finds objectionable about Bertrand is not so much his attitudes as Bertrand himself, his way of talking or behaving. It is almost as if Jim reaches for any argument that will get under Bertrand’s skin simply because he, Bertrand, represents the Establishment blocking Jim’s social and sexual advancement. Jim’s philosophy is summed up in his theory that ‘nice things are nicer than nasty ones’. [16] This is certainly undeniably true; but it is crushingly banal. It is also completely abstract. Individuals are always social individuals, for whom ‘nice’ and ‘nasty’ vary according to class position. As a world view it does not help decide what side one is on in the pursuit of the ‘nice’ in preference to the ‘nasty’, given that they mean different things to different classes. Anyone holding to such a position could easily swing – as Amis did – from left to right.
In the 1950s, this individualist philosophy of common sense might pass muster. [17] The enemy was the old effete political and cultural establishment, identifiable by its style rather than its content. But style says little about the forces involved. A provincial accent, such as Jim is said to have, is not necessarily more radical than an upper class drawl and the modernity which Jim valued above Merrie England is not necessarily at odds with the long term interests of the Establishment, or, to be more precise, the ruling class. [18] Lucky Jim’s radicalism can work just so long as the Establishment itself doesn’t shift. The ambiguities can be passed off as acceptable. So, for example, Jim’s getting the job with Gore-Urquhart that Bertrand thought his by right can be viewed as his triumph over the Establishment, a triumph for the common man over privilege and snobbery, of the provincial over the metropolitan. On the other hand – and in a sense truer to the developments in the period – it could be seen as his entry into it: he does, after all, gain a place in the despised metropolis. Gore-Urquhart has a nicer attitude towards Jim but the novel leaves untouched the question of whether he will be a better employer than Welch.
The novel which followed Lucky Jim, That Uncertain Feeling (1955) was recognisably the same terrain: the target this time was the Welsh establishment and their pet bard (a parody of Dylan Thomas). [19] The next novel, I Like It Here (1958), represented the beginning of a shift. The target is still cultural pretension (the novel features an expatriate novelist, Wulfstan Strether, who writes in the exaggeratedly complex style of the early Modernist novelist, Henry James). But the tone – as suggested by the title – shades into being anti-foreign. Has the champion of ordinariness, of provincial life turned into a little Englander? Perhaps not quite: the hero of the novel likes the cheapness of Portuguese booze, but on the whole thinks the country would be improved if it were closer to somewhere like Eastbourne. The final novel in the ‘filthy abroad’ mode was One Fat Englishman (1963), where the target is America, in particular American as opposed to British linguistic forms. Arguably, none of these novels’ heroes represent Amis [20], but rather the prejudices of a certain kind of Englishman – particularly, insecure Englishmen by virtue of their sexual weaknesses and (in the case of One Fat Englishman) physical unpleasantness. Amis might be said to have played up the philistinism, the better to criticise the limitations of the central characters’ responses. In short, authorial comment which would guide the reader is deliberately missing, the better to get the reader him- or herself to react to the limitations of the central characters. The reader who takes the lack of authorial guidance for endorsement is therefore missing the point. The argument is not convincing, partly because there is so much gusto put into the philistinism that any disclaimer that it is not being endorsed is suspect (one is reminded of the comedian who insists that the racist or sexist jokes he tells do not amount to belief in racism or sexism). More importantly the argument is not convincing because the novels themselves are not structured in a way which ‘place’ or act as a counterweight to the central characters’ reactions. The structure of Amis’s novels, for all their ‘realism’, is seldom objective. It is the central character’s subjectivity which colours and shapes the material despite the fact that the novels are told in the third person. The effect of this is to allow subjective reaction (i.e. philistine prejudice) to pass itself off, by and large, as objective comment (i.e. as analysis of how things really are).
The limitations in Amis’s revolt, then, begin to become clear. The philistinism of sticking up for ordinariness and the philosophy of individual common sense (nice things are nicer than nasty things) became an accommodation to right wing ideas. [21] With Labour in office for the last six years of the 1960s and with the rise of progressive ideas (particularly in education), superficially it looked as if a new, lefty Establishment had replaced the old one. Where cocking a snook, taking the mickey, insults and name calling had once got up the noses of the right-wing establishment, now the target was progressivism in all its forms. The Angry Young Man turned into the angry young reactionary. Why Lucky Jim Turned Right was the title of his own 1967 essay.
Nowhere was this truer than in the field of education, where Amis was a key figure at the centre of the notorious Black Papers which appeared at the end of the 1960s. The authors’ argument was that the advent of the comprehensives under Labour in the mid-1960s had brought about a dramatic decline in standards of literacy and numeracy. They were concerned not just to reverse the process but to conduct a campaign to save liberal values from the totalitarian threat of revolutionary ideas (the late 1960s had seen a mass student movement challenging authority in the universities and many of the contributors to the Black Papers clearly saw that as the beginning of the end of civilisation as we know it). They weren’t just anti-Labour: they were also against what they saw as the softness of the Tories’ response. To them the capitulation to fashionable cant about ‘progressive’ methods had affected even the Tories. Theirs was a crusade to stop what they saw as betrayal on a grand scale. Much of the argument was Cold War rhetoric about the threat from the Soviets, who in any case, as the Black Paper authors pointed out, did not themselves practise the dangerous egalitarianism which had so infiltrated British thinking on education.
By the late 1960s, when the Black Papers appeared, Amis was associated with Cold War politics. He had become a close friend of Robert Conquest, who wrote three books on Stalin’s reign of terror from an anti-Marxist viewpoint, and collaborated with him on a novel called The Egyptologists (1965) and on editing science fiction anthologies. Amis’s Memoirs suggest that they shared a similar taste for smutty limericks and practical jokes. In those days, Amis claimed, ‘I was some sort of man of the Left’ while Conquest belonged to the libertarian right.
Some time later he was to point out that, while very ‘progressive’ on the subject of colonialism and other matters I was ignorant of, I was a sound reactionary about education, of which I had some understanding and experience. [22]
Amis’s claim to have been progressive on the issue of colonialism needs to be taken with a very large pinch of salt but his boast about his attitude towards (but not his understanding of) education is true enough. Even in Lucky Jim, one of the sympathetic characters complains about the ‘outside pressure to chuck Firsts around like teaching diplomas and push every bugger who can write his name through the Pass courses’. [23] In 1961 Amis notoriously claimed that ‘more will mean worse’, by which he meant that expansion of numbers going into higher education would entail an increase in cultural illiteracy – or what H.J. Eysenck, mocking the idea of meritocracy, termed the ‘rise of the mediocracy’. By 1969, when he and Conquest contributed to the second Black Paper, the argument about the expansion of higher education was tied to horror at student revolt (they refer to the London School of Economics, but without further explanation, presumably because right wing lecturers being prevented from speaking by student militants was too obviously the result of expansion to require further comment) and the growth of sociology courses (‘not a suitable undergraduate subject’) [24], an objection which now looks quaint to us but which at the time seemed self evident to the right: wasn’t sociology part of the student demand for ‘relevance’ and wasn’t it partisan propaganda for Marxist change thinly disguised as an academic subject?
The strongest feeling that comes across from their contribution to the debate is the sense that they are part of a beleaguered group of people, smeared as fascists for wanting to uphold standards in the face of a new, authoritarian establishment of ‘progressives’ who are leading us to disaster. So, if there is a move on Amis’s part from being a ‘man of the left’ to ‘a sound reactionary’, there is also an element of continuity: he is against what he takes to be the Establishment. In the 1950s it is the cultural establishment of pompous old bores, with their aristocratic manners; in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s it is the trendies, the lefties, the politically correct, psychiatrists, women’s libbers, and so on. No wonder, then, that Amis came to be a political supporter of Margaret Thatcher. Characteristically his Memoirs dwell on her appearance and manner (’never forget she’s a bloody woman with the rest of them’ [25]) rather than her politics, about which he claims to know little more than any other newspaper reader or bar chatterer, except in the field of education where he is disappointed that her government has undermined education as education, ‘the free pursuit of knowledge and truth for their own sake’. [26]
Amis’s philistinism could be considered a fairly minor sin compared with his attitude towards women. The generally reactionary mood of his later novels extends to his presentation of the relationship between the sexes. The male characters are unremittingly chauvinist in the way they view women. The question we have already raised in connection with the philistinism of his major characters needs to be raised in this context: is the chauvinism simply an unpleasant side of characters who are meant to be unpleasant? We can approach this by looking at the justification sometimes advanced, namely that his view of women was the product of the unenlightened times in which Amis started his writing career and that it continued to mark his fiction as a consequence. It is true that in 1950s and 1960s culture one pervasive theme is the ‘woman problem’. It is all the more jarring in that the tolerance of backward views about women often coexists with a refusal to accept the status quo in respect of other values. The reason for this was that one element of revolt was a revulsion against being tied to home, marriage and domesticity. Given women’s traditional identification with this area of life, antagonism (by men) towards the social order often tended to involve a more or less conscious element of antagonism towards women. Social conflict became expressed as a battle between the sexes. [27] Of course, real political understanding would have resolved this antagonism and shown that women’s identification with the family was a sign not of their being on ‘the wrong side’ but of their victimisation at the hands of society. But in the less political 1950s such insights were rare. Not surprisingly, therefore, given the generally unpolitical nature of Amis’s revolt against the Establishment, the perception of women is ambiguous from the start.
On the one hand, there is the rejection of the (hypocritical) sexual codes preached by the Establishment. Jim’s pursuit of Christine in Lucky Jim is part of his fight against the world of the Welches. She is won from being ‘dignant’: a condition which is a product of consorting with the enemy and one which distorts her ‘natural’ feelings. Though this is presented as being liberatory for her, given the perspective is Jim’s, it is very much liberation on his terms: she seldom rises above the stereotypical blonde. But the other woman in Jim’s life is treated much more harshly. She is shabbily treated, first courted, then shunned by Jim as he pursues Christine. This could have made for a fairly complex picture of tangled emotions. But instead Margaret’s neurosis is revealed as self-created. Her previous boyfriend, Catchpole, appears at the end of the novel to prove to Jim that her suicide attempt at the beginning of the novel was a total fake. Catchpole states:
… Quite soon I realised that she was one of these people – they’re usually women – who feed on emotional tension. We began to have rows about nothing, and I mean that literally. I was much too wary, of course, to start any kind of sexual relationship with her, but she soon started behaving as if I had. I was perpetually being accused of hurting her, ignoring her, trying to humiliate her in front of other women, and all that sort of thing. [28]
Absolved of all responsibility, Jim is reassured by Catchpole that not only is it too dangerous to help her any more but that she doesn’t need any help either. His pursuit of Christine is therefore totally justified. What is objectionable is not so much the situation itself – sexual treachery has been the staple of the novel virtually from its inception – as the way in which Amis rigs the fiction to get the result. Catchpole is a character solely designed to give the desired outcome without its in any sense arising from the objective structure of the novel itself. Margaret is manipulated authorially into becoming a monster, an enemy – part of the conspiracy to stand in the way of Jim and the realisation of his desires. Catchpole’s comment, quoted above, is delivered as an unchallengeable truth.
The only thing to be said in mitigation is that the earlier depiction of Margaret in the novel is much less manipulative – even sensitive (within limits). Any such restraints disappear in Amis’s later novels: the women are much more crudely portrayed, tending to be divided into sex objects or manipulators – or both. Men may be predators, in the sense that they take every opportunity to pursue women, and that may be the source of tension and unhappiness for their long suffering wives or girlfriends, and indeed for the men themselves. But the message is that this is the nature of male desire, a frailty that in the end can be resisted but not conquered, forgiven but likely to be repeated. That, at any rate, is the message that comes across in Take a Girl Like You (1960) and its sequel, Difficulties with Girls (1988). The long suffering girlfriend is Jenny Bunn who marries handsome womaniser Patrick Standish, and the two novels feature his infidelities and adulteries and his attempts to atone. It could be argued that by making Jenny Bunn one of the central characters Amis was at least trying to understand from a woman’s point of view what being the object of sexual pursuit is like (the perspective in most of Amis’s work is overwhelmingly male). But Jenny comes across as a woman hopelessly unable to cope with the sexual attention she receives and irrationally fond of a man she knows to be a shit. In other words, she conforms to a fairly typical male chauvinist stereotype of what ‘normal’ women want. She is contrasted with Anna, the independent, strong woman – who turns out to be a pathological liar and manipulator: even her lesbianism is a fraudulent attempt to gain attention.
The crudeness of the portrayal of women goes with another kind of crudeness – that of social setting. This is sketchy, more a parade of social prejudice than anything else. Jenny Bunn herself is meant to be a northerner, from a working class background, down to earth but a bit unaware of the devious ways of the big city. But Amis hardly bothers to establish this except in the most perfunctory way. Her father, down with his wife to visit Jenny and Patrick, is ‘proved’ to be genuine working class because he is against ‘chaps with beards and silk scarves marching to and fro with their banners and petitions’ (having Aldermaston protesters wear inherently unlikely silk scarves is presumably a way of insinuating they are all middle class trendies) and forces Jenny’s penny pinching but Labour supporting landlord to buy his round of drinks. [29] In effect, in this and others of Amis’s later novels, we seldom move out of a world constructed out of reactionary fantasy. The most extraordinary example comes from Stanley and the Women, in which progressive psychiatry is ‘disproved’ by having its practitioner, Dr Trish Collings, pursue Stanley in a manipulatively sexual manner. The novel has a strong element of paranoia about it. Stanley seems to believe that there is a plot to get him and that women really are mad. [30]
The final element to consider in Amis’s view of sex is homosexuality. For a writer so committed to red blooded male heterosexuality, there’s an awful lot of ‘it’ around. No novel is complete without its ‘pansy’ or ‘queer’. The final image in Lucky Jim of Welch and son is of Gide and Strachey, i.e. posing effeminates. It is as if Jim’s masculine right to Christine has to be confirmed by what is perceived to be a lack of masculinity. In Difficulties with Girls Patrick’s marriage to Jenny is paralleled by his neighbours’ homosexual ‘marriage’ (complete with traditional roles and ‘feminine’ tantrums by the ‘wife’ – always called ‘she’). Although there is never any attempt to see male homosexuality as other than deviant, there is nevertheless a peculiar kind of tolerance for it (as of some different species). [31] Indeed, perhaps the justification for its tolerance in the novel is that it can absolve the ‘deviancy’ of Patrick’s philandering ways. If ‘queers’ can’t help their deviancy, neither can ‘real’ men. At a key moment in the novel, Eric, the ‘husband’, who has had problems of jealousy with Stevie, tells the other husband, Patrick, who is in trouble with Jenny because of his infidelities:
… you and I are by nature, by our respective natures, males who are irresistibly attracted by a non-male principle. In your case, straightforward, women; in my case not straightforward, not women – but, non-male, except anatomically. And it’s the clash between male and non-male that causes all the trouble. They’re different from us. More like children. Crying when things go wrong. Making difficulties just so as to be a person. [32]
Like Catchpole’s comment in Lucky Jim, this is delivered as truth and the basis for the acceptance and forgiveness which marks the reconciliation between Jenny and Patrick at the end of the novel: men can’t help themselves and women can’t help being emotional. Stripped to its basics, this amounts to no more than reactionary conventional wisdom about the relationship between the sexes. The only intriguing aspect is the way in which the attempt to create a male definition of individuality (women are ‘non-male’; like children they are not real persons) is perpetually undermined by the question as to whether some men are really men at all. Ironically, masculinity has to include its destabilising opposite, the male homosexual. What one might call the exclusive male club view of the world is plagued by the suspicion that there may be traitors within. [33]
Whatever this may reveal psychologically about Amis’s depiction of male-female relationships [34], it does not make for satisfactory literature. The deep vein of misogyny in his writing is not compensated for by fictional subtlety. On the contrary, as we noted earlier, the subjectivity masquerading as objective analysis produces artistic crudeness. The novels increasingly become a vehicle for reactionary prejudice.
How can we sum up Amis’s career? One explanation is that he is a product of his period. The revolt against the Establishment never got much beyond a repudiation of high culture. Without any positive pole of attraction the revolt remained essentially negative. If we compare him with George Orwell, there are, of course, differences of background. But there are certain similarities. Orwell’s dislike of upper class life and espousal of common decency are shown in his pre-war novels, Keep the Aspidistra Flying and Coming Up for Air. There is also a tendency to philistinism: the sweeping rhetoric against cranky radicalism, for example, in The Road to Wigan Pier, which mars his personal commitment to change for ordinary people. What essentially saves Orwell is both the keenness of his exposure to the misery created by the depths of the slump and, more importantly, the searing experience of revolution in Spain (though by the end of the Second World War the confidence that things can be changed has given way to a pessimism that allowed his work to be co-opted by the enemies of socialism, despite his own continuing personal commitment to change). No comparably radicalising events were available to Amis. He was too young for the 1930s to have any real effect and the long boom of the 1950s and 1960s – the period of his maturity – were mostly bereft of any historically significant upheavals (in the West, that is). That left only his experience of the army to have any impact on him – enough to make him look at the post-war world with a jaundiced eye and poke fun at its shibboleths, but little more. Hence his revolt is largely individual and personal: a fight for the right to do what one wants. There was nothing to take that revolt in a left wing direction. The movement was to the right – partly because an increasingly successful career left less to be cynical about, partly because the left wing politics he espoused (vague at the best of times, but useful as a stick to beat the cultural establishment with) became less meaningful – or so it appeared – in the context of the ‘affluent society’ and the Cold War characterisation of Stalinism.
Another consequence was that there was less to explore. His ear for voices, for mimicry of a certain type of speech, gave his early fiction – particularly Lucky Jim – real energy. But even here, with Amis at his best, there is not much sense of an objective social dimension to the novel. Of course, one doesn’t necessarily read a novel for its ability to tell us something about the world in which it is set. But there are limits to the number of ways in which the form can be fruitful if its prime virtue is the ability to impersonate a certain kind of consciousness, however brilliantly that is done. The social world of his novels becomes increasingly stuck in a narrow realm of pubs and parties. The outside world is no more than a distant echo, an understanding of it no more than a parade of unthinking and reactionary reflexes. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the world is reduced to a sexual battleground, with little concrete sense of the social determinations of sexual conflict.
Is the force of this argument that Amis was necessarily going to be limited because of the period in which he lived? That would be grossly reductionist. The 1950s may not have been a fantastically productive period as far as the novel was concerned. But one should not conclude that only an Amis was possible. Other novelists in the period give the lie to such determinism. Take, for example, Angus Wilson, a novelist who also had an acute ear for dialogue, who moved in a similar social world, whose career spans much the same period and whose fiction was as resolutely unexperimental and as satirically funny as Amis’s. There is an objectivity in his writing, quite at odds with Amis’s subjectivity: a breadth of interest in the social world of his period, and an attempt to understand its impact on individual destinies in the modern world. Sadly, all this is missing in Amis. His undeniable skill was harnessed to an increasingly reactionary and limited view of the world. The talent that had the power to satirise the pretensions and foibles of official culture became a talent to offend only the victims. Comedy became comedy in the service of reaction – and so ultimately of that world he had started his career by mocking.

Notes
1. Eric Jacobs in The Spectator, 28 October 1995, p. 28.
2. Malcolm Bradbury, The Modern British Novel (Secker and Warburg 1993), p. 324.
3. One suspects that a somewhat idealised version of his suburban existence – particularly its musical interests and sexual activities – is recreated in his 1973 novel, The Riverside Villas Murder. Even the form of the novel itself, a detective thriller, is a kind of homage to 1930s middle class culture and the novel is saturated, obsessively so, with detail designed to locate it in its period. There is never simply dance band music on the wireless, always an exact enumeration of a band and its members. No one ever simply smokes a cigarette – it is a Turban or a Weights or a Woodbine. The cereal is never simply cereal, but Farmer’s Glory wheat flakes. The effect is one not so much of nostalgia – there isn’t enough emotion for that – but of pastiche. There is no analysis of this world: it is background, faithfully realised, to the main character, the adolescent hero with a precocious capacity to solve the murder clues who is also initiated by an older married woman (an idealisation of the young Amis himself?).
4. Kingsley Amis, Memoirs (Penguin 1992), p. 78.
5. My Enemy’s Enemy (1955), Court of Enquiry (1956), I Spy Strangers (1962), all to be found in the Collected Short Stories (Penguin 1980).
6. There are two minor figures, police agents called Foot and Redgrave who do the system’s particularly dirty work. Amis was never one to stint on paranoid slurs about the revolutionary left.
7. Amis tried to get his hero, Margaret Thatcher, to accept an inscribed copy at a party he attended at Number 10. On being told by the humble adorer what the novel was about, she crushed him with the comment: ‘Can’t you do any better than that? Get yourself another crystal ball!’). See Memoirs, p. 318.
8. The Memoirs claim that when he returned to Oxford after the army he refused to rejoin the Communist Party he had briefly belonged to during his first stay at the University (p. 37).
9. Quoted in Charles Tomlinson, Poetry Today, in The Modern Age, Volume 7 of the Pelican Guide to English Literature, ed. Boris Ford (Penguin 1961), p. 458.
10. See Rubin Rabinowitz, The Reaction Against Experiment in the English Novel, 1950–1960 (New York 1967), for a useful account of this.
11. Kingsley Amis, Lucky Jim (Penguin 1992), with introduction by David Lodge, p. 158.
12. Ibid., pp. 204–5.
13. Ibid., p. 227.
14. Ibid., p. 63.
15. Ibid., p. 51.
16. Ibid., p. 140.
17. David Lodge points out that Amis’s style ‘owes something to the “ordinary language” philosophy that dominated Oxford when Amis was a student there’ (Lucky Jim, p. vi). Such a philosophy presupposes that there is nothing very important to talk about except the way we talk about the world. Such a view is only possible on the assumption that as things have been so they will remain – except for some tinkering at the edges.
18. Harold Wilson skilfully exploited this ambiguity in his pre-1964 campaigning against Lord Home in the name of a technological revolution. Culturally, the satire of Private Eye and the BBC’s That Was the Week That Was also rested on an ambiguous response to the way in which the Establishment marginalised talent. Many satirists had a genuine desire to attack privilege; but some used it as a road to advancement (David Frost, Bernard Levin ...).
19. Dylan Thomas is also the target, under the name of Brydan, in The Old Devils. This much later novel has a broader aim. Brydan/Thomas represents the temptation to literary bullshit and more general dishonesty (including sexual dishonesty) which besets the central character, Alun Weaver. Weaver is a London based TV pundit who has made a career out of being a professional Welshman (as Dylan Thomas could have been accused of being) and who has now retired to his native country (the better to go on dishonestly bullshitting and in the process messing up the lives of his former friends). Arguably, this is one of Amis’s better late novels, perhaps because it represents a revisitation of earlier material, though the offensiveness quota remains high.
20. Amis always protested that given his political support for the US he could hardly be accused of being anti-American.
21. Where individualism in the 1950s could be anti the Tory establishment, Mrs Thatcher (and the monetarist right) used it as an ideological assault on corporatism, welfarism and the rest. Giving back to the individual what the state had taken from them was her rallying cry. Needless to say, only a certain number of individuals benefited. But clearly Amis happily adapted to this right wing individualism. The shift is shown by comparing Jim’s commonsense reaction against Establishment codes with the praise poured on by the stolid and sensible policeman in Stanley and the Women: ‘Misprize common sense at your peril is my motto,’ he says, having rescued Stanley’s schizophrenic son from a spot of bother with a Middle Eastern embassy (mad Arabs, this time, rather than mad women) – Stanley and the Women (Penguin 1985), p. 247.
22. Kingsley Amis, Memoirs (Penguin 1992), p. 146.
23. Lucky Jim, p. 169. If, of course, the complaint is correct, then those who make the same criticism in the 1990s, and look back to the 1950s as the era after which standards fell, have some explaining to do.
24. Black Paper Two, ed. C.B. Cox and A.E. Dyson (Hull), p. 157.
25. Memoirs, p. 317.
26. Ibid., p. 319.
27. To give just a few examples from the culture of the period. Alan Sillitoe’s Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1958) has its hero resist being forced to marry because he fears losing the freedom which the relatively good pay from his mindless factory job allows him to enjoy (the film version brings out the suffocating respectability of his girlfriend’s mother). Look Back in Anger’s Jimmy Porter rails against his upper class wife, whose perpetual ironing and silence he takes to be part of what’s wrong with the world. Stan Barstow’s A Kind of Loving (1960) manages (just about) to reconcile his hero to being trapped into marriage by his girlfriend’s pregnancy.
28. Lucky Jim, pp. 235–236.
29. Take a Girl Like You (Penguin 1962), p. 178. He is also anti-semitic, imagining Patrick’s real name is Schtundisch. He warms to Patrick, however, because Patrick is prepared to stand his round and shows he is not a ‘Jew’ with his money. Amis’s depiction of Jenny’s father is so caricatural, so Alf Garnett like in seeing workers as patriotic bigots, as to be laughable.
30. The novel features Stanley’s son’s violent schizophrenia, so Stanley’s paranoia could be said to reflect the theme of the book. Significantly, though, the only sane and sensible psychiatrist is a man, who despises his radical female colleague, Dr Collings.
31. Part of the subplot revolves round a friend who is experiencing sexual difficulties in his marriage. He has been told by his psychiatrist that he must be subconsciously homosexual and so is determined to be ‘queer’ though he doesn’t feel any desire for a man. He simply isn’t the type: you either are or aren’t ‘queer’ and that’s the end of it. This is yet another appeal to common sense. (Fear of not performing sexually with a woman and so fear of not being a real man suggests a side to Amis that only a Freudian would dare explore.)
32. Difficulties with Girls (Penguin 1989), p. 256.
33. The preference for all male company – and a paranoid fear that there may be a plot to infiltrate and undermine the institution – is an abiding element in Amis’s work (perhaps derived ultimately from his experience of those very male institutions, his Oxford college and the army). See The Egyptologists for a fantasy version of this theme. An obsession with plots could also be said to be a Cold War theme. Paranoia for Freud was linked with fear of homosexuality; whether that applies to Amis is beyond the scope of this writer.
34. It may be that that idealised version of Amis’s childhood suburban existence, The Riverside Villa Murders, says more about Amis than he would have cared to reveal. It contains a psychologically intriguing triangle. Young Peter, the hero of the tale, is the subject of the sexual interest of both a married woman, who seduces him, and an avuncular ex-military homosexual, who self denyingly does not. He is flattered by the attentions of both, since both confirm his sense of self: the woman is proof, so to speak, that although he enjoys mutual masturbation with a school friend, his orientation is not towards men; the homosexual colonel is proof that he is an adult (the colonel treats him as an equal by making him a co-partner in solving the crime). Peter’s real object of desire, however, is Daphne, the girl next door. She baffles his every move to get her to go out with him, trapping him in adolescent uncertainty. Seduction by the married woman gives him confidence but is implicitly problematic (the need for secrecy, the threat of scandal – to say nothing of the Oedipal implications). The threat is eliminated when she is unmasked as a neurotic and sexually predatory murderess by the colonel and again when she is persuaded to do the decent thing and commit suicide. He, Peter, is now free to impose on Daphne, the implication being that he knows her true feelings better than she does. We have here a pattern which often emerges in more veiled form in his fiction: the idea that the hero becomes a real person by release from helplessness induced by involvement with a sexually manipulative woman. The suspicion that this rejection of things feminine involves being uninterested in women can be countered by giving space to the homosexual (that embodiment of lack of sexual interest in women) as something one most definitely is not – or as we saw Patrick doing, in Difficulties with Women, making the homosexual a chaser after ‘women’ of the non-anatomical variety – in other words, an honorary man.
 



‘Terrorism’ is the new global threat against which global war
must now be fought, according to ruling class politicians and the
media. Bin Laden and Al Qaida constitute for them an ubiquitous
presence against which the democratic values of civilisation are
ranged – a demon to be exorcised at all costs, even at the cost of
civil liberties.
This attitude affects sections of the left. Those who showed
sympathy to organisations (such as the Provisional IRA) using
‘terrorist’ methods in the 1970s now all too often take a
completely opposite view of today’s ‘terrorism’. The old
‘terrorist’ organisation, it seems, could be viewed positively
since their actions could be justified in the name of a secular,
progressive ideology, such as national liberation, anti-imperialism
or socialism. Today’s, by contrast, is seen as ‘Islamofascist’
or ‘reactionary anti-capitalist’, and therefore to be condemned
as no different from (and possibly worse than) the system it is
attacking.
But whatever the specific differences between terrorism currently
and that of the past – and these are less than appearances suggest
– the question of how to respond is one that socialists have
frequently had to confront.
 
The marxist tradition
Both Marx and Engels, on different occasions, had to respond to
the kind of strategy that emphasised not mass action but actions
carried out by individuals (such as blowing up buildings or
assassinating hated individuals) – what came to be known as
‘terrorism’ in the latter half of the 19th century. [1]
The first occasion was with the Fenians, or Irish Republican
Brotherhood, a revolutionary secret society dedicated to the
emancipation of Ireland. In September 1867 local Fenians in
Manchester blew open the locked door of a Black Maria in which the
two arrested leaders of the organisation were being taken to court. A
police sergeant died in the explosion. Four of the rescuers were
arrested, together with a totally innocent fifth man picked up in a
raid in Manchester’s Irish district, and were charged with murder
and sentenced to death. Three were hanged on 23 November, despite the
fact that none of the accused had fired a fatal shot and the death
had been accidental. The savagery of the British government’s
reaction to the incident led to huge demonstrations of support for
the cause of Irish independence – from English workers as well as
Irish people. However, within a couple of weeks another attempt by
Fenians to rescue a leader went badly awry. The explosives used to
release a Fenian organiser from Clerkenwell prison in London caused a
neighbouring row of houses to collapse, killing seven of the
inhabitants and seriously injuring another 120.
What was the reaction of Marx and Engels? Marx had thrown his
energies into getting the International to support the demand for
Irish independence, convinced that unless the power of the English
landlords was weakened working class revolution in England would not
be possible. [2] So it was in the interests of English workers to
support the resistance of the Irish. Marx wrote to Engels on 2
November, ‘I have sought in every way to provoke this manifestation
of the English workers in support of Fenianism’. [3] In a letter to
Engels on 7 November he said, ‘This business stirs the feelings of
the intelligent part of the working class here’. [4] Engels echoed
this sentiment in a letter to Kugelmann in Germany: ‘The London
proletarians declare every day more openly for the Fenians and hence
– an unheard-of and splendid thing here – for, first, a violent
and, secondly, an anti-English movement’. [5]
Not all progressive opinion was prepared to back the Fenians. The
Reform League, an organisation set up in 1865 to agitate for
universal suffrage, and on which leading trade union members of the
International sat, passed a resolution condemning Fenianism. This put
pressure on the International itself, and it took all Marx’s
efforts to ensure that the International maintained a hard position.
The Clerkenwell explosion clearly did not help matters. Marx wrote
furiously to Engels the day after:
The last exploit of the Fenians in Clerkenwell was a very
stupid thing. The London masses, who have shown great sympathy for
Ireland, will be made wild by it and be driven into the arms of the
of the government party. One cannot expect the London proletarians to
allow themselves to be blown up in honour of the Fenian emissaries.
There is always a kind of fatality about such a secret, melodramatic
sort of conspiracy. [6]
A few days later Engels replied, saying, ‘The stupid affair in
Clerkenwell was obviously the work of a few specialised fanatics; it
is the misfortune of all conspiracies that they lead to such
stupidities, because “after all something must happen, after all
something must be done”.’ [7]
Even before the Clerkenwell outrage, Engels had agreed with Marx
that ‘the beastliness of the English must not make us forget that
the leaders of this sect are mostly asses and partly exploiters, and
we cannot in any way make ourselves responsible for the stupidities
which occur in every conspiracy. And they are certain to happen’.
[8] But none of this lessened their public championing of the cause
for which the Fenians fought.
So support for Fenianism, as an expression of national struggle,
was tempered with clarity about the nature of the movement’s
leadership (its class composition) and the weakness of its tactics
(the reliance on conspiratorial means). What we see here, in
embryonic form, are two aspects of the Marxist tradition. One is an
understanding that socialists do not put conditions on their support
for movements of national resistance to imperialist oppression. The
second is an understanding of the limitations of such movements –
the idea that a select few can produce change through conspiratorial
methods inevitably isolates them from the mass of the population and
dooms them ultimately to failure. [9] The question is not whether
socialists stand aside because they perceive these limitations. It is
rather that they build support on class terms – as Marx, through
the First International, was able to do, even as Fenianism declined.
 
Individual terrorism in Russia
The deaths at Clerkenwell were accidental – the Fenians had not
intended to kill people, though such accidents are the likely
consequence of conspiratorial methods. The deliberate targeting of
individuals, ‘terrorism’ in the modern sense of the term, did
become the method used by some anarchists and by a section of Russian
revolutionaries (the Narodniks and their successors) in the period
from the late 1870s through to the early 20th century. [10]
In Russia Narodnaya Volya (the People’s Will
organisation) carried out a series of actions targeting highly placed
government officials, culminating in the assassination of Tsar
Alexander II in 1881. The Narodniks’ turn to terrorism was a
response to the failure of the earlier attempt to ‘go to the
people’ and stir the peasantry into overthrowing Tsarism – an
attempt that had led to savage repression by the autocracy. Only
terror, they now believed, would undermine the people’s confiden in
the government and therefore increase their receptivity to its
overthrow. [11] When Vera Zasulich was tried for the attempted
assassination of the brutal governor of Moscow in 1878, such was the
hatred for the victim and sympathy for the perpetrator that the jury
acquitted her. Only a complete reactionary would have criticised her
for the ‘immorality’ of trying to kill a hated member of the
ruling class. [12] Marx himself refused to condemn this kind of
violence. After the assassination of Alexander II he wrote to his
daughter Jenny that terror was ‘a historically inevitable means of
action of which it was as useless to discuss as that of the
earthquake at Chios’, and he admired the Russian terrorists as
‘excellent people through and through ... simple, straightforward,
heroic’. [13]
His admiration was not some contradictory admiration for what he
had condemned in Fenian conspiratorial politics. Russia, unlike
England, had arrived at such a point of disintegration that it was
‘undoubtedly on the eve of a revolution’. [14] In this context
the emergence of a revolutionary current dedicated to helping the
tottering state collapse, whatever the means, could not impede the
process. In England, on the other hand, the choice of means made a
difference. Fenian conspiracies might damage the goal of an
independent Ireland by hindering the process of developing the
consciousness of English workers.
At the same time the question of what social force in Russian
society could shape the future was thrown into relief by the
Narodniks’ activities. The rationale behind the tactics of first
‘going to the people’ and then turning to terrorism was their
belief that the archaic peasant form of common ownership (the
obshchina) could become the basis of a higher form of society, thus
enabling Russia to bypass capitalism altogether. But with the failure
of both tactics, some Narodniks began to question this belief – and
the centrality of the peasantry. [15]
One of those people was Vera Zasulich herself. She, among others,
came to look to the social force that capitalism created in the late
1880s and 1890s, the new working class. And in particular Lenin, who
did most to apply Marxist ideas to Russian conditions, developed an
analysis that not only rejected Narodnik views of social development
but their terrorist methods. This did not involve a rejection of
revolution (Lenin’s critique was not based on waiting for
capitalism to mature). It was, rather, a criticism of the
effectiveness of terrorism as a revolutionary method now that
capitalism in Russia was developing a working class capable of
self-organisation in its own defence. Tight revolutionary
organisation was as important for Lenin as it had been for the
Narodniks. But where, for Lenin, revolutionary organisation was
central to the self-organisation of the working class, for the
Narodniks it was a substitute for popular self-activity. This was a
consequence of their politics – the failure to ‘inspire’ the
peasants by propaganda had led the Narodniks to the conclusion that
terror, committed by themselves in the name of a class that did not
act for itself, could serve as a short cut to revolution. Their
desperate impatience was a tragic mistake, as isolation only made it
easier for the authorities to harass and infiltrate the Narodniks –
even to carry out terroristic acts themselves. Terror became a
self-defeating strategy. For Lenin, on the contrary, the
interventionist element of revolutionary politics was to be rooted in
the self-activity of the working class.
Lenin combined a high degree of respect for the revolutionary
traditions of Narodism with a sharp critique of its method and
programme. Thus, writing in 1899, he maintained that Russian
revolutionary Marxism ‘carries on the cause and the traditions of
the whole preceding revolutionary movement in Russia’ and ‘marches
towards the goal that was already indicated by the glorious
representatives of the old Narodnaya Volya’. [16] He
immediately qualified this by adding that the difference between the
two was that the heroism of the Narodniks rested on too narrow a
social base and an inadequate theoretical understanding of social
developments. [17] But what might have been a forgivable error, in
view of the repressive political conditions and undeveloped social
forces of the period of the late 1870s and early 1880s (the period of
Narodnaya Volya), was no longer so at the turn of the century,
when the working class movement had made enormous strides forward.
The argument became particularly important with a new wave of
‘terrorist’ actions carried out by the Social Revolutionaries
(the political descendants of Narodnya Volya). It started with
an assassination of a government minister in 1902 and reached its
peak with some 82 assassinations in 1907, before rapidly tailing off.
The most notorious assassination was of Plehve, the minister of the
interior, in 1904. One of the perpetrators, Azef, was exposed as a
police agent in 1909.
Lenin, writing in 1902, was altogether harder than he had been
with the Narodniks. These were, he claimed, ‘stormy times’ after
a long period of tranquillity, and had stirred up sections of the
intelligentsia, ‘caught up in the maelstrom of events and who have
neither theoretical principles nor social roots’. [18] On the face
of it, the Social Revolutionaries’ advocacy of ‘terrorism, not in
place of work among the masses, but precisely for and simultaneously
with that work’ [19] seemed to acknowledge the primacy of the
working class. But this acknowledgement masked a move away from class
politics, just as much as the swing to reformism by sections of the
left. For Lenin terrorism reflected ‘an utter failure to understand
the mass movement and a lack of faith in it’. It revealed ‘the
inefficacy of terrorism, for without the working class all bombs are
powerless, patently powerless’. [20] Even more stupid, according to
Lenin, was the justification for terrorism. The Social
Revolutionaries claimed that neither the ‘crowd’ (ie the masses)
nor revolutionary organisations were safe from the repressive might
of the state. Only ‘individuals or small groups that are
ceaselessly, and even in ignorance of one another, preparing for
attack, and are attacking’ have the ‘elusiveness’ [21] that
makes them immune. This, for Lenin, was a complete inversion of the
obvious truth that ‘the only “hope” of the revolution is the
“crowd”’ and its revolutionary leadership. [22] Lenin was
equally scathing about the claims made by Social Revolutionaries that
heroic single combat excites a spirit of struggle in us all. On the
contrary, he argued:
Only new forms of the mass movement or the awakening of
new sections of the masses to independent struggle really rouses a
spirit of struggle and courage in all. Single combat, however,
inasmuch as it remains single combat, has the immediate effect of
simply creating a shortlived sensation, while indirectly it even
leads to apathy and passive waiting for the next bout. [23]
Lenin made one other point about this type of terrorism – which
was to argue that the ‘present day terrorists are really
“economists” [i.e. those who restricted the movement to reform
using trade union methods] turned inside out’. [24] In putting
terrorists and reformists in the same basket, he did not mean, of
course, that their methods were the same. He meant, rather, that both
tendencies evaded the central role of how workers themselves would
change society and how political organisation related to that. One
tendency substituted terror for mass work, the other reform for
revolution. One looked to the intelligentsia as the agent of
political change, the other to the liberal bourgeoisie to lead the
struggle against Tsarism. [25] The relevance of this point today is
that parliamentary reform is not the alternative to terrorism when it
comes to changing society – neither looks to working class
self-activity as the lever for revolutionary change. In that sense, a
reformist and a terrorist approach, for all their differences, share
the same limitations.
 
‘Propaganda of the deed’
The use of ‘terrorist’ methods was not confined to Russia. An
anarchist concept of ‘propaganda of the deed’ inspired a wave of
assassinations (and attempted assassinations) of high-ranking
government figures, mostly in Western Europe. The high point was a
series of spectacular terrorist attacks in France, which culminated
in the assassination of President Sadi-Carnot in 1894.
Capitalist development had produced not just a working class. Its
victims in the great cities included a mass of déclassé
individuals, whose hatred of capitalism expressed itself in forms of
individual revolt. In France the defeat of the Paris Commune of 1871
cast a long, demoralising shadow over working class politics. The
Third Republic itself was the corrupt plaything of politicians
jockeying for office, which even the socialists were seeking
representation in. ‘Propaganda of the deed’ offered a solution,
alongside which socialist arguments about the working masses seemed
unexciting. Settling scores with hated ruling class figures seemed
better than talking about collective answers to the system. [26] But
this impatient desire to force the pace of history was elitist in its
effects. It opened the way to a terrorism much more indiscriminate in
its targets than the older Narodnik terrorism.
Some, but by no means all, terrorism was directed at ruling class
institutions or representatives. Thus in 1886 Charles Gallo hurled
sulphuric acid into the Paris stock exchange and then fired three
random revolver shots. No one was hurt and Gallo used his trial, at
which he was sentenced to 20 years hard labour, to give an hour and a
half lecture on anarchism. He had intended, he stated, to carry out
‘an act of propaganda by the deed for anarchist doctrine’. [27]
Even more spectacularly in 1893, Auguste Vaillant threw a bomb into
the French parliament, which produced a lot of damage but no loss of
life. The perpetrator this time was executed, his last words being,
‘Vive l’anarchie! My death will be avenged’ – which it
was six months later with the assassination of the French president. [28]
But other terrorist attacks were less discriminating in their
targets. A week after Vaillant’s execution, Emile Henry, the 18-year-old son of a Communard, threw a bomb into the crowded station cafe at the Gare St Lazare in Paris. [29] Many were wounded and one died later of his wounds. [30] At his trial, Henry was asked why he
had attacked innocent people. His reply, which became notorious, was
that ‘there are no innocents’:
I was convinced that the existing organisation was bad. I
wanted to struggle against it so to hasten its disappearance. I
brought to the struggle a profound hatred, intensified every day by
the revolting spectacle of a society where all is base, all is
cowardly, where everything is a barrier to the development of human
passions, to the generous tendencies of the heart, to the free flight
of thought. [31]
His justification for not sparing innocents, he went on to say,
was that anarchists:
... do not spare bourgeois women and children, because
the wives and the children of those they [the anarchists] love are
not spared either. Are not those children innocent victims who, in
the slums, die slowly of anaemia because bread is scarce at home? Or
those women who grow pale in your workshops and wear themselves out
to earn 40 sous a day? [32]
Henry’s one regret was that there had not been more victims [33]
– which followed from the false proposition that the failure to
rouse the masses was the consequence of not having produced a big
enough shock.
Henry’s action caused revulsion. However, that was not true of
anarchist attacks whose targets were the rich and powerful or the
institutions of bourgeois society, for which there was much greater
sympathy. Terrorism became ‘popular’ [34] – not least because
the French ruling class reacted so viciously (even executing those
who had not caused loss of life), and because it seemed that someone
was taking revenge on bourgeois society for its crimes. One
terrorist, Ravachol, who bombed two apartment blocks in 1892 in
retaliation for sentences meted out to May Day demonstrators, was
compared by one artist to Christ, gave his name to a new verb
(ravacholiser – to blow up), and had a song praising
dynamite composed in his honour. The reason for such ‘popularity’
is not difficult to discover. Terrorists may have an elitist disdain
for mass action and attempt to substitute themselves for the masses.
But the masses themselves, in the absence of self-confidence and
self-organisation, may secretly or openly admire those who appear to
be able to do what they themselves can only dream of – take revenge
for their humiliation.
The wave of ‘terrorist’ attacks was a test for the relatively
young and inexperienced French socialist movement of the day. It had
made a breakthrough in electoral terms by the early 1890s, and a
coalition of socialists now had a significant parliamentary presence.
But how would they react to the way in which the French government
used the bombing of parliament and the assassination of President
Sadi-Carnot to rush through laws that clamped down on freedom of
expression and civil liberties – and served as a useful diversion
from the festering financial crisis around the Panama Canal? Engels
wrote to Marx’s son-in-law Paul Lafargue that these ‘infamous
laws’ would be used more against the socialists than the anarchists
[35], but that ‘you will defeat it and you will emerge from the
struggles infinitely stronger than you went into it’. [36]
Jules Guesde, a leader of the supposedly most revolutionary of the
socialist currents, denounced anarchist violence and declared that
‘socialism will succeed only by the peacefully expressed will of
the people’. [37] The socialists’ best parliamentary orator, Jean
Jaurès, responded in a way that made fewer concessions to prevailing
ideas, despite his recent origins in non-socialist radicalism. He
sympathised with what had motivated terrorists like Ravachol and
Vaillant. [38] He went onto the offensive in parliament by focusing
on the government’s multiple ‘searches and arrests among the
poor’, its moves to control political activity in the working class
movement, its use of agents provocateurs, its prohibition of
the discussion of ‘anarchist ideas’, and its introduction of
special and secret ‘correctional tribunals’ to replace jury
trials. [39] Jaurès also tried to introduce legislation to reform
taxation as a way of pinpointing where the real problem lay – with
‘the tyranny of capitalism’. The socialist parliamentary bloc was
only a minority, and stood no chance of defeating the ‘infamous
laws’. But their forthright opposition shifted the spotlight away
from anarchist outrages, exposed the corrupt and undemocratic reality
of the system, and shook the government to its core. At the climax of
the debate, Jaurès denounced ‘all men in public life who have sold
their votes or been involved in financial scandal’. They, he said:
... will be judged as the real cause of anarchist
propaganda ... When the same barque carries the corrupt politician
and the murdering anarchist into hell, they will find much to talk
about, for they will be the complementary products of the same social
order. [40]
Thus Jaurès was able to stand against anarchist terrorism but not
concede an inch to the system against which it fought.
 
Trotsky’s polemic against individual terrorism
Leon Trotsky’s wrote two critiques of individual terrorism –
the first written in 1909, in response to the unmasking of the
assassin of Plehve as a police agent, and the second in 1911, in
response to terrorist moods in the Austrian working class. [41] They
sum up the accumulated wisdom of the Marxist tradition on the
question but need some contextualising.
In the first article Trotsky starts by explaining that the
systematic terror used by the Russian Narodniks stemmed from the way
in which the Tsarist state, built up by using European capital and
technology rather than native resources, appeared to stand above
society. It appeared to be ‘a purely external organ of coercion,
having no roots in the social organisation itself ... elevating
itself above all classes of society’ [42], including even the
privileged classes who were denied the opportunity to develop the
state along ‘normal’ (bourgeois democratic) lines. This also
affected the Europeanised representatives of Russian intellectual
life, the intelligentsia. The state’s social isolation and lack of
roots gave rise to the illusion (rapidly shattered) that no real
social forces were needed to destroy Tsarism. Explosives in the hands
of a dedicated few would be sufficient to wipe out this external
organ of coercion. But what had been a heroic illusion in a period of
undeveloped social forces had now been overtaken by the development
of real social forces – the working class and its political
self-organisation. However much the Social Revolutionaries might try
to hang on to terrorist methods by talking about them as alongside,
instead of in place of, mass struggle, they are incompatible methods:
Engendered by the absence of a revolutionary class,
regenerated later by a lack of confidence in the revolutionary
masses, terrorism can maintain itself only by exploiting the weakness
and disorganisation of the masses, minimising their conquests and
exaggerating their defeats. [43]
And precisely because it substitutes secretive, conspiratorial
organisation for the kind of organisation that looks to mass action,
it is open to police infiltration.
In the later article, Trotsky develops this argument to take in
non-Russian conditions. He starts by dealing with the accusation
directed at revolutionary socialists that they use violence
(terrorism) to achieve their ends. Trotsky’s defence is not to deny
the role of violence, but to point out that for the capitalist class
to condemn strikers for being ‘violent’ over picketing or dealing
with scabs is sheer hypocrisy, compared with the violence of the
capitalist state machine (the law, the police and the armed forces).
Indeed, if they want to say that ‘inspiring fear or doing harm’
to the class enemy is terrorism, than ‘the entire class struggle is
nothing but terrorism’. [44]
This is followed by a sharp condemnation of terrorism in the much
narrower sense of the term, of which assassination of government
ministers (the classic form of individual terrorism) or of employers
is only one example. Trotsky includes machine breaking and factory
arson as examples of terrorism – which may appear surprising, since
neither is specifically directed at individuals. His point, however,
is the class motivation for such targets – whether persons or
property – has nothing specifically proletarian about it, and
therefore will not strengthen the collective confidence or
organisation of the working class, as strike action can. Trotsky’s
repeated emphasis on the importance of the role of strike action
needs further comment. He does not confine it to the question of
‘economics’ – he relates it to politics, including
parliamentary politics. Given its position at the heart of capitalist
production, the working class can only advance its interests
collectively. Methods that rely on individual ‘terror’ cannot,
and indeed may produce confusion – if the ruling class can be
defeated by shooting its representative, what is the point of the
class struggle? Hence Trotsky’s conclusion:
In our eyes, individual terror is inadmissible precisely
because it belittles the role of the masses in their own
consciousness, reconciles them to their powerlessness, and turns
their eyes and hopes toward a great avenger and liberator who some
day will come and accomplish his mission. [45]
Therefore ‘propaganda of the deed’ has the opposite effect to
that claimed for it by the anarchists. It does not arouse the masses.
Instead, it focuses attention away from self-organisation onto the
‘terrorists’. A new minister replaces the old one, the daily
grind of exploitation resumes. The only change is increased police
oppression. This is as true of life after 9/11 and 7/7 as it was in
Trotsky’s day.
But we have to be careful how we use Trotsky’s argument.
Sometimes the condemnation of terrorism implies that but for the
terrorists the conditions for progress would be favourable – the
state would have no excuse to attack us. This is to make the
terrorists as big a problem as the system they hope to weaken. It is
as if capitalism were not always seeking to restrict our sphere of
action, and as if the working class movement did not have the
strength to recover from any temporary setback. As Trotsky put it,
‘Capitalist society needs an active, mobile, and intelligent
proletariat – it cannot, therefore, bind the proletariat hand and
foot for very long’. [46] A one-sided use of Trotsky’s polemic
can reproduce the very pessimism that Trotsky denounced in individual terrorism.
 
Socialists in Britain and the IRA
In the early 1970s repression by British forces in the North of
Ireland led to a bombing campaign by Republicans. The IRA had wide,
if passive, support in the Catholic community, because it was seen as
their defender from both the British army and the Orange Order. There
could be no question of joining in the chorus of hatred from the
British media and politicians. But what, then, should the attitude of
socialists be? Some, notably the Militant Tendency (forerunners of
the Socialist Party), argued that only class politics could solve the
national question that still existed as a result of partition. While
abstractly true, this evaded the question of whether socialists
should support the national struggle. Others in effect argued that
one had to take sides in a civil war – planting bombs in pubs,
shops, factories and the like were legitimate tactics in the military
fight against the occupying British forces.
The International Socialists (forerunners of the SWP) recognised
that there were elements of a civil war in the North of Ireland, but
concluded that the limitations of Republicanism required socialists
to raise criticism within the context of overall support for the
national struggle. Socialist Worker argued in an editorial on
12 February 1972:
Unconditional but critical support for all those,
including both IRAs, fighting imperialism. By unconditional we mean
support regardless of our criticism of the leadership and tactics. By
critical we mean opposing the sowing of illusions that the struggle
can finally be won except by the victory of the working class
fighting on a programme of social as well as national liberation. [47]
In particular, Nationalist politics (and tactics based purely on
defence of the minority Catholic community) would not appeal to
Protestant workers or break the hold that Tory Orangeism had on them.
That could only happen if there was a sizeable working class
organisation that demonstrated as great a hostility to the Green
Tories in the South as it did to the Orange Tories in the North. In
practice, the nationalist politics of the IRA meant that it could not
do this. Therefore, despite unconditional support for the Republican
movement because its defence of the Catholic minority challenged the
power of the British state, there had to be criticism. To subordinate
class to nation was to fail to see that Green bosses (both North and
South) were as much the enemy as the Orange bosses, and to fail to
see Protestant workers as part of the solution. Indeed, unless
anti-imperialism moved beyond a politics based purely on nationalism,
unless it found a way to class politics, it could not even solve the
national struggle. Duncan Hallas and Jim Higgins, two leading
members, defended the Socialist Worker editorial in an
internal bulletin, writing:
The line of our organisation – which is the application
of the theory of permanent revolution in Ireland – is that the
overthrow of imperialism in Ireland (North or South) is impossible
except on the basis of a mass movement with a revolutionary socialist
leadership ... The defence of the Catholic community against
governmental terrorism helps this development by challenging the
power of the state and thus raising the possibility of its
destruction ... The bombing campaign hinders the development by
strengthening the ties of the Orange workers to Stormont. And it
deflects the Catholic working class militants by giving them a false
perspective and activity. [48]
This argument rested on an analysis that saw that British
imperialism could not be defeated simply on the basis of a struggle
waged by the Catholic minority in Northern Ireland (one third of one
quarter of the population of the island as a whole). It had to gain
active support from elsewhere – from the working class of the Irish
Republic and from at least a section of Protestant workers in
Northern Ireland – and some degree of sympathy from workers in
Britain. The bombing campaign made this more difficult. The bombs
inevitably had the unintended effect of killing innocent bystanders,
enabling the ruling class to isolate the Republicans in the South and
to frighten people of Irish descent in Britain away from active
support for the struggle – so that the very big demonstrations
London saw in the late 1960s and early 1970s were not replicated in
the 1980s and 1990s. The correctness of our arguments is to be seen
today, with the abandonment of the armed struggle by the IRA and the
willingness of the Republican leadership to participate in the
institutions of the still-partitioned North.
Against this background, Socialist Worker year after year
carried a double argument. Its main component was that the ‘Troubles’
in Northern Ireland – and their by-product, the bombings in Britain
– were a consequence of the British presence, the latest stage in
the centuries-old imperialist domination of Ireland. For this reason,
resistance to the British troops was quite legitimate. But it was
also necessary to make it clear that the bombings were not a way to
defeat imperialism and had therefore to be criticised.
An important example was provided after a bomb planted in a pub in
Birmingham in November 1974 killed 19 workers and injured some 200
other people. Hysteria swept though the city, whipped up by the
media, creating a climate in which any Irish immigrant was subject to
at least verbal abuse, and in which six totally innocent workers were
sentenced to life imprisonment – serving 16 years before being
freed. Socialist Worker’s response to bombing was a
three-tiered headline: ‘Stop the Bombings. Fight Repression in
Britain and in Ireland. Troops Out of Ireland.’
The front page spelt it out:
The root cause of the bombings is the repression in
Northern Ireland. Internment without trial, sectarian murders by
unchallenged Protestant gangs, bullying searches and killings by the
British army have driven the minority to despair. Senseless planting
of bombs seems to some of them the only way out. Repression does not
cancel out the terrorism bred by repression. Both increase together.
Workers’ anger in Birmingham in the past week has shown
that there are not enough socialists organised in the factories to
fight back powerfully enough against anti-Irish opinion, to argue
that the militancy of the British working class should be used to
strike at the root of the Irish troubles ... The British government
and its army ... bear the responsibility for 400 years of Irish
misery.
An article on the second page of the paper went through the
history of British rule in Ireland, and the way a peaceful movement
for civil rights in 1968–69 had been attacked by the full might of
the state: ‘The way the people of Birmingham felt last Friday is
how the Northern Ireland Catholic community have been feeling every
day for the last five years.’ The editorial concluded:
We have always made it clear that socialists in Britain
have to defend the right of Irish people to struggle to throw the
British troops out of Ireland. That includes the right of Republicans
to organise to fight against these troops ... The planting of bombs
in places frequented by ordinary workers cannot contribute to the
defence of the Catholic areas or the driving out of British troops
... that is why we condemn the bombings ... But we have to continue
to insist that the precondition for a solution to Ireland’s
problems is the withdrawal of British troops. [49]
 
Today’s Islamist terrorists
The media and much of the left would have us believe that today’s
Islamist terrorists are qualitatively worse than any in the past.
Even the Irish Republicans – whose very voices were banned from the
airwaves just a dozen years ago – are now presented as rational
compared to them. What dominates is the image of the suicide bomber
as a crazed Islamic fanatic.
But there is nothing specifically Islamist about the methods of
the suicide bomb. The leading practitioners of suicide attacks as a
weapon do not come from the Middle East, nor are they Muslims. They
are the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka, whose ideology is not religious
but ‘Marxist-Leninist’ [50] (though their cultural background is
Hindu), and whose aim is the secular goal of national liberation.
Robert Pape, who has closely analysed suicide attacks between 1980
and 2003, reckons they are responsible for the biggest single group
of attacks – some 76 out of a total of 315. This is more than the
number committed by the Palestinian group Hamas. [51] And not all
suicide bombers from ‘Islamic’ groups are Muslims. Hezbollah,
which emerged in Lebanon in the 1980s, was the first modern movement
to use the method (they forced US troops to withdraw after 241
Marines were killed in a single attack). Of the 41 suicide terrorists
involved in attacks between 1982 and 1986, only three were Islamic
fundamentalists. The rest were overwhelmingly Communists or
socialists – and three were Christians! [52]
Suicide bombing campaigns may be couched in Islamic terms. That
does not mean that religious fundamentalism explains their goals.
Pape concludes from the data of his survey:
There is not the close connection between suicide
terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism that many people think. Rather,
what all suicide terrorist campaigns have in common is a specific
secular and strategic goal – to compel democracies to withdraw
forces from the terrorists’ national homeland. Religion is rarely
the root cause, although it is often used as a tool by terrorist
organisations in recruiting and in other efforts in service of the
broader strategic objective. [53]
This assessment is backed by an analysis of Al Qaida from another
source. The organisation is usually taken as the epitome of Islamic
fundamentalism – the group most bent on declaring a religious war
on the West, against modernity and secularism. But the question that
Stephen Holmes rightly raises is whether religious belief causes an
action (such as the bombing of the twin towers) or whether the action
may be motivated by another cause but be expressed in religious form:
Does Osama Bin Laden want to eject the United States from
Saudi Arabia because its troops were desecrating sacred soil, or is
he aggrieved, like any anti-colonialist or nationalist insurgent,
that the United States is plundering his country’s national
resources? Does Ayman al-Zawahiri, the physician who founded Egyptian
Islamic Jihad and who is usually considered Bin Laden’s closest
associate, want to overthrow Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak because
the latter is an apostate or because he is a tyrant? [54]
Difficult though it may be to disentangle the religious from the
non-religious, Holmes’s conclusion about the nature of Al Qaida’s
‘war’ on the US is substantially the same at Pape’s:
The vast majority of Bin Laden’s public statements
provide secular, not religious, rationales for 9/11. The principal
purpose of the attack was to punish the ‘unjust and tyrannical
America’. The casus belli he invokes over and over again is
injustice not impiety. True, he occasionally remarks that the United
States has declared war on god, but such statements would carry
little conviction if not seconded by claims that the United States is
tyrannising and exploiting Muslim people ... Bin Laden almost never
justifies terrorism against the West as a means for subordinating
Western unbelievers to the true faith. Instead, he almost always
justifies terrorism against the West as a form of legitimate
self-defence. [55]
In other words, the goal of Al Qaida is no different from other
national liberation movements – to achieve independence by forcing
the imperialist power to retreat. It may express itself in religious
terms, but in essence it pursues the same aim as previous
secular-nationalist movements in the Middle East – the defeat of US
imperialism and its allies in the region. [56]
It is a mistake to think of the strategy of suicide bombing as
betraying an irrationalism that derives from Islamic fundamentalism.
There is a rationale for the adoption of this strategy that stems
from the problem of defeating an enemy in conditions of extreme
inequality of resources. The oppressor possesses a military might
unimaginably greater than anything the oppressed have at their
disposal. The oppressed cannot hope to inflict on the enemy the kind
of material damage that will force the oppressor to back off. All
they can hope to do is inflict psychological damage that comes from
showing that the oppressed will stop at nothing – not even
self-sacrifice – to terrorise the oppressor country. As Pape puts
it, ‘Suicide terrorism attempts to inflict pain on the opposing
society ... and so induce the government to concede, or the
population to revolt against the government’. [57]
This is a ‘strategy for weak actors’ who lack the ‘normal’
military means for fighting. Suicide bombing may be a dirty, inhumane
way of fighting (because it targets civilians). However, it derives
from not being able to compete with the violence that the oppressor
can dish out supposedly ‘cleanly’ (through high-tech operations)
but which is much more extensive and devastating than anything a
suicide bomber can inflict. The hope, too, is that the preparedness
to use one’s body as a self-sacrificial killing machine will
inspire the oppressed to give their support to the struggle.
It is a mistake to think that suicide bombers are psychologically
driven by Islamic fanaticism. Rather, what motivates them to action
is rage at material conditions of oppression and exploitation –
which is then expressed by commitment to a religious outlook and way
of behaving. Bombers are not some alien ‘other’ – they are just
like us, or rather just like anyone else who is moved to anger by
inequality, poverty and injustice. This is what we know of the
background of one of the 9/11 hijackers, Mohammed Atta:
The grievances he loudly and frequently articulated
against the United States and the Muslim autocracies that the United
States supports were almost entirely secular. Most of those who knew
him before 1996 stress not Atta’s religious piety ... but his
implacable fury at the plight of the poor and the indifference of the
rich ... He was bitterly angry at the visible juxtaposition, in
Cairo, of extravagant and frivolous luxury with mass squalor and
hopelessness. Egypt’s elite, in particular, was hypocritical, he
believed. They showed a ‘democratic face’ to the West, while
displaying complete indifference to the misery of ordinary people at
home. They had sold their country to the West for trinkets. [58]
Just as Henry, the French bomber of the café at the Gare St
Lazare more than a century ago, saw bourgeois women and children as
‘guilty’ by association, so there are people suffering from
imperialism across the world (and not just Muslims) who see the
ordinary inhabitants of the oppressor nation as equally ‘guilty’
by association with what ‘their’ nation is doing. This is a
terrible inversion of the argument that says that because Bush and
Blair were elected their actions in unleashing war are legitimate.
The terrorist logic is that the population cannot be ‘innocent’
because they voted for Bush and Blair.
This is the politics of despair. It is also the consequence of
seeing the fight against injustice in non-class terms. It is the same
logic that led sections of Irish Nationalists to see ordinary British
people as part of the problem. David O’Connell, one of the
militaristic leaders of the Republicans in the mid-1970s (before they
were displaced by Gerry Adams and Martin McGuiness), argued after the
Birmingham bombings:
For five years, the British government has been waging a
campaign of terror ... against the people of Ireland. What have we
got from the British public? Total indifference. The British
government and the British public must realise that they will suffer
the consequences. [59]
Apart from the lack of religious language, it is exactly the same
argument that those who back Al Qaida resort to today. Socialist
Worker’s comment at the time still applies:
This conclusion must be opposed by every socialist. It
equates the rulers ... with the people. Our whole argument rests upon
the fact that society is divided into classes with opposed interests. [60]
Just as applicable is this analysis of the politics of an
organisation that embraces such a logic:
It is not, as the press and right wing politicians
pretend, made up of bloodthirsty maniacs – after all, it is the
right wing press and politicians who have always supported the
bombing by British armed forces of innocent civilians anywhere in the
world ... The real point ... is that its leaders see the real
division in the world as that between nations, not between classes
... like middle class politicians everywhere. [61]
It is just such a logic that thinks only a tiny group of dedicated
fighters can avenge the wrongs in society, that the mass of people is
either corrupt or incapable of stirring into action – unless
‘exemplary’ action is taken by these dedicated fighters. And
because this is the politics of despair, the greater the impotence of
those caught in this spiral, the bigger the dream of destruction –
the better to make an impact.
Suicide bombings are not some barbaric throwback to pre-modernity.
They are a horribly distorted response to the very real horrors of
imperialism and capitalism. The scale and reach of some present-day
attacks is greater than any terrorist organisation has been able to
carry out in the past. But the devastation and death toll are is
still on a massively smaller scale than that routinely inflicted by
the armed forces of ‘civilised’ states.
Never has a point made by Trotsky been more relevant. In
criticising terrorist acts, he wrote, it was important not to side
with ‘those bought and paid for moralists’ (Tony Blair and Jack
Straw spring to mind) who ‘make solemn declarations about the
“absolute value” of human life’. [62]
The Marxist tradition has never approved of terrorism as a method
of social change, and sees it as a counterproductive strategy. But we
cannot join in the condemnations that pour from the lips of
politicians and from the media – despite enormous pressure to do
so. We cannot begin to shape our critique of terrorism meaningfully
unless we start with the horrors of imperialist violence and the
Islamophobic racism directed at Muslims. We shall not be able to
intervene in the movement to explain why young Muslims resort to such
terrible tactics. Nor will be able to offer an alternative that can
offer hope to those whose despair pushes them into the dead end of
terrorism.

Notes
1. This idea of terror should not be confused with ‘the
mobilisation of force to intimidate the counter-revolution’ (H.
Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution: The ‘Dictatorship of
the Proletariat’, vol. 3 (New York 1986), p. 366), as
practised by the Jacobins in the Great French Revolution and then,
rather differently, by the Bolshevik government during the civil war,
nor with the counter-revolutionary terror used by Stalin against the
mass of the population in the 1930s.
2. See his later letter to Kugelman in K. Marx and F. Engels,
Ireland and the Irish Question (Moscow 1971), pp. . 378–379.
3. As above, p. 144.
4. As above, p. 145.
5. As above, p. 146.
6. As above, p. 150.
7. As above.
8. As above, pp. 146–147.
9. Engels noted in 1882 that apart from putting pressure on the
Liberals to act more decisively, the Fenians ‘cannot do anything
but scare John Bull. Though he grows noticeably weaker on the
outskirts of his Empire, he can still easily suppress any Irish
rebellion so close to home’ (Marx and Engels, as above, p. 435).
10. And anarchism may have been the influence on the group called
‘The Invincibles’ (to which former Fenians belonged) who carried
out the Phoenix Park murders (in Dublin) of two government appointees
in 1882 – or so Engels thought (see K. Marx and F. Engels, as
above, p. 436).
11. Far from being a sign of strength, this was a desperate
attempt to regain the initiative in the face of an infinitely
stronger opponent.
12. Similarly, few working class people shed a tear when the
Provisional IRA tried to blow up Margaret Thatcher and her government
in 1984. Indeed, quite a few Socialist Worker readers
regretted that the Provos had been unsuccessful – for all our
carefully phrased arguments about the limitation of such action.
13. Quoted in B. Nicolaesky and O. Maenchen-Helfen, Karl Marx:
Man and Fighter (Harmondsworth 1976), p. 398.
14. K. Marx and F. Engels, Collected Works, vol. 24
(Moscow 1989), p. 50. The quotation comes from the end of
Engels’ critique of Russian refugee literature, published between
1874 and 1875 in the German socialist press. Though the crisis was to
mature much more slowly than Engels had hoped, he was undoubtedly
right to see that the apparently stable bulwark of European reaction
was crumbling, thus opening a new chapter in European history.
15. Marx and Engels did not hold a deterministic view that Russia
was bound to become capitalist (a view that invited a passive waiting
on events). ‘If anything’, Engels argued, ‘can still save
Russian communal ownership and give it a chance of growing into a
new, really viable form – it is the proletarian revolution in
Western Europe’ (Marx and Engels, as above, p. 48). This point
was repeated in the 1881 preface to the second Russian edition of The
Communist Manifesto – the peasant obshchina might
survive if a Russian Revolution became ‘the signal for a
proletarian revolution in the West’ (Marx and Engels, as above,
p. 426).
16. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 4 (Moscow 1960),
p. 181. (Lenin is quoting from the manifesto of the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party, published the year before, in the
context of a polemic against tendencies that wanted to confine
socialist activity to ‘economic’ agitation to improve workers’
conditions and ‘political’ support for liberal opposition to Tsarism.)
17. As above.
18. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 6 (Moscow 1961), p. 184.
19. Quoted in above, p. 188.
20. As above, p. 189.
21. As above, p. 189. Lenin is quoting from a Social
Revolutionary leaflet.
22. As above, p. 190.
23. As above, p. 191. Worth noting is Lenin’s implied
distinction between single and collective combat. As his comments on
the need for an armed uprising in 1905 indicate, ‘intelligentsia
terrorism’, separate from the mass movement, was something that had
to be opposed, but not the kind of strength exemplified in ‘the
terrorism of the great French Revolution’, which is ‘the strength
of the revolutionary movement of the people’ (V.I. Lenin, Collected
Works, vol. 8 (Moscow 1962), pp. 160–161. Equally,
Lenin considered it wrong to condemn guerrilla operations as
‘terrorist’ since they were neither acts of individual vengeance
nor did they spring from lack of faith in working class insurrection
(though, of course, mistakes were possible) (V.I. Lenin, Collected
Works, vol. 10 (Moscow 1962), pp. 117–118). The
point, here, is that Lenin’s condemnation of individual terrorism
was never a condemnation of revolutionary violence.
24. As above, p. 190.
25. The essence of Lenin’s critique of ‘economism’ in Russian Social Democracy was that in constraining socialist activity
to ‘economic’ questions, on the one hand, and ‘political’
support for liberal-bourgeois demands, on the other, ‘economism’
was a variant, in the peculiar conditions of Russian society where
democratic institutions barely existed, of the revisionist/reformist
adaptation to parliamentarianism that had become a strong feature of
socialist parties in Western Europe. See A Retrograde Step in Russian Social-Democracy, in V.I. Lenin, Collected Works,
vol. 4 (Moscow 1961), in particular pp. 278–279; and the
section What Is There in Common Between Economism and Terrorism?,
in What Is To Be Done? in V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 5 (Moscow 1961), pp. 417–421.
26. Victor Serge left a vivid but critical impression of this kind
of milieu (which he knew intimately as a result of his involvement
with the notorious anarchist Bonnot gang on the eve of the First
World War). What he encountered was ‘exacting idealism, in the
breasts of uncomplicated men whose energy could find no outlet in
achieving a higher dignity or sensibility, because any such outlet
was physically denied to them. Conscious of their frustration, they
battled like madmen and were beaten down. In those times the world
was an integrated structure, so stable in appearance that no
possibility of substantial change was visible within it. As it
progressed up and up, and on and on, masses of people who lay in its
path were all the while being crushed. The harsh condition of the
workers improved only very slowly, and for the vast majority of the
proletariat there was no way out. The declassed elements on the
proletarian fringe found all roads barred to them except those which
led to squalor and degradation. Above the heads of these masses,
wealth accumulated, insolent and proud. The consequences of this
situation arose inexorably: crime, class struggles and their trail of
bloody strikes, and frenzied battles of One against All. These
struggles also testified to the failure of an ideology’ (V. Serge,
Memoirs of a Revolutionary (Oxford 1967), p. 42).
27. Joll, as above, p. 113. [Note by ETOL: There is no
earlier reference to a book by Joll, but we assume that the following
is the book referred to: J. Joll, The Anarchists (Cambridge MA 1964).]
28. As above, pp. 113–114.
29. Joll says the crowd consisted of ‘modest Parisian
shopkeepers, clerks and even workers’ (p. 118). The question
of the social composition of the crowd may seem irrelevant, but it is
possible that, just as in a terrorist attack on a music hall in Lyons
in 1882, Henry saw the cafe as an institution representative of
‘false, bourgeois values’ (Joll, as above, p. 112) – which
may explain the motivation he provided at the trial (see the
quotation below).
30. Both Kedward, as above, pp. 41–42, and Joll, as above, pp. 117–119, provide detailed accounts. According to Kedward,
p. 42, at his trial Henry was clinical and detached. He welcomed
the sentence of death and refused to apply for a reprieve. This calm
readiness for death anticipates the acceptance of self-extinction
that characterises today’s suicide bombers. [Note by ETOL:
There is no earlier reference to a book by Kedward, but we assume
that the following is the book referred to: H.R. Kedward, The
Anarchists: The Men Who Shocked an Era (London 1971).]/p>

31. Quoted in Joll, as above, p. 118
32. Quoted in Joll, as above, p. 119.
33. Woodcock, as above.
34. Particularly in bohemian milieux. One anarchist writer,
himself a victim of a bomb explosion in a restaurant, said, ‘What
does humanity matter, provided the act is beautiful? (‘Qu’importe
les vagues humanités, pourvu que le geste soit beau?’), quoted
in Joll, as above, p. 152. The poet Stéphane Mallarmé, famed
for his rarefied aestheticism, would not discuss ‘the acts of these
saints’ when pressed for his reactions to terrorism (Joll, as
above, p. 150). The Anglo-Polish writer Joseph Conrad drew a
much less sympathetic portrait of anarchists and terrorism in his
1907 novel The Secret Agent, which was based on an attempt to blow up Greenwich Observatory.
35. He was right. The first victim of these laws was a Breton socialist.
36. F. Engels, P. Lafargue and L. Lafargue, Correspondence,
vol. 3 (1891–1895) (Moscow n.d. [1963]), pp. 337–338.
37. Quoted in H. Goldberg, The Life of Jean Jaurès
(Madison 1962), p. 120.
38. He wrote in La petite République in early 1894 that
Vaillant was not inherently evil – he was victim of society, moved
by hatred of life to die for something meaningful. Along with other
socialists he signed an appeal for clemency, which Sadi Carnot
refused to grant. See Goldberg, as above, p. 121.
39. The equivalent then of today’s move to criminalise ‘the glorification of terrorism’ and to abolish habeas corpus for
‘terrorist offences’.
40. H Goldberg, as above, pp. 126-127. So shaken was the
ministry that it survived a vote of censure by only one vote.
41. These can be found, printed in reverse order, together with
comments by Trotsky on Stalinist smears against the Left Opposition
in the 1930s and on the assassination of a Nazi official in Paris in
1938, in L. Trotsky, Against Individual Terrorism (New York
1974). The articles can also be found on the internet. [Note by ETOL: The Bankruptcy of Individual Terrorism (1909), Why Marxists Oppose Individual Terrorism and For Grynszpan: Against Fascist Pogrom Gangs and Stalinist Scoundrels.]
42. L. Trotsky, as above, p. 11. The italics are Trotsky’s.
43. As above, p. 13.
44. As above, p. 5.
45. As above, p. 7 (the italics are Trotsky’s).
46. As above.
47. Reproduced in the conclusion to D. Hallas and J. Higgins,
Marxism and Terrorism (March 1972), available at www.marxists.org.
48. See above.
49. Socialist Worker, 30 November 1974.
50. Which, of course, we should understand as Stalinist in
derivation.
51. R. Pape, Dying to Win (New York 2005), p. 4. Pape
is not sympathetic to his subject – which makes his analysis all
the more convincing. His rejection of the myths surrounding ‘Islamic
terrorism’ is because he sees them, and their use in Bush’s war
on terror and occupation of Iraq, as counterproductive to the
interests of ‘democracy’ – i.e. US imperialism (which he supports).
52. As above, pp. 129–130.
53. As above, p. 38. For ‘democracies’ we must, of
course, read ‘imperialist powers’.
54. Stephen Holmes, Al-Qaeda, September 11, 2001, in D.
Gambetta (ed.), Making Sense of Suicide Missions
(Oxford 2005), p. 133.
55. As above, p. 164, 165.
56. It is beyond the scope of this article to discuss why Islamist
organisations should have replaced national-secular ones. For an
analysis of Islamism, class and revolution see C. Harman, The Prophet and the Proletariat (London 1999), reprinted from an
article of the same name in International Socialism 2 : 64
(Autumn 1994).
57. As above, pp. 27–28.
58. Holmes, as above, p. 139.
59. Quoted in Socialist Worker, 30 November, 1974.
60. Socialist Worker, 30 November 1974.
61. As above.
62. Holmes, as above, p. 8.
 






Blaming the poor for their problems is the message behind the ideas of ‘communitarianism’. Gareth Jenkins shows that these arguments are nothing new.



The Tories ideological offensive which blames the poor for their own misfortune has striking parallels with the early 19th century, when attempts were made to disband the old, paternalistic Poor Law system. The leaders of society were determined to replace it with a system that reflected the priorities of the market.
They drew on the theories of the Reverend Robert Malthus who argued there was a tendency for the population to outstrip food resources. The only solution Malthus offered the poor was that through thrift and prudence, by saving money and avoiding having children, they might be able to make their lives tolerable.
He wanted the poor to be taught ‘to depend more upon themselves’. Self reliance would be better than receiving any handouts, no matter if you starved in the process. The logic of this was abolition of all public relief.
The job of carrying through the new Poor Law, which parliament passed in 1834, fell to Edwin Chadwick. Under the old Poor Law, the main expense had been outdoor relief, mainly supplementing low wages – what we might call benefits. In Chadwick’s view this failed to persuade the poor to look for work.
As his report to parliament put it:
‘The labourer feels that the existing system [the old Poor Law], though it generally gives him low wages, always gives him easy work. He need not bestir himself to seek work; he need not study to please his master; he need not ask relief as a favour.’
Now the poor were forced to enter the workhouse. The family was broken up. Men lived separately from women – to stop them breeding. Children were also lodged separately – to stop them being influenced by their parents. Everyone was forced to do some kind of work and the food was limited and bad.
Dickens may have exaggerated workhouse conditions in Oliver Twist, but only just. They were run as prisons. Poverty was like crime and it carried the stigma that the poor had themselves to blame.
The ‘deserving poor’, were always viewed suspiciously to see whether they truly deserved any handouts. They were distinguished from the ‘undeserving poor’, those who were improvident, lazy, vicious and sexually careless. Today’s equivalent of the ‘undeserving poor’, as far as the Tories are concerned, are those who live on the dole when they should be jobseeking; who make noisy disturbances on council estates; who are single mothers or travellers.
Frederick Engels scathingly paraphrased the attitude of the Poor Law Commissioners:
‘We grant you poor a right to exist, but only to exist; the right to multiply you have not, nor the right to exist as befits human beings. You are a pest, and if we cannot get rid of you as we do other pests, you shall feel, at least, that you are a pest, and you shall at least be held in check, kept from bringing into the world other “surplus”, either directly or through inducing in others laziness and want of employment. Live you shall, but live as an awful warning to all those who might have inducements to become “superfluous”.’
The ‘pests’, however, did not take this lying down. There were protests, demonstrations and riots. Indeed the great Chartists’ demonstrations which swept Britain were fuelled by hatred of the Poor Law.
It was not until the advent of the welfare state under the 1945 Labour government that people were no longer punished for not being able to make ends meet.
Now the Tories want a return to something like the system of minimal relief and ‘cringing or whining’ on the part of those who dare apply for benefit. Once again, poverty is being scapegoated and the victims are being blamed for their own misfortunes. Shamefully, too, the Blair Labour leadership has not the guts to fight these attacks.
 



The mood of fightback in France has put the country’s Tory prime minister under pressure in this month’s presidential elections. Lee Humber and Gareth Jenkins talked to French workers and socialists about the anger from below
The changing fortunes of France’s three presidential candidates – the two Gaullists Edouard Balladur and Jacques Chirac, and the Socialist Party’s Lionel Jospin – lift the curtain on the period of intense social and political instability that France is currently undergoing.
As European integration continues apace and monetary union draws nearer, the French state is desperately trying to reorganise French capitalism in order to help its capitalists compete more effectively against their European and non-European rivals. Prime minister Edouard Balladur and his right wing Gaullist government have been seeking to cut the cost of labour for French bosses by attacking wages and workers’ living standards. Over 30,000 workers have already lost all rights to unemployment benefit as a result of measures brought in since 1992.
However, as in Britain, the ruling class is split over how best to achieve this reorganisation. Running against Balladur is another Gaullist candidate, the current mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac. Although he is presenting a largely very similar programme of cuts to Balladur the ructions between the two candidates have increased the instability at the top, causing a recent Financial Times editorial to comment that the presidential campaign could ‘tear the government apart’.
Scandals and allegations of top level corporate corruption are rife and French banks are up in arms over a government plan to bail out the state owned Crédit Lyonnais bank after it reported huge financial losses.
At the same time, attacks on workers have set off a series of strikes and protests over recent months. With unemployment standing at 3.31 million overall, and with one in five people between 18 and 25 years of age jobless, tensions are running high. Marc Blondel, general secretary of the Force Ouvrière union told a rally of 30,000 people in January that changing the welfare system could merit a general strike.
The mood of fightback has dragged the political terrain of the presidential elections to the left, forcing candidates to respond. Chirac now argues that ‘our society is fractured – we must ensure equality of opportunity.’ Amazingly he has also spoken out in support of squatters, who have achieved high levels of organisation in response to the chronic shortage of affordable housing, especially in Paris.
Jospin has offered the most left wing of the mainstream candidates’ programmes, stressing the need for government intervention to combat unemployment. He has also said, however, that he intends to keep the sweeping anti-immigration measures brought in by the arch right winger and interior minister Charles Pasqua, in a clear move to pander to the racist vote. Balladur, meanwhile, now talks of the need to ‘push society towards reform’ and has made a number of vague proposals to help French workers including a grant of 60,000 francs (£7,340) to help young couples buy apartments. But all candidates are hesitant, terrified of going too far and setting off large scale protest.
The Financial Times has argued that, in this climate ‘it is not surprising that France has a leader like Mr Balladur, who conducts reforms as if he were walking on eggs. Mr Balladur was at Georges Pompidou’s side in May 1968 and does not want another “omelette”.’
Socialist Review went to France to talk to workers about their fightback. We began to discover some of the reasons for the presidential candidates’ fear.
Jocelyn works on the Paris Metro. He explains why underground workers are angry. ‘They’re decentralising the network, which means there’s competition inside the transport system.' He explained how on his line management are cutting back by redefining jobs. Drivers are being asked to take on extra work such as checking tunnels. They aren’t trained for this. Hervé, who works on another line, says that someone was nearly electrocuted as a result. The bosses want ‘flexibility’ so that the total number of jobs can be reduced.
There is plenty of resistance. ‘The rank and file want to have a go,’ says Jocelyn. His line is contacting other lines to see what can be done. ‘We want our elected reps to push the CGT [the main union] into calling action.’
Hervé explains:
‘Two years ago we had a week’s strike against job re-evaluation. Management froze the project. The problem was, we got divided – the independent union produced a leaflet saying we had won but my line wanted to continue the action despite an overall vote to end it. The following March management came back with the project and it went through because two unions accepted it.’
Both Jocelyn and Hervé stress that strikes are still defensive, but things are changing. The key is pulling the militants together across the different lines. Jocelyn has ten workmates who buy the socialist paper Socialisme International each month.
Three strikers at a fruit and vegetable packing company at Les Ulis, south of Paris, told how worsening conditions led to a strike which built the union.
ED le Maraîcher is only a small firm of 22 employees but it supplies some of the largest supermarket chains. One of the strike leaders, CGT member Bofambu Sengele, talked of the appalling situation: fruit left to rot for weeks on end, dangerous conditions, no warm clothes, a canteen without water and means of heating food, disgusting toilet and washing facilities.
Then a new manager changed the work schedule. In front of the all immigrant workforce, he said he was here to ‘get rid of the black spots’. ‘We were asked to do 50 percent more work for no extra payment. It was inhuman. Four people were sacked. They increased the work rate and said that only if we managed to make no mistakes would we get paid in full.’
A two week strike was followed by the premises being occupied. The publicity scared the management into partially backing down.
Not far from Les Ulis is a large secondary school where teachers and students have been involved in strike action. Cuts in jobs and a 19 percent increase in hours led to three separate days of strike by teachers. ‘A worsening of conditions went with a worry about the future of the students’, said teacher Dominic Durin. ‘The first day of action back in December was initiated by the teachers.’
On the second day of strike action the students took the initiative. Stéphane, a student leader at the school, takes up the story:
‘We called a general meeting which elected representatives. Three went to see the rector. The other three were the crisis committee, which organised banners and distributing leaflets round the school. We wanted to organise our own union. We wanted a rep on the school administrative council, a room and postal and telephone facilities.’
This second day of strike action was a big success. It was also one which drew in other schools in the district. The preparation for the big national strike on 7 February involved loads of delegation work. ‘Students knew other schools and spread the word around.’ Around 30 from his school turned up at the station to go to demonstrate in Paris as part of the national teachers’ strike, when 100,000 came out onto the streets, throughout France.
Chausson, where Renault and Peugeot make vans, has two factories: at Creil, north of Paris, and Gennevilliers, in the Paris suburbs. Eddie works at Gennevilliers and describes what happened on the day of action over jobs at Creil, when 2,200 Chausson workers came out on strike on 2 February. ‘The whole area stopped out of solidarity. We blocked the station and the motorway to Lille. We also liberated the motorway tollbooths so that people didn’t have to pay.’
The workers occupied the headquarters of the National Employment Agency last month.
‘We forced the doors with crowbars and sat in in the offices. The director was forced to phone the industry minister, who sent a fax to the union secretary promising talks. We refused because the minister hadn’t said what the talks would be over. So a second fax came back.’
The general experience of socialists in France is that, given the anger, they have also made a real difference. The anti-fascist struggle shows what can be done.
Dard, an active socialist, says ‘In February 300 students demonstrated against the hardline fascist group, the GUD, who use the law faculty at Assas in the south of Paris as a base for physical attacks.’
Much more dramatically, the activity which followed the murder of Ibrahim Ali, the young black killed by fascists in Marseilles, led to a demonstration of 20,000 in Marseilles.
‘In Lyons Socialisme International intervened in a 600 strong “gathering”, transforming the mood to build for a demonstration, when 2,000 people turned up – a lot of young schoolkids from the local area, very angry.’
Dard sees more opportunities opening up generally.
‘People detest Balladur. Chirac can only appear different because there’s nothing on the left. Jospin, the Socialist Party candidate, is not even like Blair. The Communist Party may appear more radical, with its talk of the need to increase wages. But it’s tied to electoralism and appealing to small business.
‘There’s no big movement. But the strikes in the post – small, isolated, but becoming more frequent, and the housing campaign – are symptoms. People want to do something. They are turning to us because we want to do things. These are the opportunities we need to take.’


First class post
Jean-Pierre is a Paris post worker.
‘My office was very active in the 1980s. People could easily be mobilised to fight against restructuring and job losses. But each time it was defeat, defeat, defeat. People got demoralised and the union leadership became more passive. There’s been a change in attitude in the last year. There’s been a 90 percent turnout in strikes.
‘They’re responding to management pressure to get more work out of us.
‘This is all part of the drive towards privatisation. Each time there’s an attack people fight back. There are bitter strikes of two to three days, even a week. But we’re only delaying things or saving 10 to 20 jobs out of every 50 job losses.
‘People are angry and fighting. And when they take strike action, they say, “How about that! Everyone’s here!” They’re surprised by the solidarity.
‘They’re wary of what the unions do, of the pally relationship between the unions and the bosses. The CGT is the most radical in appearance but says there’s always a way of sorting things out. They don’t talk about strikes but about days of action.
‘There’s a terrible lack of contact between the offices. A cross Paris strike would have a fantastic impact because the system’s so centralised – everything goes through Paris.
‘People say it’s going to explode, that what we want is a good revolution. Every week people refer to the events of May 1968. They want a big one.
‘When people are working all kinds of racist things get said. When they fight things are different. So it’s easy to show that immigrants don’t have more “rights” than French people, that if they had real rights it would help all of us, that if their lives improve so will ours. It’s easy to convince people about the need for equality in the job market. It would mean bosses wouldn’t be able to exploit us, that we could force them to give in.’


Our house
There are between 400,000 and 620,000 homeless in France.
This has sparked off a massive protest called the Droit au Logement (DAL), the right to a home. François is a member.
‘There’s a law dating from 1945 saying that where there is a serious housing crisis buildings must be requisitioned to house the homeless.
‘There’s been pressure to get the authorities and the government to requisition buildings. There have been demonstrations, which have been attacked.
‘So people have been taking over empty buildings themselves. A building society left a building in the Rue du Dragon empty for three years, speculating to force up rents. We decided to take the empty building over.
‘When we occupy these places, roughly 50 of us turn up with the families who are to be rehoused. People come with brooms, hammers, beds, wardrobes and kitchen utensils, to get the place ready, then the families who’ve been waiting move in.’
The DAL has gained support from prominent scientists and singers. There are even two priests who have been central to the activity, the 84 year old Abbé Pierre and the Bishop of Evreux, who was kicked out by the Vatican for his radicalism.
The movement has spread across France. It is not just about the right to housing, but also about the right of immigrants to be treated decently, and about people with AIDS not being thrown onto the streets.


Coming to the boil
The current political climate in France, with high levels of protest and strike action, has been building over the last two years. Back in the early 1990s Edouard Balladur announced an austerity package to combat the effects of the recession then sweeping across Europe. The package included amongst other things tax cuts for the bosses, privatisation of up to 21 state industries, job cuts along with price hikes for petrol, bus and train fares and other consumer goods. Workers were also going to have to pay higher contributions for sickness and unemployment benefits and pensions. Conditions and terms of employment were set to change. The workers’ struggle that exploded in 1993 put the brakes on many of these measures.
From August 1993 onwards a whole series of demonstrations and strikes took place: in factories threatened with closure, among bank workers and Metro workers in Paris and in the four month long strike by postal workers in Toulouse.
France’s three main union federations were forced into action. The Communist led CGT, the right wing Force Ouvrière and the Socialist Party dominated CFDT were all active in organising demonstrations against the austerity measures through from September to November that year. One jointly called demonstration pulled up to 100,000 onto the streets in Paris.
The most remarkable dispute during this first phase of workers’ recovery was at Air France in October. Workers there occupied runways and departure lounges, built barricades of burning tyres and successfully fought off the thuggish riot police, after having been threatened with 4,000 redundancies, on top of 5,000 job cuts made earlier. The strike started amongst freight workers and quickly spread to maintenance workers. Pilots, air hostesses and white collar workers joined in the dispute with levels of solidarity not seen for many years. The mass meetings of between 800 and 1,000 which characterised the strike gave rank and file workers the confidence to reject their union leaders’ advice to go back to work, and to win a full withdrawal of all the proposed job cuts.
In March and April 1994 anger spilled over again with huge demonstrations all over France, especially in Paris. The main focus of the protests was government attempts to cut the minimum wage rate for young workers by 20 percent in an effort to provide a cheaper young labour force for French bosses. All of the main union federations called demonstrations. One was over 400,000 strong with students and workers from all over France converging on the capital.
Other demonstrations also occurred, often turning into rioting. A demonstration in Garges-les-Gonesse over a racist murder saw police beaten back, cars overturned and set alight and shop windows smashed. Opinion polls carried out at the time revealed that 69 percent of people thought a serious social crisis was imminent. Over 57 percent said they would be prepared to join in a general movement of opposition to the government if one developed.
In recent weeks, car workers at Renault have struck over pay, joining a growing number of other workers fighting for higher wages, including a virtual general strike in Corsica on pay.
Workers on the railways and on the Paris metro and buses were planning a strike at the end of March. Miners are also talking about taking action. The power to beat government attempts to channel discontent in a racist direction lies in this new phase of workers’ struggle.
The anger that has been simmering over the past two years may well be coming to the boil. If it does so, whoever becomes president will find themselves under even greater pressure, as they discover that the militancy of recent years has not just been a flash in the pan.
 



Al Richardson (ed.)
Victor Serge, Collected Writings on Literature and Revolution
Francis Boutle, 2004, £12.99
[Marxism], we are told, dismisses culture, together with other
superstructural activities, like law and religion, as marginal to the
interests of the oppressed and the exploited. This crudely
deterministic account has bolstered the opposing view that culture
has no class determination, that it should be viewed as something
free-floating, with its own value system and subject only to its
internal laws of development.
It is, therefore, important to recover a quite different tradition
within Marxism, one that neither succumbs to a reductionist,
deterministic understanding of culture nor abandons culture to the
enemy. Foremost in that tradition is, of course, Trotsky, whose
Literature and Revolution of 1924 analysed not only cultural and literary developments of the post-revolutionary period but
provided a magnificent vision of an emancipated humanity developing a
truly human culture. The recent publication in English of Alexander
Voronsky’s writings (Art as the Cognition of Life) has
revealed how other Russian Marxists of the period developed that tradition.
Now we have an important collection of Victor Serge’s writings,
translated from French for the first time. Serge, who was active as
an anarchist in France and Spain before joining the Bolsheviks in
Russia and working for the Communist International in its early
years, intended these writings for a French audience. They cover much
the same ground as Trotsky but in the context of ‘advanced’
Western capitalism.
Serge’s starting point is the fate of intellectuals and culture
in the modern world. For Serge, the First World War killed off the
idea that intellectuals, including literary intellectuals, remained
the guardians of a human heritage that transcended national
boundaries. [1] Most gave cover to their own side – by justifying
the use of poison gas, by justifying censorship, and by stereotyping
the enemy and its culture. Socialist intellectuals were not exempt
from this corruption: they led the Second International in its
betrayal of the working class movement and many were quick to
denounce the Russian Revolution.
Serge sees this history of intellectual abdication as proof that
there can be no such thing as ‘disembodied thought’. The
cultivation of ideas does not transcend the division between those
who labour and those who live off labour. Culture, in this broad
sense, ‘is only accessible to those who have the leisure, the
requisite education and the knowledge that can be acquired at
monetary expense, by those who, in one way or another, benefit from
the exploitation of crowds condemned to ignorance and
thoughtlessness’ (p. 35).
Serge is not ignoring intellectuals who revolted in the name of
pacifism, or freedom of opinion. He is, rather, saying that even the
bravest of ‘oppositional ideologies produced by the culture of the
controlling classes’ cannot avoid the reality that ‘all thinking
– apart from that of the proletariat – serves, whatever its
twists, to justify and perpetuate the domination of capital over
labour’ (p. 36).
Intellectuals have to recognise, therefore, that it is not their
words, but the working class through the forcefulness of its action,
which will end the threat of war and change the world. This
recognition, Serge sees, is enormously difficult for them,
temperamentally attached as they are to the ‘very forms of their
thought’, ‘their love for a culture of which they are the
privileged captives’ and ‘their material and moral position
within the capitalist system’ (p. 36).
How is proletarian thinking developed? Serge was deeply
sympathetic to the infant Soviet republic’s attempt to raise the
cultural level of the working class. If the working class was to
defend itself against both its external and internal enemies it not
only needed the physical means of survival – it needed to cleanse
itself of the muck of ages. [2] Workers had therefore to have access
to culture. But what kind of culture? Clearly, culture (as Serge
showed) was always a class culture. So could a new proletarian
culture be created?
Proletarian culture, as theorised and practised in the USSR in the
early 1920s, is something Serge rejects. Quoting Trotsky more than
once, he argues that there can be no such thing because of the
fundamental difference between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in
realising their class aims. The bourgeoisie has had centuries to
create its culture. Long before the bourgeoisie seized power it had
the opportunity to encourage intellectual and creative activity that
reflected its needs. No such opportunity exists for the working class
because of the way it is exploited under capitalism. The working
class lacks property (including cultural property) – unlike the
bourgeoisie. Its only weapon is self-organisation. Its historic
mission is the dissolution of all property relations – unlike the
bourgeoisie, whose mission is to secure capitalist property
relations. The role of the working class is not to constitute itself
as a new ruling class (in the traditional sense) but to prepare for
the abolition of all classes – including itself. Its role is
transitional in that it leads to the creation not of a proletarian
society but of a truly human society, the creation not of proletarian
culture but of a truly human culture.
Serge’s objection to the theory of proletarian culture was its
ultra-radical dismissal of all past culture as non-proletarian. It
failed to recognise that workers could, and would have to, master
previous cultures to realise their historic mission. What
‘proletkultists’ were demanding was the creation of an artificial
culture, with themselves as its self-appointed guardians and their
monopoly over cultural production sanctioned by the party. Far from
this being an attempt to develop genuine self-expression among
workers it was a move towards foisting an artificial and sectarian
culture on them. ‘Consequently, as Serge pointed out, a
“proletarian literature” produced to order, with its stress on a
“correct” political line and characters drawn according to
abstract types, was a lifeless and schematic affair.’
Serge does appear to contradict himself on the question of
proletarian culture in a 1928 interview in which he states:
‘A working class that has become conscious of itself
... does have its own ways of feeling, of understanding life, of
suffering, of laughing and of fighting; it has its way of thinking
about society, the state, the laws, work and the family; it has, in a
word, its world view and its historic mission. But until now all this
has only been expressed to a limited extent for political ends in the
class struggle. One could easily imagine a literature that expresses
this proletarian feeling about life ... A proletarian literature is
possible’ (p. 53).
And he qualifies his support for Trotsky’s view with the
following reservation:
‘Like the armies of old, they will have their bards,
their storytellers, their musicians and their philosophers ... In
this historically limited sense there will be, and there already is,
a culture of the militant proletariat’ (p. 47). [3]
Serge may have thought that Trotsky’s polemic against
proletarian culture was too negative. [4] He was also familiar with a
very different tradition in France about proletarian culture, whose
concern was with how the working class develops its own intellectual
resources to resist the culture of the ruling class and which had
nothing to do with Proletkult. [5] There is a sense in which Serge
wanted to rescue this broader vision from the danger of its being
identified solely with the target of Trotsky’s polemic. [6] The
ferocity of Trotsky’s attack can be explained by the specifics of
the Russian situation, where the idea that the working class should
turn its back on ‘alien’ culture renounced the goal of a truly
human culture. Serge, with his focus on western Europe, was probably
anxious not to lose sight of how writers could be won to developing a
culture in the service of the working class (proletarian culture in
the broad sense).
Serge’s analysis of the challenges facing the modern writer
takes in an extremely wide and diverse range of novelists and poets –
from Walt Whitman to the surrealists. But the bulk of his writing is
devoted to examining the Russian writers (‘fellow travellers’, to
adopt Trotsky’s term) who came over to the revolution and whose
works sparked a renaissance of Russian literature in the 1920s
(before Stalinism snuffed it out).
Like Trotsky and Voronsky, Serge asserts that literature cannot be
valued in didactic or propagandistic terms. Speaking of the novel,
Serge says that its ‘unique value’ ‘comes from the fact that it
presents to man something other than political slogans or demands;
ways of feeling, coming alive in our deepest feelings, understanding
the other person and understanding ourselves, loving and becoming
passionate about it’. Moreover:
‘A complete attempt to subordinate creative activity,
where a number of conscious and unconscious factors come into play,
to a rigorously conscious direction would result in an awkward
impoverishment of the work and personality. Would the book gain in
clarity of ideas what it has lost in spontaneity, human complexity,
deep sincerity, and rich contradictions?’ (p. 88).
However, Serge’s openness to imaginative literature does not
imply a laissez-faire attitude. He is aware that class and ideology
are always at work within literature, even if ‘in an indirect and
distant way, apparently loose and invisible to all but the analyst’
(p. 88) and is also aware that formal techniques that
characterise a writer’s approach to his subject are linked to the
way class and ideology work on a writer’s subject matter.
Serge shows how form and class interrelate in the Russian writers
of the 1920s. They are, he points out, too young to have any roots in
the literary world of the pre-revolutionary period, while the
hardship they experienced means that they have not learnt ‘about
“life’s epic venture” out of old books’ (p. 173).
Consequently ‘present day literature shows a renewal of the
language, enriched by returning to its roots in the speech of the
masses’ (p. 174).
Discussing Boris Pilnyak, the best of these fellow travellers,
Serge says that it is impossible for him to use the style of a Balzac
or an Anatole France (both writers in the great realist tradition
that started in the 19th century):
‘The revolution that broke all the old social habits
also broke the all too conventional ones of literature. There is no
story line to be followed in this Russian writer. There is no “plot”
(a poor thing, a poor word!). There are no distinctive, central
personalities. There are crowds in movement – in which each is a
world, an end in itself – events which overturn, cross over, mix
up, overlap with each other, multiple lives that appear and
disappear, all rare, unique and central, since they are human, all of
them insignificant in “Russia, the snow storm, the revolution”,
for the one thing that remains and matters is the country, the
masses, the storm ...’ (p. 202).
To characterise Pilnyak’s fiction thus is to recognise him as in
some sense a ‘modernist’. [7] But much as he admires Pilnyak’s
ability to capture the reality of the revolution without
sentimentality, Serge pinpoints a weakness in the very ‘idea of the
revolution-storm so dear to Boris Pilnyak’:
‘Looked at from the outside by a foreign observer, the
revolution might appear to be a prodigious unleashing of elemental
forces. But if that is all it had been, it would have been limited to
a primitive jacquerie [feudal peasant rebellion] which the possessing
classes, sufficiently well organised, would in the end have been able
to get under control. It is really a matter of peasant revolution
which was well and truly created in Russia, assisted, led and
supported by the proletarian movement’ (p. 217).
This identification with the revolution only through its peasant
aspect (and so omitting its central working class component) is one
Serge sees as shared by many Russian writers of the 1920s – an
identification which gives their writing its strength but also poses
a challenge to how they might develop as writers.
Mayakovsky is a very different kind of writer. As a poet of the
city, he identifies with the urban masses, not the peasantry. But
Serge’s ‘literary’ analysis of his vivid use of language and
his tendency to rhetorical extravagance is linked to the strengths
and weaknesses of Mayakovsky’s ideological outlook. His critique is
that his weaknesses as a poet are rooted in his ‘pastism’: in the
‘mad individualism’ that characterises the capitalist society of
the past, not the communist society of the future, where a true human
individuality will flourish. So Mayakovsky’s fondness for
hyperbole, most evident in his poem One Hundred and Fifty Million,
where the colossal Russian Ivan confronts the fat colossus, Woodrow
Wilson, is the antithesis of proletarian thinking and revolutionary
realism (pp. 266–270). [8]
Serge was quite clear that literature should not toe the party
line. At the same time, however, literature was not treated as
exempt, by virtue of its artistic status, from political
intervention. Precisely because Serge took literature (and culture)
seriously as part of the struggle for the working class to advance
the interests of humanity, his literary and cultural criticism is an
attempt to lead writers towards an understanding of how they need to
absorb a new outlook on the world, that of the working class, to give
new depths to their work. His analysis, sympathetic but politically
firm, is designed to encourage them to a deeper understanding and
commitment to proletarian revolution – an understanding which will
enrich their creativity.
Serge’s vision is broader than the limits set by Soviet Russia
of the 1920s. He sees the same need for commitment and renewal in the
West. Serge’s argument, sketchy though it is, is not dissimilar
from Georg Lukács’s thesis in The Historical Novel about
the decline in bourgeois thought and culture as the rise of the
working class reduces it to apologetics. [9] But unlike Lukács,
whose model of literature is too inflexibly rooted in the past, Serge
is open, but not uncritically open, to modern literature. It is
implicit in his approach that the task of literature is to explore,
in complex and rounded ways, the nature of the world. In other words,
writers should be judged for their realism – they cannot retreat
into producing self-contained, self-referential work, as certain
versions of formalist modernism would have it.
Serge’s call is for a literature that asked the great questions
of modern life, that was interested in the future of the world, that
understood work and the workers, that in other words had discovered
the hitherto unknown nine tenths of society – which did not limit
itself to describing the world, but now and again might think about
changing it, in a word, was active and no longer passive, would
appeal to human potentialities, and would respond to every spiritual
need instead of confining itself to amusing the rich; even
independently of the intentions of its creators, a literature of this
sort would be tremendously revolutionary. Its development from then
on would be contrary to the interests of the possessing classes (p. 84).
This collection shows how revolutionaries can combine, without
crudeness, formal and political analysis in a way that both respects
literature as literature and sees it engaged with the struggle to
change the world.

Notes
1. Serge is, nevertheless, positive about this heritage when he
looks at the role played by Enlightenment intellectuals in
pre-revolutionary France.
2. In his articles from the early 1920s, on such diverse matters
as drink, swearing, correct forms of speech and how workers should
write for newspapers, published in Problems of Everyday Life
(New York 1973), Trotsky shows just how seriously the Bolsheviks
undertook this cultural task.
3. Serge wrote this for the French journal Clarté in 1925,
in the heat of the debate about proletarian literature in Russia. He
quotes these, his own words, in his later Literature and
Revolution (1932).
4. Serge hints as much when he writes of Trotsky’s Literature
after October that ‘so cruel are some words that they cut as
sharp as a lancet, and so summary are some judgements that they are
like a bludgeon’ (p. 164).
5. See, for example, M. Martinet, Culture Prolétarienne
(Paris 1935).
6. It is evident from early Soviet pronouncements that
‘proletarian culture’ was used confusingly to cover two different
definitions. It was Lenin who seems first to have demanded
clarification. See, for example, his demand in 1920 that the Central
Committee should draw up a draft resolution which promotes
proletarian culture as an educational project but rejects any idea
that this should be an attempt ‘to invent one’s own particular
brand of culture’ – V.I. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow
1966), p. 317. Note, however, that Lenin continues to use the
term positively in the first sense.
7. Serge is unlikely to have known the term. But Serge’s mention
of other aspects of Pilnyak’s style – for example, his
‘simultaneism’ and his love for ‘a phrase or catchphrase picked
up in the street and reproduced without explanation’ (p. 203)
– suggests that he was well aware of new developments in fiction in
the period. (Serge’s admiration for the modernist American writer
John Dos Passos is well known: see his Memoirs [Oxford 1967]
p. 263, which interestingly links Dos Passos to Pilnyak as well as to
Serge’s own fiction.)
8. Serge’s analysis is very close to Trotsky’s (see his
Literature and Revolution [London 1991], pp. 177–188), but both praised Mayakovsky’s tremendous talent.
9. It is clear from his Memoirs that Serge was personally
acquainted with Lukács, whom he held in ‘greatest esteem; indeed,
I owe him a great deal’ (p. 187), and who was ‘fairly well
disposed towards me’ (p. 188). This thumbnail sketch, which
also includes sharp criticism of Lukács’s complicity with
Stalinism, is maddeningly vague about what his debt to Lukács was:
could it have included insights into literature?
 



The Serge-Trotsky Papers: Correspondence and Other Writings between Victor Serge and Trotsky
Ed: David Cotterill
Pluto £14.95
Victor Serge was one of the very few revolutionaries to survive
Stalinist persecution in Russia. He survived because his fiction and
above all his account of the Bolshevik triumph in 1917, Year One
of the Russian Revolution, had caused a stir in France. A
vigorous campaign forced the Stalinist bureaucracy to release Serge
from internal exile and in early 1936 to expel him from the Soviet
Union. It was not a moment too soon. Had he remained he would
undoubtedly have perished, like thousands of others, in the great
purges which started later that year.
However, Serge’s problems were not over. In Belgium, where he
first settled, and then in France, he was treated with suspicion by
the authorities and the Stalinists continued to hound him in their
press. His wife’s mental illness made their lives a misery.
Politically, there were few outlets. The majority of left leaning
intellectuals rallied to Stalin as the defender of the Popular Front
against fascism. Criticism of the Soviet Union from a revolutionary
point of view was taboo.
There remained only Leon Trotsky as a figure of any stature, a
survivor, like Serge, from the heroic days of the revolution and like
him an opponent of Stalinism. But Serge and Trotsky did not join in
agreement and common work, despite the fact that Serge had rallied to
the Left Opposition as early as 1923 and refused to capitulate when
many others did go. They fell out over what line to take towards the
Spanish revolutionary party, the POUM; over the significance of the
Kronstadt revolt of 1921; and over the creation of the Fourth
International, a new revolutionary international organisation to
replace the Stalinist one.
This book tells the story of their disagreements and reproduces
the relevant documents – letters and extracts from articles, some
of which are published for the first time.
Who was right? David Cotterill and his fellow writers tend to
accept Serge’s point of view and on the face of it Serge’s case
was strong. The tiny groups adhering to Trotsky and the Fourth
International were marginal to the working class and seemed to spend
more time feuding with one another than directing their energies
outwards. Serge felt that their sectarianism made genuine
revolutionary work impossible. Better to operate with other left
parties with some roots in the working class. In Spain this meant
working with the POUM, a Marxist party with real influence amongst workers.
Serge came to feel that the persecution suffered by the Left
Opposition was contaminating it. Intolerance to other tendencies on
the left was replacing fraternal debate. Stalinist dogmatism was
breeding a similar dogmatism among their Trotskyist victims. An
unquestioning defence of everything that happened in revolutionary
Russia while Lenin and Trotsky were at the helm was becoming a new
orthodoxy to rival the Stalinist orthodoxy. Not even Trotsky, for
whom Serge continued to profess the greatest admiration, was, he
felt, exempt from this tendency.
Serge appears open-minded and Trotsky impervious to debate in this
reading of their differences. It is easy to find evidence to back
this up. There is, for instance, Trotsky’s furious personal attack
over the misleading summary inserted in front of Serge’s
translation of Trotsky’s Their Morals and Ours.
But Serge’s case is overall a weak one. It is clear that Serge
concentrates on matters such as Trotsky’s style of argument and
failure to acknowledge errors of fact, to avoid facing up to
Trotsky’s searching political questions. Trotsky argued that the
POUM’s policy of entering the Spanish Popular Front was disastrous
and that its failure would ruin the Spanish Revolution’s chances of victory.
And so it proved. Serge preferred being ‘unsectarian’ but
politically evasive towards the leaders of the POUM instead of
reinforcing Trotsky’s unsparing analysis. The result could only be,
for someone so closely connected with Trotsky and the Russian Left
Opposition, to sow confusion.
The same is true of Kronstadt. Either the suppression of the
mutiny was necessary to avoid counter-revolution or it was not. Again
Serge was evasive: to read his comments is to see him trying to have
the best of both worlds.
No wonder Trotsky was so exasperated. Even Serge’s assessment of
the Fourth International was unsatisfactory. He could have used his
immense talents and his experience to work to overcome its
sectarianism. Instead he frittered them on keeping in with centrist
forces, which, though larger and more working class, stood the test
of struggle less well than the Fourth International.
The book’s value is that it gives us more of Serge’s writings.
Yet its implicit claim, that Serge’s criticism of Trotsky has real
weight, is unsustainable.
 



Those who watched Dennis Potter’s last interview, given when he
was racing against death to complete his last two plays, will have
been moved by his personal courage and that he was still committed to
fighting back against what he once called ‘the occupying power’.
His weapon was writing – not for himself but for the millions
who have access to television and who are perpetually threatened by
the deadening effects of commercialisation.
The price Potter paid for writing serious but accessible
television drama was a vicious campaign waged by Mary Whitehouse and
the rest of the morality brigade. He was attacked for bringing bad
language and sex to the small screen.
This campaign frightened the BBC into banning one of his best
plays, Brimstone and Treacle, for over a decade. Nevertheless
Potter kept up a breathtaking output, with his phenomenally
successful plays, Pennies from Heaven (1978) and The
Singing Detective (1986), proving that a mass audience could be
created for complex and challenging culture.
Potter was a political writer. He was clearly on the left, but
suspicious of pat phrases and easy solutions. Perhaps this reflected
his own personal development and the political period that formed him.
He was born in 1935. His father was a coalminer in the Forest of
Dean, an area of industrial villages between Gloucester and Wales. He
gained a scholarship to Oxford University and then started work in
the BBC in the late 1950s. He also worked as a journalist and thought
about becoming a Labour MP before embarking on his career as a
television playwright.
This left him with a tangled sense of where he belonged. As a
working class grammar school boy he did not fit into the privileged
world of Oxford. He saw and criticised the society it represented
from the outside. At the same time he was for ever cut off from his background.
There was no possibility of returning to the ‘land of lost
content’ – a line he used in Blue Remembered Hills (1979),
which explored childhood with all the children played by adults. He
did not wallow in nostalgia. If he hated the narrow ruling class
interests masquerading under the high culture to which he was
educated, he did not forget that the close knit community from which
he came could be cruel and repressive. At the same time he felt
guilty at denying his family and community as the price paid for
widening his intellectual horizons. He was both victim and traitor.
This complex double role was a theme he constantly returned to in
his plays, particularly when he explored its roots in childhood
trauma. The Singing Detective, Philip Marlowe, is haunted by
it as he delves into his past and begins to realise the
responsibility he bears for his fate.
We see virtually the same images of childhood in the play Potter
wrote 20 years earlier, Stand Up, Nigel Barton. This and its
companion piece, Vote, Vote Vote for Nigel Barton, show
Nigel’s use and betrayal of his working class roots.
Potter never settled for easy explanations of complex personal and
social problems. He always went for uncomfortable topics. The most
memorable of these was the banned Brimstone and Treacle. This
featured what was becoming a central feature in Potter’s work –
the use of fantasy to explore the dreams of ‘ordinary’ people and
show what lurked beneath the appearance of respectability.
Brimstone and Treacle features a suburban couple whose
lives have been wrecked because their daughter, Pattie, has been
reduced to a drooling, slobbering wreck as the result of a car
accident. Into their lives walks Martin, who claims to have known her
before her accident and whose wholesome niceness offers relief from
the everyday burden of caring for her. But his miraculous presence
proves (literally) diabolical. He rapes the girl and she is restored
to a ‘normality’ which reflects badly on her father’s sexual morality.
The devil who walks into this couple’s life is not an outsider.
He brings out what is diabolical in the situation of suburban
respectability: the mother’s vulnerability to religious
manipulation and the father’s membership of the National Front.
Potter’s most ambitious work came after the excruciating skin
disease which paralysed him and nearly ended his writing career. In
Pennies From Heaven, The Singing Detective and Lipstick
on Your Collar he looked at the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s
respectively and perfected the technique of using popular songs as
expressions of people’s dreams.
He was neither sentimental nor dismissive about images of popular
culture. In a cheap and nasty world, the heaven people search for
cannot avoid being cheap and nasty. But their aspirations are still
compelling for all that.
Potter also wanted to show individual aspiration in a collective
context. In Pennies from Heaven this was the little man
dreaming of independence in a world where no such independence is
possible. Arthur’s ambitions to make something of his life, have
his own business and profit from the new, expanding world of song
recordings perpetually runs up against his own limitations.
In The Singing Detective there was the same attempt to mix
fantasy and reality, the personal and the social. The ‘hero’, the
aptly named Philip Marlowe, has a mixture of self loathing and
paranoid contempt for his fellow human beings. In Lipstick on Your
Collar the focus is on the Suez crisis, an episode which marked
the eclipse of British imperial power and the triumph of the US as a
world power.
His hatred of ‘the occupying power’ went with a proud love of
the country under occupation, which smuggled in a kind of nationalism
by the back door which had been kicked out the front.
It was similar to his fascination for religion’s role in
people’s lives, which came close to a kind of surreptitious
endorsement.
But these are minor difficulties. All the indications are that his
last works, Karaoke and Cold Lazarus, will confirm his
achievement as the greatest television dramatist.
 



Corruption at Westminster is widely claimed to be an aberration
by a few rotten apples. Gareth Jenkins explains
its systematic and historical basis
‘This country has an international reputation for the integrity
and honour of its public institutions,’ said John Major last month.
This was despite the resignation of two ministers accused of taking
cash in return for asking questions, and the publicity around hotel
bills at the Paris Ritz.
Parliamentary representatives should serve the interests of those
who elect them. They should neither line their pockets by abusing
their position nor act on behalf of private interests. No MP should
be in effect the MP for Harrods or for Blue Circle. And who would
disagree? Accountability is the lifeblood of any democratic process
and MPs should be as accountable as possible. The more restrictions
on MPs being able to ‘supplement’ their income by being part time
dentists or by becoming ‘advisers’ to lobbying companies the better.
However, parliament is not the democratic centre of our society as
Tory and Labour politicians constantly tell us. The Tories have an
obvious interest in the parliamentary myth as a way of diverting our
attention from the reality. They represent not us but the people in
the unelected part of the state machine (judges, top cops, army
chiefs) and in company boardrooms (accountable only to shareholders),
who take all the crucial decisions affecting our lives.
Labour on the other hand is in a different position. The judges,
top cops, army chiefs and company bosses profoundly distrust the
Labour Party because of the class gulf between themselves and the
vast mass of people who vote for Labour. Labour can court
representatives of the ruling class on the prawn cocktail circuit as
much as it likes – it never has the class identity with them that
the Tories enjoy. But because Labour sees no other avenue for change
except operating through parliament, Labour too has to invite us to
trust in its basic soundness.
This blunts its attack on corruption. Just as it makes concessions
to the market in order to make it acceptable to the economic
priorities of the boss class, so too it makes concessions to the
deception that parliament has real control over the bosses or that it
can ever be the servant of the mass of the working population.
Yet corruption has always played a part in the ‘Mother of
Parliaments’. Parliament emerged historically as the instrument of
the capitalist class. That may have enabled it to play a heroic part
in the struggle against aristocratic and feudal reaction, culminating
in the English Revolution of the mid-17th century. But with the
emerging capitalists more or less firmly in the saddle thereafter, it
has never departed from its role as the servant of that class.
The long history of corruption from that day to this is not an
aberration but an expression of this role as different sections of
the ruling class have jockeyed for influence with MPs and governments
to advance their interests.
Sometimes this involved the most naked forms of corruption. In the
18th century MPs were little more than paid lackeys of the
landowners, now thoroughly imbued with the new commercial ethic.
Contracts, titles and favours went with the job. Robert Walpole, the
Whig prime minister in the first half of the century, regularly used
Treasury coffers to pay for support for his government.
Politics was literally the business of a few who could buy votes
as they chose. What the vast majority wanted could be safely ignored
as there was little sense that parliament represented anything except
the interests of the men of property.
That began to change with the growth of radicalism, especially in
the first half of the 19th century. Democracy became a force that
could not be ignored when it became tied to the mass working class
movement of Chartism. The ruling class was forced to concede inroads
into what had hitherto been its exclusive debating forum –
parliament. Our rulers didn’t like the fact that they were more
open to public scrutiny. But there was a certain advantage for them.
If they could persuade the mass of the population to see parliament
as the one and only place for ‘politics’, then the fact that
politics happened elsewhere – in the private debates among judges,
generals, chief constables and the captains of industry – could be
glossed over.
But to make parliament credibly appear to reflect the interests of
society as a whole, the obvious corruption would have to be swept out
of view. No more could the election of MPs be secured by bribery or
coercion, a relatively frequent occurrence as the novels of Dickens
and Trollope show. In the 1870s and 1880s, with the newly
enfranchised masses needing to have their respect for parliament
confirmed, the Liberal statesman William Gladstone brought in the
secret ballot and limited electoral spending.
The myth of MPs’ public accountability dates from this period of
reform. When Labour entered the scene a little later the myth was
confirmed rather than challenged. Yet in reality the corruption
continued. Even Gladstone, the reform minded prime minister, sold
honours in exchange for cash to fill party coffers, a habit taken up
vigorously by his successors, Liberal and Tory alike.
Initially the whole process was fairly discreet. But by 1922 the
scandal became open. For the previous six years Lloyd George, the
Liberal prime minister, had been promising peerages to his cronies –
without even bothering to get royal clearance. One baronetcy went to
a convicted wartime food racketeer and another was offered to a South
African diamond merchant found guilty of serious fraud. The war had
been fought for profit and parliament was full of hard faced men who
had done well out of it. The scandal could not be toughed out,
however, because this was also the period of heightened class
antagonism. There had to be an attempt to rehabilitate parliament in
the eyes of the masses. A debate in parliament led to the downfall of
the government and the setting up of a Royal Commission.
This made not a jot of difference. The network of contacts
masterminded by Maundy Gregory, who had been whisked away to France
by his Tory backers just as the scandal broke, continued to operate.
Several Indian princes were persuaded to part with £3 million in
today’s money.
Faced with a choice between letting the corruption continue and
discrediting parliament in the eyes of the voter, no politician was
prepared to tolerate the latter. In 1934 Ramsay MacDonald, former
Labour politician, reluctantly colluded in the corruption and gave
one of Gregory’s protectors a knighthood. As Stanley Baldwin, the
Tory leader, put it, the alternative was to let Gregory ‘stir up
such a filthy sewer as would poison public life’. This would have
exposed the Royal Commission as a sham.
After the war, in the context of the long economic boom and
absence of political crisis, corruption was a tamer affair. But it
did not disappear. It flourished strongly in local government.
Financial sleaze connected local government officials and companies
anxious to make lucrative contracts out of the massive rebuilding
programmes in the inner city areas. The architect John Poulson, whose
construction company paid T. Dan Smith, Labour leader of Newcastle, a
‘fee’ of £155,000, was the most well known symbol of much wider
corruption. Both went to jail. Poulson’s associate, Tory minister
Reggie Maudling, resigned in 1972 after being exposed by Paul Foot in
Private Eye.
But this is small beer compared with the corruption which has
swollen over the last 15 years. The Tories have been so long in power
that some MPs think they are untouchable, greedy as a result of their
government’s deregulation and privatisation measures and careless
about openly abusing their positions of privilege. The economic
crisis has also meant that access to government decision making has
become more keenly contested.
This is particularly true of sections of industry like defence and
construction eager at any cost to secure lucrative overseas
contracts. The stickiest web of corruption involves arms sales to the
Middle East and massive projects like the Pergau dam project in
Malaysia. The revelations and allegations about Mark Thatcher,
Jonathan Aitken, Saudi businessmen and former ministers are only the
tip of an exceedingly murky iceberg.
Corruption dogs the institution of parliament, whether in its
early days, when it was unreformed and in the possession of a tiny
minority, or whether in its maturity, when it was reformed and
supposedly the expression of the interests of the majority. For in
effect, whether the number of voters is a handful or whether every
adult over the age of 18 has a vote, it has never and can never
belong to the majority. In a class society, where the economy is
owned and controlled by a minority, so too is every political
institution, however democratic the appearance.
The levels of corruption may vary, depending on the health of the
economy and the degree of political crisis, but corruption and
parliament are inseparable. Essentially, parliament is unreformable.
But we should not be indifferent to these scandals. They are an
expression of the contempt our rulers have for the democracy they
pretend to stand for and of their personal abuse of public services
while claiming there is no money for things we need, like health and education.
There should be no illusion in parliament’s ability to solve
these problems. Labour’s failure to take full advantage of the
Tories’ discomfiture is strange at first sight, given that the
Tories are such an easy target.
The reason for not taking full advantage is that Labour panders to
parliamentary illusions. So it goes along with the idea that the only
way to overcome deviations from the parliamentary ideal is by
trusting to parliamentary procedure. Hence its only quarrel with the
Tories over the Nolan inquiry is the extent of the inquiry’s brief.
Hence, too, the quandary it finds itself in over the Committee of
Privileges, whose deliberations the government decided would remain
secret. Outraged by this attempt to sweep the dirt under the carpet,
the Labour MPs quite rightly walked out. But since Labour accepts the
idea that you have to work within the committee system and the rules
laid down by parliament, it sees no option but to go back in. Tony
Benn, again quite rightly, decided to make public the committee’s
secret deliberations. Labour’s front bench has not backed him
because he is breaking the rules they endorse.
The most glaring example of Labour’s failure has been its
reaction to the Guardian’s fax to the Ritz. The Tories
jumped on this as an abuse of parliament and a gross deception. Major
appeared at the dispatch box and claimed sanctimoniously that this
was an insult to the highest standards of journalism. ‘The end
never justified the means’, he droned. Labour failed to make the
obvious reply: what’s a little deception which hurts nobody
compared with the massive deception which enables MPs to have their
hotel bills paid by crooks in exchange for favours over arms deals
that will strengthen the killing powers of despots?
Instead Labour MPs echoed the Tories’ completely bogus anger and
agreed that it was an unpardonable breach of parliamentary rules.
Labour allowed the Tories to go on the offensive as defenders of parliament.
There is no way parliament will reform itself. We shall rid public
life of corruption only by reform from below, from mass activity that
does not look to parliament. In the process we shall discover that
the alternative to parliamentary corruption is not some ‘genuine’
parliament but the democracy of workers’ self organisation.
 



‘For much of the novel George Eliot seems to
be in two minds about her attitude towards change ...’
Transferring the classics to the small screen can sometimes be an
exercise in nostalgia for a cultural back to basics. Whether
Middlemarch succumbs remains to be seen. But if the adaptation
wins new readers for the novel then all well and good.
George Eliot (born Mary Ann Evans) wrote the novel in 1871–72.
It looked back to the period just before the Reform Bill of 1832, the
period when the British bourgeoisie – the factory owning class –
forced its way into parliament. The captains of industry weren’t
exactly waging war on the old aristocracy. But there were high hopes
that something more than simply expanding the franchise might come of
parliamentary reform.
In reality those hopes quickly faded. Social advance proved less
than glorious and frustration and disappointment are central to the
novel. The two characters who dominate the book, Dorothea Brooke and
Tertius Lydgate, start their adult lives with a burning conviction
that conditions can be improved for the mass of the population.
Dorothea wants to devote her wealth not to the frivolous pursuits of
the landed gentry she has been born to but to noble causes: building
model houses and repairing the homes of her uncle’s tenants.
She also wants a nobler life for herself. As a woman she is denied
access to real education. She is expected to be interested in the
feminine pastimes of her class: jewellery, visits and gossip – a
life her sister is perfectly prepared to settle down to. So Dorothea
hopes she can gain access to education through marrying knowledge.
Her clergyman husband is engaged in strenuous mental labour,
synthesising all past cultures, which she wants to help him with and
thereby help diffuse it to a larger audience.
Lydgate is the man of science. He too has turned his back on his
class to study medicine, not for a comfortable provincial practice,
but to extend the boundaries of medical understanding and improve the
health of the people.
But these wide horizons are rapidly narrowed by the characters’
own shortcomings and what George Eliot calls ‘the meanness of
opportunity’. The epic life is not available to an upper class 19th
century woman who cannot see what is plain to everyone else: that her
husband, the Reverend Edward Casaubon, is a dried up pedant whose
knowledge is useless and old fashioned.
Marriage seals her in a living tomb. Marriage also seals the fate
of Lydgate. He falls for the lovely Rosamund Vincy, who has been
turned out by the best local finishing school her father, the mayor,
can buy. Lydgate’s ‘spot of commonness’ is to see in her the
woman who can adorn his life while he gets on with his scientific
research. And she sees in him the realisation of her dreams of moving
up the social scale.
Before long their mutual infatuation turns to mutual contempt, the
marriage descending into a deadly tussle of wills, with victory going
to the placid but determined Rosamund.
Some of the best passages of the novel are those which trace the
way in which the reality of the wedded state dawns on the characters.
George Eliot refuses to simplify the characters into goodies and
baddies. Casaubon’s coldness and emotional cruelty towards Dorothea
follows from his realisation of his own inadequacy. Rosamund’s
childish obstinacy stems from the way she has been ‘infantalised’
to become the perfect wife.
The characters produce their own misery but they are also products
of their social environment. The novel is set in middle England with
its provincial limitations and habits. But events are also in mid
march towards a newer England. An older, more enclosed world is dying
out to be replaced by speedier communications and more cosmopolitan ideas.
There are gains and losses. Dorothea glimpses that new world in
the art and culture of Rome, which she encounters on her honeymoon
and which so shocks her provincial, Protestant soul. She also
encounters it in her deepening relationship with Will Ladislaw, the
cosmopolitan (Polish, Jewish, English) cousin of Casaubon. But
Ladislaw is rootless, drifting from one enthusiasm to another, in
both art and politics, even though his sympathies are wider than Casaubon’s.
For much of the novel George Eliot seems to be in two minds about
her attitude towards change. There is irony both at the expense of
dull, plodding Middlemarch society and at that of bright new ideas
for reforming the world. She sympathises with the passion for change
but also warns against wanting to progress too fast.
In many ways she was the classic Victorian liberal, against both
conservatism and radicalism, looking for a middle way, evolution
rather than revolution. The novel concludes with the observation that
‘the growing good of the world is partly dependent on the
unhistoric acts.’
The message is: trust the slow path of progress and avoid heroics.
This explains some of the weaker sides of the novel, such as the
relationship between Ladislaw and the banker Bulstrode. For it turns
out that Bulstrode has a shady past and a set of unconvincing
coincidences lead both to his exposure and to the removal of
obstacles to Ladislaw marrying Dorothea after the death of Casaubon.
There has to be, at one level, a happy ending because there has to
be a reward for wanting to improve the human condition. But because
George Eliot cannot put her trust in change from below (ordinary
people are too ignorant, heroic individuals too likely to be naive
idealists, or worse) she has to put her trust in the conviction that
events will come out right. Hence the creakiness of the plot at
points in the novel.
But the novel is not dominated by the author’s ideological
commitment to gradualism. Lydgate may go down to defeat, becoming a
society doctor whose claim to fame is his treatise on the rich man’s
disease of gout rather than his research to improve the health of the
poor. And Dorothea may not rise above being the wife of ‘an ardent
public man, working well in those times when reforms were begun with
a young hopefulness of immediate good which has been much checked in
our days’.
But what remains, and what makes the novel so brilliant at its
best, is the enduring conviction that struggle is needed to bring
about a new world – even if that world is a mediocre one that
wastes and abuses the passion which brought it to birth.
 



Unfinished Business
by Michael Hastings
One of the myths about the Second World War is that from the
outset the British people were united as one behind the fight to
destroy Nazi Germany.
In fact there was considerable hostility to the war. The Communist
Party denounced it as an imperialist war and backed the call for a
‘people’s peace’ and a ‘people’s government’. This had
some resonance among workers.
But there were other forces wanting peace. As Hitler’s plans for
the invasion of Britain in the summer of 1940 got underway, fascists
prepared to welcome the German forces. The Nazis were in contact with
a home-based puppet government and a New British Broadcasting radio
station took to the airwaves in southern England.
This play focuses on events in a country house in the long hot
summer of 1940. It is a symbol of tradition, of the continuity of
British life and everything worth defending. But the aristocratic
family to whom it belongs, together with their guests, a bishop and a
woman police commander, are plotting the success of the planned Nazi invasion.
Their attitudes and behaviour are by turns idiotic and sinister.
They drawl on about a ‘third way’ that harks back to rural Saxon
ways and the need for a classless society (a society free of class antagonism).
At the same time they are absurdly snobbish, bitchy and dependent
on their servants, particularly the butler whom they suspect of
informing on them.
The son of the house exercises the traditional prerogative of his
class by seducing the maid and then kicking her out when pregnant. He
too is full of cant about wanting to be in touch with the working classes.
The unfinished business of the play’s title refers to the fact
that this is no quaint episode from the past which is over and done
with. The play is cast in the form of the son, now an old man in the
nursing home which his country seat has become, recalling events to
his nurse.
A querulous, self-pitying invalid in the opening scenes, he is
still dependent on those beneath him. Just as he used the maid as a
young man, he now uses the nurse. He is unrepentant, rejoicing in the
present day revival of fascism.
A rather far fetched coincidence at the end of the play reinforces
the point that fascism is still active and exploitative, trading on
weakness while despising it.
The image of fascism that comes across is not very political. It
is conveyed as a fairly grotesque collection of upper class pasties,
more absurd than a threat, more to be pitied for their personal
inadequacies than to be fought.
So it is difficult to see that the play goes anywhere once the
basic conflict is established. And the butler’s behaviour, on which
so much of the theme of social dependency depends, is frankly not
very convincing. Despite some really comic moments, it’s a bit of a disappointment.
Unfinished Business is now showing at the Pit, Barbican
Centre, in London
 



Daens
Dir: Stijn Coninx
One image dominates the opening of the film. We are in a textile
factory in the Flemish town of Aalst. As the mechanical loom is
pushed forward, small children advance on their knees, picking up
bits of cotton. They have to be alert, for the loom is pulled back
and any child caught unawares risks being crushed.
This is late 19th century Belgian capitalism, red in tooth and
claw. Recession grips the country. The French speaking bourgeoisie
argue among themselves about whether they can cut wages any further.
They also attempt to keep socialist agitation to a minimum –
through control of the non-socialist press, religion and by
recruiting thugs to keep order. The workers themselves are cowed into
sullen anger.
Into this grim world comes a priest, Father Daens. Appalled by the
poverty he encounters, he denounces the bourgeoisie from the pulpit.
Fighting every obstacle they put in his way, he eventually gets
elected to parliament to give the textile workers a voice. This rebel
against the Catholic hierarchy takes seriously what Pope Leo XIII
says in his encyclical, that the workers have rights which must be
respected. He soon discovers that the Church does not.
This film is not just about what happens to religious rebels who
sympathise with the appalling suffering of the working class from the
outside. It focuses on how workers themselves, through their own
experience, begin to abandon religious illusions.
At the centre of the film is a young woman textile worker from a
Catholic family. Her elder brother is a member of the bosses’ band
of thugs. She resents but puts up with the attentions of the foreman.
But she is no socialist. She mocks the young socialist attempting to
sell his socialist papers.
Daens, on the other hand, does command her respect. She begins to
have hope when Daens forces the government to send a commission of
inquiry to inspect the horrible conditions of the factory she works
in. It is a naive hope that the great and the good will listen once
the truth is known. Though warned by the foreman not to step out of
line, she attempts to speak directly to one of the commissioners –
only to find that he speaks no Flemish and she no French.
When one of the children picking up cotton is killed she leads a
march of fellow workers to the commission. This time she hopes that
the mangled child in her arms will be tangible proof that transcends
the divisions of language. The march has religious overtones. It is
like a procession with the dead child as a Christ figure. Her
illusions are shattered when the mounted gendarmerie cut down the procession.
It is impossible not to be reminded of the procession led by
Father Gapon in the 1905 Russian Revolution. Workers whose
consciousness was totally shaped by religion also had illusions that
the Tsar, their little father, would understand their plight.
The Flemish society depicted in the film is not as steeped in
religion as Russia was. Nevertheless it is a society in which
religion plays a major role in dividing the working class. Under
pressure of class conflict the religion of the poor becomes a weapon
against the ruling class. In the process both dissident priest and
radicalised religious workers move beyond religion, even if they
retain its forms.
Indeed, the film is about the shedding of other illusions besides
religion. When Father Daens eventually gets into parliament, he soon
discovers that his splendid denunciation of the factory owners is
insufficient. Parliament is not the friend of the workers any more
than the Pope is.
The film ends on a sober note. Daens has been expelled from the
church. The young woman has been raped by the foreman. The workers
appear no further forward than they were at the beginning, despite
the demonstrations and the fights to get Daens elected. But something
crucial has been learnt. As Daens himself puts it, the workers have
no friends above them and only themselves to rely on. It is a hard
lesson – but not a pessimistic one.
It is impossible to leave the cinema without being deeply moved
but at the same time utterly optimistic about the future for the
workers’ struggles. This is a brilliant film which no socialist
should miss.
On very limited release – so watch out for it!
 



Tony Blair’s plan to remove Clause Four from Labour’s
constitution is an attack on the left. Gareth Jenkins looks at
the origins of the clause and how it was originally favoured by the
right
‘To secure for the producers by hand or by brain the full fruits
of their industry, and the most equitable distribution thereof that
may be possible, upon the basis of the common ownership of the means
of production and the best obtainable system of popular
administration and control of each industry and service.’
So runs Clause Four of the Labour Party constitution adopted in
1918. It has remained emblazoned on Labour Party membership cards
ever since – plus the commitment added in 1929 to common ownership
of the means of distribution and exchange.
Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell tried to get rid of it in 1959 and
failed. For him as for Tony Blair it is the embarrassing symbol of an
idea they want to bury – the idea that Labour is a threat to the
rich and powerful who own British industry. For the left that idea is
exactly why Clause Four should be defended.
The myths surrounding Clause Four are enormous. The current myth
peddled by the Labour right is that it is, in Shadow Environment
Secretary Jack Straw’s words, ‘a sop to keep middle class party
activists happy’. Alan Johnson of the Post Office workers’ union,
the UCW, made the same point when he claimed at the Labour Party
conference that Clause Four had been the creation of middle class
reformers, unrepresentative of the vast bulk of working class supporters.
There is little evidence, Jack Straw went on to say, that Labour
in government had ever sought to implement taking the means of
production into common ownership. In that he is quite correct. But
that was equally true of the framers of Clause Four, who were indeed
middle class but as right wing as Jack Straw or Alan Johnson.
For Clause Four never represented the triumph of the left in the
Labour Party or the conversion of the Labour Party to socialism. The
people responsible for Clause Four saw it as a way of stifling
not promoting socialism.
They were terrified by the rising level of class struggle as the
war ended and the prospect of revolution, such as had already
occurred in Russia, sweeping across Europe as a result.
Labour had participated in the wartime government and tasted power
for the first time. But with the mood swinging against sacrifice in
the national interest, Labour’s leaders feared they would be
discredited and swept aside, as their counterparts had been in Russia.
How could they rehabilitate themselves in the eyes of their
followers? At the same time, if their time for government had come,
how could they ensure Labour’s fitness for office?
It fell to Arthur Henderson, Labour parliamentary leader and
cabinet minister in the wartime coalition, and Sidney Webb, leading
Fabian thinker, to transform the Labour Party. They had to
accommodate both pressures: the move to the left among workers and
the need to modernise. They were ideally suited to the task.
Henderson was never on the left. But he had witnessed something
his colleagues had not: revolution at first hand. Prime Minister
Lloyd George had sent him to Russia after the February Revolution to
stiffen the resolve of the Provisional Government against the
workers’ revolution. His job was to keep Russia loyal to the Allied
cause by boosting the flagging morale of the troops.
Henderson therefore saw how events might hoist Labour to power.
But he also feared how precarious Labour’s position might then
become (as the Provisional Government’s proved to be). He returned
determined to avoid the ‘disaster’, as he saw it, putting
‘supreme control in the hands of the workpeople themselves’.
The only way to avert this dreadful prospect was to strengthen
reformism, so that it could contain and dissipate revolutionary
impulses among rank and file workers.
Two things were needed. The first was to overhaul the Labour Party
itself. It needed to be a mass party of individual members rather
than a mass party (however indirectly) of the trade unions. Up till
then you could only join the Labour Party as a member of a trade
union or of a socialist organisation. If the Labour Party was ever
going to become a party of government in its own right it would have
to attract the right kind of people.
Just to prove how non-class this new party would be it was even
seriously suggested that Labour should change its name to the
‘People’s Party’.
But if the Labour Party had to be ‘modernised’ in order to fit
it for stable and effective capitalist government in the turbulent
period ahead, it had also to be attractive to workers. Hence the need
to adopt a left face in the shape of Clause Four.
This is where Sidney Webb, one of Henderson’s ‘brains’, came
in. He, like other Fabians, hated the mass movement because of its
threat to ‘order’. But he also realised the need for a
collectivist ideology. This would give the new elite he believed
should run the capitalist state a voting base among workers stirred
by mass action. With the skill of the civil servant that he was, he
drafted a clause that would appear socialist and favourable to
workers’ control but commit no one to anything.
Thus the adoption of Clause Four fitted a pattern that has long
characterised the Labour Party. That pattern is to try to marry class
and nation. Labour depends on workers’ votes and the trade unions:
it is a party of the working class. At the same time, its aspiration
to run the state machine binds it to the dominant interests of the
state: it is therefore also a capitalist workers’ party. The
relationship between the two shifts, dependent on the balance of
class forces.
In 1918, when Britain was close to revolution, Clause Four was the
necessary concession the Labour Party had to make. In 1994,
determined to cosy up to the market because it sees little scope for
even minor reforms, the leadership wants to rid itself of the
illusion of its socialist past.
Even if it succeeds – and we should resist with all our might –
that won’t mean that the Labour Party has become an openly
capitalist party like the Tories and the Liberal Democrats. It will
continue to depend on workers’ votes in elections and the trade
unions. But it does mean the creation of a socialist alternative to
Labour is more urgent than ever.
 






Attacks on health funding and closure of
			hospitals are continuing despite Tory protests that they are
			spending more on the health service. Gareth Jenkins looks
			at the facts and Labour’s alternative



Anyone who uses the National Health Service knows the reality of
long waiting lists, ward closures and an increasingly decrepit service.
Yet the Tories in general, and Virginia Bottomley in particular,
continue to stress that more money than ever is going into the
National Health Service.
So what is happening? Are the Tories pumping money into the
NHS? And what is the effect of their reforms? Labour has pledged to
‘set aside the chaos and waste of the internal market and to take
up the challenge of a health service for the new millennium.’ But
will it?
First, the funding question. The Tories are right when they say
that expenditure on the NHS has been rising. Since the early 1980s
gross NHS expenditure has risen from £16.3 billion (1983–84) to
£33 billion (1991–92) and is projected to rise to £40.6 billion
by 1995–96. Even if we express that as a percentage of gross
domestic product, the amount spent on the NHS has still risen –
from 5.3 percent in 1983–84 to 5.7 percent in 1991–92 (the
projection for 1995–96 remains at 5.7 percent).
The doctors’ British Medical Association (BMA) has been forced
to admit that in the context of the government’s attempt to control
public expenditure, health has done relatively well. ‘Health
expenditure as a percentage of general government expenditure
(excluding privatisation proceeds) has increased steadily so that
between 1978–79 and 1991–92 it has improved its share from 10.4
percent to 12.9 percent.’
There is no particular mystery as to why this has happened. The
Tories are acutely aware of the perils of an all out assault on the
NHS – and not just for electoral reasons. They only have to look
across the Atlantic to see the dangers of letting private medicine
run rip. Far from decreasing health costs, the opposite occurs. The
US spends 12.2 percent of its gross domestic product on health. The
rising cost of this policy is beginning to make recession hit
industry squeal with pain. Even so, the figures the Tories brag about
are highly misleading. They do not spell out whether the increase is
enough nor whether it is being spent on the right things.
One obvious test is to compare Britain with other advanced
countries. Britain is clearly low down the international league of
advanced countries. It spends less proportionately than any of its
European Union partners. It devotes 6.2 percent of its gross domestic
product on total health care expenditure. That is 1.7 percent below
the average for the OECD countries (7.9 percent).
There are fewer doctors per head of the population. Britain has
only 1.4 specialist doctors for every thousand of the population.
France, on the other hand, has 2.6, Belgium 3.3 and Germany 2.9. And
for every £5 spent by these countries on health care Britain spends
£2 less.
Using this benchmark of international comparison the BMA reckoned
last October that Britain ‘could and should be spending around
another £4.5 billion on the NHS’. This calculation, it should be
remembered, is no starry eyed socialist estimate – it simply
compares this country with other capitalist nations of the advanced world.
Then there is the question of what the extra money has been spent
on. Between 1990–91 and 1991–92 the total gross expenditure on
the NHS went up by over £3 billion. After deducting the increases in
prices and pay, a record £l. l billion of development money
remained. It could have been spent on patient care. In fact, much of
it wasn’t. The exercise to review how the NHS expenditure was spent
alone absorbed nearly £400 million. The trust hospitals and GP
fundholders also kept some money back (though how much has not been disclosed).
Far from eliminating waste by introducing the cut and thrust of
the market the whole new system of management has itself spawned a
far more wasteful and greedy bureaucracy than ever existed before.
That is evident not just in the scandalous rise in top management
salaries which hit the headlines earlier this year. The Labour Party
has calculated that the increased costs of management and accounting
that followed the introduction of market style competition have
doubled since they were last in office:
‘Nearly 11 percent of the NHS budget is now spent on
administration, compared with 6 percent before the Conservatives came
to power. Even since 1979, annual bureaucratic costs have increased
by 110 percent from £1.44 billion to just over £3 billion.’
And most staggering of all: ‘NHS senior management costs have
risen 1,800 percent since 1987, from £25.7 million to £494 million
in 1992.’
That might be bearable if there had been a comparable rise in
money going to patient care. Instead the opposite is the case.
‘Since the Conservatives came to power in 1979, one in
five hospitals have closed and one in three beds have been lost. In
addition, the number of nurses in training has been cut by almost 20
percent in the present financial year [1993–94].’
But if nurses have lost out, administrators have not:
‘Since the imposition of the government’s changes the
number of nurses employed in Britain has been cut by 27,000, while
those designated to senior management, administrative and accountancy
posts has increased by 36,000. The spending on cars for senior
management has risen by 30 percent to £70 million in the last year alone.’
Little wonder that people’s experiences differ so markedly from
the rosy picture drawn by Virginia Bottomley and that opinion polls
give the government a 13 percent confidence rating and the secretary
of state the lowest sincerity rating out of all the Tory ministers.
Little wonder too that the government has resorted to the most
elaborate smokescreens to disguise this reality. Where once success
might be reckoned in terms of numbers of patients entering and
leaving hospital, now we have it reckoned in numbers of ‘episodes
of care’ – which can amount to no more than a patient moving to a
different ward (or even a different bed in the same ward!) after an operation.
Waiting lists are also being deliberately distorted. The
government has invented the notion of getting onto a waiting list to
see a consultant for the first time as a way of claiming real
improvements. There is now an all time record of over one million on
the waiting list – an increase of more than 100,000 since the last
general election.
The reality of what the Tories have done to the NHS became
painfully clear to thousands of people when routine surgery in
hospitals up and down the country had to be cancelled last autumn
because the contracts had run out and there was no money for the rest
of the financial year. All Virginia Bottomley could say was that
hospitals hadn’t paced themselves properly.
Even the flagship of the new trust system of hospital, designed to
pull the NHS out of stagnation, has been sunk. Guy’s Hospital in
south London is to be shut, its specialist services transferred
elsewhere, leaving behind a brand new state of the art building worth
£140 million.
The introduction of fundholding for GPs, which was also trumpeted
as improving patient care, is resulting in a two tier service.
Fundholding is an idea imported from the US, where a tendency to shy
away from taking patients who are going to demand a lot of health
care in exchange for little money and to concentrate on patients who
will leave a surplus at the end of the day is common.
The Bristol model is producing its own version of this problem. As
resources are squeezed, the fundholding GP takes precedence over the
non-fundholding, traditional GP. The Tories deny this happens but a
BMA and Labour Party survey in December last year showed that ‘two
out of every five hospitals across the country were offering
preferential access to treatment for GP fundholders’. Even the
president of the Association of Fundholding Practices has warned that
unless extra funding is provided he would not accept patients with
learning disabilities.
Health is a class issue. The gap between rich and poor has grown
since the Tories came to power in 1979. The incomes of the poorest 10
percent of families have fallen by 14 percent. The incomes of the top
10 percent have risen by half again. Infant mortality for the richest
in Britain is five per 1,000 live births, for the poorest it is 11
per 1,000. Ill health affects just under 30 percent of the richest
but nearly 50 percent of the poorest.
The imposition of VAT on fuel will lead to an estimated extra
2,500 deaths in winter. The Department of Health’s own statistics
show that every 1 percent increase in unemployment shows an increase
of between 0.2 and 0.5 percent in prescriptions.
As Labour’s document on health proves, unless the causes of ill
health themselves are tackled there can never be an adequate health service.
In the mid-1940s, in the wake of the Beveridge Report, the
demand for a national health service was not just about providing
free medical care. It was about proper protection from cradle to the
grave; about prevention as much as cure; about tackling unemployment,
housing and welfare. The idea of free health care had at its centre
the need to abolish the distorting effect of profit on the quality of
people’s lives. In short it was about the need for socialism.
Then British capitalism was prepared to go some way in allowing a
strong element of socialisation to enter private medicine – if only
to make sure that a relatively healthy workforce, having won the war,
could now rebuild the economy. Today British capitalism neither wants
nor is able to make the kinds of concessions it made in the late
1940s. So Labour faces a more acute choice at a time when defending
and improving the NHS is more urgent than ever.
Yet about the only concrete thing Labour promises to do is to
abolish fundholding and abolish tax relief on private insurance. Much
of what else it has to say is concerned with generalities. It says it
will abolish waste and improve democracy. But on the vital issue of
extra cash its voice is muffled. Whether it will commit itself even
to the type of money the BMA thinks necessary, let alone the money
required to meet needs, is unclear.
That is not just because Labour buckles under the Tory taunts of
where is the money going to come from. It is because increasingly
Labour has accepted the priorities of the system, including the idea
that the market can be persuaded to provide. This is a retreat even
on 1945, when at least Labour was prepared to use the state to
reorder priorities.
Everything Labour points to as inseparable from tackling the
causes of ill health also points to the need for socialism. In its
own distorted way that was recognised in the 1940s. The fact that
nothing comparable is raised today shows how little Labour will in
effect be able to halt the offensive against the NHS.
It will be down to those who work in and use the service to fight.
That fight is part of the struggle for something much larger: the
creation of a genuinely free society in which no one will be
prevented from developing their potential because of lack of health care.
 



Socialism from below
Hal Draper
Humanities Press £39.95
Nothing has done the cause of socialism more harm than the notion
that socialism equals state control.
The heyday of this idea was the period after the Second World War
and it created a problem for the left. If socialism equalled the
state on the Soviet model, then socialism lacked all democracy. And
if the West was no longer prone to crisis because the state could
regulate the economy, then socialism amounted to management of reforms.
Defence of socialism as not being identical with state control was therefore a burning necessity. It found powerful expression in the work of the American revolutionary socialist Hal Draper, whose marvellous essay The Two Souls of Socialism, originally written in 1966, is republished in this collection of essays.
The key distinction Draper makes in this article is between
socialism from above and socialism from below.
The idea of emancipation from above, Draper points out, is an old
one, born of centuries of class society and oppression. People look
to a saviour from on high and the rulers preserve their power by
promises of protection. Only with the arrival of the modern working
class could this cycle be broken: liberation from below became for
the first time a real historical possibility.
But old patterns of thought – of socialism being handed down
from above – persisted in social democratic reformism and in
Stalinism, not so much opposites as twins. Draper’s point is that
this emancipation from above is not some easier and safer route to
socialism. It is not socialism at all.
The essays collected here reflect the problems of this period.
There are some articles of variable quality, in which Draper is more
sure-footed when defending what Marx had to say but less so when
applying the tradition (such as the article in which he appears to be
defending free speech for fascists).
Draper’s politics had one central flaw: he was clear about what
the Soviet regime was not but he could not explain what it was.
Draper believed that the Stalinist regime was bureaucratic
collectivist, a view he shared with other revolutionary socialists
who had split from the Trotskyist movement in the early 1940s.
The analysis left a key question unanswered. Did this bureaucratic
collectivism represent a new world historical trend in exploitation?
Some of those who split from Trotskyism drew the conclusion that
managerialism was the future (and a good thing too); others, that old
style capitalism was more progressive than the new style exploitation.
Either way most believers in the theory of bureaucratic
collectivism (Draper was an honourable exception) retreated rapidly
from socialism. The weakness of this theory, which he clung to, is
evident in one essay reprinted here on how far collectivism had gone
in influencing social democracy.
Draper was better at understanding what Marx stood for than
analysing where the world had got to. Nonetheless, at a time when
workers’ self emancipation as the core of socialism was in danger
of being lost, he was a champion of that idea.
 



Mother Courage and her Children
by Bertolt Brecht
The two world wars this century have sometimes been seen as one
continuous war, a struggle over conflicting imperialist aims which
the 1919 Treaty of Versailles failed to resolve. The outbreak of
fighting in 1939 (the year in which Brecht wrote Mother Courage)
was merely the resumption of unfinished business after a 20 year truce.
There is a parallel with the Thirty Years War in Germany in the
early 17th century, which Brecht used for his play. A series of
struggles between marauding Protestant and Catholic armies, which
drew in all the major European powers, plunged the heart of the
continent into an era of unprecedented savagery.
Brecht created Mother Courage as an ‘ordinary’
character trying to make ends meet. With her canteen wagon she
wanders across the ruined continent selling drink, food and other
vital supplies to the rival armies so that she can support herself
and her three children.
As such she invites our compassion. But Brecht doesn’t want us
to ignore her other side. She survives as a business woman who makes
a living out of the war. In her small way she does what the marauding
armies do: survive at the expense of others.
The terrible irony of her situation is that what starts as a way
of protecting those she loves ends by killing them.
Mother Courage loses her elder son, Eilif, to the army while she
is haggling over a belt. She loses her second son, Swiss Cheese, who
is killed because she cannot resist haggling over the price of his
ransom. There is a further twist to the agony. Courage has to deny
that the body of her son is hers in order to avoid further
retribution. Finally, she loses her daughter, who is shot, because
she is off trading in the city.
So the action of the play is designed to bring judgement to our
sympathy. People may be victims of larger historical processes that
crush them but what they do, or don’t do, contributes to that process.
Commonsense slogans, which pepper the play, are precisely what tie
ordinary people to perpetuating the misery that the great and the
powerful let loose on the world. We need to respond to the horror of
what we see, not by wallowing in facile emotions of pity but by using
our minds to think beyond commonsense slogans. We should be distanced
from the events on the stage so that we leave the play better able to
change the world.
This new version by Hanif Kureishi is lively and racy, the acting
is good, and Ellie Haddington as Mother Courage is excellent. So too
is the staging. But it’s not sharp enough. Mother Courage is a
touch too loveable; not enough of the battlefield vulture comes across.
Perhaps this connects with one feature of the funding that would
have amused Brecht. A programme slip proudly announces that the
production is sponsored by British Petroleum and could not have been
mounted without their funding. For a play that looks at the theme of
exploitation I can’t help wondering whether Brecht or BP is the winner.
 



Balzac
Graham Robb
Picador £20
Marx was so impressed by the fiction of Honoré de Balzac that he
planned to write a study of Balzac’s novel cycle, The Human
Comedy. It was not just Balzac’s ability to depict the social
life of early 19th century France that impressed Marx. It was his
ability to grasp capitalism’s constant revolutionising of social
life. Even more remarkable, in Marx’s eyes, was the fact that
Balzac was compelled to recognise the force of this new power,
despite his reactionary belief in the old order.
This biography is the first in English since the 1930s and Robb’s
energetic account of Balzac’s life is worthy of its subject. It
also, despite its rather dismissive attitude, confirms the Marxist
analysis of Balzac’s work.
The novelist’s life spanned the political, social and economic
transformation of France in the years following the great French
Revolution. He could be said to have lived it in more ways than one.
Not only was he a witness to the period, he participated in its illusions.
Balzac was born in 1799 in the sleepy provincial city of Tours.
His family three generations back had been peasants in the backward
mountainous area of central France and his father had already risen
socially by becoming a public servant and marrying into the local bourgeoisie.
This was the year in which Napoleon ended the turbulent years of
the French Revolution by consolidating the rule of the new bourgeois
order, though the old monarchical system was to stage a comeback in
1815. However, the Bourbon kings could not reverse the wheel of
history and the last was to flee during the 1830 revolution. His
replacement, who imagined he could do a deal with the new powerful
financial oligarchy, suffered the same fate in the 1848 revolution.
The new century shook the social structure loose of its
constraints, allowing the ambitious to do in private life what
Napoleon had done in public – claw their way to the top. Paris was
an irresistible magnet for young men from the provinces. Balzac was
to rise higher than his father, adding the noble ‘de’ to his
name, to which he was not entitled. Like his hero Napoleon he did it
by force of individual achievement.
Though he became a supporter of throne and Church, he rose via the
very forces that undermined these values. For all his aristocratic
leanings he was the dynamic, thrusting bourgeois entrepreneur par
excellence. And like these self made men he experienced both the
ups and downs of capitalism’s constant revolutionising of the means
of production.
He was never out of debt his whole adult life. He borrowed
massively to invest in his own printing and publishing works, only to
go bust. He spent his life constantly on the verge of bankruptcy. The
pressure of debt ensured that he had no let up from writing. Indeed,
the more his dreams expanded, the more his debts increased.
Robb gives us an example of what this meant. Balzac wrote a short
novel of some 40,000 words in a single night, when he discovered that
a miscalculation over print size had left 80 blank pages. This speed
of composition was by no means exceptional.
He had a boundless appetite for other things beside writing –
for knowledge, for travel, for love, for food, for enterprise
schemes. But at the same time there was the conviction that these
were achieved at a price – as, for example, his feeling that a
night of sex resulted in an ‘expenditure’ of energy that could
otherwise have been ‘invested’ in writing novels.
He lived a kind of devil’s pact with capitalism. It is a theme
mirrored in much of his fiction. In return for the promise of
boundless power, you sell your soul not so much to the old devil as
to the new forces of capitalism.
Over and over again his novels are full of characters whose
ambitions and obsessions are accomplished at the price of self destruction.
Balzac died in 1850, the year before the coup d’état in
which Napoleon’s nephew destroyed the second republic. Capitalism’s
turbulent energy had turned to ash. So too had Balzac’s life,
exhausted by the fires of creativity.
He left behind him a body of fiction whose restless energy,
fearless curiosity and critical spirit show bourgeois culture at its
greatest. Graham Robb’s biography is an excellent introduction to
some of the greatest novels ever written.
 



Malcolm Bradbury
The Modern British Novel
Secker and Warburg 1993, £20
D.J. Taylor
After the War. The Novel and England Since 1945
Chatto and Windus 1993. £17.99
Is the modern British novel in terminal decline? Taylor certainly thinks so. In a tone of ‘Where are the novels of yesteryear?’ he lashes both contemporary novelists and the social condition we find ourselves in for the departed glory of fiction. Bradbury takes the opposite view. Looking at the state of the novel as we come to the end of the millennium he refuses to share the kind of pessimism that provokes Taylor to such passionate denunciation. There is, he claims, after 100 years of the modern novel, no signs of exhaustion. On the contrary there is growth and renewal, enough of both to take us confidently forward into the third millennium.
Both critics at least share common ground in their conviction that the novel has to be understood as part of its social context. By avoiding the academic jargon common on both sides of the Atlantic, which derives from post-structuralism, deconstructionism and postmodernism, they make their books very readable and avoid the sense that arguments about culture are the preserve of an inward looking elite. Indeed, one element in Taylor’s polemic is to let fly at approaches to fiction which ignore the historical and social foundation to culture leaving texts prey to an endless play of interpretation. Bradbury is altogether more polite, as befits a long established professor at the University of East Anglia. He is not averse to dipping into some of the categories of postmodernism. But he does so lightly and deftly, without committing himself to them (indeed, quite what he is committed to is unclear).
Of course their desire to root fiction in material circumstances does not make them Marxists. If anything, Taylor’s approach derives from a type of materialism which sees culture as determined by environment (he quotes the 19th century French critic Hippolyte Taine favourably), and Bradbury’s approach is reminiscent of an older sociological approach which insists on a ‘background’ to literature. In dealing with what he calls the literary consequences of Mrs Thatcher, Taylor is generally fairly rude about the left (with the exception of Stuart Hall). When talking about the Eastern European revolutions of 1989 Bradbury assumes that Marxism is dead (though he is not particularly complimentary about capitalism). Both writers could be described as having an allegiance to common sense. In Taylor’s case this is a no nonsense approach – all very welcome as a contrast to theoreticism but not without its rightward moving political consequences; in Bradbury’s it is the common sense of liberal tolerance for diversity – so that you don’t really know where he stands. [1]
Taylor’s first passion is for the great Victorian novelists, whom he loves with a filial affection (indeed, his introduction paints a cosy family scene with the teenage Taylor settling down in front of the gas fire in his father’s study to discover the delights of Dickens’s Dombey and Son). It is almost with a sense of the family being betrayed that he attacks the illegitimacy of the descendants of the Victorian novel, ‘the bastard great-grandchildren of a once unsullied family’. ‘We know,’ he insists, ‘we just know, that no modern writer – certainly no modern English writer – can hold a candle to them’. [2] The crucial difference lies in the field of character creation:
One of the touchstones of the Victorian novel is the faith which we display in the characters who populate it, characters whose behaviour is always plausible, and somehow, owing to the underlying strength of the portrait, that much more plausible when they behave out of character. Compared to David Copperfeld and Lucy Snowe, Jim Dixon and his descendants seem pale, pallid creations, the ‘people in paper houses’ of Graham Greene’s essay on Mauriac of 1961. [3]
The reason for this inferiority has nothing to do with the author’s creative ability but with ‘the prevailing social circumstance’. Investigating the ‘links between modern English fiction and the historical process’ [4] is the task Taylor sets himself.
In the 12 chapters that follow his polemical introduction, Taylor attempts to establish the shifting contours of English cultural life in the post-1945 period. He examines the exaggerated fears of the right, and the equally exaggerated hopes of the left, which arose from Labour’s sweeping election victory in that year. He looks at the consequences of diminished international status, of confusions over national identity and of awareness of class in the 1950s. He explores what he sees as an antagonism between working class culture and the beliefs of a largely non working class left. He wonders about just what degree of class war there was in the 1960s, what follows from the decline in religious and ethical belief, the consequences of being able to write more freely about sex in the aftermath of the Lady Chatterley trial (he thinks that greater freedom tends to mean less good writing) and just what the quality of women’s writing is in an era of greater opportunity for women. In the last chapter he reviews the literary consequences of Mrs Thatcher (not too hot, in his opinion) [5] and in the epilogue returns to his first love – the Victorian novel – and his sense that the late 20th century novel has betrayed it.
Taylor backs this story of decline and fall by referring to well known novelists such as Anthony Powell, Antonia Byatt, Margaret Drabble, John Fowles, Evelyn Waugh, Ian McEwan and Alan Sillitoe, as well as some rather obscure ones. But there are some curious omissions: William Golding, Anthony Burgess, Muriel Spark and Iris Murdoch barely get a mention. Taylor’s explanation – that his is a particular type of book best illustrated by a particular set of writers – is hardly convincing. Salman Rushdie gets a single mention, which seems strange for anyone wanting to look at the link between politics and literature during the Thatcher years.
How illuminating is the result? It is all very well to say that the diminished circumstances of our era, rather than the abilities of the writers, are to blame for the decline in the novel. But that makes the task of any novelist paying attention to Taylor’s thesis a fairly hopeless one. All one can do is regret the passing of the Victorian age. Much of the time the book appears as a no nonsense polemic against trendy notions, as if Taylor were a latter day George Orwell (of all the cultural and political critics referred to in the book Orwell’s name appears the most frequently). But the Orwell which floats up from the pages of the book is not the Orwell at his most acute; it is rather the robustly commonsensical Orwell that on closer inspection proves dogmatically assertive. Particularly in the opening and closing pages, with their nostalgia for a good Victorian read, the author (who was born in 1960) comes across as the youngest of old fogeys.
If there is a specific target in this polemic, it is Kingsley and Martin Amis, the two novelists, father and son. In the introduction Kingsley Amis is compared to the comic villain in Dickens’s Pickwick Papers, Mr Jingle, always popping up throughout the long narrative of the post-war novel, ‘a figure of monstrous symbolic intent, a representative of all those earnest young Bevanites who fell out with the Labour Party ... and regarded the Conservative election victory of 1979 as a national deliverance’. [6] ‘Monstrous symbolic intent’ seems pitching it a bit high. But the character Taylor really has it in for Jim Dixon, the hero of Lucky Jim (1954), Kingsley Amis’s first and most famous novel. Not only does he regard him as the bastard descendant of his 18th century fictional forebear (the young man in search of fame and fortune), he also speculates on what might have happened to him in some 1980s sequel. In the style of a Victorian epilogue, Jim Dixon is given a future: he grows up, enjoys a better standard of living, watches television, stops voting Labour and buys ‘shares in a newly privatised utility’. [7] In short, his life becomes the life of one of Martin Amis’s degenerate ‘heroes’ (a fitting son for a fittingly ‘monstrous’ father, so to speak), like the character of Keith Talent in London Fields (1989), to whom Taylor returns in the epilogue as the rotten ripe fruit of the Thatcherite revolution which followed the 1979 election victory.
Fun though this is – and in its way quite a telling illustration of the continuity within the changing consensus from welfarism to the market between the 1950s and the 1980s – there is something slapdash about Taylor’s method. It is not altogether clear whether it is the character’s life or the novelist’s that is being attacked. True, Kingsley Amis’s transition from ‘angry young man’ to Sir Kingsley can stand for a particular kind of shifting with the times, and maybe his lack of real radicalism was implicit from the beginning. But the novel can stand independently of its author’s ideological beliefs and motivations. Taylor half recognises this but seems unable to resist the temptation to blur the distinction if the reward is an elegant and witty aphorism.
As for Bradbury’s book, we have here an ambitious attempt to cover the last 100 years or so, without weighting the account in favour of the tried and tested classics of the first 30 to 40 years of our century. Bradbury is scrupulously fair in dividing his book evenly between the two half centuries, thus providing us with a survey of post Second World War fiction to compete with Taylor’s. It is not easy to prevent a survey turning into a glorified but ultimately boring list of novels. Bradbury, however, succeeds by and large in overcoming this. He situates major trends in novel writing in their cultural context and at the same time finds the space to give reasonably full analyses of key works of 20th century fiction. He begins with the break from Victorian conventions in the 1870s and the development of a more self conscious form of fiction, moves onto the pre-First World War avant garde and the post-war flowering of modernism, then looks at the impact of politics in the 1930s, the retreat from experiment in the post-Second World War period and ends with examining the continuing variety of novel writing. At each stage he suggests the complexity of fiction’s development, both the persistence of older traditions and the emergence of new forms, as well as the dominant trends. Even in the chapters where he is covering the same ground as Taylor, Bradbury provides a better sense of the relationship between fiction and the historical process than Taylor. One can only hope that the book will soon appear in paperback. [8]
But if Taylor is too crusty, Bradbury is too bland. Where Taylor jumps in, fists flying, to sort out the novel, Bradbury sits on his hands, hesitating to pass any judgements whatsoever. Taylor – in a kind of cultural back-to-basics – wants to shake up the received new wisdom. Bradbury appears to befriend each new ‘ism’ or fictional tendency as it comes, on its own terms. To criticise him is not just a question of yearning for a bit of literary rough and tumble of the type Taylor provides. It is because Bradbury sidesteps an argument which has been around for a long time – whether the advance from realism is a real step forward – which Taylor does at least stir up in his crude way.
What does one mean by realism? In the ordinary, common sense use of the term, realism is the sum total of effects used by novelists to provide us with a sense of life. Characters resemble real people; plots resemble real histories. There is what Henry James called a ‘solidity of specification’; in other words, we are provided with an accumulation of detail which persuades us that what we are reading is a chronicle of real existences, subjected to the same cause and effect as the world we live in and unfolding chronologically in the same way our lives do. Typically, the language of realism does not draw attention to itself. To do so would be to undermine the illusion that we look through the pages of the novel we are reading onto the world itself. Language seeks to be transparent, as if it were a window. It tells us what is happening without getting in the way of the action. The merit of the realist novelist is that he or she succeeds in perfecting the illusion of lifelikeness, such that the characters and plot are perfectly credible.
But will that ordinary, common sense meaning of the term do? The difficulty is that it covers too broad a spectrum. The criterion of lifelike characters, as solid, concrete and specific as anything you might meet in real life, would appear to include virtually anything from Balzac to Brookside. It reduces realism to a set of techniques which the writer deploys (consciously or unconsciously) to achieve certain effects. What this weak sense of the term leaves out is that realism is not simply a formal technique; crucially and centrally it involves the ability to convey the dynamics of social development in ways that do not involve an apologia for the status quo. Balzac’s realism is able to do that in a way that Brookside’s ‘realism’ never can. This is because the realism of soap opera, whatever the authenticity of detail or concern with actual issues, cannot approach the sense of social totality evident in the range of fiction Balzac wrote about the human comedy of the early 19th century French upper classes.
This was the kind of argument put forward by the Hungarian Marxist, George Lukacs, who wanted to make a sharp distinction between realism as a mode of aesthetic comprehension of the world, with concrete individuals and particulars standing for more general types, and a ‘realism’ which set itself no greater task than representing discrete surface phenomena. This retreat from totality carried an ideological message. It was a retreat from an understanding linked to changing the world to contemplation of a world that was apparently unchangeable, simply a ‘given’ against which human beings were powerless elements in the landscape, driven by dark forces they could not in the nature of things control.
The point of the contrast is not just to reinforce the evident point that the realism of Balzac is qualitatively superior to the ‘realism’ of Brookside. It is also to say something about different novelists within the 19th century itself – a point of some relevance as far as Taylor is concerned, given his indiscriminate adoration of Victorian fiction. Let us take Anthony Trollope, reputedly John Major’s favourite novelist and one praised by Taylor for his ability to create ‘memorable’ characters. Just how realistic is he in the Lukacsian sense? While it is true that Trollope painted an interesting picture of life at the top of society (particularly the lives of the aristocracy in politics, much less so when it came to the lives of the clergy and bishops) his work possesses no real sense of totality in the way Balzac’s novels do. He has his moments (particularly in the late novel, The Way We Live Now, with its attack on the power of money). But even this novel lacks the critical edge of realism proper. By making the villainous central character, Melmotte, a plutocratic Jewish outsider, the target of his criticism Trollope diverts attention, in a way Balzac never does, from the internal social dynamic of English society. The ‘memorableness’ of Trollope’s characterisation, which Taylor so admires, carries with it a strong dose of acceptance of traditional, i.e. class, values. So we need to discriminate among the Victorian novelists in a way which Taylor’s weak sense of realism never does.
Unless we make this distinction between realism in its strong and weak senses, we abandon the field to its great 20th century rival, modernism. If Taylor’s nostalgia for the Victorians is the only thing meant by being in favour of realism, one is tempted to say to hell with it – the experimental nature of modern fiction has got to be better. The danger is that if realism is identified with conventional bourgeois writing then modernism must be its revolutionary challenger. But that fails to see that there is nothing inherently radical about modernism – for the same reasons as those which Lukacs advanced in his criticism of the retreat from realism in the strong sense to ‘realism’ in its weak sense. The same ideological message is still there. If ‘realism’ in its naturalistic, photographic sense implies human powerlessness, so too does modernism. If that appears provocative, let us look at the question a bit more closely.
The classic justification for modernist experimentation in the novel is that it was a qualitative step forward from a type of writing that had become flawed and compromised. The techniques of realism could work no longer. It was impossible to regard language as a transparent medium, to think of characters in a photographic way or to trust narrative to reveal the significance of events. Realism could not deal with the new reality of the primacy of fragmented experience, the complexity of the inner workings of the mind, the ways in which the mingling of past and present in the act of memory do greater justice to events than setting them out in merely chronological fashion. Above all, the function of language had to change. No longer a self effacing medium to provide with a window on life, it had to draw attention to itself, to the ambiguities of meaning, the resonance of words and their power to create a world of its own. A new reality – the reality of a world torn apart by the advent of mass communications which broke up a settled society, of increasing conflict which destabilised the previous certainties of identity, including sexual identity – required new techniques of writing. The collapse of the old world just before or during the First World War finally destroyed the notion of progress which had underpinned the 19th century’s sense of itself and its culture of realism. In its place, history was reduced to ‘an immense panorama of futility and anarchy’ (to quote the modernist poet, T.S. Eliot) or a ‘nightmare’ from which the central character (if character is still the right word) of that modernist epic, James Joyce’s Ulysses, is trying to awaken. Modernism was the new technique of writing to deal with this reality; indeed, it could claim to possess a higher realism than realism itself.
This classic justification is one that Bradbury articulates effectively and which provides the context for many illuminating commentaries on early 20th century fiction. But there are limitations. For one thing, English modernism was wedded to a particularly conservative view of history (futility, anarchy, nightmare) which was not true elsewhere. In other countries the smashing of the old order and the collapse of traditional culture went with an upsurge of confidence that a new revolutionary culture could be created alongside a new social order. One has only to think of the direction taken by some versions of modernism in post-revolutionary Russia. Here the notion of the avant garde shed some of its elitist tendencies (the idea of a beleaguered and inward looking cultured minority) and began to take on the political notion of a vanguard, in advance of the masses but existing to bring them forwards. [9]
That brings us to the second, and altogether more important problem. Just as there is a tendency to see realism as a set of techniques, rather than the ability of a culture to grasp the underlying dynamics of an epoch, so there is a tendency to do the same with modernism. The important point to grasp, however, is that, whatever the merits of particular modernist works, the notion that reality is necessarily plural and fragmentary (which is the justification used to underpin the plural and fragmentary nature of modernist experimentation) is not an ideologically innocent characterisation. This brings us back to Lukacs. Realism in the strong rather than the weak sense assumes that it is possible to grasp reality aesthetically and understand it in a way peculiar to culture. Historically, it goes with the confidence of a rising class to subject all aspects of social development to fearless (‘realistic’) appraisal, not just for its own advancement but on behalf of humanity as a whole, which is why realism as a movement coincides with the rise of the bourgeoisie, the advance of science, the enormous growth of human productive powers and the overthrow of social relations which hinder progress.
Modernism on the other hand makes no such assumption. It rather coincides with a sense in which the growth of productive powers cannot be mastered by the human subject. To argue that reality is plural and fragmentary may well be to point to an important aspect of modern experience, which the modernist techniques of fragmentation reflect. But this is to reinforce the ideological notion of human impotence – a notion that depends on disguising the continuing potential for humanity to become the subject rather than remain the object of history. Realism in its weak, naturalistic sense concentrates on the impotence of human beings as objects in a social spectacle which it is at pains to describe. Modernism as a tendency shares the same assumption about impotence and views it from the other side of naturalism. It denies the potential of the human subject either by withdrawing into a private space of subjectivity or by making the subject as inhuman as the forces which confront it in the public world. Either way, the condition of alienation is accepted as a given, whether despaired of or rejoiced in.
It is this ambiguity which explains the ambiguity of Futurism. The thrill of the machine, its novelty and dynamism, all of which were central to Futurism and symbolic of new powers breaking through the inertia of tradition, could move in two directions. One was towards praising power over human beings for intensified exploitation. This is why the pressure of fascism pulled Futurism sharply rightwards in Italy (as it also did to its paler Vorticist offshoot in Britain under the artist and novelist Wyndham Lewis, who was to write one book extolling Hitler and another entitled, The Jews – Are They Human?). [10] The other was towards praising the power of human beings for intensified control over nature, which is why the pressure of the Bolshevik revolution pulled it sharply leftwards in Russia. Even so, as Trotsky’s comments on Mayakovsky and Futurism show, its radicalism had difficulty moving beyond individualism, with serious consequences for its aesthetic method. But if modernism is ambiguous in its politics, it has to be said that the pull is towards human powerlessness. Fragmentation, plurality, the dehumanisation of the subject, the aestheticisation of experience – all of which remain key elements within the modernist movement, even at its most radical and challenging – emphasise the sphere of individual refusal as the only meaningful sphere. [11] The public world at best can only be a given, raw material for the self to devour. The idea of collective transformation based on an objective understanding of historical movement is foreign to it.
This is why a certain caution has to be exercised in respect of the high points of modernist fiction. There can be no denying the brilliance of Ulysses, its extraordinary exploration of the inner self, the sexual side of experience and the power of language. But, despite its detailed reference to the topography of Dublin as explored by two wanderers in a single summer day, the novel is a real retreat from an understanding of social and historical interaction of the sort we are given in realist fiction. Beyond the universe of the mind, there is little except fortuitous encounter or an imposed pattern which derives from myth (hence the title). The novel compensates in part for this precisely because the theme of the novel – identity, culture and homeland – as experienced by a son who denies his father (homeland) and a Jewish father, who lacks a homeland and a son, gains real strength from the impact of the movement for independence in Ireland, at once positive in its struggle for freedom and negative in its allegiance to nationalism.
Compare Ulysses with any novel by Virginia Woolf and one can see how hollow the radical pretentions of modernism is. Woolf is often praised as quintessentially fulfilling the exciting promise of modernism to explore the myriad complexity of human consciousness. Yet one cannot escape the feeling, beneath the richness of language, of artistic impoverishment which follows from impoverished grasp of social reality. The turmoil of national upheaval at least enters and informs the modernism of Ulysses. Absolutely no significant social experience informs that of To the Lighthouse or The Waves (though something of the madness and horror of the First World War enters Mrs Dalloway). What is striking is not that the public world of earlier types of fiction is replaced by a more complex and challenging complex range of inner voices, which truly explores the diversity of different individual consciousnesses, but that if you abolish the social you abolish real individuality. In the end it is always the same consciousness, however much the names of the characters vary (as anyone who has read that excruciatingly boring novel, The Waves, is forced to recognise).
The point being made here is not to deny any merit to modernism. It is clear that, as Brecht sarcastically said in his debate with Lukacs about realism in the 1930s, one cannot hold Balzac up as the model and tell modern writers to write like that. Classic realism declined with the decline of bourgeois culture into an apologia for the status quo. Nothing can bring that back and it is no use being nostalgic about the glories of 19th century fiction (as Taylor tends to be). On the other hand, it is also wrong to abandon realism as simply a movement whose moment passed. That leads simply to an uncritical acceptance of the latest ‘revolution’ in the arts, as one ‘ism’ is replaced by another.
This is the drawback inherent in Bradbury’s approach. It becomes the internal history of movements, with their reactions to one another and their interactions – despite his evocation of social background. For background description does not explain what writers make of their response to the world. Social crisis, for example, can push novelists both to the left and the right whatever their formal aesthetic allegiances (as we have seen with Futurism). More importantly, perhaps, we have to judge whether novels get to grips with the complex dynamics of social development (whether they are, in the strong sense I specified earlier, realistic) – and not simply whether they satisfy certain formal aesthetic criteria. What is missing in Bradbury’s account is precisely this element – which is evident in his treatment of Woolf, for example. If Graham Greene could savage her novels for their social vacuousness, one would expect at least some debate about their artistic merit. But it is a debate which Bradbury ignores.
Despite the disfiguring crudeness of Lukacs’s concessions to Stalinism, which has enabled all sorts of critics to dismiss what he has to say, his critique of realism and modernism offers a method of analysis which both Taylor and Bradbury could learn from. This should enable us to avoid Taylor’s uncritical celebration of the 19th century novel as a whole as well as being able to avoid what in the end amounts to Bradbury’s eclectic account of the development of the novel in the 20th century. It should mean that we do not drop a sense of what novels should be about in the interests of some fake tolerance towards the products of each new development in the novel, or towards any mix of genre which the catch all category of postmodernism permits. As we draw towards the third millennium, the question of whether the novel has a future does not depend on vanished glories or blind confidence in internal renewal of the form. As in the past, its strengths and weaknesses are tied up with the ways in which class struggle does, or does not, quicken the pulse of cultural life.

Notes
1. At one point he contrasts Stuart Hall’s understanding of the basis of Mrs Thatcher’s attraction favourably with the left’s supposed dislike of her on the grounds of her vulgarity and says in respect of Michael Foot’s ‘fissiparous and diminished’ Labour Party battalions: ‘There must have been several million electors who voted Labour in June 1983 – I was one – in the not quite conscious hope that Labour would lose’ (After the War, p. 271).
2. D.J. Taylor, After the War, p. xiv.
3. Ibid., pp. xv–xvi.
4. Ibid., p. xvi.
5. This is reminiscent of his earlier attack on novels in the 1980s in A Vain Conceit.
6. Ibid., p. xxv.
7. Ibid., p. xxvi.
8. And that the author finds time to correct minor, if irritating, errors. Aziz in Forster’s A Passage to India gets reclassified from Muslim to Hindu and at one point there is a confusion between Thomas Mann’s two novels, Buddenbrooks and The Magic Mountain.
9. This is perhaps an unfair criticism to make of Bradbury, given that this is a book about the English novel. But in his references to Futurism he talks only about its Italian, not its Russian, version, which was politically a very different animal. Yet if he wants to suggest the full social background, some discussion of why modernism took such a conservative form in England needs to be debated.
10. Bradbury mentions the reactionary nature of Lewis’s politics in passing but doesn’t feel obliged to consider whether this novelist of ‘extraordinary force’ (p. 195) is really as brilliant as he claims. It is fair enough to make a separation between the author and his or her work. But how good are Lewis’s novels? His fantastic satire even at its best is limited in a way that that of other right wing novelists, like Evelyn Waugh, is not – something which is connected to an extremely limited grasp of social forces.
11. It might be said that Bertolt Brecht is the exception here. It can be argued, however, that the truly modernist Brecht is the early Brecht of expressionist revolt, before he became a Marxist, and that the plays of the early 1930s suffer from propagandism (i.e. lack of true realism) in their deployment of modernist effects. Only the later plays have real greatness and this is because modernist techniques are subordinated to realism.
 



IT IS JUST over a year since Salman Rushdie went into hiding. His recent article in the Independent on Sunday stirred old arguments.
Rushdie’s explanation of The Satanic Verses demonstrates once again what a brilliant novel it is and how much his detractors, who for the most part have not read it, distort what it says.
He also directs some bitter comments at false friends and defenders. Labour MP Keith Vaz first telephoned his ardent support to the author and then weeks later supported the banning of his book at a demonstration which called for the author’s death. Guardian columnist Hugo Young decided that if Muslims didn’t appreciate tolerant British culture, they could always leave (not much tolerance there).
Now Rushdie is calling for a paperback edition which would enable many more people – particularly young Muslims – to judge for themselves and disperse the fog of prejudice.
James Kirkup, though against censorship, is against a paperback edition. He feels it would provoke further misery. (The irony here is that the editor of Gay News was charged with criminal blasphemy and jailed for reprinting Kirkup’s poem about the dying Christ’s homoerotic fantasies!)
But to distinguish between hardback and paperback is elitist by implication. The assumption is that it is acceptable for people with money to have access to such books but not ordinary people. These were the arguments used against paperback editions of Lady Chatterley’s Lover and Last Exit to Brooklyn. When Penguin was brought to trial for publishing Lady Chatterley’s Lover the prosecution could ask in all seriousness if this was the kind of book one’s wife or servant should be reading.
A more serious kind of opposition to a paperback edition comes from Bhikhu Parekh, deputy chairman of the Commission for Racial Equality.
He says that freedom of expression has been satisfied with the existence of the hardback, which should not be banned or withdrawn from circulation.
A similar point seems to lie behind Michael Dummett’s Open Letter to Rushdie, also printed in the Independent on Sunday.
Dummett, a liberal anti-racist, argues that of course the death threat is wrong, as is the whipping up of racist hostility to Muslims, but that Rushdie himself does not seem to realise how his book has damaged race relations.
Free speech, Dummett argues, is fine, but the rhetoric surrounding it disguises whether there should be restraints when it comes to defiling what people regard as holy – something which Western unbelievers cannot grasp because they are oblivious of the pain caused.
Therefore, Dummett concludes, there is a case for extending the blasphemy laws to other religions. We don’t allow free speech to cover racist incitement, so we shouldn’t in the parallel case of gross offence to believers.
These are exactly the same arguments used by Rushdie’s attackers to have the book withdrawn and can be used by every brand of bigot, from the Catholic Church to Mary Whitehouse, to censor any book or TV programme considered offensive to belief.
Racist offence and religious offence are two different things.
We oppose racist provocation not on the grounds of “offence” but on the grounds that it strengthens the hold of reaction, dividing the working class and terrorising one part of it.
Religion is a different matter. Socialists are for the right of people to practice the religion of their choice, although we are opposed to attempts by the state to impose religion.
But we do so not because we approve of religion. On the contrary, we oppose religion as being incompatible with genuine human emancipation. We defend religious liberty because not to do so strengthens rather than weakens the hold of these ideas.
This is because, as Marx well understood, religion appears to abolish the alienation caused by material conditions. Without tackling material conditions the need for religion cannot be overcome.
But this process must involve the idea that human emancipation is not compatible with belief in Holy Texts and Supreme Authorities. So socialists also defend the right to attack or mock religion.
Those who say that Rushdie should not ridicule religion may do so for the best of motives – that we do not want to add to the pain of the oppressed. There is a problem, however. Of course, socialists are against “superior” white society imposing enlightened solutions from above. But what about those in the Muslim community who want to break with religion, who want to question religious authority and the “right” of the elders to dictate anything from dress to sexual behaviour?
Absent from most of this discussion is any consideration of why racism has led to a revival of religion in Britain. Fundamentalism in towns like Bradford and parts of London hasn’t increased because people with brown skins are prone to fanaticism (a racist myth). It has to do with things like unemployment (in 1984 in Bradford 34 percent of young male Asians were without work as opposed to 17 percent young male whites) and with the way in which Bengalis in east London have been forced into the most dilapidated estates by Liberal-run Tower Hamlets council.
It also has to do with the growth of state racism, including a tightening up of immigration controls and more deportations, in the context of the retreat by the reformist left and the trade union leaders from any effective challenge to Thatcher.
Into the vacuum has stepped religion, which a dozen years ago would not have appeared attractive to youth.
It is this that explains the furore around Rushdie. All the pain and rage of racist oppression has exploded but missed its real target by lashing out at a book that more than any other gives a deep insight into the pressures on the immigrant community.
 







The two hundredth anniversary of the French Revolution occurs this month. It had an impact on the whole world, Gareth Jenkins explains its significance, why it developed in the way that it did and how it opened up a period of revolution which is still continuing





THE FRENCH Revolution demonstrated the necessity of revolution. Most bourgeois commentators from that day to this see in revolution something accidental. Change, if there has to be change, can come about peacefully, through reform. Revolutions, as far as they are concerned, are the products of mistakes. Rulers are too weak or obstinate and opponents triumph through diabolical cunning.
The truth is, however, that there could not have been a peaceful transition from the old feudal regime in France to the new bourgeois order. Although there had been attempts to reform the state, which was bankrupt, the bourgeoisie found its path blocked. The nobles would not abandon the bulk of their privileges.
In May 1789 Louis XVI summoned the Estates General, representing the clergy, nobility and the Third Estate (the “commoners”), each being separate bodies, for the first time in more than a 150 years.
The Third Estate, dominated by the bourgeoisie, wanted voting in common. That way its numerical size would have overwhelmed the clergy and nobility. But the King refused.
Denied a “legal” way out, the Third Estate was compelled to challenge the power of the monarch. It decided to turn itself into the National Assembly, representative of the nation as a whole.
In the space of two months the elements of the new bourgeois France began to emerge. At the beginning of August the old feudal order was abolished – in principle (it wasn’t until 1794 that the last remnants of feudalism were swept away). The peasants were freed of many of their obligations to their lords and office holding ceased to be the almost exclusive preserve of the nobility.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man (26 August) proclaimed liberty, equality and fraternity. This was an enormous step forward in a society dominated by divisions of rank, unequal treatment before the law, censorship and arbitrary powers of coercion.
In practice, though, what it came to mean was emancipation for bourgeois forms of property: freedom to trade without restrictions, equality based on money rather than title, fraternity of “respectable” people rather than the multitude.
But none of this would have been possible without what is common to all genuine revolutions – the intervention of the masses from below.
Even at this early stage of the French Revolution the National Assembly’s work would have got nowhere without mass pressure. The King was not going to give up without a struggle. Royal troop concentrations in the suburbs of Paris, designed to frighten the Assembly, provoked an urban uprising which led to the fall of the Bastille.
This, together with peasant uprisings all over France, cowed the old ruling order into sullen submission. Not that the bourgeoisie was terribly keen on “disorder”. The creation of the National Guard (staffed by “respectable” citizens) in this period was as much an attempt to ensure popular disorder did not get out of hand as to create a counterbalance to royalist troops.
Hence the history of the rest of the French Revolution is the history of vacillation by sections of the bourgeoisie as they first leant on popular activity to secure their position (with the danger of being outflanked by the lower orders) and then tried to control it (with the danger of compromise with the old order and consequent loss of power).
This is evident in the events from late 1789 to 1794. Leading bourgeois representatives in the Assembly tried to do a deal with the King. In exchange for the King’s recognition of the August decrees abolishing feudalism, he would be allowed to keep considerable, if reduced, powers, including a right of veto over legislation.
But the King refused this settlement. He again summoned military force, and once again this led the Parisian masses to march on Versailles, where the King was. They forced him to improve supplies to the capital, agree the August decrees and to go with them to Paris, where he would be under the watchful eye of the populace.
This not only strengthened further the revolution, it discredited that section of the bourgeoisie which wished to compromise with the old order. Power now switched to a less moderate section of the bourgeoisie. But stability could not last for long. Again it was the King, who continued his intrigues with exiled émigrés and fellow monarchs, who upset the delicate balance.
In June 1791 he attempted to escape from Paris for the border. The plan was bungled and die King was brought back under heavy military and civilian escort to Paris. Once again the revolution was pushed leftwards. Now the call for a republic gained ground. This was at the expense of the moderate bourgeois representatives in the Assembly, who were loath to give way to demonstrations for the King’s abdication and so pretended that he had been abducted!
These moderates (later called the Girondins) were further discredited when war broke out in April 1792. They had been in favour of war in the hope that it would force the King to appoint their supporters as ministers. But the setbacks suffered by die army, plus further deterioration in die living standards of the masses, fuelled suspicions that treachery was at work designed to restore the old order.
The Girondins had no option but to go along with popular agitation in order to avoid accusations of treachery being levelled at them. Furthermore, they had no wish to be beaten in the war, since defeat would have spelt the end of the revolution and the loss of the gains made since 1789.
In early August a violent insurrection in Paris overthrew the monarchy. The Girondins were forced to proclaim the Republic. A new Assembly was elected, for the first time by near total male adult suffrage, itself a reflection of the pressure of the petty bourgeoisie and the “common people”. So the balance of power began to shift away from the Girondins, who represented the big bourgeoisie, to the most extreme section of the bourgeoisie, the Jacobins.
 
ALTHOUGH still in a minority the Jacobins, led by Robespierre, eventually forced a majority of deputies to pass the death penalty on the King. Louis XVI was guillotined in January 1793.
However this was not the culminating point of the revolution. While there were internal and external enemies looking for an opportunity to restore the old order, any hope of stabilising the revolution by compromise could only end in defeat. It was all or nothing.
The outcome of the war was still undecided and the economy, with runaway inflation, was sliding into chaos. The rising cost of basic foodstuffs hit the urban poor hardest. The Jacobins decided to force the issue.
On 2 June 1793, a revolutionary force of many thousand National Guards and sans culottes (as the most determined group of the urban labouring classes were called) surrounded the Assembly. The Assembly had no option but to surrender to the insurgents’ demands. Twenty nine Girondin deputies and two ministers were put under house arrest. Power was soon to pass to the Jacobins.
The Jacobins – or rather their most eminent leaders Robespierre and Saint-Just – were first and foremost radical democrats. That is to say, they believed in absolute popular sovereignty.
This is reflected in the proclamation in June 1793 of the constitution of the National Convention, which approved of plebiscites for every law and did away with the separation between legislative and executive. However, the constitution was suspended for the duration of the emergency facing the country.
It is also reflected in the way in which, quite self-consciously, the Jacobins sought to build up and use popular power. Other bourgeois tendencies were often compelled to rely on it, but they did so reluctantly and with a suspiciousness that was repaid in kind.
This was the Jacobins’ strength. They responded to popular discontent by imposing a maximum price on essential goods and services and by introducing the Terror, which despite bourgeois myth was not an arbitrary weapon for bloody revenge on opponents but a highly effective instrument against hoarders and speculators.
This in turn enabled them to mobilise the necessary manpower to defeat the counter-revolutionary foreign armies that had invaded France.
The Jacobins went well beyond bourgeois norms. Indeed, there was no other choice. They had to violate property rights (as in the Maximum and the measures against speculation) in order to gather the urban masses under their leadership. Without these violations the bourgeois revolution would have been lost.
At the same time, their class interests were bourgeois. Their social and political ideal was not communism, but the republic of small producers. They believed in property – neither too large (thereby creating a handful of powerful oppressors) nor too small (thereby creating poverty and dependence).
So, although they used popular power, they always attempted to control it. They incorporated sans culottes into organisations under their command and later were happy to see the Maximum applied as much to wages as to prices.
It is this contradiction which explains their downfall. They pushed the revolution to its necessary extreme but perished in the process. The cause was twofold.
On the one hand, once it was clear that the war was being won, the bourgeoisie was less and less willing to put up with the sacrifices it had endured. On the other hand, as theJacobins relaxed measures that favoured the urban poor or stifled their self-activity, the masses were progressively alienated.
As the Jacobins dealt blows first to the left and then to the right, their base narrowed dangerously. The right wing deputies eventually refused Robespierre’s demand for a fresh purging of “impure” men and arrested him. The Jacobins could no longer mobilise forces outside the Assembly. On 28 July (the tenth day of Thermidor, according to the revolutionary calendar), along with 22 other victims, Robespierre was guillotined.
Looking back from the early 1850s, Marx called this process the “ascending path” of the revolution:
“the rule of the Constitutionalists was followed by the rule of the Girondins, and the rule of the Girondins by the rule of the Jacobins. Each of these parties leaned on the more progressive party. As soon as it had brought the revolution to the point where it was unable to follow it any further, let alone advance ahead of it, it was pushed aside by the bolder ally standing behind it and sent to the guillotine.”
Trotsky dubbed this same process successive phases of “dual power”. His model was the evolution of the Russian Revolution between February and October 1917.
 
FEBRUARY 1917 saw the overthrow of the Tsar. But in reality, despite the advent of a “democratic” republic, the old exploiting classes (landlords and capitalists) still retained power, and the apparatus of the old state had not been destroyed.
However, a rival form of state power, in the shape of the Soviets, was being shaped – only half consciously – by the exploited classes (workers and peasants).
Necessarily, as Trotsky points out, this division was inherently unstable. Power cannot be divided forever between hostile classes. Either there is a fresh revolution or there is counter-revolution.
The February revolution had raised hopes among the masses that the horrors of war would soon be ended, that the land would be distributed among the peasants and that workers’ conditions would improve. The moderate socialists, who had emerged as the leaders of the majority in the Soviets, promised to satisfy these hopes.
Yet these Mensheviks believed, like their predecessors in the French Revolution, that the revolution was now over. They therefore tried to balance between the contradictory elements of dual power, and in the process vacillated between compromising with reaction and, when reaction threatened them, appealing for working class support.
Thus they refused to let the Soviets take power, instead subordinating them to the bourgeois ministers of the Provisional Government. This could only mean deferring the question of ending the war, of solving the land question and improving the lot of the working class.
It was the Mensheviks who egged on persecution in order to keep their bourgeois allies sweet. But when persecution threatened in the person of General Kornilov to sweep away not simply the most militant layers of the working class but the Mensheviks themselves, there was no alternative but to turn to the masses for support.
It was resistance of the workers to the Kornilov coup in August that saved the revolution. But it also took things further. With the Mensheviks discredited, the Bolsheviks became the majority party in the Soviets. Thus by October the insurrection was able to hand real power to the Soviets and destroy the bourgeois government.
So far we have looked at the “ascending path” of revolution. But there is also its opposite. This can take different forms. After Thermidor in 1794, when the Jacobins fell, the steps of dual power began, in Trotsky’s words, to descend. And the French Revolution of 1848, according to Marx, was the reverse of the French Revolution between 1789 and 1794 when each party had leaned on the more progressive party.
We are, therefore, talking of revolutions that decline after having done their work or that are quite simply failures.
 
EVENTS between 1794 and Napoleon Bonaparte’s coup in 1799 are an instance of the first type. With the fall of Robespierre “Thermidorian reaction” set in. Radical and political activity was curtailed, the Terror relaxed and suspects released from prison.
The jeunesse dorée, or gilded youth, made up of scummy middle class elements, went round Paris beating up Jacobin workmen. In the south of France an unofficial and indiscriminate White Terror was unleashed, with victims “hunted down like partridges”.
With controls dismantled, the economy once more began to decline. In May 1795 there was one last popular uprising in Paris, which was easily put down by government forces. In effect, the role of the masses in the revolution had been exhausted with the fall of the Jacobins. Marx explained why:
“The proletariat, and the other sections of the town population which did not form a part of the bourgeoisie, either had as yet no interests separate from those of the bourgeoisie, or they did not yet form independently developed classes or groups.”
So although the masses had antagonistic interests to those of the bourgeoisie, ironically their struggle could only bring about the victory of their enemy. The revolution was safe. Thermidorian reaction soon degenerated into royalist reaction, and in October 1795 royalists attempted a coup. (Napoleon, an up and coming young general, quickly suppressed it with “a whiff of grapeshot”.)
Once again the pendulum swung to the left. The collapse of the currency and rocketing prices accentuated the gap between rich and poor. This time the attempt to overthrow the government had a radically different purpose. Babeuf s “Conspiracy of the Equals” aimed not at purifying the revolution but at replacing bourgeois society by communism.
The conspiracy never got beyond the planning stage because Babeuf and his co-conspirators were betrayed by a police spy. Even if it had done, it would not have succeeded, the balance of forces being what it was. But what it did show was chat the lessons of revolution were being learned by class conscious opponents of the bourgeoisie.
The major theoretical weakness lay in Babeuf s view of the proletariat. The working class was to attain communism via a revolution carried out on its behalf by an elite group. The focus of revolutionary activity was on the technique of insurrection rather than the consciousness and combativity of the masses. For this reason, the conspiracies were bound to fail.
It was against this view of revolution that Marx wrote the Communist Manifesto and the rules for the First International in 1864, which start by declaring that “the emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves”.
Marx’s view of revolution was confirmed by the Paris Commune of 1871. In his passionate defence of the Commune he stressed how the people
“have taken the actual management of their revolution into their own hands and found at the same time ... the means to hold it in the hands of the people itself, displacing the state machinery, the governmental machinery of the ruling classes by a governmental machinery of their own.”
This lesson was repeated in the Soviets in 1917 and was central to the practice of the Bolsheviks. Like Marx before him, Lenin stressed the self-activity of the masses. The role of the revolutionary party was not to substitute for that but to organise the most advanced elements of the working class and so give the revolutionary process its cutting edge.
On the other hand, without a carefully planned and executed insurrection by a party which had earned itself leadership within the working class, the revolution would have dissipated itself and been lost.
So, as Trotsky pointed out, when the revolutionary party heads the Soviets, it also prepares (in response to objective and subjective factors)
“the military bases of the insurrection, unites the shock troops upon a single scheme of action, works out a plan for the offensive and for the final assault. And this means bringing organised conspiracy into mass insurrection.”
Such a view of insurrection reflects the growth of the modern industrial proletariat over more than 100 years. That Babeuf had a conspiratorial view of communist revolution was a product of his period. The working class barely existed at the time of the French Revolution and his model was essentially that of the most advanced revolutionaries of his day, the Jacobins.
 
COME the year 1797 the French Revolution had lurched so far to the right that in the elections to the Assembly constitutional monarchists were now the majority. The revolution had retraced its steps almost to its starting point, with the distinct possibility of the monarchy being restored without a struggle.
This threatened to undo the entire work of the revolution – a prospect the bourgeoisie disliked. Those who had benefited from the confiscation of émigré lands or the sale of church property might find themselves dispossessed, and much worse would happen if the White Terror were visited not just on Jacobin workmen but on all republicans who had voted for the King’s execution, including the respectable ones.
The problem was, what force could save the bourgeoisie? During the ascending path of the revolution the masses had done so. But in the descending path the masses had become too weakened. Increasingly, it was the army that came to the rescue. In theory, the army was not a force independent of the people. The “mass levy” of 1793 was the revolution defending itself against internal and external reaction. But that now changed. The army had conquered large chunks of neighbouring territory and demanded booty both to support itself and to solve the mounting indebtedness of France itself.
In practice, therefore, the army had raised itself into an independent force. The servant was now the master. As such it, and not the elected representatives sitting in the Assembly, was the incarnation of bourgeois interests.
Pressure from both right and left (the Jacobins had a modest revival of support) continued to weaken both the Assembly and the government. It was only a matter of time before a military coup d’etat in 1799, led by the Republic’s most effective and popular general, abolished both. Napoleon was now dictator.
Though democracy was at an end (and the Republic itself was soon to be dissolved in favour of a new hereditary Empire), this did not mean a return to the old order. Feudalism was not re-established. Bourgeois property rights were preserved and strengthened, even if the social and political ideals that had inspired the revolution largely disappeared.
The bourgeoisie had been compelled to yield to a saviour that stood above society, a force that acted independently of it (and sometimes against it), in order to safeguard its essential interests.
This Bonapartist solution to acute social tension was to recur in later revolutionary situations. It also marked the end of the 1848 revolution in France.
The year 1848 was one of revolutions throughout Europe. Starting in February in Paris, with a revolt that dethroned Louis-Philippe and declared the Republic, the wave of revolution spread rapidly to different parts of Germany, Austria, Hungary and Italy. Within weeks governments toppled like ninepins. It seemed to many, including Marx and Engels, that 1848 was going to be a second version of 1789 in which die bourgeoisie would put paid to feudal reaction across Europe.
This was not to be, despite initial concessions. Within 18 months the revolutions had all been defeated. The defeat had less to do with the strength of reaction than with the weaknesses of the opposition.
Take Germany, which was a patchwork of states and statelets each at different stages of economic, social and political development. There hopes for change ranged from moderate demands for liberal concessions from the King of Prussia (the most powerful of the German states) to radical demands for the unification of the country into a single democratic republic.
Assemblies, like the timid Berlin Assembly which was looking for agreement with the crown, and the more radical National Assembly at Frankfurt, came into existence.
But these assemblies achieved nothing. Where the French National Assembly of 1789 had had to call on the masses to protect itself from reaction, the German liberal bourgeoisie was extremely reluctant to do so. It feared “disorder” more than it did “order”.
It preferred, therefore, to while away its time devising constitutional changes which it fondly imagined would be acceptable to the existing rulers. It was only a matter of time before reaction triumphed in 1849, but not without having to smother the last flare ups of revolt in different parts of Germany.
In France too the revolution did nothing but retreat – the opposite of what had occurred in 1789. Each of the three phases of the revolution was a move backwards.
The first phase had been won by mass action, but the provisional republic that came into being was interpreted in different ways by different classes. The working class expected it to be a social republic, ie one that would reflect their economic interests. Although this was incompatible with the expectations of the other classes that had rallied to the revolution, which were looking to protect bourgeois interests, the illusion persisted that this was not so.
But in the second phase the illusion was destroyed. The National Assembly that met in May 1848 was clearly designed to further bourgeois interests and when Paris rose in June was united in the need to smash the working class. But this only served to open up the divisions in the bourgeoisie, between the petty bourgeoisie and the big battalions of the financial and industrial bourgeoisie. This betrayed itself in struggles between different shades of republicans and supporters of the two rival pretenders to the French throne.
With the working class smashed after June 1848, the democratic petty bourgeoisie, though it too was hostile to the proletariat, was in no position to defend itself against the big bourgeoisie.
It is clear, then, why Marx contrasted this “descending path” with what had happened in 1789. And the reason why 1848 had no “ascending path” is obvious. The working class, though defeated early on, was now historically a powerful and independent contender. The bourgeoisie was more scared of “disorder” than of “order”. So the Jacobin option was closed off from the outset. Therefore there remained only its polar opposite, the Bonapartist solution.
 
NAPOLEON’S nephew had been elected President of the Assembly in December 1848. He appeared to be the servant of the revolution. But by manoeuvring between the different social forces (appealing to the peasantry’s mistrust of the towns, posing as the constitutionalist, calling for an end to anarchy) he contrived to become its master. He also strengthened his position by getting control of the state bureaucracy and army.
With the exhaustion of the contending rival classes he was, like his uncle before him, able to pose as the saviour of society and in the coup d’etat of December 1851 he brought the revolution to an ignominious end. A year later he replaced the Republic with the Second Empire, with himself as Napoleon III.
Marx thought this Napoleon a grotesque parody of the first. The reason has to do with changed social relations. The first Napoleon had at least preserved the progressive content of the French Revolution, even if by thoroughly reactionary means.
The nephew’s regime had nothing progressive about it. It served to protect the now reactionary bourgeoisie against threats from the new progressive class in society, the working class. It may have done so by depriving the bourgeoisie of its political rule. But it guaranteed its economic rule (exploitation) all the more effectively.
It also perfected the modern state, which appears to stand above society as the arbiter between the classes, while in fact ensuring the domination of the bourgeoisie. As such, Marx saw Napoleon III’s coup as the culmination of the 19th century revolution of the old type. Future revolutions would be of a different order. Their task would be to destroy the despotism of the state and the only force that could do that was the working class.
In 1870 Napoleon fell as a result of defeat by the Prussian army. When revolution broke out the following year, Marx’s prediction was proved correct. The first proletarian uprising of modern times created the Paris Commune. As Marx wrote at the time, the working class could not “simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery and wield it for its own purposes”. It had to smash it (which it did) and set up its own state, unfortunately short lived.
 
OCTOBER 1917 is a long way from 1789. But it is possible to summarise what remained valid and what did not. The revolution of 1789 showed that force was required to overthrow the old order once and for all. The most daring representatives of the bourgeoisie, the Jacobins, knew that and were prepared to mobilise the masses to that end.
By 1848 the bourgeoisie had become cowardly. Unlike the-Jacobins it was not prepared to mobilise the working class for fear that it had more to lose than gain. It preferred either compromise with the old order or the Bonapartist option that had sealed the revolution of 1789.
The working class inherited the revolutionary heroism of the Jacobins. But it went further than that. It learnt about the need to smash the state that had been perfected by its class enemy.
It also learnt that the way to do this is not by conspiracy but by mass struggle leading to the creation of democratic workers’ organisations that can reshape society. Even more importantly, it learnt the need for a revolutionary party, not of the old conspiratorial type, but one immersed in the struggle and disciplined enough to bring matters to a head by an insurrection.
This was a long, painful process culminating in the Bolshevik Revolution. The year 1917 is the worthy inheritor of all that was best about the French Revolution of 1789.
 



Ian Sinfield
Literature, Politics and Culture in Postwar Britain
Continuum, 2004, £9.99
No argument about the kind of society we want can ignore the question of culture. Stalinism provided a bureaucratic parody of the relationship between culture and the masses; and in the Cold War West arguments about culture retreated into disengagement from politics. A few voices kept alive the notion that the ‘value’ of culture might depend whose side you were on and how you linked it to broader political struggles.
Only with the upsurge of struggle (May 1968, mass strikes, anti-imperialist struggle, civil rights, the women’s movement, gay liberation) was there something like a revival of a Marxist understanding of culture in the 1970s and 1980s. Conservative academics were outraged that a new generation should undermine the idea that ‘culture’ possessed ‘universal’ values. Worse still, in their eyes, all kinds of ‘popular’ culture became subjects for debate and study. The barbarians, if not the lower orders, were taking over.
Alan Sinfield, born in 1941, belongs to this new generation. This is the third edition of a book that first appeared in 1989. It has a lengthy new introduction, which combines autobiography and social analysis and considers how far cultural materialism, applied to post-war British literature and culture, has intervened in political struggle.
Cultural materialism holds that we should not see culture as abstracted from its material conditions of production or reception. Culture is not some free-floating ideal, existing outside the world of exploitation or oppression. It is an area of contention, in which dominant groups seek to buttress their power and subordinate groups seek to carve out subversive alternatives. Culture must be historicised to prevent its being given a spurious universality that only serves to mask its role within class society.
This is what Sinfield proceeds to do in this wide-ranging and very readable book. He places a number of themes – notably, the representation of class, homosexuals, black people, women, youth music, and the role of left cultural critics – in the context of shifts in British capitalism from welfarism to Thatcherism. At every stage, and more pointedly in the conclusion, he raises the question of what role cultural critics play in broader struggles to end exploitation and oppression.
Sinfield has stood fast (as the new introduction fully shows) against the tendency, extremely prevalent over the last 15 years in the postmodernist academy, to retreat from a socialist struggle over culture. For this, if for no other reason, the reissue of this book is extremely welcome.
But is cultural materialism simply Marxism under a different name? Marxist ideas about class certainly play a large part within cultural materialism. Nevertheless, there is a heavy import from a very different tradition – particularly from the tradition that places great emphasis on how the world is represented, if not constructed, through language. We can sum these ideas up as theories that explain oppression (in particular) by the power of culture rather than the power of material circumstances.
To be fair, this does not characterise Sinfield’s overall approach. He is very conscious of culture’s material and social determinations. But there is a strand in Sinfield’s work arguing that ‘storytelling’ is a source of power at every level of experience.
Now, this yields a number of insights – but it does point to a problem. To use just one of Sinfield’s own examples: Thatcher’s mantra ‘There is no alternative’ may well have been powerful – but surely not primarily because working people found it a plausible story (that implies a positive acceptance), but because they lacked the confidence to mount an effective challenge.
It would be grossly unfair to accuse Sinfield of abandoning the very materialism he so clearly endorses. But the danger of emphasising the power of culture to shape and determine our lives lies in the implication that there is little we can do beyond exposing the ruses of culture. What thus emerges is scepticism about ‘big’ political struggles. The chapter added in 1997 argues that the failure of welfare capitalism is so disastrous that, as far as he is concerned, the elaboration of a comprehensive new politics is not on the agenda – or at least not yet, though hope for a revolutionary conjuncture is still there, as is the desirability of socialist advance, however limited.
The kind of certainty that past cultural critics had about the role of the working class now seems to be fractured beyond repair. There are now only subcultures to work in. It is as if Sinfield has resisted the theoretical lure of postmodernism but succumbed to its practical conclusions that there is nothing beyond the local and the particular. This pessimism was perhaps excusable in 1997 – before the rise of the anti-capitalist and anti-war global movement. And maybe the 2004 introduction is less despairing. Sinfield quotes Brecht’s demand to reject what we regard as natural as unchangeable. ‘The political impetus in Brecht’s proposition’, he says, ‘has become immensely stronger. If we cannot change the world, it is not going to last very much longer.’
 

