

For over two weeks representatives of the Big Four have been gathered in Paris discussing the problems of Germany and their relation with each other. The Paris Conference, which many believed would mark a sharp and definite Russian retreat in Europe, has dragged on so far without any serious accomplishment, although it is clear that a general-scale Russian retreat has begun. But just as clear is the fact that the Russians are determined to retreat only a half step at a time, fighting for each inch of ground as they give way before the superior pressure (for the moment) of the Allied imperialist bloc.
Any belief that may have existed that a general political settlement for all of Germany – including a peace treaty – might result from this conference is now largely abandoned. Both camps that now occupy Germany and exert their control over its 65 million people are unable to settle on any form that a unified Germany, under their guardianship, shall take.
The Russians, in view of the severe defeats they have lately suffered In their zone, cannot permit extension of the Bonn Constitution to the Eastern zone since they know a free election would sweep their quisling SEO (Stalinist party) out of any position of influence. This proposal was therefore countered by Vyshinsky’s fantastic proposition to resume full military control over all of Germany, just as if the country had suddenly been conquered, all over again!
At the moment, the Western Allies feel strong and capable of standing fast on their demand for a unified Bonn Constitution Germany. Thus there seems little likelihood of any agreement, in addition to the fact that the Russians will not yield to the demand that they give up their Russian-owned trusts in Germany and turn back these properties to the Germans.
 
Russians Fear Discontent
It is still possible that some progress toward political agreement may be made or even that a final treaty with Austria will be written at this conference. However, after two weeks, these have become secondary matters on the agenda, as the conference turns more toward narrow and practical matters where some hope of agreement still exists. This consists essentially, if not exclusively, of two points: Berlin, and resumption of trade and commerce between the East and West of Europe in general and within Germany in particular.
It is now apparent that economic factors forced the Russians into this conference and that any political concessions on their part will come with the utmost reluctance. So tenuous and shaky is their hold over Eastern Germany, so universally hated and despised are they and their quislings in this zone, that the slightest political concession which would permit, for example, the Social Democrats to function freely, or which would permit the holding of free elections, would unloose an avalanche among the population.
They cannot risk this, but they can provide for the resumption of economic life by working out an agreement which will lift the trade blockade imposed by the West. This, together with some practical agreement for a resumption of Four Power rule over Berlin, appears to be all that will come out of the present conference in Paris.
Yet even this will indicate a trend on the part of Stalinism. All the Eastern countries, including the Eastern zone of Germany, are suffering seriously in ah economic sense. The worse their economies become, the greater becomes the menace of national-resistance movements against Russia, and the threats of Titoism.
This is why Vyshinsky remains in Paris. This is what forces Stalin into his limited retreat, which he will try to keep as orderly and controlled as possible.
 
Outside the Hall
But the Paris Conference illustrates. a far more fundamental matter. This is the absolute inability of the Big Four to make a real and final settlement of the “German problem,” or that of Europe, for that matter. Guided exclusively by their immediate imperialist interests, each of the participants can measure proposals and counter-proposals only in national, imperialist terms.
But outside of and far away from Paris, a real settlement of the German problem is being worked out. More and more, the whole issue is being removed from the hands of Messrs. Bevin, Vyshinsky, Acheson and Schuman.
We refer, of course, to Germany itself, where a most remarkable and welcome revival of political and social life and activity is continuing. There are not only many evidences of this, but everything indicates that this independent action on the part of the German people will grow steadily.
The militant strike of the railway workers against the Russian authorities continues and they have rejected overwhelmingly the Stalinist offer to pay their wages 60 per cent in Western marks. All strikebreaking and scabbing efforts have been crushed by them. The so-called People’s Congress in the Russian zone was a farce attended by hand-picked Stalinist delegates and witnessed the amazing spectacle of several delegates actually voting “no” and uttering a few remarks of protest. Economic conditions within this zone deteriorate further, and many incidents of active sabotage and opposition are reported.
 
Election a Test
Of still greater importance are the coming elections within the Western zone (two-thirds of Germany), under the Bonn Constitution. These elections will be held in the middle of August, and will mark the first event approaching national elections, with national parties participating, that Germany has known since 1932 – that is, since Hitler. Despite the undemocratic features of the constitution, nothing can stop this election from having the greatest possible significance.
During July and August, Germany will witness an active and militant political campaign centering around the struggle of the Christian-Democrats against the Social-Democrats. The Stalinists and other political groupings such as the Liberal-Democrats will play little part in this election. It will take place in an atmosphere of a revived national consciousness and national economic life, the reawakening of all desires to regain Germany’s freedom from occupation and division, and a universal hatred of the Stalinist system.
If will likewise be a great test for the Social-Democrats and their willingness to act as leaders in a national struggle – a willingness which to this moment they are far from expressing. It is premature to tell exactly how the elections will run, and what will be the major issues.
But it is not too soon to predict that much less will come out of the Paris Conference than had originally been expected. Perhaps, however, this is not of too much consequence since the real and all-powerful trend of events today in Europe and Germany is for the 85 million Germans themselves to take command of their own destiny. This process has still a long way to go, but the gentlemen now meeting in Paris cannot retard it.
 



If it is true that Western European capitalism has effected a remarkable productive recovery and overcome a series of problems, then, it may be asked, what lies behind all the present difficulty, why is there this permanent cry of “crisis” and “disaster”? The ironic answer, it seems to us, lies in the fact that European capitalism (and we exclude the Iron Curtain nations which, for the moment, must be considered outside of Europe) has progressed back to a state of comparative “normalcy.” That is, the character and quality of its current problems are characteristic of declining capitalism: the functional and structural weakness of a sick organism which expresses itself in unemployment and price problems; financial, currency and commercial problems; and, above all, trading, marketing and business problems.
For a variety of reasons we need no list here, the elementary problem of the postwar period – that of setting in motion the wheels of production – must be considered as largely solved, in capitalist terms. Western Europe, from a productive standpoint, is definitely an active and going institution. In 1948, its production increased by 9 per cent, and is now 15 per cent above the 1938 level. Last year’s exports from Europe increased by 30 per cent over the prior year. In every field of production, ranging from heavy to consumer’s industry, there has been enormous progress. We must understand, of course, that this expansion started from the lowest point conceivable and it is hardly our thesis that European capitalism has achieved an expansion which reverses the historic tendency of a falling off in the rate of its productive increase beginning in the 1920s. Only to take into account the increase in population since 1938 would suffice to brush aside such an illusion. This is no matter of rejuvenation of European capitalism.
Our point, however, is that a material basis, in the form of goods, wealth and services, once more exists and it has long been our contention that this is a minimum requirement for the resumption of political life in Europe, particularly in democratic and socialist terms. The outstanding proof of this, of course, is Western Germany, where productivity has risen now to 86 per cent of its 1936 level.
The essence of this “New Europe” lies in the revival of its economic life which has, in turn, meant a resumption of social, cultural and political life and brought a definitive end to the stagnation of 1945–46. Western Europe lives and breathes again; a fact for which we can be more than thankful!
 
Who Shall Benefit?
It is our intention to outline some of the new economic and social problems that this revival has created. Obviously, a new struggle for the products of society has commenced. That is the real nature of politics in Europe today: which class and sector of the population shall benefit from the renewal of life? In which direction shall European society turn, now that it again has a comparatively solid floor and foundation under its feet? While confusion may be dominant, it should not be thought of as the former apathy and indifference so characteristic of post-war Europe.
Europe’s masses have only general conceptions and negative attitudes as to what they desire. Stalinism, of course, nourishes itself upon this. But there is again time to think, to read and to contemplate. Social life is no longer a question of bare physical survival: masses are working, earning some money and eating regularly.
Today’s problems are related to the working and operation of the system itself; therefore, the thinking of masses is related to the problem of how to make the economy operate in an effective manner, to the advantage of all. This means that the gist of European problems is again genuinely social in character, and any revolutionary movement or group desiring to progress must approach all matters with the broadest possible outlook and understanding. The real reason why the so-called Fourth International has vanished from the scene is that it could not understand the nature of postwar Europe’s social problems, and confined itself to a “political” approach in that term’s narrowest meaning.
The recovery of Europe is largely due to American pump priming, the proper term to describe the first phase of the Marshall Plan. America contributed $12 billions between the end of the war and the start of the Marshall Plan. To augment this recovery in production, another $5 billion was given in 1948, the first year of the plan itself. This has had two significant and conflicting consequences, in addition to what we have indicated above. First, Western Europe is now able to resume a limited independence not only in relation to America, but to the rest of the world, including Stalinist Russia. Secondly, what has been called the second phase of the Marshall Plan is now upon us. Having saved the patient, so to speak, by an emergency blood transfusion, Dr. Imperialism is now planning to make his demands and collect his fee. But the patient, ungrateful wretch that he is, not only has other ideas, but feels himself at least partly equipped with the strength to carry them out! Western Europe is now capable of offering resistance to the overbearing and arrogant economic demands of America, as we shall see in examining the case of England. Those who felt that Marshall Plan aid meant some automatic enslavement and subordination of European economy to America neglected to examine the multisided effects that an elementary productive recovery would have.
We have said that the crisis of Europe differs vastly from that of several years ago. Before explaining these differences, we should briefly state the economic nature of this new crisis:
 
Dollars Versus Pounds

In part it is a continuation of the old. The shortage of dollars is almost as acute as before, and it is estimated that Western Europe’s uncovered dollar balance (deficit) at the end of the Marshall Plan (1952) will still be between $2 and $2½ billions. For the year that began July 1, 1949, the shortage will be $4½ billions, or only about $190 millions less than the previous year. All participating nations are asking for huge dollar grants, in many cases larger than the previous year, with the exception of England, which has requested only $923 millions as compared with $1,239 millions the previous year. All this signifies, of course, that the unbalance of trade remains as distorted as before.
 
Trade between the Eastern and Western sectors of Europe, one of the principal keys required for unlocking general European stagnation, has failed to materialize and grow. This, of course, is essentially a political factor and it appears likely that current political developments will break up this jam before long.

It is often asked, has the Marshall Plan been a success? A satisfactory answer would require a complete definition of what is meant by “success,” and such an effort would be in vain since each nation and each tendency participating in the plan has its own conception. In general, the Marshall Plan has been partially successful for all those involved in it and a complete “failure” from the Russian viewpoint.
It is the second phase of the plan, now under way, which will determine whether the risk run by the nations of Western Europe in accepting conditional aid from capitalist America has been worth the game. It is the second phase of the plan which will determine correspondingly for American imperialism whether or not its expenditure of profitless billions up to now has been worth the game, from its standpoint.
It is premature to attempt any answer to this question. We shall only indicate the problems already created as this second phase begins, the tendency of which will be to set Western Europe in constant and growing opposition to the United States, reviving under new conditions that struggle of Europe vs. America which Trotsky formerly described.
 
Who Is Helping Whom?
First, with the initial phase of the plan largely over, what are the new objectives of the United States in continuing its aid to Europe? We may summarize them as follows:

An immediate objective is the revision of the system of payments already agreed to by the ECA (the control body regulating intra-European aspects of Marshall aid) so as to end the rigid system of holding tight to dollars, and to permit a freer form of currency payments. This was, in part, the heart of the recent conflict between America and England which ended in a temporary withdrawal of American demands.
 
To force a general lowering of European prices, primarily through a devaluing of all European currencies – including the pound, franc, lira, etc. The purpose of this is to satisfy that aspect of American policy which desires to .see an expansion of European exports, making it possible to close the gap further between exports and imports and thus move closer to achieving a balance of trade essential for economic health.
 
To return as quickly and closely as possible to the prewar system of unfettered trade, under which system America could compete in the European markets on an “open door” basis.
 
To break up European cartel and price-fixing systems (such as exist still in Germany) wherever possible. This is one manifestation of the broad policy to limit European recovery within definite bounds. It may be said, in point of fact, that the Marshall Plan will ultimately become a definite fetter upon the expansion and growth of European economy, but that point is not yet reached.
 
To break up all closed off international market arenas (such as the so-called sterling area, and the French colonial area) and permit free entry of American competition. This is combined with an unwillingness to permit access to any American markets, including the United States itself.

In face of this, one would expect that the natural tendency of Western Europe would be to draw together, in some common economic union of self-defense from the danger represented by America. It might seem, in fact, that the oft-heard expression in America in favor of a “United States of Europe” (even Dewey!) would contradict American policy and aid Europe to draw together. But talk in America favorable to European unification must be clearly understood for what it is. Its conception is a strictly limited one, in terms of certain economic measures such as tariff agreements, currency measures to stimulate business and inland transport arrangements, etc., which will aid the short term American perspective of setting Europe up on its economic feet. American imperialism does not want a unified Europe, a solid bloc of nations with a powerful economic base to support itself. It is aided in this by the incapacity of Western Europe to unite itself in any serious way, even against the approaching danger of the new Marshall Plan phase.
The manner in which these diverse factors pull Europe now one way toward unity and now another way toward disunity can be best illustrated by current efforts to loosen up European trade. Here is the New York Times’ comment on the results:
The Economic Cooperation Administration is now engaged in a big drive to force Europe to take great risks by loosening trade barriers and making currencies more freely convertible. Europeans are beginning to ask whether there is any use taking risks, including depreciating their currencies, to improve the competitive position of European exports if the only market in which they can earn dollars is to be closed to one community after another as soon as their competition makes itself felt.
 
The Only Market
The “only market” referred to is, of course, the United States. To put an end to the dollar shortage, Paul Hoffman has declared that America must “double its imports from Western Europe by 1951.” The tendency today, given the current regression, is in the opposite direction.
A series of new factors further complicate the picture, and lead to what we have described as the “new crisis” in Europe. There has been a decline in American world prices* but British, French, Belgian, etc., prices remain the same. In competitive terms, English prices particularly are too high. England is struggling to maintain her exports, but to do this she must become more competitive in price offerings. How to do this: by lowering wages and thus dropping production costs, or by devaluing the pound? England is simultaneously struggling to maintain her bilateral trading area (the sterling area) against American encroachment. The whole British trading system is a bilateral one of protected exports, whereas the American trading system is a sharply competitive one, seeking to batter down doors. This is the basis for violent American opposition to the recent British-Argentina trade pact which was, in effect, a barter agreement; this is the basis for the new Anglo-American rivalry. Britain is fighting to save the pound, preserve whatever dollar reserves it still has, and to keep its protected sterling trading area in the world.
Other immediate factors aggravate this “new crisis.” England, seriously disturbed by the possibility of competition from a revived Western Germany for continental markets, desires to push Germany in an easterly direction and is thus anxious to rebuild East- West trade, but the United States works to subordinate such trade to political objectives in winning away the satellite nations. This, of course, is but one part of a larger problem which may well become the key problem of Europe: the astonishing revival of Western German production (now 85 per cent of its 1936 rate) means that Europe’s greatest productive apparatus is rapidly getting back into business. In fact, since Western Germany is not permitted any armament production, we have the ironic circumstance that this part of Europe is producing a mass of finished and consumer goods (electrical equipment, books, textiles, etc.) without the burden and hindrance of supporting a war machine! Shall this production flow eastward or westward? This is already a central problem, and there are those who believe that American imperialism will more and more openly encourage revived German capitalism and make of it Americans chief prop in Europe. But the question of Germany’s new role is a subject in and of itself and demands separate consideration.
The final factor responsible for the “new crisis” is the worldwide business recession, which has depressed orders, trading and transactions in all countries. The buyers’ market has replaced the sellers’ market and there is no reason to expect any reversal of this trend. The volume of business is dropping and, with the exception of England, where export still flourishes, the problem of unemployment is common to all nations.
We have indicated the important factors influencing the economic life of the New Europe. For the most part, they are familiar and could hardly have come into existence without the substantial recovery we have described. Has this now reached its peak? It appears that only the revival of a serious East-West trade could act as a new stimulus, comparable to last year’s Marshall Plan grants, but who can say whether this will come?
There is definitely a “leveling off,” and that at a low level indeed! Nowhere can mass living standards compare with pre-war standards. The 1948 economic survey of the United Nations, issued in Switzerland, indicated this and, more seriously, indicated that economic autarchy had been stimulated rather than broken down by the Marshall Plan. Borders, tariffs, customs, etc., are as insurmountable and difficult as before. In the long run, of course, this indicates that all the old problems remain as before: economic nationalism and inability to unify; a low level and high- cost productivity; contraction of the internal market, with a more bitter struggle to share the world market, etc. The classic problems of European capitalism are now back with us. The patient, once semi-conscious and prostrate, is now back on his feet only to discover he suffers from a dozen bothersome and incurable ailments!
But nothing can do away with the fact that a substantial material basis exists for the pursuit of the democratic and socialist struggle. It is our opinion that the serious and real struggles of the future throughout Europe will be intensely social in nature. They will be over the fruits of this social and material revival, and plans for substantiating it. The abstract issues of ideological politics and the question of war will recede into the background. The people of Europe have long since heard what each and every political tendency proposes: they now want to know how to carry these things out, in the specific.
 



Als Gefangene bei Stalin und Hitler
by Margarete Buber-Neumann
Verlag der Zwolf, Munich, Germany; 285 pages
(published in England under title: Under Two Dictators, Gollancz).
Margarete Buber-Neumann, whose testimony at the now famous Kravchenko trial highlighted the procedure itself, has published this overwhelming account of her seven years’ imprisonment under two totalitarian systems. The book created a sensation in Germany, where its circulation is extensive, and is widely discussed today in England. Unfortunately, no American publisher has yet taken the initiative to make it available in an English translation in our country.
The merits of the book lie essentially in the fact that its author has permitted her experiences to speak for themselves. Recognizing both her abilities and her limitations, Margarete Buber-Neumann has not attempted to draw deeper sociological or psychological conclusions from her tribulations in Stalinist and Nazi concentration camps, but rather has told us her own story, in a simple and moving narrative style.
Beginning with the period of the purging of all foreign Communist elements in Russia, she takes us through the Moscow prisons, the so-called hearing and trial and her sentencing to ten years’ imprisonment in Siberia. The horrors and sufferings of life in a remote Siberian desert area are described, and then the pathetic and illusory journey back to Moscow, where, instead of freedom, she and others were turned over to the Gestapo on a bridge crossing the Bug River near Brest-Litovsk! To make sure there was no mistake, full records of her political life and association as a member of the German Communist Party were supplied by Stalin to the Gestapo!
Then began the long five-year internment in a German KZ; the notorious Ravensbrueck camp near Berlin itself. The stories, anecdotes and incidents described by the author make fascinating, if melancholy, reading. The inner relations of the camp, the disciplined Stalinist fanatics who awaited the arrival of “their” army; the struggle for retention of life itself – all this reaches its climax in her flight out of the camp before the invading Russians, toward the West and the comparative safety of the approaching American forces.
Frau Buber, as we have mentioned, narrates her story without political inference or conclusion. With the exception of one comparison, which we shall mention, the reader is left to draw his own analogies between the vastly differing terror techniques of the two systems. But in describing the trial procedures of the GPU and the Gestapo, she draws an interesting contrast:
“... many of them (the Gestapo) were brutes and bullies, comparable with the worst type of GPU men, but their methods of examination were different from those of the GPU – or perhaps I should say, rather, the object of their examination was different.
“The GPU examiners aimed from the beginning, not at finding out whether there was any factual basis for their suspicions against their prisoners, but at establishing their ‘guilt’ and securing sufficient ‘proof’ for a heavy sentence without all the preliminary bother of bringing them to trial.
“The Gestapo men, on the other hand, were still bound, if ever so loosely, to the judicial traditions of a civilized country, in which, in the ordinary way, an offender had to be charged and brought up for trial.”
The German Stalinists have, of course, launched a violent campaign to discredit her book. Their principal attack seems directed at her husband, the former German Communist Party leader, Heinz Neumann, who vanished forever in Stalin’s camps many years ago. Now it is true that Frau Buber tends to whitewash the political role of Heinz Neumann throughout the book, but this has no relevancy of course to the book’s validity. Neumann was a notorious Stalinist in his day and a faithful executor of the fatal “social fascist” policy in Germany, as is known to all. Stalin destroyed him when he became critical of indications that a rapprochement with the German Fuehrer was in the wind.
Neumann’s life ended in failure and tragedy. His wife, who seems to make up for her lack of political understanding with a fine, human quality and capacity, has told us a valuable story in the struggle against barbarism in both its fascist and Stalinist forms. Her book should be widely read and circulated.
 



If so much was not at issue, from the point of view of the peoples of the world and peace, the struggle of statement and counter-statement between Stalin and Truman might provide excellent relief in a comic opera. The upshot of the exchange seems to be that never were two men more “anxious” to meet with each other, but one is “grounded” by bad health and the other likes Washington so much that he couldn’t dream of leaving for a moment. (Since Stalin cannot travel by “boat or plane” we could suggest a trip by submarine, equipped with one of the navy’s new “schnorkel” breathing devices.)
In any event, the whole matter has boiled down to nothing – there will be no meeting, at least under the circumstances and conditions proposed by Stalin. (Wasn’t it Truman, by the way, who described the gentleman from the Kremlin as a “good old Joe”?)
We are all familiar with the official reasons: Stalin suggests that Truman simply doesn’t want to meet him, that America wants to continue its aggressive policy, etc. Truman and his Secretary of State Acheson – the latter eager to wipe out any past suggestion that he was not as “tough” with Russia as he should be – have coldly and sarcastically rejected the Stalin invitations on the grounds that they are “maneuvers”; that the UN is the proper mailbox for such requests; that the other powers involved in the dispute must also be present, etc.
 
Cold War Spreads
In the meantime, our cleverest journalists are busily at work weighing up the score of who won the exchange, from a propagandistic viewpoint. The scale seems about even (that is, a fat zero on both sides), but it is perfectly clear that the much-maligned cause of peace has lost, and solidly too.
The cold war continues and, in fact, extends itself to hitherto comparatively untouched areas and nations! We refer, of course, to the new struggle over the Scandinavian nations of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, which takes the form of Stalin’s effort to maintain their “neutrality’’ (that is, refusal to join the North Atlantic pact) and Truman’s effort to draw them into that same war alliance.
This is the only real, concrete result of the past few weeks’ discussion – a deepening of the differences which have now reached the stage of outright military pacts, alliances and arrangements. In this light, the “rejected invitations” assume a farcical form and a primitive way of deceiving great masses of people.
 
Stalin’s Motivation
We must ask ourselves, however, how can we explain the statements of Stalin and those of Truman? Was Stalin merely seeking to put his rival on the spot by having him reject a demagogically-proposed invitation? Was Truman simply slamming the door and proposing full steam ahead for war? It is not as simple as this. There is little doubt that Stalin would like a meeting at which a temporary and important settlement of today’s most outstanding and sensitive differences could be settled. In Europe, at any rate, Stalinism has scored no recent victories; in fact, it has lost some serious struggles: Berlin, Yugoslavia, etc. Everything indicates the most serious difficulties in economic relations both with the occupied lands and in the occupied lands (particularly Eastern Germany). Furthermore, the victory of Chinese Stalinism in Asia is only remotely a victory for Stalin, since it bears no direct relation to the Russian armies or Russian imperialism itself.
America, on the other hand, particularly by contrast with Russia, has scored some definite victories in Europe and – most important – now appears in a position to move to the offensive and to gather some fruits from its billions invested in European recovery. The ERP program has had definite successes; European capitalism is again a going concern. The content of Stalin’s answers to the loaded questions put to him shows Uncle Joe’s awareness of this and his desire to stop future progress. “Want to settle the Berlin issue?” Then don’t form a Western Germany. “Want to have peace in Europe?” Then drop the idea of a North Atlantic Security Pact. “Want to have world peace?” Then stop the rearmament program, liquidate your atomic bomb construction.
The motivation of Stalin, therefore, is to force a halt in the expansion and aggressiveness of American imperialism. This halt must be on all levels: political, military and economic.
 
They Cannot Bring Peace
Truman’s rejection has, of course, the same origin. As the leader, spokesman and champion of American capitalism, he must advance his country over the only road which can fulfill its objectives, in imperialist terms.
That means preparation for war (rearmament, atom bomb construction, etc.); formation of a strong Western German state as a buffer and the creation of a solid military bloc out of the Marshall Plan nations (North Atlantic Pact). How can he turn back, without liquidating his entire foreign program? No more than Stalin can change the seemingly defensive tactics Which have been dictated to him today by circumstances beyond his control.
In short, then, the cold war will and must continue. In fact, the temperature can only get warmer, particularly after such fiascos as this latest! The issue of peace does not lie in the hand of either Truman or Stalin; they are two men pursuing similar paths which, while they may not always be parallel, will inevitably meet at the crossroads of war.
*

Mindszenty: Mea Culpa
Cardinal Mindszenty has “confessed” (or, at any rate, partially “confessed”) and the trial in Hungary has drawn to its inevitable conclusion. Inevitable, we say, because it is sure that Stalinism cannot undertake such risky ventures as its confession trials without absolute, iron-clad guarantees in advance that the play will unfold precisely as the GPU script writers have written it up.
The question is again with us: why these self-incriminating “confessions,” which seem so useful to Stalinism? A broken “Old Bolshevik” – yes; but an active cardinal of Rome? We suggest, to begin with, that we should be no more surprised at the alleged confession than the Catholic Church itself has been. Rome laid the basis for an “explanation” of the confession as soon as Mindszenty’s arrest took place by its charges of torture and mysterious “confession-inducing” drugs. What they expected has taken place, although hardly for the reasons they suggest. It is not necessary – in fact, it is futile – to seek explanations in such over-simplified tales as drugs, beatings, etc. The fact is that there is no one all-embracing and all-satisfying “explanation” such as one reads at the end of a detective thriller. The technique of Stalinism is far subtler and more serious. We don’t claim to have “the” explanation; we only suggest that it is a combination of many factors and forces, operating together and so cleverly used and played upon by the GPU masters that – and why should this be inconceivable? – the confessor actually believes, to a great extent, his own fantastic explanation!
Why cannot there be some elements of factual truth in the cardinal’s “confession”? Is it inconceivable that he was involved in black market currency manipulations, for example; or that he approached Western circles for aid, etc.? Basing themselves upon these kernels of truth, upon isolation, questioning, trickery and a combination of psychologically demoralizing techniques well know to students of such matters, it is not impossible to conceive of Stalinism rapidly breaking down and undermining a Mindszenty. These, of course, are secondary factors in the tragic trial now concluded.
Furthermore, the historic tendency of the church has always been to compromise, to seek a modus vivendi with the state power, regardless of whom this power was. The story of Nazi Germany is familiar. We contend that this principled readiness to compromise in itself prepares the moral and psychological basis for a capitulation and “confession” such as this. For, unlike other social systems or varieties of capitalism, totalitarian Stalinism cannot compromise with the church so long as that church rests upon the Vatican (that is, the West). Faced with an enemy who will not compromise with him, the Catholic Church in Stalinist lands must meet a new situation which it hitherto has never had to face. That is, it must become either a principled, outlawed opposition, leading an underground existence – or cease to exist as a Roman Catholic Church and become a Stalinist State Catholic Church.
We shall now see whether the Hungarian bishops break with Rome to form a new church or go into the opposition. But this unexpectedly harsh enemy who will not make a “deal” (except on his own terms) has sowed confusion and despair among the church leadership. This is the moral groundwork for “confessions.”
 
Political Objectives of the Trial
Furthermore, if we examine briefly the social structure of Hungarian Stalinism, the picture is even clearer. In this backward land, two-thirds of the population were peasants, cemented to the big landlords by the influence of the Catholic Church over them.
The transitional social basis of Stalinism consists of these same peasants whom it has converted info small landowners by its program of division of the estates. But this is a transitional, opportunistic and very unstable base for Stalinism, in the long run. This same peasantry formed the major reservoir of resistance to the new regime and the church’s influence over the peasantry must be broken as a part of the struggle of Stalinism to dominate this same peasantry. (This, of course, with an eye to the period when collectivization of the small farms must be begun.)
The trial, then, must also be seen as an effort to discredit and humiliate the Catholic Church before the Hungarian peasantry. The cardinal has “confessed”; “he did not fight like a man”; he has disavowed the Vatican by offering his resignation to the Hungarian government; he traded in American dollars, etc., etc. How can such a compromised church authority build up and organize a future opposition to the present regime?
There are many other implications in this sensational trial which must wait for more information and details. The above analysis, of course, assumes that our readers share the same revulsion and disgust that we do with the whole affair, stamped as it is with the sinister methods of Stalinism.
 



Its Political Views and Role in France
It is approximately one year since the Rassemblement Democratique Revolutionnaire (Revolutionary Democratic Assembly, or Grouping) was founded in France. To have been founded in the first place and then to have grown within the space of one year to its present size and significance, certain unique circumstances must necessarily have existed. These were found in the France of 1948. They may be summarized in the following terms;
A polarization, both political and ideological, took place rapidly in France after the end of the war. This polarization occurred at both the proletarian and bourgeois extremes of French society, and naturally tended to draw the numerous middle-class layers of France (peasantry, urban professionals and shopkeepers, etc.) to one or the other side. In the general milieu of the Left, the French Stalinist party naturally dominated. The tendency was toward the freezing fast of all political programs and doctrines. Ideology, in working-class and progressive circles, became compartmentalized, narrow and hard. In view of the fact that Stalinism was everywhere supreme in the field, that the Socialist Party had sunk back into a more than ever hopeless version of its pre-war reformism (after a short Resistance period of new life), and that French official Trotskyism had proved its bankruptcy to all who cared to examine it, the political outlook in France was gloomy indeed. One real movement existed – Stalinism; the rest was confusion and despair.
 
RDR’s Major Role
It is here that the RDR enters into the picture, and if this is not understood then the RDR’s great contribution and function can never be grasped. It broke up the icefields of Stalinist ideology and set the flux of French left-wing political life in motion once again. If it had accomplished no other purpose, its foundation would have more than outweighed its faults.
One of the RDR’s creators, David Rousset, has explained its historic function in these terms:
We are thus faced by a vast social zone extending from the moderate wing of the middle classes to working-class groups, either hostile to the Communist Party or disturbed and hesitant with respect to its policies. Hundreds of thousands of men and women retire from public life. It is the most important social phenomenon in France today. It ruins any possibilities for the traditional democratic play of forces. Politics is in abeyance. If it persists and becomes aggravated, it will call forth a totalitarian solution. It indicates, finally, a dangerous sclerosis in French society. Our Assembly, however, tends precisely to fill up this emptiness, to lead back to public life those masses who were drawing away from it. This is what I mean by again giving a popular basis to democracy. [Discussion on Politics, Les Temps Modernes, September 1948, p.390.]
Or again, in an article published in Le Semeur, organ of the French Federation of Christian Student Organizations, Rousset explains the origin of the RDR as follows:
It is a framework for political action adapted to today’s conditions, but due to the general decomposition of social forces throughout France and Europe it is premature, so it seems to me, to pose the problem of a new party demanding all ideological homogeneity that no one can achieve at this moment. What is important is the assembling, on a broad front from an ideological viewpoint but more precise so far as immediate program of action is concerned, of the very great number of Frenchmen who are tired of all that has happened these past years. Because the immediate danger, internally, is some authoritarian solution and ... externally, involvement in war. To prevent that, large masses, capable of expressing themselves, must be rapidly mobilized ... so that the existing relationship of forces may be modified.
Within the context of the RDR’s actuel and living struggle against war and Gaullist reaction, of course, it is believed that the vital clarification of political and ideological problems will take place.
 
New, Progressive Alternative
Now, this is not the place to examine in any detail whether the RDR, in one brief year, has lived up to all its hopes and expectations. Furthermore, its leaders and spokesmen are best qualified to handle this question. We should only like to point out that the RDR has grown significantly and stabilized its organizational framework considerably. In view of the prevalent political apathy – the very condition of the RDR’s creation! – the fact that the RDR has definitely entered into the stream of conscious French political life is noteworthy in and of itself; Particularly in left-wing circles, the RDR, together with its press and publications, has become a major factor.
Above all, it has become a center of attraction for those turning away from the SFIO (Socialist Party) and the Stalinist movement, yet desiring to remain in active political life. At the precise moment when alternatives of withdrawal or a deepening ideological decay in either the Stalinist or reformist political organizations seemed to exist as devil’s choices, the RDR emerged and presented a new, progressive alternative. Again, only in this way can it be understood and welcomed.
It is clear that Jacques, author of the preceding article, hardly shares this view. We shall attempt to indicate how his analysis of the RDR is based upon little else than his, own sadly lacking information, to begin with, and on an approach which in advance prevents him from attaining the slightest understanding of what this new movement is all about and why it merits the friendliest and most welcoming response from American socialists.
The essence of Jacques’ charges against the RDR seems to be as follows: This new movement, particularly in the presence of its intellectual leadership, represents a turning away from political life and activity, a revulsion against party life and action, and a withdrawal in the direction of an idealized and spontaneous “syndicalist” philosophy and practice. The socialist and revolutionary cause in France has been positively harmed by the formation of the RDR since it encourages these “syndicalist” moods and prevents the building of a vanguard revolutionary party. The RDR is thus not merely a failure, a “total frustration,” but a reactionary tendency in French political life, although Jacques does not specifically state this obvious conclusion.
It is possible to answer Jacques in many and alternative ways. On one level, many of his remarks reveal an ignorance of the bare facts about the RDR, even to an inaccurate translation of its name. [1]
 
“Anti-Politics” Charge False
The RDR is headed by a group of intellectuals who, because of their anti-Stalinism, their antipathy to the totalitarian regime in Russia, etc., have decided to “turn their backs on all politics.” So says Jacques. Is this not absurd?
What is the RDR’s program, if not “political”? What are its activities (its press, meetings, branches, organization, etc.) if not “political”? Finally – and perhaps this will convince even Jacques of its “political” character – the RDR’s National Executive Committee, meeting January 30 and 31, decided to present RDR electoral lists in the coming cantonal elections in March, as well as to prepare for a national convention of the RDR in October of this year (La Batalla, February 7, 1949).
What Jacques means, of course, by his “anti-politics” charge is that the RDR does not fit into his conception of a revolutionary vanguard party. That the RDR is not a revolutionary Marxist vanguard party is ... true. Did it or any of its leaders ever claim that it was? Or is it Jacques real point that it should have become one, from the day of its foundation?
We have tried to indicate the origin of the RDR and we challenge anyone to conceive how the French crisis of one year ago could have given birth to a “vanguard party.” The need was not another artificial attempt to call forth a "vanguard party" – had not the French Trotskyists been blowing upon this futile theme for a minimum of fifteen years without the slightest success? – but the creation of such a broad grouping as could eventually, after a long period of practice and experience, produce precisely such a party.
Rousset has explained this clearly enough:
We must, however, find these answers [to political questions], and we can succeed in this only by maintaining a living contact with daily social development. It is only through our being in and practising a common struggle that the necessary theoretical solutions will be found. It is this that explains, on the one hand, why we are not ready to found a party and, on the other hand, why we are founding an assembly. This assembly itself expresses our agreement on more limited, more immediate objectives, which correspond more directly to the present situation …It thus allows for a regroupment of new or former militants – that is, it creates a milieu for work. It therefore responds to immediate and necessary tasks, the principal one for us being the need to give a popular base to democracy and it permits the creation of conditions indispensable for effective theoretical research. In simpler terms, by first regrouping the great mass of those who desire a transformation in their means of existence, it opens the way for the formation of a new political vanguard. This is why, without any hesitation or any demagogic intent, we are not a party but an assembly. [Ibid., p.387]
But it is not the RDR’s only sin that it refuses to be what it never could be in the circumstances. The leaders of this movement, according to Jacques – all of them, without exception – distrust political parties as well as politics in general. It is Sartre who even denies that the RDR is a “political movement” (we are not given the source of this denial) and therefore becomes, in Jacques’ eyes, the one “who best expresses of all the spirit of the RDR” At one point, it is even referred to as “Sartre’s movement.”
 
Wild Errors
The errors and misrepresentations here run wild. To begin with, distrust of the existing political parties in France was the beginning of wisdom and a sine qua non for any kind of progressive reorientation. That certain individual intellectuals, reacting in a familiar manner, have extended this skepticism on their part into a paralyzing generality is beside the point. Jacques claims this is characteristic of all the RDR’s leaders, and does not hesitate to give a rather dishonest example in proof. After quoting a speech of Rousset in which the speaker cites the fact that the Spanish masses rose, at the start of the civil war, without being tied to rigid political parties (a statement of fact!), Jacques continues: “As soon as the parties stepped in, the inevitable bureaucratization was followed shortly by reaction.” Is it not clearly intended to give the reader the impression that this is the subsequent content and thought of Rousset’s remarks? This unfortunate impression could not be further from the truth, as any reader who examines Rousset’s speech (La Gauche, December 28, 1948) can easily ascertain.
The same kind of false impression is left with regard to Sartre. Whatever criticisms can be made of him, from the standpoint of Marxist politics and philosophy, the most stupid one is to accuse him of an anti-political bias! If only American intellectuals would function with the same political consciousness and activity as Sartre! His whole work is permeated by political thought and action and, in fact, the only possible basis on which one could make an adequate and objective study of the man and his doctrine is clearly through a political and social analysis of his work.
This holds particularly true for his important play Mains Sales (Paris version, not the New York distortion) which contains his interpretation of the relationship in political life between ends and means – an interpretation which, in our opinion, is strongly open to criticism and must be rejected. But Sartre’s philosophy and doctrine; having as it does many elements in common with the best of Marxist teachings, must be approached not only squarely but fairly. Jacques’ remarks are simply false.
 
How Sartre Puts It
It may well be, for example, that Jacques confuses the French word syndicalisme (meaning trade-unionism) with our term syndicalism (IWW, etc.), but there is nothing in Sartre’s writings to indicate the latter trend. Actually, he has virtually nothing to say about labor unions and workers’ organizations, beyond perfectly acceptable comments and generalities about democracy and the need for the French labor movement’s rank and file to find a means of expressing its will on issues of Stalinist-called political strikes, etc. In France, as a moment’s reflection will indicate, the struggle for trade-union democracy is vitally different from that in America. There it is bound up in the closest conceivable fashion with political problems.
Let us see what Sartre himself understands by the role of this RDR which he helped to create. We quote again from his discussion with Rousset (ibid., p.339):
Inasmuch as we are not only – we do not want only to be – the expression of a class, but that, placed as we are on the line of demarcation between the middle class and the working class, we seek rather to bring about a reunion of these two classes which, on many levels, have the same interests. That implies different ideological elements facing each other. That implies that we will be in the presence of people impregnated with Marxist culture and others with different points of departure – particularly for the intellectuals with their standpoints stemming from bourgeois philosophical thought which is, in its best aspects, a democratic philosophy.
What is of importance for us is that the functioning of our Assembly’s internal democracy leads to the constitution of – I will not say an ideology – but a powerful ideological current held in common between these different elements. And this wish is not utopian, because all those united in our Assembly have certain essential ideas in common, be they Marxist or be they not.
And whether we share Sartre’s viewpoint that an ultimate common ideology can be created between these diverse currents or not, the whole point of the matter is that Marxism and revolutionary socialism in France can gain nothing but credit and benefit by participating in this effort! This is one road to the creation of the essential revolutionary party. This is why one finds in the RDR today such tendencies as pacifism, World Federation (the Garry Davis movement), intellectual socialists of all shades and varieties, Christian Socialist youth and students, revolutionary socialist youth elements (Action Socialiste Revolutionnaire etc.), and the group of French Trotskyists who had enough courage and understanding to break with their hopeless past ties.
 
Did RDR Block New Party?
The masses of France, pursues Jacques, were ready for a new party but the leadership to create such a party was lacking. The RDR stepped in and instead of progress we had a “relapse.” For one who quotes Trotsky at such length and with such approval, this reveals a deep ignorance of a major tenet in Trotsky’s teaching: the relationship between class and party. Is there the slightest truth in his statement that, one year ago, the French masses were set for a new revolutionary party, with all its consequences, but the RDR blocked them? How could a handful of “anti-political intellectuals” accomplish such a task?
The truth is that, suffering from defeat in the famous general strike of winter 1947, plus a deepening disillusionment with Stalinism, a mood of pessimism and apathy had set in. This is common knowledge. A revolutionary party cannot be created out of nothing, and that was the situation in France – at least until Jacques proves that the facts were contrariwise. No RDR could have been born and survived a month if the over-all tendency had been in the other direction.
Sufficient has been said, we believe, to suggest some important fallacies in Jacques’ approach to the problem of the RDR. He has criticized it for not being what it never could be; for being something that it is not; for aiming at some mythical goal it cannot attain; and for not aiming at some goal (acceptable to Jacques) which it never could have attained. His criticism is doubly faulty and valueless since it blocks our seeing the real problem of the RDR, its real faults and weaknesses.
The destiny of the RDR is clearly a highly undecided matter. Whatever our opinion as Marxists may be, nothing could be worse than the laying down of a doctrinaire formula which would exclude, in advance, the possibility of revolutionary socialists working in such a movement, in the most open, friendly and objective kind of way. Truism though it maybe, experience is still the greatest teacher and the membership of the RDR must learn in this way, together with the ideological and analytic assistance provided them by its Marxist wing.
The real weakness of the RDR movement, as we suggested, has not even been mentioned by Jacques. The RDR has no solid trade-union ties, nor much support among the workers of France in their actual organizations. Thus, it tends to be still largely a movement of students, intellectuals, middle class, etc, and its working-class composition is small indeed. It must find a means of creating these ties, but here we come upon its principal political weakness: namely, its unwillingness to openly confront the issue of Stalinism, political and ideological, and its pursuit (in its press, etc.) of an essentially ostrich-policy about Stalinism in general and French Stalinism in particular. There seems to exist a widespread belief that since Stalinism still leads the majority of the French proletariat, the RDR’s best hope of getting workers’ support is not to antagonize “their” party. We believe the RDR membership will rapidly learn this is an illusion.
Where the RDR has been at its best is in the development of a specific program for current French issues of economy, inflation, etc. On broader political issues, only a beginning has been made for discussion and clarity. The organizational weaknesses of the RDR are apparent and certainly better known to those in its ranks than to us (including Jacques and myself) at a distance. But all these criticisms, of course, assume the justified, progressive nature of the RDR and look forward to a “bigger and better” movement.
The RDR is no finished product but a fluid and live movement with an intensive political and intellectual life of its own. In this sense, it is precisely what was needed in France; and the long, revolutionary tradition of that country (above all replete with examples of the creation of just the right organization to fit an historic need) indicates the potentialities for a bright and healthy future for the RDR.
HENRY JUDD

Footnote
1. We cite this not out of petty polemical spite, but because it is so revealing of his misunderstanding of the RDR’s nature. It is not a “Rally of Revolutionary Democrats,” as Jacques states, but a political assembly calling people together on a democratic and revolutionary program which was clearly specified in its very first manifesto (i.e. against war, against Europe’s division into pro-Russian and pro-American blocs, for the socialist organization of French life etc. ...). Jacques’ title makes the RDR out to be some kind of neo-Jacobin movement or, worse still, nothing at all. It is one thing to attack and criticize the RDR for its program, its practice or its claims but it is another thing to deny, in effect, that it has any shape or form or program.
 



The unification of Western Europe is bound to come, in some form or manner. The entire European crisis, still growing in intensity, is forcing the still relatively independent nations of Western Europe to unify. So the question no longer is shall there be a United Western Europe, but HOW shall Europe be united, by WHOM shall it be unified and WHAT shall be the objectives and purposes of this unification?
With the announced formation of a “Council of Europe” by the five powers who have signed the Brussels military defense pact, the problem is again presented to us, but now with a force and acuteness as never before. Cautious as the first steps have been, the ice has been broken, a principle of “unity” has been laid down and additional steps are now inevitable. The above questions, then, are now living realities and any revolutionary movement must plunge into this stream and try to chart its own course.
First, precisely what steps have been taken as of now? Britain, France, Belgium, Holland and Luxemburg have declared their intention of forming a council, composed of two bodies. A “ministerial committee” composed of government ministers will meet in secret to take decisions. A public “consultative committee,” elected by participating countries as they choose, will have only advisory powers. Other Western European nations will be invited to join, and the seat of the Council of Europe will be in the famous Alsace-Rhine city of Strasbourg.
 
Not an Isolated Development
Even by the most conservative standards, these proposals are cautious and limited. In reality, a consultative and advisory body is proposed and, in terms of bourgeois law and formalism, no surrender of sovereign rights and powers by the individual nations is implied. The precise functions and powers of the council have not even been clarified and remain to be worked out. Thus, still passing judgment purely in terms of accepted formalities and so-called international law, we are presented with a cautious step forward on the road to a European unification of the type dreamed of by such liberals as Count Sforza and other parliamentarians. But it is too easy to be deceived by such formalities. The proposal is far different in its real content.
To begin with, it takes place at a moment when European economic recovery has advanced to a point where a bloc of the nations involved would have a specific meaning in terms of power, both economic and military. The worst of the economic collapse has been overcome and Western Europe is again a going concern, by comparison with the end of the war, capable of some independent action as a power bloc. The fact that unity has not advanced any further than outlined above is primarily due to differences between France and the British Labor government as to how unity shall take place and who shall be its leader and spokesman.
Furthermore, one must understand the situation in which the Council concept is put forward. It is far from an isolated development. It is an intimate part of the forthcoming North Atlantic military security pact and cannot be separated from this proposed American alliance for a common military front against Russia. In another sense, the Council of Europe is a development of the Marshall Plan, which foresaw first the economic restoration of Western Europe, then its remilitarization with American help, and finally its actual transformation into a solid and powerful bulwark against Russian advance and for war with Russia. Step by step, this American strategy has been advancing, with many overlapping parts to it, of course.
We must thus see this new move as a part of the entire international picture. In Europe, at any rate, Stalinism is on the defensive and in considerable retreat. Russia forms its Eastern European economic alliance, as America (by remote control) advances its Western European alliance. Stalin proposes new peace talks and Truman proposes a “world fair deal.” But the real direction is toward a deepening of both the world and European split between the two power camps. In this sense, we cannot be deceived by the formal appearance of this new step toward European unity, a result much desired by socialists, since this appearance is far overshadowed by its content in terms of power and imperialist politics.
 
Socialist View of European Unity
But this judgment does not cover anything. Slogans and formations for the unity of Europe have long been familiar. Equally familiar has been the socialist analysis of these slogans (particularly when advanced by Churchill and, recently, the Pope) and their counter-proposal for the socialist unification of Europe, under revolutionary governments. Till now, both conceptions – bourgeois and socialist – have been abstractions. Now the bourgeois concept of unity begins to take on reality! The question is not before every socialist in Europe: how shall he respond? Shall he limit himself to analysing and condemning, more or less in the same terms that we have, the Council of Europe? Shall he continue in the tradition of an unconditional rejection, based on long hostility, of the unity slogan when advanced by his enemies? Shall he, likewise, maintain his traditional silence before this slogan because the Stalinist movements of Western Europe, directed by Moscow, have directed with considerable success a campaign of constant abuse against the unity idea? And, finally, shall he continue his abstract answer of a “Socialist Europe” even when confronted by what will be the undoubtedly growing reality of a bourgeois united Western Europe?
It is clear that we would consider such an approach as wrong, limited and fatal, from the viewpoint of attempting to win influence. Worst of all, it would give the bourgeois leaders of the Western unity idea the ideologic leadership over what is undoubtedly a widespread and popular demand in Europe; it would permit them to run off with the ball almost at will. Now is the moment for Europe’s revolutionary socialists to consider, concretely and specifically, the idea advanced to them by the Workers Party – namely, that they shall become the popular champions of the idea that Western Europe must form a democratic federation, popularly fleeted, and brought about by labor and social democratic governments.
In a word, socialists must counterpose – in specific and realistic terms – THEIR conception of a “Council of Europe” to the bureaucratic, manufactured-from-above, power and military-dominated Council of Europe which the reactionary politicians wish to impose upon the people. This cannot be the empty abstraction of a “Socialist Europe,” any more than it can be the reactionary bloc proposed by the Big Five of Western Europe. It must be something new, worked out by the anti-Stalinist socialists of Western Europe who are by far best equipped to give this conception both scope and realism.
For example, it is proposed that the new “Council” shall consist of government-appointed representatives who shall meet in secret, etc. To condemn this is not only easy, but not enough. Let us propose a democratically-elected Western European Constituent Assembly, composed of representatives from all participating nations on a population basis, who shall publicly draw up a constitution for the new Western European Federation. This same thing must be worked out for all political, social and economic aspects of the new unity. The real question is: shall the coming European Union be a power instrument in the hands of reactionary forces who, by transmission, shall force it to operate for America; or shall it be a people’s union, in the interests of peace and social progress?
There must be a struggle organized around this, and only Europe’s socialists can do it. Stalinism cannot, because it desires the disunion and disintegration of Western Europe; its campaign can be purely negative and thus reactionary. Again, circumstances have arisen to give the real socialists of Europe a splendid opportunity for political propaganda and activity. They cannot complain of a lack of opportunities. We hope they shall take advantage of this newest chance and use it to their own interests. They can again establish contact with progressive masses who are going in their direction. But they must begin now, today, in their press and propaganda.
(The above column is contributed as part of the discussion on Western Union, opened in Labor Action several weeks ago with the publication of a resolution on Western Union drafted by the Political Committee of the WP.)
 



One year will shortly have elapsed since the beginning of the European Recovery Program (ERP), the economic aid aspect of the much broader Marshall Plan. The initial $5 billion fund has now been exhausted or committed and it has therefore become necessary to ask Congress for an additional appropriation of $5½ billions to carry the ERP through June of 1950. This is the formal explanation behind Secretary of State Acheson’s recent statement on the ERP as well as Economic Cooperation Administrator Hoffman’s general report on the first year of the program. Of course, the additional billions will be approved by Congress (after a minimum of complaining and criticism). To begin with, much progress has been made from the American standpoint despite possible complaints and, more importantly, it would be out of the question to withdraw from or hedge on such deep commitments.
What kind of progress can be cited? Naturally, ERP tries to take full credit for the undoubted and substantial recovery which Western Europe has undergone in the past year. It would appear that this has all been due to the glorious and philanthropic gifts flowing out of America’s abundant production! The natural economic forces in Europe, with the rich resources in material and manpower that Europe still possesses, are hardly taken into account. Yet the fact remains that western Europe has achieved a definite and tangible recovery, that it is again a going capitalist economic region, that its productivity is surpassing the bare minimum necessary for life itself and that its economic specific weight in relation to America and eastern Europe has advanced.
In this respect, it has again become possible for the political and ruling groups of eastern Europe to reassert themselves in world affairs and to maintain a certain independence they have not known in many years. It would be absurd to deny this since this factor will greatly influence relations between western Europe and America in the future. It will not be strictly a one-sided affair, thanks to the counterforces and trends which economic advancement has created. And this is something to be thankful for!
 
Nature and Scope Recovery
The recovery referred to can be measured in more specific terms: 1948 factory and mine productivity was about 15 per cent over 1947 and equal to pre-war productivity; steel output equalled that of 1937 and gained 25 per cent over 1947, if we excluded western Germany from the totals; railroad and freight traffic was largely back to normal; crops for the year were 25 per cent above the extremely bad year of 1947 and – with the exception of western Germany which is about to be subjected to an ersatz milk and meat diet experiment, and still strictly rationed England – the general food situation is far superior to previous years. Perhaps the most favorable sign of all was the 20 per cent increase in overall exports for the Marshall Plan countries, with the general prospect that increased export and tourist trade for 1949 will again be much higher. In general, the picture when viewed objectively would indicate that the recovery potentiality of western Europe, once it was stimulated by the American flow of goods, proved considerably higher than originally expected.
The considerable flow of foods, fertilizer and feed from America in 1948, together with good weather, were responsible for the crop recovery. The quantity of raw materials, semi-finished products, machinery, fuel, etc. – accounting for about 60 per cent of the billions spent – provided the necessary stimulus to set western Europe’s productive plant into operation once more. These factors, together with the skill and capacity of the workers, are behind the marked recovery.
Of course, there are many factors on the other side that must be considered. We have written here of recovery measured in purely capitalist terms, and not in terms of real needs and distribution. For example, it is already clear that by the time ERP runs out in 1952 few, if any, of the nations involved will have achieved a trade balance and overcome their current dollar shortages and deficits. Very little progress has actually been made toward the abolition of trade barriers and customs boundaries, and East-West European commerce is virtually extinct. Whatever efforts were made at some kind of “economic union” of the participating nations fell flat before the mutual rivalry of the countries involved. Large-scale unemployment persists in Greece and Italy.
From the standpoint of the European people and workers involved, most detrimental is the continuation of inflationary regimes with swollen military budgets that unbalance the entire economy. Thus, in the field of distribution of the gains we have cited, we have the typical disproportions characteristic of capitalist economics. The improved standards of the masses are at a far lower level than that of the rich, the industrialists and the business men.
 
Victory For U.S. Diplomacy
From a political point of view, the U.S. has won a considerable victory in its struggle with Russian expansionism. The recovery achieved has halted both Russian imperialism and the national Stalinist movements which resorted to open sabotage in the struggle against the Marshall Plan. In this respect, the leadership of the countries of western Europe is more dependent upon continued U.S. aid than before; but as we have indicated above this is not unilateral relationship as, for example, is the case when Russian imperialism seizes hold of a foreign country. In this sense, both the temporary halting of Stalinism and the economic recovery are objective results that are highly favorable to the real socialists of western Europe, provided they make use of them.
Acheson, who will manage fhe new phase of the ERP program, will continue the economic aid in substantially the same way as hitherto. However, his political approach will be more and more a pushing of the Marshall nations towards some form of unity, according to his conception of the term. That is, a partial economic unity to further strengthen the economic recovery achieved, and above all a military unify based upon his proposed North Atlantic pact and other measures. The administration’s ideal is a semi-unified western Europe, productive and strong, with a coordinated military machine supplied by American arms. This is the essence of the new phase of the Marshall Plan.
Many controversies will develop during this new phase. The pressure of Congressmen for immediate and tangible repayments (in the form of strategic metals and raw materials; privileged trade agreements; forcing unwelcome tax provisions upon the benefiting nations, etc.) will grow. We submit, however, that these are secondary and subordinate factors in the real picture. At this stage of the game, U.S. imperialism does not proceed in that way. The conception of those who conceived of the ERP program as resulting in the outright and clear “enslavement” of western Europe, its governments and peoples by the U.S. has proved to be more than naive. The shrewder and more far-sighted exponents of the “American Century” have other ways of proceeding, and they have not failed as yet.
This is precisely why the revolutionary socialists of Europe must match them in keenness of analysis and program by building their own political approach on the basis of objective facts and not presuppositions. Their struggle must be, in economic terms, for a progressive sharing of the fruits of economic recovery and, in political terms, for the shaping of the coming unification of western Europe in a democratic form rather than the militaristic form which America would like to see.
 



“The ending of the Berlin blockade,” said Dr. Kurt Schumacher, head of the German Social-Democratic Party, “means the start of a new and great struggle for the whole of Germany.”
It is this now obvious fact which has greatly tempered the enthusiasm of the German people and the Berlin population at the welcome news that the 10-month-old airlift is about to end. While the immediate danger and tension of war has greatly relaxed, new and even larger questions are at stake.
The rapid events of the last week have brought profound changes in the European and world situation as a whole, as well as in Germany itself. The disclosure that secret negotiations have been going on for two months to lift the blockade was followed by the actual event itself had arrangements for a new Four Power conference to be held this month in Paris. Finally, the Bonn Assembly concluded its work and announced the formation of a federal republic for Western Germany.
All these happenings have, understandably, been greeted by people everywhere with a genuine, if somewhat skeptical, enthusiasm and eagerness. To many, it seems that perhaps the cold war is coming to an end, that a peace treaty with Germany may actually be signed and a new era of good will and East-West cordial relations is about to begin. Let us see how much truth there is in such expectations.
 
Shift in Strategy
That Stalin and the Kremlin rulers have decided upon a significant shift in strategy and tactics is beyond any question. It is, of course, far too soon to measure the extent and depth of this change, but we shall soon know how far Stalin is prepared to go by observing the behavior of his spokesmen at the coming conference, as well as by keeping a sharp eye on Stalinist tactics and strategy elsewhere. Nevertheless, there is no question that by this sudden shift, Stalin has reopened once more the whole question of Germany and its future.
But despite the remarks of President Truman, the lifting of the blockade does not simply put matters back as they were a year ago when the blockade was imposed. Not only has much changed in the meantime, but the issue is no longer that of the city of Berlin. It Is rather the issue of Germany’s fate as a whole. The whole new tactic of Stalin was deliberately calculated to do exactly this.
There are many factors motivating this unexpected development, from the Russian viewpoint. As with every major change in strategy, the motive has both “positive” and “negative” sides. All are not yet clear, nor will they be until the Paris conference itself has begun. But certain factors are already known. In the first place, there is no question but that Russian imperialism lost its struggle to terrorize and take over Berlin, thanks not exclusively or even primarily to the astounding airlift, but above all to the determined anti-Stalinist stand of the millions of Berlin people. Stalin suffered a first-rate and catastrophic political defeat at the hands of the Germans who fought the Russian terror to a standstill.
In addition, from a narrow economic point of view, the Russian zone of Germany has been far more drastically effected by the Allied counter-blockade than vice versa. The choking off of Ruhr steel and coal supplies has hit the Russian zone, and hit it hard. Productivity has suffered and, recognizing his political defeat, Stalin is further encouraged to make this strategic withdrawal by these economic difficulties.
Simultaneously with these defeats in Berlin and greater Germany, Stalin has become cognizant of the fact that Western Germany has steadily grown in economic and political strength, particularly by contrast with his zone. Its attraction represents a particular danger to him, and here we can see another aspect of the new grand maneuver. The steady mounting of productivity in the Western zones has been accompanied by a steady revival of independent German political life, both in the capitalist and working-class ranks. The success of American imperialism in rebuilding Western Germany is clear enough, to this point.
Therefore, a new approach must be made in an effort to halt and then destroy this success. Thus, writing in Izvestia, a gentleman named Mikhailov (Stalin) tells us that the main purpose of the new Bonn “constitution” is to pave the way for the inclusion of Western Germany into the military bloc of the Atlantic Pact nations.
 
To Neutralize Germany
We may summarize the political motivation thus: to broaden the issue from a struggle over Berlin to a struggle over Germany as a whole; to prevent the development of Western Germany and its absorption into the Marshall Plan-North Atlantic bloc. Expressed otherwise, since Stalinism has failed to conquer Germany, a gigantic maneuver has opened up for the neutralization of the whole of Germany. Let us set up a neutral buffer state between us, Stalin is telling American imperialism.
In abandoning his last year’s perspective of a conquest of Germany, via Berlin, Stalin of course has not abandoned his long-range aim: the political and social conquest of the country. But he must profoundly change the way in which this task is to be fulfilled. His immediate goals are different henceforth: resumption of trade between the eastern and western halves of the country; a seat on the board of control over the Ruhr industries; a renewal of reparations from the Western zones, etc.
But the political perspective is to be pushed into the background now, even if the alleged “people’s democracy” of the East must be abandoned. The German Stalinist party (SED) must reorient itself, both in the East and West. In the West, it must first find a basis for its very existence, even if this means working within the framework of the new Bonn constitution. A re-adaptation is demanded of it.
Other and more concrete points will undoubtedly be proposed by Vishinsky (Stalin) at the Paris conference. It has been suggested these will include: (1) demand for German unification under the old Weimar Constitution form; (2) withdrawal of all occupation forces within one year; (3) conclusion of a final peace treaty with Germany. The struggle at the Paris conference will take place around these points, but it is clear that the Russians are prepared to make the greater concessions necessary for arriving at an agreement.
Will this include free and open supervision of any future elections to be held throughout Germany, including the Russian zone? Will they permit other political parties, such as the Social-Democrats, to function freely in their zone? We cannot be sure yet, but in all likelihood, yes. Stalin understands the meaning of a retreat and withdrawal; a price must be paid.
The real obstacle standing in the way will be the economic assimilation of the Russian zone, where property has been nationalized and statified in various forms, with the economy of Western Germany, where capitalism and private ownership not only prevail, but receive the utmost support from America. But faced with the dominant political task of the moment, there is no reason why America and Russia cannot shelve this problem of economic forms for the moment by retaining the status quo in all zones. Since, as we shall see, even the most elaborate kind of agreement cannot be permanent, this matter too can be temporarily solved.
 
The Stalinists Look Ahead
And what of the Allied position at the conference? They will most certainly oppose an ending of the occupation, thus giving the Russians an excellent propaganda point. They will insist upon the Eastern zone entering a unified Germany via the new Bonn Constitution which has just been formulated under their influence. In other words, the Americans will continue to press forward with their plans for the limited revival of the German state, in a capitalist form of course, and will seek its integration within the general framework of a Europe largely influenced by American imperialism. It appears that the Russians will (because they must) go along with this approach.
But the Russians, with their long-range view, are banking on the development of other factors. A revived capitalist Germany will eventually be struck by the same failures and weaknesses which Western Europe is already experiencing after its revival of the past two years. This involves the whole problem of the Marshall Plan, which cannot, be discussed at length here. Suffice to point out that the latest United Nations report on this plan lays emphasis above all on the fact that the Marshall Plan, far from tending to economically unify Europe, is driving nation after nation along the road to a new economic autarchy.
Germany, estimates Stalin, will take the same path, thus providing the German Stalinist movement with a new basis for political life after a few years. In the interim, it is quite likely that the present SED and its Stalinist leadership of Pieck, Grotewohl, etc., will be discarded. They have failed – and Stalin never forgives a failure!
Can this shift in strategy and tactics over Germany mark a still wider shift that may possibly be worldwide in scope? Is it true, as Drew Middleton wrote, “Larger questions than the settlement of the German problem are at stake”? It has been suggested that Stalinism is about to enter a new phase of collaboration with the West in Europe, while pursuing its aggressive tactics in Asia. It is, of course, too early to predict just how far this shift will be carried; yet there are surely signs that indicate some truth in all this.
The Greek Stalinist government has signified its desire to end the “civil war”; the Italian Stalinist-led unions are preparing nationwide strike settlements; the tone and tenor of the recent Stalinist Paris “Peace” Conference had all the bluster and bragging that rearguard cover-up actions always have. But one must wait and see just how much is involved.
 
Opportunity for Social-Democrats
Finally, it must be pointed out: a new factor of vast political importance figures in this forthcoming conference – a revived German nation, and a revived politically-conscious German working class. This is not a conference of victors, gathered about the prostrate body of bombed-out Germany. A third factor has entered into the situation, mobilized in the form of the German Social-Democratic Party.
What a magnificent opportunity lies before this party! Yet, because of its timorous and reformist leadership – both top and secondary – we know that this opportunity for pressing home the viewpoint of a genuinely independent Germany will be either lost or, at best, only partly expressed. There is no question that the German Social-Democracy is the party in Germany today.
If it took a firm stand for unification, withdrawal of all armed forces, convening of an All-German Constituent Assembly to draw up a genuine new constitution, etc., it would receive a support and acclaim that would stand the Four Power negotiators on their ears and end their importance in the situation. This is too much to expect, of course. Yet the German masses will make their viewpoint known at Paris and we shall watch to see how hard this is fought by a common American-Russian front.
 



Sufficient time and discussion has elapsed since the original presentation of the North Atlantic Security Pact for us to attempt to draw some more fundamental conclusions as to its significance. Like any other document, after all, the pact which has so engrossed public opinion for several weeks, is a skeletal statement, of objectives and principles upon whose bones only political reality can place some flesh.
It is all the more difficult to evaluate this pact since it is doubtful if any such document has ever been followed by such a formidable barrage of deceitful propaganda, misrepresentation and general chicanery. On the one hand, its proponents have sought to cover it with shining innocence and nobility, all in the blessed spirit of Easter. Not only does it fit into the spirit and framework of the UN and its charter (in fact, it is nothing but a measure to bolster the UN!), but its purely “defensive” purposes could only be misunderstood by evil-doers whose minds are bent on “aggression.” Russia and its satellite powers, of course, have described the pact as open preparations for war, “military plans against the Soviet Union are being drawn up” (Gromyko), the heights of insolent imperialist aggressiveness, etc.
At the present point, the only subject on which all analysts of the pact (right, center and left) can find unanimous agreement is that it has delivered a death blow to the already rapidly expiring UN. That body, whose prestige has declined at a pace infinitely more rapid than that of the League of Nations, has become simply a center of public propagandistic announcement for the two warring camps which divide our world.
The contempt and disdain with which the top representatives of all foreign governments now treat it (they are content to send their lesser spokesmen to its gatherings) is matched by the tone of the discussions which go on. It is only necessary to listen to radio broadcasts of UN meetings – a welter of abuse, charges, accusations, slander, etc. – to realize that this body is effectively dead from any point of view. Three years sufficed to murder it.
We must reject with equal emphasis both interpretative views on the pact itself. It is neither an innocent document of “defense,” as its reactionary endorsers would like us to believe, nor is it a violent “aggressive military alliance” preluding the launching of World War III against Russia, as its Stalinist opponents and other analysts tell us. Both points of view are gross oversimplifications made with malicious propagandistic intent.
 
Pact Is Obsolete
That the pact is a totally reactionary document, based upon a reactionary conception of world politics, goes without saying. But its reactionary nature rests not simply upon its militaristic tendencies, its drive to further harden and split the world into antagonistic sectors, but rather upon a more fundamental fact.
This has been suggested by David Rousset, writing in the Nation of two weeks past. The pact is an “anachronism,” suggests Rousset, and rests upon an outmoded (and therefore both reactionary and impossible) conception of territorial security belonging to a pre-war period. Yet it is the only kind of conception which American imperialism, the organizer of the pact, is capable of developing.
Why is it outmoded and antiquated? Simply because its “defensive” military doctrine conceives of a military world of large mass armies which the atom bomb and the jet plane have bypassed? Or because that part of the pact which contains military implications is an absurdity which deceives no one since, unlike true military alliances of previous periods which consisted of understandings between two actual military powers, this particular alliance is between one mighty military power (America) and a set of nations which are, at best, only potential military forces?
No, the military absurdity of the pact is not sufficient to warrant our description of “anachronistic,” particularly since the pact is far more a political document, attempting to create a political force in opposition to Stalinist Russia, than a military one. Its military clauses, as we shall see again, rest on extremely shaky grounds.
Its reactionary nature is primarily political in character, and this in more than one way:

It is not an alliance between equals, but between a powerful supernation and nations which, badly weakened by the war, are dependent to one or another degree upon America. This means the inner operation of the pact will be determined by minority forces determined to retain the existing relationships and with no concern for the masses of people involved.
 

Looks to Status Quo

It conceives of the defense against Russia and Stalinism in static terms, with the ultimate decision to be based on military superiority. While it is not true that military force is to be applied today or. that immediate preparations for war mobilization are placed on the urgent order of the day (we agree with Rousset’s viewpoint which defines the immediate tactical aim of the pact as an effort to wring concessions from Russia by a show of strength short of immediate war), it is perfectly clear that each clause and line in the pact leads in but one direction – an eventual showdown with Russia by force and violence.
Linked with Point 2 is perhaps the more important fact that, if we remove for the moment the pact’s military aspects, the remaining political content is entirely status quo in nature. That is, it presumes the continuation and hopes for the stabilization of both American and Western European capitalism. There is no conception of any political or social struggle against Stalinism or Russian influence in progressive terms; no idea of winning Europe’s masses to the side of this new “Grand Alliance” by a superior and attractive program of social progress.

Since none of the pact’s signers dare admit the increasingly apparent fact that Europe’s social order is structurally an exhausted one and that, at best, it can regain a limited stability if America continues its loans and outright grants, it naturally follows that they cannot meet the Stalinist challenge (which is primarily social and political; only military as a final resort) by a social challenge of their own. It is in this, of course, that the pact’s impossibility of success really lies.
Let us put it in another way. The pact belongs to the overall Marshall Plan strategy of American imperialism. Like the economic-aid program, it is a part of the broad plan. By an outward show of force and strength, it is believed that Russian expansionism will be brought further to a halt. At the same time, the undoubted economic recovery in Western Europe together with American military and continued economic aid is supposed to permit the rebuilding of large military forces in Europe – 100 divisions, huge jet air forces, etc. Within 5 to 10 years, Western Europe will be militarily powerful enough (so the most optimistic proponents of the plan believe) to halt the Russian armies. The whole conception treats Russia and its problem as if it were nothing but a revived Nazi Germany which only superior military forces can halt.
Even this conception is absurd, and raises an infinity of problems. Shall, for example, the Maginot Line be reconstructed? Shall France and England rebuild their huge land armies of millions of men? Shall America send token divisions to Europe? And what is to happen to today’s economic recovery, still so shaky and convalescent? Shall there be a new turning away from production of consumers’ goods and towards military production? But how could this possibly be done without another and more thorough reversal of current German policy which would not only permit, but demand full, unhampered production of each and every machine in that area and foremost of all in the Ruhr?
 
Doomed to Failure
The great dilemma of even a powerful producer like America – guns or butter – surely cannot be solved by the weak ERP nations. If they are called upon to divert their recovery into war channels now (and this would have to be full-scale, or it would be meaningless), we shall rapidly see the collapse of even the recovery that has occurred. And this tendency carries within it an even greater danger – unquestionably the major, danger of all – since it would involve the life and standards of the workers of Europe, those who are to be called upon to do the war production work and the fighting which lies at its ultimate end.
There is the heart of the problem. Can the masses of Western Europe be mobilized by (a) America, or (b) America’s representatives in the ERP nations for a violent struggle against, Russia? A highly dubious matter, in our opinion. Arms, cannon, jet planes, etc., are not enough. There must be the political, social and ideological will to fight. The story of France’s collapse in 1940 is a familiar one and no one believes any longer in the theory of overwhelming German technical superiority. The French masses had no desire or willingness to fight in 1940; the European masses have even less desire or will to fight in 1949.
Who seriously contends that their apathy to America versus Russia will have lessened by 1950, or 1955? If their national governments engage in all-out war production, at the expense of consumers’ goods and living standards, is it not clear that the national Stalinist movements will at the very least hold their present mass strength? Thus, when and if the war comes, it will not be with a Hitler with hundreds of Nazi agents in France, but a Stalin with millions of supporters in Italy, Germany, France, etc.
The more one examines the pact in its concreteness, the more impossible it becomes. It will meet with the passive resistance, in Rousset’s words, of the European masses who simply cannot be mobilized to fight for American or any other kind of capitalism. The fulfillment of this pact would guarantee the overrunning of Western Europe by Russia. And America? Would Truman then proceed to the systematic atomic destruction of each and every major European city?
We conclude then: the North Atlantic Pact is a gesture doomed in advance to failure. In content, it is reactionary; in outlook, it is antiquated; in perspective, it is illusory; in doctrine, it is hopeless. Its European political supporters join the ranks of generals without armies. Yet, as we know, it is the best our capitalist statesmen are capable of producing.
To our general indictment of bankruptcy against them we must now add the charge of being incapable of defending Western Europe, or any part thereof, from the threat and menace of Stalinism. It is precisely because socialists are so concerned about halting the spread of Stalinism throughout the world that they reject any support to such pacts, or those who originate them.
 



The Paris Conference of the Big Four Powers has already begun, but it is not there that Germany’s real future will be decided.
This latest of a series of conferences between the foreign ministers of Russia, America, France and England will probably arrive at many decisions concerning Germany and its people, but between these decisions and their applications stand the 65 million Germans themselves who are experiencing a great revival of nationalist sentiment and a desire for unification of their country which has erupted as an independent and perhaps decisive force in the whole situation.
The question of Germany’s unification will certainly occupy a leading spot on the Paris conference agenda, but they will not be talking about the same thing that the people of Germany mean by unification. In discussing unification at Paris, the foreign ministers are guided by two principles: (1) Their desire for a unification which will still subject the Germans to overall control by Allied governmental and military forces; (2) the tug-of-war over the kind of unification which will best serve one or another bloc in the continuing “bold war” between Russia and America.
Thus, the Americans and their supporters will press for unification under the new Bonn Constitution which creates a loosely federated Germany, without a strongly organized central government and with its authority severely curbed by the Allies and subject to constant supervision. It seems likely that the Americans will oppose any effort to end the occupation immediately.
For their part, the Russians may propose a more centralized German government, also subject to overall supervision, but with the hope on their part that the German Stalinist movement could more easily infiltrate and seize eventual control over such a centralized government.
 
Imperialist Unity
Whatever differences may develop at Paris, it is clear that all the powers involved in this conference will stand united solidly against the idea of German unification which is now sweeping over the country itself. This, of course, is the real question today: what kind of unification shall there be, and by whom shall it be done?
There is no question but that the reactionary splitup of the country imposed at the end of the war is about to be ended. Unification is coming because such powerful political and economic forces have been created as to make it impossible for the present division to last any longer.
But shall this be a formal unification imposed upon Germany from without by the imperialists in session at Paris, shall it be a unification which denies the essence of national freedom by its refusal to permit the German people themselves to decide its exact form and nature – or shall it be a genuine and progressive unification brought about by the actions and struggles of the Germans themselves? This is the real issue of Germany’s future.
The Americans are, of course, opposed to a unified Germany either under Russian influence or dominated by the German Communist Party – a “Stalinist” Germany. The Russians, in turn, are bitterly opposed to a unified Germany under American influence in any form or shape. Yet it is clear that today, since the Russians are in retreat for the time being, they may well have to accept the American style of “unification” (represented by the loose federation of the Bonn Constitution) if they wish to get in exchange for this such vitally necessary things as a resumption of East-West trade, a look-see in management of the Ruhr industries, etc. This may well be the essential bargain made at Paris – an all-German Bonn Constitution in exchange for renewal of trade arid commerce.
But there is one issue on which both Acheson and Vyshinsky will stand firmly united. We have already mentioned this: opposition to a genuine free and unified Germany, to be achieved in the only possible way – by the masses of German people themselves who, acting without restraint, create a new German Republic expressing their own democratic hopes and ambitions. For us, therefore, the only possible answer to the fake German “unification’’ conference at Paris should be the demand of the German people themselves for a freely- elected, all-German Constituent Assembly – a sovereign body of the German people – empowered to draft and put into effect the constitution for a new German Republic.
Such a demand, of course, will be bitterly opposed by the occupying powers – Russians and Americans alike – who already indicate their disdain and contempt for the German people by failing to allow them representatives at Paris. If the Russians succeed in having some of their Stalinist supporters in Germany come to Paris, it will only be a propaganda game to back up Russian proposals.
Two events of the past week have clearly indicated precisely how the German masses themselves feel. The violent strike of the Berlin railway workers is a militant demonstration against the hated Russian occupants and their Stalinist quisling supporters. It caps the whole successful struggle for the saving of Berlin from Stalinism. More significant is the result of the elections to the Stalinist “People’s Congress” in Eastern Germany. On each ballot appeared the statement: “I am for the unity of Germany and a just peace treaty. Therefore [!] I vote for the following [Stalinist] list of candidates.”
By their own admission (this, in itself, is an astounding fact), the Russians admitted that over 4 million voted No – meaning that they did not accept this Stalinist “therefore.” At least 4 million said, that precisely because they wish unity and peace, they could not vote for the Stalinists. Just how many more than 4 million actually voted No is unknown, but it certainly approximated 50 per cent of the total vote of 12 million. This was a stunning defeat for the Stalinists, and indicated just What is the status of Russia and its Stalinist forces in the Eastern Zone.
 
People vs. the Parties
Within Germany itself, the key political party in the situation is undoubtedly the German Social-Democratic Party, headed by Kurt Schumacher. Almost in spite of itself, and against the will of many of its weak, timid leaders, this party is being forced to assume leadership in the struggle for a genuine German unification. Its leader, Schumacher, recognizing the true sentiments of the German workers, speaks out for unity even against the top circles of his own party.
It is important to recognize that the various conservative and reactionary parties, such as the Christian-Democrats, Liberal-Democrats, etc., are extremely cautious and even hostile to unification. Why? Because they fear the Stalinists would get the upper hand? Not at all; they know that Stalinism has reached an incredibly low ebb in Germany.
It is rather because they know that a democratic unification would probably sweep the Social-Democratic Party into power throughout Germany, and that the Social-Democrats would be forced to embark on a social program contrary to the interests of these pro-capitalist parties. Reconstruction, nationalization of heavy industries – housing and re-building programs; modification of the educational system, etc. A popular unification, in other words, would be accompanied by a radical outburst on the part of the German people, who would demand a program of sharp reforms and changes within the country itself.
Thus, we see that Russia and America (as well as all the occupying powers), plus the German Stalinist party and the conservative pro-American parties, are all united as one against such a unification program. Yet the overwhelming mass of the people are for it – unification and an end to the occupation. This marks a turning point in the post-war history of Germany. The lowest depths of the defeat, Nazi terror and military occupation, have been successfully passed. The German people are standing on their feet once more, and participating in political and social action again.
This is perhaps the best news to come from Europe since 1939, when the war began. Will the Social-Democratic Party take advantage of its historic and unprecedented opportunity? Will it openly assume leadership and press for its program? That depends upon circumstances we cannot yet foretell: it depends upon what happens at Paris, to some extent, and primarily upon the ability of the German people themselves to increase and redouble their pressure and drive forward to taking the whole situation out of the hands of the Paris negotiators and placing it where it properly belongs – in the hands of Germany’s 65 million people.
 



For eight months 65 men representing political parties of Western Germany, with a majority of conservative Christian-Democrats in charge, have been writing a constitution for their half of this split nation. This body is peculiar and unique in the history of constitution-making bodies. Its like has never before been seen.
It is not even called a Constitutional Assembly, but merely “Parliamentary Council.” No one knows what parliament it is a council of, since such a parliament does not exist. This arbitrarily selected group has attempted to fashion a constitution at the bidding of the three occupation powers of Western Germany.
Last week, their efforts broke down in a deadly stalemate which well represents the general political and social stalemate now gripping all of Western Germany. The truth of the matter is, the occupational authorities simply do not know what to do, which path to take, where next to turn. This conflict exists on many levels, some of which intertwine with each other, and therefore render the stalemate extremely complex.
For example, there is a sharp struggle within the “Parliamentary Council” of 65 between the Social-Democratic delegates and the reactionary Christian-Democrats.
There is a general struggle between the council as a whole which, at times, presents a united face, and the military government of Western Germany as a whole (which also on occasion presents a united front against the Germans).
There is a bitter struggle among the occupation authorities themselves, particularly between the Americans and the French.
Finally, there is the broad background of the whole German situation, which consists of two principal factors: (1) The substantial economic revival of Western German economy over the past year, which has brought German industry back as a factor in both European and world affairs. (2) The split-up of the nation between East and West with its accompanying vicious struggle so familiar to all of us.
 
S-Ds Weak-Kneed
A word on the “Parliamentary Council” still holding its sessions in the ancient Rhineland town of Bonn. The history of Germany is strewn with the bones of “Constituent Assemblies” which met at various moments, usually to thwart more radical reorganizations and solutions to Germany’s historic problems of national unification and independence. Marx wrote some of his most fascinating political studies around, for example, the famous Frankfurt Assembly of 1848.
But even those gatherings were models of revolutionary will and forthrightness compared to the miserable clique of 65 politicians, hand-picked, who meet today with the permission of the military government and wrestle impotently with their problems.
The Bonn assembly may still draft an actual interim constitution and impose it upon Western Germany but, again, it will quickly be proved that such constitutions in which the democratically inspired masses of people have no say will not endure for very long. The swiftly changing situation within Germany will rapidly liquidate whatever comes out of Bonn, particularly since it is written and stamped by the occupation authorities whose power, obviously, is waning throughout Germany as a whole.
In this assembly, Social-Democrats and Christian-Democrats (linked with the so-called small businessmen’s party, the Liberal-Democrats) have fought many a battle. But the Social- Democrats always end by surrendering in principle, since their very willingness to participate in the council, to begin with, makes no other action possible for them. Their leader at Bonn, Professor Carlo Schmid, has made clear some of the essential differences:
(1) The occupation powers demand a “federalistic, decentralized” constitution and’ will permit a referendum on it to be held only if and when they find it “sufficiently federalistic.” The Christian-Democrats, representing by. and large the most conservative and reactionary elements in the country (landowners, professors, Catholic Church and all elements of traditional German provincialism), naturally lean to this system since they wish free reign to be given to all of Germany’s centrifugal tendencies.
The Social-Democrats, however, oppose such strong federalistic conceptions and tend, for reasons we shall mention below, in exactly the opposite direction. This was bound to cause serious conflicts, a partial reflection of similar disputes among the Allies themselves.
(2) The occupation powers have prepared a common occupation statute for the whole area of the three Western zones. Although not in complete agreement as yet, they have decided to withhold a whole series “of most important powers from the future German government.” This statute will delimit the constitution now being drafted, and “will reserve the right in certain cases to take the bulk of power back in their hands again.” In other words, the new constitution – when and if it comes into being – will have a permanent sword over its head.
Now, it is clear the contending parties in Germany have widely divergent opinions about this fact. The real left wing of the Social-Democracy desires not to accept such conditions and to withdraw from the Bonn Council, whereas the most conservative elements of the Christian Democrats, who lean entirely upon a perspective of a permanent occupation of their country, are prepared to go along with anything, provided a certain provincial autonomy is guaranteed to them.
 
Centralization?
(3) Various other issues, such as the creation of state schools of a denominational character with an extensive clerical influence (proposed by the Christian-Democratic Barty, of course), as well as what concrete shape and form the various legislative bodies of the new Bundestag and Bundesrat shall take, have provoked further disputes.
(4) Perhaps the most vital (and surely the most violent) dispute of all has been over the issue of taxes and finances. In brief, the conservatives want such matters to be controlled by the local states (Laender) and to make the federal government dependent upon their good will, whereas the Social-Democrats “want to equip the Bund with independent taxes and its own finance administration so that it would not feel itself to be at the mercy of the Laender.” This is a basic issue, and reminds one of the early struggles of “States-Righters” vs. “Federalists” in the American government.
The Social-Democrats have refused to alter their stand for the centralization of financial powers in the new government, and have thus provoked the immediate crisis. The military government authorities have entered the struggle and, headed primarily by the French, demand a Social-Democratic capitulation. On this issue, the S-D Party stands alone against a combination of the Allied occupation authorities, and all other Western German political movements, including the extremist-separatist (pro-monarchist) Bavarian Party.
Actually, this struggle represents a more deep-going split. The German capitalist class is no longer able to function, politically and socially, as an organized class, with a clear-cut political party of its own and a. definite policy. It is too weak and shattered for that. If the German bourgeoisie proved fit subject for all of Marx’s irony and venom in 1848, today he would waste little time dealing with it. It is wrong to believe that the Christian-Democratic Party is simply the party of the German bourgeoisie. It is not a homogeneous movement, but rather a catch-all for all types of elements: ex-Nazis, politicians, reactionary professors, separatists, monarchists, landowners, etc.
In a certain sense, the Social-Democrats have taken over the role of the German bourgeoisie. It is they who struggle – in their own way – for a state with central powers and authority. “One should not demand our agreement to do something which does not even create the precondition for a state,” declared Professor Schmid, their Bonn spokesman. Their program is for creation of a national state (in Western Germany), and a central government with power to nationalize industry, and attract Eastern Germany to itself by its superior economic power. This theme of the German Social-Democracy acting as a kind of neo-capitalist force requires, of course, greater study than a brief article permits.
Now they are openly threatened by the Western military governors, who hint at a liquidation of the Bonn Council and use of an alternative method. It remains to be seen whether the Social-Democrats will stick to their principle this time. If they do, they stand little chance of losing, since the Western Powers can offer no possible alternative at this stage.
 
Other Issues
We can but briefly mention some of the other broad issues at dispute. Among themselves, the Western Powers disagree over the contents of their proposed occupation statute, as well as just how to organize their proposed “Trizonia.” French imperialism, which in effect has made its zone simply a colonial area attached to France, is the chief obstacle to agreement in this sphere. The French want to de-emphasize any centralist trends, retain taxing and financial powers over their zone and maintain a veto power over “any changes in the basic laws governing a future Germany.”
As for the issue of East versus West, a new development in this struggle has been the propagandistic approach of certain pro-Russian “neutrals” in the direction of various German politicians and businessmen, not to mention some Ruhr industrialists, with a nebulous scheme for “uniting” Germany as a neutral nation lying in the heart of Europe. A tempting proposal, which, may interest many individuals and groups at a later stage, provided no Western German government can be established.
Now, what has all this meant to the masses of German people? On the one hand, the value of the Social- Democratic Party as the proper center today for revolutionary socialists in the fight for a real German state, independent of all occupational forces, is reinforced. The Social-Democracy, no matter how hard its conservative and old leaders resist, simply has become the rallying center for all such progressive forces.
On the other hand, there has undoubtedly been a great revival of all reactionary circles among the Germans. Each of the tendencies we have described above naturally tries to organize its own forces. The Separatists (as in Bavaria, for example, welcome ex-Nazis, monarchists and anyone willing to play their game. As Marx would say, “all the old crap” is stirred up again! The occupation authorities, particularly the French, lend their support to such tendencies, but the all-important thing is that today, for the first time, these movements are really free of Allied control and have a momentum and will of their own.
Germany, as perhaps no other nation ever has, repeats over and over again many of its outworn struggles, even if under new conditions. There is an intermingling of all historic German struggles in the new one going on today, side by side with the multitude of new issues created by the war, the occupation and the split of the country. All this adds to the complexity of the picture.
 



In last week’s column we outlined briefly the course by which China’s Stalinist movement, thanks to the unhampered aid indirectly given it by the reactionary regime of Chiang Kai-shek, has grown to gigantic proportions so that today it is ready to assume power over the nation as a whole. This fact confronts the political world with such an unbalancing of present forces that all political tendencies – governmental, democratic, radical, revolutionary – must readjust their outlook and analyses accordingly.
We cannot, of course, accept the popular view among journalists that what is happening is simply a shift of direction by Stalin and Moscow in their campaign against the United States. Blocked in the West (that is, Europe), so runs this viewpoint, Stalin has turned his field of action toward the East (that is, Asia). Undoubtedly, Stalin benefits considerably by the victories of the Chinese Stalinist movement and certainly takes it into account in planning his future actions and strategy. But not only is it simply not an all-sided victory from his viewpoint, in that it creates the danger of a new Titoistic tendency to disturb him; it must also be borne in mind that we are witnessing a veritable social overturn and not merely a battle between America and Russia in China. This last factor, at the moment, is of little importance and far outweighed by what is occurring within and to China itself.
 
Complications Multiply as Forces Advance
Within the past few weeks it is clear that the leadership of Chinese Stalinism itself must be freshly evaluating the situation and analyzing the meaning of its remarkable victories. The closer it approaches the vital areas of China – particularly the seaboard cities where both foreign imperialism and a large city population and working class await it – the more carefully must Stalinism itself inspect its future and lay its plans. Caution seems to he increasingly the word, and the immediate objective seems to be a coalition government with Chinese politicians and elements not too much tarred by the Kuomintang brush. Above all, power must be assumed with reasonable calmness and orderliness in the great cities and a violent transition is to be avoided.
The overturning of the ancient feudal land relationships has built up a tidal wave which is now flowing on and which has – in backward, agrarian China – sufficient momentum to engulf the cities where a passive and beaten proletariat lives. Chinese Stalinism is depending upon a peaceful and orderly future in which it can consolidate its power, build up its own administrations and bureaucracy, prepare the day when, with one stroke, it can liquidate today’s apparently unavoidable coalition government, trade with the Western powers and accumulate capital and goods for some kind of an industrialization program, and keep Stalin’s hot and suspicious breath from blowing down the neck of Mao- tze, the potential Tito of China. This is a program of accumulated headaches, and explains why Stalinism does not yet administer the final coup to Chiang.
Simultaneously, all world powers are busily reconsidering their relations with the China of the future. The Dutch attack upon Indonesia has further complicated the problem of this reconsideration since it has given the Stalinists not only a new departure point for invigorated campaigns against imperialism, but has aroused Asiatic nationalism as nothing before. The possibility of an Asiatic bloc, no matter how feeble it might be at first, would be unwelcome to American imperialism at present and largely explains the exasperation with which America has reacted to the Dutch invasion. With such blundering, how can American imperialism plan its business with Stalinist China and develop a Marshall Plan for Asia as a whole? Yet this is the real perspective that America now has. Since the ultimate issue of Russia versus America is to be decided by war, reason the leading American imperialists, while we have suffered a serious reverse in China it is not disastrous. In Europe we have had a partial success in our program, and momentarily halted Stalinism. With time we can perhaps even partly make up for the defeat in China, but in any case the Third World War will ultimately decide everything, and China represents only backwardness and ignorant masses.
This is an analysis of rationalization and consolation, and probably the only one that can be drawn from the defeat. Its value cannot be determined today, but only when we shall see more clearly how far Chinese Stalinism can go with its program and what – in practice – it can accomplish toward the industrialization and modernization of China.
 
Interpretations of China Events
Other political tendencies have tentatively attempted to pass judgment on the events in China, with a minimum of success and even disaster in some cases. Most of the conservative labor movement, of course, has little or no interest in such matters and pays no attention to them. Certain isolated labor leaders of the Mathew Woll stripe have made isolated remarks critical of the American government for not backing up Chiang Kai-shek! This contribution to political thought, based upon the remarks of Max Eastman at the recent AFL convention, have been ignored by the State Department, which knows a lost cause when it sees it. Eastman’s wisdom is not available to the State Department. The rest of the press has been sucking whatever meager comfort it could out of the situation and mumbling about “we can still do business.”
Of particular interest has been the New York Evening Post, a newspaper of traditional liberalism, which has championed the cause of the Chinese Stalinists! Since the organized liberal movement in America has maintained an embarrassed silence on the whole matter, it is curious that the one loud liberal political voice should be behind that of Chinese Stalinism under the total misconception that their cause represents a “democratic people’s movement” which shall bring the traditional American liberal precepts of peace, prosperity and freedom to 450 millions of people. The editorials of the Post exhibit a vigorous example of liberalism aiding a noble cause, “in our nation’s finest traditions” which is outmatched only by the writer’s utter incomprehension of what is going on.
Stalinism in China, to him, is a democratic movement of the masses to end “corruption” and bring the modern world into being; it is the fulfillment of Sun Yat-sen’s people’s program, etc. One would never dream in reading these remarks that Stalinism, with a tradition and program of its own, exists! This is indeed making the best out of a situation, in the best American traditions of optimism and progress, but what relation has it to reality? In an event of such scope we see our famous liberals either maintaining a blanket silence or so twisting their conceptions as to pervert all their treasured “values” beyond recognition and make the victory of a reactionary, bureaucratic and totalitarian force something that even if no longer pretends to be! Many years have passed since Chinese Stalinism claimed to be a gentle, harmless ewe, offspring of the lamb of democracy.
In the radical movement, with the exception of the Workers Party, only the SWP has had anything to say on China. It naturally supports the Stalinist movement – with its monotonously repeated criticism and stale “qualifications” – and is sure that the hopelessly isolated Trotskyist sect in Shanghai will be able to “survive.” The Militant “Far East expert,” Li Fu-jen, writes a letter to the editor from Los Angeles in which he slaps down a not so expert comrade who had suggested that “the Chinese Stalinists continue to score successes not because of their own policies but despite them.” It seems, according to Li Fu-jen, that the Stalinists’ agrarian program, which he quotes at great length, is “... drastic, radical – yes, revolutionary. I doubt if a Trotskyist government would proceed very differently in tackling the land program in the initial stages.” Not only does he show his incomprehension of a revolutionary agrarian program, but Li Fu-jen joins with the Post in proclaiming a “democratic” revolution as taking place in China. The Post, at any rate, has the decency to stop at this point, but not our Far Eastern expert.
He must criticize the Stalinists to prove he is still a Trotskyist. The Stalinists, he says, “offer nothing to the city proletariat except a continuation of wage-slavery in industries owned by capitalists, with whom they hope to force a coalition government ... The Stalinists hope to rule China, in coalition with the bourgeoisie, with a satisfied peasantry as their base.” This, of course, is the familiar SWP version of events according to which Stalinism operates as an “agent of capitalism” (in this instance, Chinese capitalism) and desires only to keep capitalism alive. Of course, to be consistent, Li Fu-jen must really insist that Chinese capitalism is really undergoing a rebirth and has a wonderful future ahead of it since every Marxist knows that “democracy” symbolizes the highest flowering and flourishing of capitalism. If he could only persuade the Kuomintang leaders and bankers, along with the industrialists and landlords, that such is their future, he could replace both Confucius, the Chinese Buddha and even the opium pipe as a course of cheerful consolation!
Narrowness, one-sidedness, half-blindness and, above all, a lack of the proper imaginative vision to see the sweep and scope of China’s Stalinist revolution – these characterize to date the suggested evaluations of the event.
 



Last week we pointed out a new series of steps by which the Allied occupation authorities have renewed their hold over Western Germany and have indicated a growing fear that nationalist trends are becoming too bold and must therefore be curbed. Not only did they indicate by these actions their intention to remain in Germany, in some form or other, for an indefinite period, but they forced upon all German political parties and groups the necessity of re-evaluating their attitudes toward the continuation of the occupation. This necessity, of course, is a good and necessary thing.
The concrete issue over which this restatement of attitude toward Allied occupation takes place is the new decision on the Ruhr, referred to in our previous article. Contrary to expectations, protests and declaimers have been mild. No one expects the type of mass, passive resistance movement which the Ruhr workers developed in 1923 against the French occupation of that region. The Ruhr Stalinists naturally demand such actions, but considering that they have just been humiliatingly defeated in all trade union elections for this area, it is unlikely that their slogans will have any results.
The attitude of the German capitalist parties (Christian Democrats and “Free” Democrats) can easily be explained. Since these two parties represent not so much big capitalists, industrialists and bankers as the badly-off German business man and small factory owner, together with the professional and middle class elements of the population, one could hardly expect a determined reaction from them. Their perspective is essentially a slow and tortuous one. implying years of revival and a gradual building up of the old German bourgeoisie. They are in ho condition, materially or politically, to lead a serious struggle against the occupation, nor is this their actual perspective.
Instead, they rely upon the division between America and Russia as making it possible for them to reassert themselves, step by step, since they feel confident that American imperialism must permit such an economic reconstruction and revival in Germany that the day will come when it can no longer be controlled by the occupation authorities because the rebuilt economy will have become an independent factor in both European and world capitalist economy. This explains their patience and persistence, as well as the fact that the Constitution they are now writing at Bonn is so loosely and vaguely worded that it may be considered an “Algebraic” Constitution, full of unknowns whose real value will be determined in the future. The future of such parties and what is left of German capitalism is subordinated to the occupation authorities and the most they will do is to take advantage of any situation to strengthen their hand.
 
An Inept and Leaderless Movement
But what of the German Social Democracy, that political party of the German working class which has made a truly astounding comeback since the end of the war and is now the mass party of Western Germany? Completely destroyed under Hitlerism, the Party now numbers close to 1,000,000 members and has a vast electoral and political influence which reached its height after the Berlin victory. According to the SPD-Jahrbuch 1947, which was presented at the Party’s annual convention in Duesseldorf in September, 1948, the Party has 9191 branches in the country, gained 200,000 new members in one year and has 1,000 youth groups (Jungsozialisten) with a membership of 100,000. In its traditional strongholds of the Ruhr, Westphalia, Hanover, etc., the Party dominates the local situation. The Party publishes no less than 15 papers, now has extensive contacts abroad and of 1,416 Landtag delegates throughout Western Germany, 563 belong to the Social Democracy.
Organizationally and in terms of influence among workers and the population as a whole, the German Social Democratic Party leads all others. At the very least, it should obtain a plurality vote in the elections that will later be held under the Bonn Constitution, with a possibility of a majority not excluded. Here, one would think, is a party with sufficient support and strength to establish itself as a leader of the entire nation in a struggle both against Stalinism and for national independence. The reality is far from this, unfortunately, and politically the SPD is surely one of the weakest, most inept and leaderless movements ever inflicted upon the working class.
In terms of leadership, with the exception of Kurt Schumacher, the Party is without any outstanding personality or authentic voice. For the most part, the leaders consist of ancient Social Democrats repeating their past, with all its former mistakes, under the new conditions of the occupation. Old professors, holders of doctorate degrees, union officials and minor bureaucrats operating in one or another capacity in the military government administration, form the bulk of the leadership. Uninspired and colorless, they retain their hold primarily because a new and dynamic leadership has not yet come forward, because there is insufficient political agreement and understanding among party members to develop such a challenge. As the report on the Duesseldorf convention puts it, “The Party is quite free of serious internal divisions.” And that’s precisely what is wrong with this loose and ill-formed mass.
Politically, the “official” stands of the Party are a disgrace to itself and all its professions. Naturally, everything is loosely interpreted and much local autonomy exists because “hardly anybody wants to abandon coalitions in such states where the socialists are indispensable for forming a majority and where the Christian Democrats, looking for the Catholic workers vote, even support socialist legislation ...” (Convention Report) In his speech to the Convention, Schumacher declared that “Social democracy is still on the lookout for partners in an alliance,” and that the question of a coalition after the coming elections would depend on the attitude of the other parties, not his.
 
Evade Occupation Issue
In a formal resolution adopted as to the new tasks of the Party, the issue of Germany’s occupation is evaded although the attitude, in practice, is clear enough. A struggle over the occupation on any front or at any level is to be avoided, no matter at what cost. “A legal basis defining the relations between Western Germany and the occupying authorities” is the principal goal of the Social Democratic leaderhip, who support without criticism the ERP program and the Marshall Plan. Naturally, other and harsher words are reserved for Russia and Stalinism whose efforts at expansion “will be met by the decisive and uncompromising resistance of the Social Democratic Party.” Essentially, the political approach of Schumacher and his supporters does not differ substantially from that of the German bourgeoisie who likewise demand “more responsibility” for themselves within the occupation framework and a legal defining of the occupational powers. This latter request will shortly be fulfilled – and in a clearcut fashion, too – by the “Occupation Statute” now being drafted by the Big Three. On the Ruhr issue, the Social Democrats conceal themselves behind a “nationalization formula” and blame the present situation upon ... Nazism!
The sad fact is that history has forced upon this shapeless party a task which is far too difficult and complex for it to handle – namely, organization of and leadership in the struggle for Germany’s rewinning of national freedom and independence. For lack of any other party, and in opposition to Stalinism, Germany’s working class has been obliged to rally behind this doddering and toothless image of the past. Yet this fact indicates the astounding possibilities in this situation. If ever a movement was thirsting for the organization of a militant left wing, based upon the youth groups and the party’s young elements, it is this Social Democratic Party.
Will such a left-wing come into existence in the near future? At the moment, there is no real signs of this because opposition voices are still too weak and scattered, but surely this is the direction of the future. Then, behind a program of clear-cut opposition to any and all forms of opposition, and for a genuine Constituent Assembly representing all of Germany which shall be protected by its own national workers’ and people’s militia from Stalinism and the occupation forces, one can expect a favorable and revolutionary turn in the affairs of Germany.
 



Western Germany, a political football held tightly in the hands of the Allied occupation authorities, has received lately a series of vigorous boots and kicks at the hands of these same authorities. Under the guise that the Berlin crisis and the threat of Russian absorption of Western Germany has, for the time being, been averted and under the heavy threat of blackmail presented through the pressure of French imperialism (the blackmail consisting in the threat that General de Gaulle would come to power unless ...), a series of actions has been taken to throttle the developing independence, initiative and freedom from occupation that have become quite noticeable throughout Western Germany. The familiar propaganda barrage that “the Hun is stirring again” and “German insolence and arrogance are back” has accompanied these actions. Obviously, a cover must be provided, as the Allied powers reset their grip around Western Germany’s throat and curse the Russians as the cause of its having momentarily slipped.
Simultaneously with these actions, which we shall describe below, the revival of economic life shows full signs of slowing to a merely perceptible monthly increase in productivity. So far as living conditions for the masses of people are concerned, the spectacular improvement of the summer months has ended. We exclude Berlin from this, since the same situation of a bare-level existence has gone on there for six months and will continue indefinitely without any change. Dollar scarcities have strictly limited all but essential imports to Western Germany, and there is even talk of now resorting to barter trade on the international level in order to procure necessities.
Economically speaking, Western Germany is now beset by basically the same problems (except to a worse degree) as those of France and other European nations: inflation (the black market mark is now 15 to a dollar, as against the “official” rate of 3&frac13 to a dollar) and chronic deficits in all forms of business, governmental expenditures, etc., rising prices, shortages of commodities, revival of all types of black marketeering, dollar shortage for trading, etc. After the sensational upturn of last summer, the economic picture is becoming darker each day with the masses of people unable to purchase what they need. It is simply the form of their difficulties that has changed, while its content – miserably low living standards – has remained the same. Put otherwise, the revival of capitalist economy in Western Germany has brought back with it all the characteristics of post-war European capitalism. It is against this background that the Allied imperialists have decided to launch their new blows at the German people, thus indicating the real nature of their occupation and administration of their half of the country.
 
Bonn Assembly a Farce
What are these fresh blows? First of all, the alleged “Constituent Assembly” which has now been meeting for months at Bonn has practically come to a halt in its work of drafting a constitution for a Western German government. The Allies, primarily because of France, of course, have been unable to present to this “Assembly” any draft of their so-called “Occupation Statute” which is supposed to determine relations between the as-yet-to-be German independent (?) government and the Allies. They cannot agree among themselves as to precisely how this quisling government of the future shall best be held under their thumb – in escrow, so to speak. The French, as usual, demand the utmost in decentralization and do not even wish to permit a German (not even one!) to sit on the proposed court which shall decide future interpretations of this “Occupation Statute.” Thus the phony “Constituent Assembly” now meeting at Bonn cannot proceed with its labors since it knows not which “powers” will be allotted to it in the not-yet-written “statute”!
The Bonn farce of “constitution writing” has largely been ignored by the German people who instinctively recognize that whatever emerges from that Assembly will merely be a legal structure for the continued occupation of Western Germany, until the nebulous future. It is clear already that no form or shape of sovereign power shall be permitted under the Bonn constitution; and that, in effect it will be a constitution largely designed to the requirements of French imperialism – that is, decentralized, autocratic, without sovereign rights, weak and quislingesque. The Bonn Assembly has degenerated to a farce.
A series of economic measures indicates a desire to check the tendency of Western Germany to develop its own economic life, particularly with respect to the world market. First, the report of the Hoffman committee on halting plant dismantling has been delayed and postponed, although it has been ready for weeks. Whereas it seemed a few weeks ago that most dismantling would halt, this is no longer so certain, and scheduled dismantling continues. The merger of the three zones economically into a “Trizonia” is far from completed, thanks to the French, who are still holding out for the exclusive right to milk their zone privately. A dispute over taxation powers is blocking this merger and the French have yet to permit trade unions in their zone to merge with similar unions in Bizonia. At the same time, the growth in German productivity, particularly in the commodity field (machinery and parts, chemicals, photographic and precision apparatus, wines, etc.), far from being welcome by her Western European neighbors, has, on the contrary, aroused nothing but fears and threats of trade blocking by Belgium, France, Holland, etc.
 
The Agreement on the Ruhr
Finally, and surely most significant, has been the new agreement on the Ruhr – arrived at by the London conference of six governments of Western Europe, England and the United States – which partly nullifies “Law No. 75” issued one month ago and strikes a heavy blow at the right of the German nation and its people to decide the ultimate issue of who shall own and control the Ruhr and its industries. The new agreement, marking major concessions to the French, may largely evade this question of eventual ownership by not taking it into consideration, but it does not evade the issue of who shall, for the next period, exploit the Ruhr territory and benefit from its production.
In this respect, the French have won important demands, from their standpoint – that is, the standpoint that the Ruhr shall remain. indefinitely under Allied imperialist control, management and that France shall largely benefit from its coal and steel products. The former proposal of a German “trusteeship” system, to be in effect until an independent government shall decide its ownership, is cast overboard and in its place an “International Authority” with sweeping powers to supervise the Ruhr’s industries for an indefinite period is created. While this does not detach the Ruhr from Germany, as the French demand, it postpones even that issue to the benefit of French imperialism in that it prevents even the beginnings of the creation of a purely German administration and apparatus.
It is true that the agreement is loosely worded and much of it will be subject to interpretation, but this applies only to the Allied powers who will fight it out among themselves. The “role” of the Germans in this agreement is far from loosely worded and is worth quoting at length to indicate the real state of affairs. On the “International Council” set up (which has full powers), there is a total of 15 votes. Three of these 15 votes are “German,” but let us consider the Allied definition of “German representatives.”
Under Article 9, Clause (c) we read, “The votes allocated to Germany shall be cast as a unit by the joint representative of the occupation authorities concerned appointed as provided in Article 4, until the occupying powers concerned determine that the German government, by accession or by other means, has assumed the responsibilities placed upon Germany by the present agreement. Thereafter such votes shall be cast by the German representative.”
Translated, this means that the Allies will do the voting now for the Germans, but the Germans will be allowed to vote when they’ve finally got a government that fully meets the “Approved by Military Government” stamp!
The three German votes, it is reported, are to be cast exclusively by America, according to a secret clause in the agreement. In fact, it seems that the agreement has other secret sections which will be revealed at a later date.
This Ruhr agreement has been universally condemned by all parties and sections of the German population and has undoubtedly wiped away much of the “good will” created by the Berlin airlift. It has raised once more all political questions, particularly those concerning relations between German political parties – above all, the Social Democratic Party – and the occupation authorities. It has given the German Stalinist movement in the West and in the Ruhr a new lease on life which it has quickly grabbed hold of. But these political effects of the new Allied offensive against the people of Western Germany – particularly as it affects the German Social Democratic Party – must be considered in a separate article in our next issue.
 



In significance and quality, the President’s inaugural address has been compared with Roosevelt’s famous Chicago “Quarantine” speech and his 1941 “arsenal of democracy” talk. In the sense that the Truman speech attempts to define the role and place of America in the world today it is definitely in the historic tradition of such remarks as those of FDR, but actually it was much further advanced and developed. Some have compared it rather with the “American Century” doctrine of Luce, expressed several years back, and it certainly had a ring and stamp to it that could be associated with a slick Life magazine editorial proclaiming America’s “destiny” to be world rule (in a benevolent sort of way, of course).
The Truman message was both ideological and political in nature. In his harsh ideological attack upon Russia and Stalinism (referred to as communism by him, of course), Truman indicated his acceptance of the concept that the struggle between American and Russian imperialism is first and foremost an ideological one, based upon two exclusive and contradictory social systems. It is easy enough to accept such a definition of the struggle’s “terms of reference,” but the Truman definition of the American ideology – “our people desire ... a just and lasting peace – based on genuine agreement freely arrived at by equals” – has as little relation to the real issues and definitions involved as does the definition of a “people’s democracy” by Matyas Rakosi, leader of Hungarian Stalinism, who has just informed the world that it is a “dictatorship of the proletariat, without the soviet form”! By “soviet form” Rakosi means, of course, workers’ democracy.
It is impossible to expect any correct and honest definition of the social and ideological issues involved from spokesmen of either side, since ideology is used equally as a camouflage for both camps. The real significance of the Truman ideological attack was that, at the start of his new term of office, he gave a clear indication to Stalin that any fundamental settlement of the dispute is out of the question; that the cold war will continue and that, at best, temporary and unstable agreements on tactical and secondary issues (such as an Austrian peace treaty) are all that can be expected. In this respect, he aimed to cut short the rather phony and feeble “peace offensive” that several Stalinist wheel- horses, like Marcel Cachin of the French CP, have been (pushing along in recent weeks.
 
An “American Century” Speech
The more positive political aspects of the inaugural address are more interesting. The differences between the Roosevelt speeches and this one with which they have been compared lies in the fact that the former intended deliberately to involve American imperialism in world affairs while the Truman speech assumes this deep involvement (there is not even the usual reference to the departure and death of isolationism) and is concerned with the question: what form shall this involvement take, and how shall it best be organized and carried out? In this sense, it was an “American Century” speech, proclaiming the power and might of American imperialism both in words and in the roar of the huge airpower armada display.
Of course, no plans were made specific nor was their content filled in. The bulk of the speech, however, dealt with America’s approach to the outside world – the program for combating Stalinism on a world-wide scale. A “dynamic” American leadership shall lead us in the struggle. The United Nations will continue to function, but new nations (from the colonial world) will be of increasing interest to American imperialism which shall attempt to establish solid relations with them not in the outmoded form of colonial occupation, but through the ties of business, commerce and economic loans.
The Marshall Plan, largely responsible for the temporary containing of Stalinism in Europe, will continue and at least $4 billions will be advanced this year. To bolster the economic and political gains of the Marshall Plan, a North Atlantic pact in the form of a “collective defense arrangement” will be arranged. Those nations involved in it will be supplied by a new form of lend-lease material aid, an adjunct to the ERP program. It is a “companion piece” of the Marshall Plan.
 
Streamlining U.S. World Control
Finally, and the newest concept of all, Truman proposed a broad generality according to which America will make “the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas.”
It is clear that here we have a general conception that may mean innumerable things – for example, the development of a special Marshall Plan for a future Asiatic anti-Stalinist Union. Its specific meaning was deliberately left out for many reasons, most notab|e of which is the fact that the entire Asiatic world, thanks to the victory of Chinese Stalinism, is readjusting its relations with the Western nations and nothing is yet clear.
Behind the whole Truman, address is the recognition that economic factors will represent the new Administration’s most serious headaches in the future. Too many signs exist that the post-war boom period is over. The domestic market, in terms of capitalist economics, appears to have reached the saturation point or very soon will. Yet American imperialism is more productive than ever before! More than hitherto, it must turn toward outside markets and new areas for doing business. Conditions in Europe are such that no answer lies there. It is quite likely that an unprecedented stress may be placed by the new administration on capital investment and business relations with those areas of the world – Africa and southeast Asia. – that have yet to come under Stalinist influence and can still be developed in capitalist terms. It is apparently this that Truman had in mind in stating his new worldwide economic paternalism.
To say that America and the imperial power it represents has its social, political and economic fingers in every part of the world has become an obvious statement of fact. Now begins the period in which the effort will be made systematically to organize, streamline and build up this power. This is the main task that Truman has set for his administration – the systematic extension of the network of complicated binding ties which American imperialism is weaving around the world.
 



No nation has passed through so many grave social crises as France; no nation has gone so often or so deeply through the cycle of strikes, mounting into mass political and social movements, bringing into existence pre-revolutionary situations, and then passing to defeat and withdrawal. Every conceivable type of crisis is known to the French people, a battle-hardened and politically sophisticated nationality if one has ever existed.
Particularly since the conclusion of the last war, a series of social and political disturbances have occurred, all of which have their origin in the national soil of the country, but their fate has been determined by international factors more than anything else. Have the French people some national predilection that drives them toward social-revolutionary action, but which dooms them to frustration and defeat?
Our purpose is to examine the national origins of France’s social problems, their roots in its economic structure, and to suggest the reasons why there has yet to be a resolution of its crisis despite the many attempts.
*
After a sharp decline in his fortunes and influence, Europe’s leading contender for Bonapartist-militarist-dictatorial power – General Charles de Gaulle – has suddenly catapulted back into prominence.
The French bourgeoisie, after encouraging his decline, has now openly and fairly decisively shifted to his favor and greeted with acclaim his recent important victory in gaining an almost absolute majority in the upper house of the French National Assembly. The general is riding high and fast and preparing his organization for the taking-over of political power. Here we are not concerned with political problems and events, nor are we predicting the approaching victory of Gaullism. While the tendency is certainly strongly in his favor, many factors stand between De Gaulle and his goal.
What concerns us is the question: why has the bourgeoisie shifted to the Gaullist solution, with all its entailed anxieties, costs and uncertainties? To state the problem in other terms: Why has a middle-of-the-road stability and prosperity failed to develop in France despite the amazing economic recovery in productivity and the uplifting of French economy as a whole?
The decline of Gaullism corresponded with the dramatic upsurge of French productivity and – so it was believed – the ushering in of a period of relative capitalist stability and relative social prosperity. The new rise of Gaullism likewise corresponds with the dashing of these hopes and illusions and the opening up of a new phase of economic and social difficulties for French economy.
“Three years ago,” writes E. Germain in the November 1948 Fourth International, “the French economic crisis was a function of extreme underproduction, acute scarcity of consumer goods and a chronic lack of raw materials. Today the self-same basic illness – the senility of the capitalist order in France – assumes new forms.”
What are these new forms? But first let us examine the contention that French productivity has made major strides forward.
 
The Question of Productivity
According to the Paris Herald Tribune’s index (which is based upon official government reports) French industrial productivity as a whole stood at 112 in July 1948 as compared with the 1938 monthly base figure average of 100. Breaking this down in various fields, we get the following – all by comparison with the 1938 average of 100:



Coal production


  


102




Electric power  


149




Iron ore


  75




Heavy industry


124




Auto production


111




Textiles


115




Building materials


128




Basic chemicals


128



Although coal imports from the United States are at record figures, French coal production (until the recent strike) rose steadily, thanks to general recovery and also monopoly acquisition of the Saar coal basin. As we see, electrical power, chemicals, textiles and heavy production were far above 1938. Only iron ore, due to the disorganization of the industry, lagged badly. On the face of things, a rather optimistic picture of economic recovery in the successful fields!
In agriculture, the same general recovery in productivity and farm stock is noticeable although at a slower pace. In general, agricultural production is 10 to 15 per cent behind and below that of the pre-war period. But France has just had her best harvest in ten years; the number of cattle and horses in Normandy (the agricultural heart of France) is back to the pre-war level; and there is certainly no serious hunger. In the same sense, the stores of Paris and the larger cities are filled with all types, qualities and quantities of consumers’ goods. In theory, everything is now available.
Yet even in these bare production statistics, certain qualifications enter to dim their cheerful sound. These qualifications, while worth noting, do not negate the undeniable fact that the French agrarian and industrial population has shown its powers of work and productivity to an amazing degree, considering the situation they inherited from Nazi and Allied occupation; the myth of French “inefficiency” and “shirking of work” in the interest of other more pleasurable pursuits ought to be dispelled.
These qualifications form part of the field of productivity itself. First, between 1930 and 1946 there has been a decline of three millions in the number of France’s producers. This loss has been to a substantially increased bureaucracy of non-producers, and the return of many foreign workers (Italians, Poles and now Germans) to their homes. This means, of course, that a comparatively smaller group of workers, handicapped by the well-known problems mentioned above by Germain, are required to produce for a population which has remained numerically stationary.
It must also be related to the obvious fact that French productivity has not increased at the same pace as that of more fortunate countries whose general advance in productivity is far above the mere 12 per cent recorded by France over ten years. Yet such qualifications alone could never account for the desperate character of this new French social crisis. We must look elsewhere and deeper.
Unquestionably, the failure of agriculture to regain a productivity equivalent to that of 1938 contributes to a partial continuation of the bitter struggle between countryside and city. The price of agricultural produce is high – very high – and many staple items are still heavily subsidized, but the French peasant is deeply dissatisfied. The price structure of industry is such that what he desires (farm equipment, chemicals, consumers’ goods) is beyond reach. His reactions follow familiar patterns such as hoarding, resistance to putting his crops on the market, etc., plus several new forms of economic opposition which seriously affect the national economy as a whole and are related to similar tendencies which we shall describe below. In general, since France is still predominantly an agricultural nation, its lack of balance between the recovery in industry and that in farming forms a general background to the disturbances of its economic life. Yet even this would be insufficient to explain all that has occurred.
Before attempting such an explanation, it is necessary to wade through statistics which, in reality, indicate the origin of the disturbances themselves. These statistics deal with such matters as prices, wages and their relationship to prices, export-import trade, currency and finances, etc. They serve, furthermore, to give us a skeletal description of the actual state of French economy in terms not merely of production, but the more important social relationships between the various aspects of the economy.
 
Prices and Wages
If the 1938 annual average equals 100, then the general wholesale index of prices stood at 1698 in July 1948, with wholesale industrial prices at 1743 and raw materials at 1749. The retail price index in Paris was 1716 for foods in July 1948 (it is now over 1800 – that is, eighteen times that of 1938), and the general retail index was 1528.
In 1948 alone, a catastrophic price increase took place, simultaneous with spurts forward in production. Between January and July 1948, wholesale prices jumped 75 per cent (resale of Marshall Plan material to industry by the government) and the retail index increased 13 per cent.
If we bear in mind that, according to the National Institute of Statistics, food represents 50 to 60 per cent of the French family budget, we will realize the importance of food prices to millions of French people. Its importance is, roughly, in budgetary terms, double that of an American family. Consider then the following table:



Cost-of-food index in 1938


  


  100




Cost-of-food index in July 1948


1559




Cost-of-food index in August 1943


1716




Cost-of-food index in September 1948


1819



That is, food costs now more than eighteen times what it did ten years ago! The steady rise in 1948 was largely due to the fact that the government withdrew its subsidies on grain crops, with corresponding effects on prices. Stated most simply, this means that the average French worker, functionary and middle- class professional works simply in order to purchase the food necessary for him to work again. The remainder of his income not represented by food purchases is spent on rent and other living necessities. The margin left for savings, purchase of clothing and other commodities is small indeed.
The price-wage spiral was illustrated in classic fashion during the month of October 1948. A united front of the three trade unions (Stalinist, Socialist and Christian) had forced from the government a decree raising minimum wages, as well as all wage scales, by 15 per cent. This was exactly and precisely offset during the same month of October by government decrees increasing the price of coal, gas, electricity, gasoline and (as a result) an increased price in manufactured goods. The net result was zero, but this was only the latest and crudest in a whole series of such self-defeating actions.
In general, the wage-price relationship may be summarized as follows. Whereas today’s cost of living is seventeen times that of 1938, the wage and salary index is only ten times that of 1938. In other words, real wages, in terms of purchasing power, have declined by 40 per cent.
The minimum wage demand of all unions in October stood at 13,500 francs per month ($42). Yet the government finds it impossible to meet this modest demand. The wage-price relationship grows steadily worse, to the detriment of the worker, and indicates the inability of French capitalism to stabilize and steady itself. Only one price has declined steadily – French bonds issued by the state are now at their lowest value in history!
 
Export-Import Trade
Like the rest of Europe, France’s foreign trade is seriously unbalanced in relation to America and the rest of the world. The dollar shortage is notorious and continues despite some gains which have made it possible to lower imports from the United States and despite a corresponding gain in inter-European trading. But these are small matters compared with the fact that trade is still $130 million in the red every month; over $1½ billion annually.
Why cannot France hope to balance this deficit? To a world market demanding raw materials, foods, machines, practical consumers’ items, France offers its traditional luxury articles (wines, liqueurs, fine textiles, handicraft products, etc.) and at extremely high prices. A fundamental change in French productivity, aimed at increased output and lowered costs, would be required before the possibility of a favorable trade balance could exist. The loss of colonial and other export markets is well known.
 
Currency and Finances
Note circulation is now the highest in France’s history, and steadily mounting despite the various devaluations (such as withdrawal of all 5,000 franc notes) that have taken place. In the month of August there was a note increase of 32½ billion francs in circulation, making a total increase of 100 billion francs in a three-month period. In the month of September 1948 there was the fantastic total of 877 billion francs circulating in this inflation-ridden nation whose bankrupt government meets its bills by extra shifts for its printing presses.
The nationalized Bank of France, which handles currency and financial operations for the state, reports the following facts on its condition at the end of July 1948:

Gold holdings: 65 billion francs (compared with 87 billion francs in 1938).
Total advances to the state: 716 billion francs (compared with 36 billion francs in 1938).
Banknote circulation: 837 billion francs (compared with 111 billion francs in 1938).

This is the balance sheet of a financially bankrupt government living on deficit financing. Between January 1945 and May 1948 the state’s deficit amounted to $6 billion. This was met by a $2½ billion levy on the public and private holdings (in turn, leading to the liquidation of a large part of France’s overseas holdings), and by borrowing $3½ billion abroad in the form of foreign loans. But an end comes ultimately to such methods, and it is very close at hand.
*
This brief survey of French economy indicates the structural and functional nature of the French social crisis. Nothing operates properly. Everything – agriculture and industry, export and import life, prices and wages, currency and financing, distribution and consumption, production and consumption, needs and actual resources – everything is fundamentally out of balance. This unbalance in all sectors of the economy naturally prevents its normal functioning.
One section of the country has sufficient bread grains to throw away its ration tickets; another section cannot even honor the ticket’s. One section (Normandy) has all the meat, milk and dairy products needed, while nearby Paris has little or none. Maldistribution of raw materials forces a greater strain than ever on the robbing of Saarland coal, Lorraine iron ore and Ruhr coke.
It would be possible to extend this list of examples indefinitely. If, immediately after conclusion of the war, one might have described France in terms of a seriously ill patient who lies prostrate in a coma, unable to move and barely alive, it may now be said that the patient – thanks to treatment, normal processes and Marshall Plan injections – has returned to consciousness and is even able to stand on his feet, no matter how shakily. But re-examination by his doctor has revealed a heart condition, nephritis, dropsy and several other organic and functional diseases which now require treatment.
The coma has been overcome, but replaced by a new and just as serious condition.
These organic illnesses of French society, which cause it to be chronically and “fundamentally out of balance,” were not properly estimated by many – including Marxist analysts – who expected the return of a fairly stable capitalism accompanied by a temporary revival of democracy (democratic interlude). Perhaps the error consisted in attaching too much importance to the purely productive aspect of the economy, and neglecting the many-sided nature of capitalism which includes the elements of distribution, rate and cost of production, world trade and internal financing.
Actually, the confidence of the French bourgeoisie in its own structure is at a low ebb. We do not refer solely to the recent trend among the peasantry to develop a new type of the traditional hoarding, in the form of buying gold bullion on the open market and concealing it in the family mattress. This exists on a mass scale and has driven the price of gold to stupendous heights, but the lack of confidence is more profound.
The French bourgeois who has money to invest seeks new sources – gilt-edge values within France itself, wherever possible; if not, international values, or gold like any peasant, or real property. There is a distinct flight of capital from France to Switzerland, or Africa, or South America. There is no real trend to reinvestment in French industry, with the object of modernizing and rationalizing it.
 
Capitalism’s Dilemma
We might summarize the issue of French capitalism along the following lines: No serious progress has been made toward the solution of its real disturbances. Since only remedial measures have been employed, with the aim of stopgap relief, everything remains substantially as before. That is, an outmoded, worn-out industrial technique and plant equipment; a one-sided productivity based upon the desire for high and quick profits (luxury goods); a senile system of marketing, distribution and transportation; a low rate of productivity, together with a high productivity cost; a leveled-down population mass with a low purchasing power and therefore providing a narrow and stagnant market; a bureaucracy (non-productive) all out of proportion to the producing population; an international situation which prevents dependence upon overseas trade and which further drains away the nation’s capital.
In essence, France is now living on its accumulated capital, failing to replace what it uses, and digging itself deeper into deficit and bankruptcy each month.
This, in our opinion, is responsible for the new forward surge of Gaullism, the instability of the middle-of-the-road governments and the apparently concluding period of revived parliamentary democracy. It is against this background that one must understand the three major political movements of the country: Gaullism, with its rightist solution; Stalinism, with its Stalinist-collectivist solution; and the efforts of the center parties (Socialists, MRP and Radical-Socialists) to survive by hanging grimly on to the ropes.
If the French bourgeoisie has now more or less openly swung to support of De Gaulle, this does not mean either that its support is an enthusiastic and unqualified one, or that the discursive and vain general stands at the very door of power. The handing over of power to De Gaulle would be more in the nature of an act of abdication or default on the part of this bourgeoisie than, for example, such action was in the case of pre-Hitler Germany where the Nazis offered a dynamic program of conquest as bait. Many obstacles still stand before De Gaulle (the opposition of the French working class, the opposition of American imperialism to this bearer of grandiose pretensions, etc.), but none are greater than his own lack of a serious positive program. This, in turn, is due to the same diseases of French economy as affect all parties.
Gaullism is still essentially a negative movement – anti-Stalinist, against German revival, against American encroachment upon Europe, anti-British, etc. This is its real weakness and this is why, despite the three-year period of the Fourth Republic’s bungling and steady decline, Gaullism has not yet taken over.
 
The Rightist Program
Yet the French Right in general has its proposed solution to the difficulties of the nation, and Gaullism tacitly accepts these solutions. The series of cabinet crises and replacements, despite its comic-opera appearance, did mark a political trend; and close examination showed each new cabinet shifted slightly more to the right. That cabinet which included Paul Reynaud must be understood as a preview of a Gaullist government which failed only because it was premature. The trend is steadily towards a bridging of the gap between the post-war period of parliamentary democracy and Gaullist dictatorship.
The rightist program is the following:

Destroy the influence of the Stalinist party (a) either by outright suppression, or (b) by curbing it through legal or other methods.
 
Prune the many social reforms and labor measures of the government in all aspects and sufficiently to lower the budget deficit considerably.
 
Weaken the nationalized sectors of the economy (coal mines, airplane building, electrical power, etc.) by permitting private investments in these industries, and eliminating all union influence over their management (the Reynaud Plan).
 
Balance the budget by method (2), and “soak the workers and middle class” in taxation.
 
Stimulate capital investment in private industry.

With or without De Gaulle, no group or section of the French bourgeoisie has a more imaginative or practical program than the above to offer. On the “middle-of-the-road” side of the ledger, we find no program whatever. The Socialist Party, the MRP and the Radical Socialists have no hope beyond that of somehow stumbling along, and depending upon the continuity of American financial and economic aid to provide empiric solutions to the day-to-day problems, while the surrounding atmosphere of social disorganization remains untouched.
On the left, only the RDR (Revolutionary Democratic Front) has put forward proposals which bear a relationship to the real problems of French society.
In an analysis of the budgetary and balance-of-payment deficiency problems, the organ of the RDR (Gauche, August 1948) proposed the following:

Increased taxation on the higher brackets, and an extension of the taxation coverage to those elements still successful in avoiding taxation.
 
An increase in the volume of production put out by the nationalized industries by greater capital investments in those already nationalized, and the extension of nationalization to still more sectors of the economy.
 
An increase in public and social services (already far beyond that known in America, for example) so as to lower general living costs.
 
Balancing of the budget by a reduction of current military expenses, and the complete withdrawal of the various disastrous colonial expeditious in Indo-China, North Africa and elsewhere.
 
An ending of subsidies to private industry and the utilization of this money for nationalized industry.

The long-range problem of modernization and rationalization of French economy (the only real solution to the low-productivity and high-cost questions) is something that only a massive capital levy on all forms of wealth and private hoardings could solve. This is why the famous Monnet Plan for modernization exists only as a paper document.
We are now witnessing the profound effects of the inability of French capitalism to stage a sufficient all-around recovery, essential for the achievement of even a temporary and mild stability. The possibility of a still greater recovery has long been excluded by the fact that French capitalism, more than any other in Europe, long ago turned in upon itself and began to devour its own vitals. What was expected – and now it appears to have been a false expectation – was the limited recovery we have mentioned.
Perhaps more than any other in importance is the psychological effect this past three-year period has had upon the French people. Much of it is obvious to even the foreign observer: a rapid disillusionment and an openly cynical attitude toward the Fourth Republic; a belief that pervades all layers of the population that traditional parliamentarism has exhausted itself (and everyone else) ; a turning away in great masses from Stalinism which has shown it can only launch self-defeating adventures; a reluctant drawing of the middle classes and sections of the workers toward Gaullism. Yet this attraction toward the Peacock General is not a powerful one – it is more negative and despairing than anything else; a longing for some stability accompanied by the concept that perhaps only the general can end the perpetual Stalinist guerrilla warfare.
Most important of all, however, of these mass reactions – and surely the greatest cause for worry – is the loss of self-confidence and initiative that is so noticeable among a great working class which has always distinguished itself particularly by these characteristics of confidence, initiative and boldness. Yet these unbroken series of defeats, false alarms and forays, turnings-back and blind-alley attacks have had their deep effects upon the French proletariat and its traditions of struggle. Apathy, rather than energy; despair, rather than hope; confusion, rather than clarity – these are the real characteristics of the best sections of France’s population today.
It will take more than any of us are gifted enough to foresee to reverse this trend, and rouse the French workers from their ideologic slumbers. A boldness of program and approach, an open coming to grips with the issue of Stalinism and its totalitarianism, an exhibition of energy and clarity – these are the real requirements. Much as the RDR marks an advance in this direction, and a break with various sterile pasts such as that of French “Trotskyism” and Socialist Party “Blumism,” this new movement of the French people has still much ground to cover before it attains the needed goal. Fortunately, there is still time for it and other political groupings in France to continue along the line of revolutionary progress.
 



In statements made by them this past week both Maurice Thorez, head of the French Communist Party which still has about 1,500,000 members, and Palmiro Togliatti, head of the Italian Stalinist movement with about 2,000,000 members, have both deliberately provoked the possibility of arrest of themselves, their parties’ respective top leaders and, finally the outlawing of their organizations. The question naturally is: what lies behind this careful provocation on their part; why was it made at this particular moment; how does it fit into the well thought-out tactics and strategy of Moscow? For there should be no mistake about that. These statements, although uttered in French and Italian, were written in Moscow or wherever the Cominform now has its central bureau.
But, first, let us be clear as to what these two Stalinist gentlemen had to say. The phony “peace” offensive undertaken some weeks back by the decrepit Marcel Cachin, the Stalinist Senator from Brittany, has now dried up and this antique has been put back on the shelf. The reaction of America to that offer was its concretization of the terms of the impending North Atlantic military alliance. Against this background, Thorez had his say, to the effect that if Russia should be obliged to invade France (in a war with America, of course) the French Stalinists would openly side with the Russian armies. In his rhetorical way, Thorez stated that in the event of war “... could the workers of France have any other attitude toward the Soviet Army than has been that of the people of Poland, Rumania and Yugoslavia?” A cynic might, of course, willfully interpret this to “mean” that the French would do their damndest to throw out the Russians, but everyone knows what Thorez had in mind.
From the viewpoint of the French government this, of course, is a treasonable statement. A strong, unified French government (not the shaky thing that passes for a government now) might have clapped Thorez in jail at once. Instead, the reactions so far have been rather timid – a resolution condemning Thorez passed by the National Assembly, without depriving him of his Assembly immunity from arrest; some raids on secondary Stalinist headquarters; a few arrests of fifth rate Stalinists, etc. It is possible, however, that the government is contemplating a more violent reaction at a later date. So it is, the general situation of stalemate probably means that the matter will rest and tend to die out unless the Stalinists pursue their provocative course.
 
Togliatti Goes a Step Further
In Italy, Stalinist Togliatti made much the same declaration. After poopoohing the whole idea of the Russians coming as far as Italy, Togliatti, with deliberate hypocrisy, nullified his own insistence that it was all a “hypothetical” matter by an even more specific and clearcut statement than that of Thorez. (Catch an Italian Stalinist leader being outdone by a French Stalinist!) “... the Italian people would have the evident duty to aid in the most efficient way the Soviet Army in order to give the aggressor (that’s America, of course) the lesson he deserves.” That is, Togliatti proposes active and positive assistance to the Russian troops, whereas Thorez only talks about welcoming them (as did, allegedly, the Polish, Rumanian, etc., people). Uncle Joe will surely make a note of this in his index file of rewards and punishments.
Just what the even weaker Italian government will do with Togliatti is still more doubtful, unless, again, the Italian Stalinists pursue their provocations with other statements and actions. This, of course, would create a major crisis involving much broader issues than those at stake now and would change the whole picture. But this still seems unlikely.
So much for the facts in this evidently new “tactic” of western European Stalinism. What’s behind the whole performance?
One aspect is obvious enough. The North Atlantic security pact is coming Shortly, the differences are about to be worked out, and the tendency for the strengthening of western Europe – on a capitalist, militarist basis – continues to progress. This is therefore Stalinism’s open declaration of war on the coming military alliance of Western Europe, and all have understood it as such. It is both a warning and a threat, aimed at weakening the effects of the Pact and issued with perhaps a vague hope of even forestalling it. Thorez and Togliatti are both saying to their respective bourgeois governments – if you go to war against Russia, under American leadership, you will face “civil war” at home.
So much is clear, but the question still remains: why should western European Stalinism, a movement which has become distinctly weakened, less popular and much more actively opposed within the past year, risk its immediate future and actually court a further decline and loss of membership by such obviously provocative declarations? From their immediate viewpoint, both Italian and French Stalinism can only lose considerable ground now, particularly since they are incapable at this moment of taking power, or even seriously threatening to. This cannot be answered by merely saying that both parties are aware that the existing governments in France and Italy are too weak too suppress them, no matter what they say. This consideration naturally enters in the picture, but neither government is so weak as to be unable to annoy, disrupt and hamper public Stalinist performances and activities. Stalinism is in for rough times in both countries.
 
No Independent Road to Power
The question must be answered more tentatively and from various aspects. It has long been clear that western European Stalinism has little likelihood of coming to power now, today, independently, under its own force and steam. We believe that a new thought must be added to this now: namely, not only is this pretty much excluded, but Stalin (that is, the Russian ruling group) consciously and deliberately does not want this to happen! He desires Stalinism in power in France and Italy, to be sure, but only over a certain road. That road is not the independent political action of the French and Italian parties, but rather over the road of the Third World War; i.e., invasions of his Russian troops who will then hoist a dependent national Stalinist movement into the saddle. Stalinism to power over the Polish, Rumanian, Hungarian road – yes; but not to power via the road of Jugoslavia or China. The images of Tito and Mai-Tze-tung are probably haunting Stalin today equally as much as the visions of Truman and Churchill.
In this sense, the declarations of Thorez and Togliatti are also declarations of loyalty – that is, subservience – to Stalinism, Russian style. They are both declaring, to Stalin, their willingness to continue their present decline in influence and membership, to flirt with the danger of a renewed underground existence, etc., because they both accept the Stalin strategy of coming to power only during the course of a new world war. Stalin has demanded proof of loyalty and subservience. Partial proof has been the new-concluded violent purge that went on in both these parties. This is final proof that the leadership has abandoned any temptations of an independent road to power, outside of and against the will of Moscow. Will Stalin demand further proofs? That depends upon other factors. If he believes that war with America is coming closer, that it may come within the next four or five years, he most certainly will – including such provocative actions as would surely result in the suppression of his parties.
Such seems to be the meaning of these new tactical declarations. As to the charge of “treason” directed against the Stalinist leaders, they are most surely guilty if we clarify what we mean by “treason.” Yes, Togliatti and Thorez are treasonable agents of Russian imperialism, if by that we mean treasonable to the Italian and French people in general, and the working class in particular. In essence, they have declared their open intention of imposing Stalinist totalitarianistic dictatorships upon these people at their earliest opportunity. And that is treason in the real sense of the word; treason to a socialist future and humanity in general. No socialist can be so naive therefore, if they should be arrested and prosecuted, to consider this a “civil liberties” issue and to fight in their behalf; anymore than any socialist could side with his own government’s charges of “treason” since de Gasperi and Queille have an entirely different interpretation of this word than we do. Thorez and Togliatti are guilty, guilty in the judgment of socialism. We look forward to their appearance before a court of the people, charged with their crimes against humanity.
 



The North Atlantic Security Pact has been published and the world has been presented with an accomplished fact – a grand and sweeping war alliance. Among the numerous comments heard, surely that of Belgium’s Prime Minister Spaak is the most absurd. This ex-socialist proudly announced the public nature of the document which, according to him, was not conceived in “secrecy,” unlike previous pacts and alliances. The fact is, of course, that only long after the terms had been agreed to was any publication permitted. Is it conceivable that such a document would be announced without a prior understanding, for example, by the American Senate that it would give its almost unanimous approval?
It is true that most of the terms had long since been rumored and bruited about by reports and newspaper commentators. But a reading of the pact as a whole and not piecemeal indicates that (1) this is the most significant document to appear since the end of World War II; (2) it is one of the most significant steps in the history of the United States, and (3) its full implications can only be partly seen today. Just as the Marshall Plan is the overall economic and social strategy of American imperialism, so the North Atlantic Security Pact is a concretization of American military and war-alliance strategy in terms of that same imperialism.
The terms of the pact have been publicized and it is hardly necessary to repeat what is so well known. Above all, little or no attention should be paid to the propaganda barrage intended to calm disturbed nerves by emphasizing the “defensive” character of the pact and its alleged legal justification in terms of the United Nation’s charter clause permitting “regional agreements.” If we stretch the term “regional” to include just about half the world (and the most important part of it, to boot!), then perhaps our new slick Secretary of State Acheson can get away with that one. The already famous Article 5 of the pact signifies that the United States, as well as all other powers involved, will automatically and assuredly find itself precipitated into war provided the initial action is considered sufficiently important to warrant such steps. The wording which formally retains the Congressional right to declare war has not only that purpose in mind, but also the more important objective of permitting the American government to decide whether this or another concrete move by Russian imperialism warrants the blow-up of a Third World War.
 
Major Implications of Pact
Let us try to list some of the broader implications of the new pact which will largely determine American action and policy in its relation to the rest of the world. Here are some of the more striking ones. The others will turn up in practice as we move along to the inevitable war now planned by both American and Russian imperialism.
(1) The world is now launched in a new armaments race which, in its effect, will make all others insignificant both in the sum of moneys to be spent, and the disastrous nature of the weapons to be employed. Greater percentages of national budget will be devoted to armaments. Already Russian expenditures have jumped to 20 per cent of the new budget; American expenditures stand already at 40 per cent and French at one-third of the budget.
The first steps toward European rearmaments, to be concentrated on the organization of new armored divisions in France and the British jet-propelled air force, will cost between $1 and $2 billions. It is claimed this will not interfere with the European Recovery Program expenditures (ERP), but this is absurd. Priorities will be disrupted necessarily, and the old adage that a nation (even America) cannot produce both “guns and butter” in equal quantities and indefinitely still holds true. Furthermore, what contribution will billions in guns, tanks and planes make toward the desired goal of Eurppean economic recovery? We propose, instead, that the quantity and quality, of the essential raw materials, food and machinery still needed by Europe shall be added to by this billion dollars. We will oppose the forthcoming presidential bill for European rearmament and support instead any move to divert it into non-military, economic aid.
(2) Secondly, American policy is no longer that of an external force which intervenes in European affairs at moments chosen by it. America now becomes an organic and integral part of Western Europe as a whole; the most important member of the Western European community, in fact! Just as the economic consequences of the Marshall program meant the intermingling of European and American responsibility and leadership for rearmament, military organization and leadership of this area. Who doubts that America will determine strategy, the importance of Russian counter-American actions, etc.? It is not merely the fact that traditional isolationism is dead and buried (that has long since occurred). The fact is that even so-called “neutrality” doctrine is cast aside and a most openly interventionist and, in fact, decisive role is deliberately undertaken. When and if World War III comes, is it not obvious that America will be involved in it, in a leading capacity, from the very first day – no, from the first minute!
 
Legal Cover for “Cold War”
(3) The European rearmament program about to be undertaken does not mean that millions of men are about to be drafted, organized, trained and equipped for an all-out attack on Stalinist Russia tomorrow. Such a program would take about ten years’ time and would still be greatly handicapped by the weakness of the European economies. A more limited objective is in mind – the internal strengthening of the nations involved by a bolstering of their home forces and divisions against any possible Stalinist actions. There is no real fear that Russian troops will march today or next year. The central governments of France and Italy must first be strengthened to crush any Stalinist adventures within those countries.
(4) In this respect, it is significant that Acheson has laid down the principle, in his interpretation of the pact, that “a revolutionary activity inspired, armed, directed from the outside” (and this holds true of all Stalinist actions) would be considered an armed attack on a nation and therefore, under the pact, terms, intervention would be permissible. The current civil war in Greece, of course, is an example of what he had in mind. In other words, America considers itself justified and ready to intervene in any civil strife involving Western Europe under the pretext (alleged or real) of “outside direction.” Quite a different principle from the FDR “non-intervention” policy in the Spanish civil war, and indicative of how far American imperialism has gone in recent years.
In summary, then, the North Atlantic Pact must be considered as a kind of constitutional and legal document covering the terms and formalities of the present “cold war” between the two great world power blocs. It defines the arena of conflict, the opponents and their allies involved, the terms under which today’s “peace” will remain “peaceful” (that is, a line has been drawn beyond which Russian imperialism is advised not to advance – the Berlin airlift is that line), and the circumstances under which war will come.
In this respect, all of us now know all facts we ever need know. Antagonists, motivations, intentions – all are clearly before us. The trend is clear and its meaning is obvious: war on an international scale between Russia and America within five to ten years. Let us hope that the reaction of people everywhere will be more intelligent and not half as scurrilous as the shameful endorsement given to the pact by the top council of the American CIO.
 






It was in the month of August 1940 that the assassin Jacson struck at and destroyed the life of Leon Trotsky.
In past years, The New International has taken note of this memorial date by publishing, among other things, less known excerpts from Trotsky’s writings, indicative of the many-sided aspects of his personality and activity. This year we are reprinting Trotsky’s interesting speculations on the transformation of the family and its life under socialism and proletarian revolution. It is taken from the long out-of-print collection of essays entitled Problems of Life. A chapter from this work has previously been printed in the January 1948 issue of The New International.
In addition, Henry Judd’s article on The Relevance of Trotsky, representing the personal views of the author, appears in this issue as a discussion article. – Editor



Within a year, the first full decade since the death of Trotsky will have passed. It is to be hoped that plans now under way to organize an international symposium in The New International on the tenth anniversary of Trotsky’s assassination will be successful. An evaluation and estimate of Trotsky’s life work, and the relationship of his theoretical program and activity to the events of the past ten years is seriously required. This checking of theory and prognosis with real development is something that Trotsky himself always insisted upon. He never excluded himself.
This particular article has the modest task of introducing the subject and indicating some of the broad problems that must be considered. It is partly motivated by its author’s belief that it is high time to begin such a reconsideration, and partly by the fact that certain efforts in this direction have already been made with, unfortunately, disastrous results. The most recent one has been a lengthy article in the British Socialist Leader, by that publication’s historian, F.A. Ridley. Ridley, in burying Trotskyism, after a series of distorted and factually erroneous statements about its history, comes up with the fantastic viewpoint that it is dead because Stalin has taken it over! Trotskyism for him, therefore, is akin to the imperialist expansionism of Russia and the extension of Stalinism. This is theoretical bumbling carried to absurdities, and such efforts must be corrected or our discussion will be uselessly sidetracked at its start.
More serious are those who, supporters or sympathizers of Trotskyism at one period in their political lives, now turn ferociously upon it and painfully seek to discover the source of all current difficulties in some fundamental flaw, now retrospectively revealed, in the theory itself. Individuals of this tendency are familiar enough and need not be cited at length. Some discover the “flaw” to have been Trotskyism’s links with Leninism; others, with Marxism in general; and one has even turned up with the novel suggestion that our present disaster had its origin in Lenin’s acceptance of Trotskyism! There is no end of variations, but we find all such efforts lacking. They represent a twisted and unique form of Utopianism and panacea seeking, which, denying the dynamics of history, attempts to pass a sterile judgment on the past.
If politics is the struggle of “alternative programs,” it is easy to see how hopelessly afield are these people who search the past and strain after flaws and mistakes. Explicitly, or by indirection, after they have pounced upon the historical fault of Marxism, or the Russian Revolution, they suggest what the correct way should have been. Be it classical Social Democracy, or Menshevism – its Russian expression – or even the road of liberalism – it is clear that these critics of Marxism and the Russian Revolution cannot evade the responsibility of an “alternative program.” The bolder among these critics do this. But in any case, there appear to be two flaws in this method. First, it is a belittling of history since it would seem that social movements, events and changes take place much as one switches freight cars around on different tracks in a freight yard. If Russia’s masses, for example, supported Lenin and his Bolsheviks, and took power together with this Party, we cannot lay this to “accident,” or “mistake” or “trickery.” We might as well give up the study of history.
 
Towards Evolution of Marxist Program
More important, this kind of an approach has altogether too much in common with those whom it intends most of all to confound – the so-called orthodox Marxists, of various political tendencies, to whom the past is sacred, particularly their reading of it. Many subtle and skillful arguments could be found indicating what is wrong with both these approaches which, in different ways, subordinate a living analysis to sterile historic introspection. But we prefer a simple fact which suffices because it is based on reality. Namely, the fact that within the past 25 years our whole world has so changed, from every conceivable point of view (social, cultural, psychologic, etc.) that the relevance of the past, its criteria, examples and illustrations, has dropped catastrophically. Is this not a bald fact? The marking off point has been, of course, the Second World War and its aftermath, during which the most traditional conceptions of Marxism, expressed at that moment in the theories and program of Trotskyism, were found to be lacking. Insofar as revolutionary socialists have concerned themselves with new problems of theory and practice since 1939 (and it must be admitted that this concern is at its lowest ebb since the beginning of Marxism), their efforts have been directed toward the creation of a new program, within the broad framework of Marxist and socialist principles.
Not too much progress has been made, it must be admitted, but those who raise the demand that the critics of orthodox Marxism must produce their program, both in broad outline and in detail, fail to understand the actual process by which alternative programs are worked out at crucial moments in the history of Marxism. There must be a conscious sense of crisis and open recognition that the past, in terms of program, approach and attitude, has failed and collapsed. There must be a collective will among the leaders of progressive Marxism to grapple with the new problems, and to experiment freely, even in an empiric sense. There must be a patient understanding of the fact that creation of a new program is a painful, tedious and difficult process in which the factor of trial-and-error plays its part. We find little recognition of these requirements, despite the obvious fact that Marxism, on an international scale, can hardly sink much lower without vanishing. To make one’s way past those critics who abandon all (including the future) by their rationalistic approach to the past; to make one’s way past those who repeat the past and are smugly content with this – this is the requirement for today. We can think of no more appropriate starting point than an examination of Trotskyism and its relevancy.
In the August 22, 1949, issue of The Militant, a series of articles appears, memorializing Trotsky. The tone of these articles is hardly worthy of comment, but the central theme is the “Confirmation of Trotsky’s Ideas.” The current “crisis of Stalinism” testifies to the “correctness of his analysis,” in the eyes of his self-styled followers organized in the Socialist Workers Party, and, most unbelievable of all, we are informed that Trotsky’s “major contribution” to the socialist movement in the last years of his life was his analysis of “the nature of Stalinism”! In its own fashion, this issue of The Militant sings paeans of praise to the leader who was never wrong and who is now more correct than ever. But Trotsky, unfortunately, cannot defend himself from his “supporters.”
The above is characteristic of the movement, followers and spokesmen whom Trotsky left behind. It is doubtful if ever before in political history a truly great leader bequeathed a more pathetic group of followers whose alleged objective was to carry on in the spirit and manner of the man who headed their movement. The so-called Fourth International has proved, organizationally speaking, the most unsuccessful organization known to the history of the socialist movement. It has literally vanished from sight in most parts of the world, and it is doubtful if it could claim, with justification, 2,000 members in all lands. In Europe, its traditional center, it has virtually ceased to exist. The one mass movement it claimed (in the remote island of Ceylon) has long since dissolved into its component elements of a popular, nationalist movement loosely held together, and a narrow clique of sectarian “Trotskyists,” characteristic and typical of their fellow sects in other areas of the world.
If his organization has proved so unworthy of his name, what can be said for the political leaders and spokesmen Trotsky left behind? How fortunate for this great socialist and revolutionist that he cannot be estimated in terms of his “heirs”! If Trotsky felt called upon to denounce as epigones those whom Lenin had trained and educated, how shall we characterized this pompous group who speak in Trotsky’s name? Those whom Trotsky called epigones were giants by contrast with the “leaders of the Fourth International.” It is also significant that with few exceptions, at the same time, so many individuals who stood close to Trotsky and worked on an intimate basis with him have left both the working class and socialist movement far behind. It would appear that, with few exceptions, Trotsky’s leading cadres tended either to degenerate into bankrupt cliques, with a bureaucratic ideology; or to leave the movement on a largely personal basis in which the element of demoralization played more than its share. One must of necessity ask himself; why did such a magnificent leader, of such heroic and bold proportions, leave behind such a short-lived movement which stumbled from one disaster to another and has now definitively collapsed?
 
At the Core of His Perspective
A large part of the answer, of course, lies in the false perspectives which his movement inherited from Trotsky. In our publications, on many occasions, sufficient comment has been made about this for it not to require repetition now. With the collapse of the Third International, Trotsky set himself the task of creating a new International which would carry on in the same spirit and tradition engendered by the Russian Revolution. In its basic characteristics, the epoch after Trotsky declared the Stalinist International to be finished as a progressive factor, remained as before – an epoch of capitalist decline, the threat of war and fascism, a sharpening of the class struggle, etc. But most important of all, the epoch was profoundly revolutionary and the central need was for a revolutionary leadership and a revolutionary party. There was no fundamental change, and the Fourth International would replace what had failed.
Trotsky had a rounded, internally clear and consistent view of things. Proletarian revolution was at the heart of it, just as belief in the simplistic “dialectics” of Engels was at the heart of his approach to science. Little wonder that he fought so bitterly against those who tended to upset his well worked out theoretical program with either doubts or outright challenge on such matters, for example, as the “Russian Question.” It is true that certain doubts and questionings were expressed by Trotsky himself before his death. The vague possibility of other historic alternatives than proletarian revolution were mentioned, but instantly dismissed, or ridiculed. Furthermore, the overwhelming emphasis and weight given by Trotsky were on the side of socialist revolution, most concretely expressed in his perspective that the Second World War would result in a new proletarian upsurge, carrying on where the Russian Revolution had left off and ushering in a new phase of world revolution. It is true, to be sure, that Trotsky did not foresee an imminent global victory for the proletariat, but rather a, new series of revolutionary struggles, accompanied by victories and defeats, in which the Fourth International would mature and assume historic leadership. Russian Stalinism, tested and found wanting under the strains of war, would be swept aside by a resurrected Russian working class in accordance with the Trotskyist theory which saw in Stalinism an historic accident and a temporary perversion.
 
A Transition Between Epochs
From our standpoint, any movement which based its perspective upon such a reading of the present and future could not but find itself increasingly disoriented by reality. It is clearly not merely a misreading of historic tempo, but a failure to grasp, the profound changes occurring not only in the structure of world society, but in the source of revolutionary activity itself; i.e., socialist mass and class consciousness. Any movement which clung to the Trotsky perspective was bound to end up in that state of political paranoia, marked by a phantasy-world existence, which we see in his followers today.
We must say, in retrospect, that the period of the Second World War marks a definite transition between two epochs – the Trotsky epoch, as analyzed by the last of the classic Marxist theoreticians and revolutionists, and the new retrogressive-collectivist epoch whose nature we attempt to understand as we move into it and which presents socialist revolutionists with a new set of problems to be mastered. It is doubtful, at least to this writer, that the concepts of classic Trotskyism can be of much assistance, based as they are upon the existence of a mass socialist consciousness, forever expanding under the lash of experience and the teachings of the vanguard party. Perhaps the outstanding difference between the past of Trotsky and our present is the absence of this mass of human beings in whom socialist consciousness, to one or another degree, existed. In no nation of the world today does there exist a body of workers possessing a socialist consciousness in the traditional sense of the word; no sons and daughters of socialist fighters, trained and educated even in the inferior schools of social democracy.
There exists, to be sure, great masses of socially conscious people; in fact, they are probably more numerous than ever, and offer us a clue to the kind of program required. They desire a new life, they are against war, they have hopes and aspirations often concrete in form. But to consider the Labor Party masses of England, or the best militant workers of America, for example, as equivalent to the socialist conscious proletarians of the past is highly misleading. Even more misleading, in our opinion, would be any reference to the working class masses who follow the Stalinist leadership.
The essence of socialist consciousness lies in self-consciousness and awareness; a state of understanding in which the worker himself realizes that his and his alone is the task, that he is the creator of the revolution and socialism. But Stalinism destroys precisely this and replaces it with its own central thought that the leadership fulfills all tasks and ushers in “socialism.” Self-awareness is replaced by bureaucratic dependency and a Stalinist worker is a pitifully betrayed creature who in turn serves only reactionary purposes, thus betraying socialism.
It is time to drop our illusion of the Stalinist worker who “really is socialist.” If other masses have lost their former sense of socialism through the disruption of the past by war, fascism and other catastrophes, we must admit that Stalinist masses have had this sense of socialism thoroughly perverted. The regression of capitalism has led to one result; the emergence of international Stalinism to the other.
 
Problems of Socialist Program
What of other, more concrete, contributions of Trotsky to the world of Marxist theory? How do matters stand in this respect? We cannot consider here all aspects of Trotsky’s work, but only the more outstanding ones. The first, of course, is his position on Russia, Stalinism and related matters. What is universally acknowledged now to have been his major theoretical and political debacle has been hailed as his outstanding contribution by his American supporters. The “workers’ state” theory, the conception of Stalinism as a narrow, conservative and provincial force whose endurance was dubious and whose social and economic nature made imperialist expansion absurd – these and a dozen other characteristics of Russian Stalinist were the most potent immediate factor in the derailing of Trotskyism. Except for the small groups of his followers, these ideas have no status anywhere in the world today, although every socialist recognizes, accepts and learns from the history of Trotsky’s specific Russian struggle against Stalinism and his running analysis of the degeneration of the original Soviet state. But no thinking person can even seriously consider his basic conclusions on Russia and Stalinism.
The Transitional Program was one of the more remarkable documents and summaries of Trotsky’s thought in the later part of his life. It was his concretization of the revolutionary perspective, in terms of tactics and strategy, we have noted above. But if one troubles to reread it today, it must be admitted it is largely useless and irrelevant. By no means because each section and each slogan is invalid – many of its details are just as correct as before. It would be necessary, however, to reincorporate them into a new transitional program harmonizing with the fundamentally changed problems of this new period. Trotsky’s Transitional Program originates in his revolutionary perspective described above; it was the tactical and strategic means by which the Fourth International was to become the “World Party of the Socialist Revolution.” This is the spirit that permeates it and this is what, unfortunately, means that it corresponds in no sense to our new requirements.
A “transitional program” is surely needed, but not one directed exclusively at proletarian and vanguard revolutionary elements, aiming to define the relationship between class and vanguard party. Trotsky’s program was based upon the assumption that a mass, specific proletarian consciousness existed, in a dormant state, and required only the sting of vanguard consciousness to arouse it from lethargy. Experience, of course, was to play its role. But this proved to be, in fact, a wrong assumption. Can this be denied? The gap to be bridged is much wider and deeper than that between party and class. It is no longer a gap of inner class relationships, but rather a gap between the working class as a whole, together with its socialist consciousness, and the rest of society.
A new program must concern itself with the problem of resurrecting socialist consciousness and thereby beginning to regain for the working class its role – now lost – as leader and emancipator of society. But these are problems necessarily of an entirely different order than those Trotsky concerned himself with in his Transitional Program. They go back to the origins of Marxian socialism itself, rather than resting upon the long Marxist tradition, as did Trotsky’s program. He cannot help us with this.
 
The Theory of Permanent Revolution
Trotsky’s unique contribution to Marxist analysis, of course, was his theory of the permanent revolution. Although he lacked the opportunity to develop it in its fullest and most rounded form, his life work was permeated with the tactics and strategy upon which this theory was based. In defining the relationship between proletariat and petty bourgeoisie and bourgeoisie in backward, colonial countries, Trotsky was mainly concerned with revolutionary power. In our epoch, he maintained, those tasks formerly associated with the bourgeois democratic revolution (national independence, unity of the country, agrarian solution, etc.) could only be solved by a proletariat in power. In the sense that a progressive, democratic and socialist solution of such tasks can be achieved only by the proletariat, Trotsky’s theory remains entirely true and valid. But we know now that, in the form he presented it, it is no longer adequate and its proposed tactics and strategy are largely obsolete abstractions.
What has brought this about? On the one hand, imperialism is an abstract and absolute force in Trotsky’s theory. Because of his concentration upon immediate issues within the national-revolutionary movement itself (as, for example, in his writings on China), Trotsky did not concern himself with changes in imperialism itself. This was, of course, entirely correct and we do not mention this in any critical sense. But, particularly since the war, the changes within imperialism have been of such a significant nature that this alone has altered the whole problem of colonialism. The outstanding example is the decline of the British Empire and the freeing of India. In terms of a mechanical application of Trotsky’s theory, it is impossible to conceive of an independent India. (A large portion of the Indian Trotskyist movement, consistent to the point of absurdity, still maintains that India is not free!)
More important with regard to Trotsky’s theory is the conquest of huge colonial areas by Stalinism which, in its own way, “achieves” the tasks of the “democratic” revolution. This is related to the emergence of a new force – neither capitalist nor socialist – seeking world power. Trotsky vehemently denied such a possibility, which every sane person now recognizes. It is no longer a problem of theory, but one of reality.
Since the socialist movement in those colonial areas where Stalinism comes to power now finds (or will find) that its problems are no longer those of liquidating feudalism, colonialism and imperialism, but rather of an anti-Stalinist, democratic revolution, it too faces new, undreamed of problems. It must painfully fight its way through new, unknown territory and, at best, Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution can assist it only by the spirit of its approach, its audacity, etc.
This is no longer the colonial world of 1925-27, and it is a major task in itself to readapt and rework Trotsky’s theory for this new colonial world. Related to this, of course, is the need to revise Lenin’s theory of imperialism which, both descriptively and analytically, simply no longer fits reality.
We have left for the last the question of the revolutionary vanguard party. While this well may be the crucial question in the future of Marxism and socialism itself, it is not the case in any appreciation of Trotskyism. Trotsky accepted the Leninist party, to be sure, but he did not contribute much to what he took over. In fact, his main concern with the role of the party as such dealt largely with its inner degeneration (The New Course, etc.) and his struggle against its bureaucratism. There are indications that he tended to change his opinion on the role of the party, above all in a little-noticed article on the subject of “class, mass and party” published after his death. But for all intents and purposes, Trotsky proposed that the Fourth International continue in the Leninist tradition.
To discuss the question of the party is really to discuss the question of Leninism and its validity today. In such a summary article as this, it would take us far afield and must therefore be left aside except to remark that whatever Trotskyist “parties” exist today are but bureaucratic caricatures of even the Leninist conception. A true, Trotsky-created party has never existed (and never will), which makes it still more difficult to talk concretely about Trotsky’s conception of the party.
 
Master of Tactics and Strategy
Without any pretense of more than introducing the subject, the above seem to me to represent the fundamentals of Trotskyism, and the status of these fundamentals today. This brief treatment is not adequate, but it is presented in the hope that it will stimulate thought and discussion along needed lines. But what then remains of Trotskyism as such? It is an integral part of the revolutionary socialist heritage, and as such particularly rich in instruction and rewarding in example. But its place in Marxist history must be understood in relation to the new problems of today which are yet far from solution, far from even a correct posing.
There is, first of all, the example contained in Trotsky’s life itself, above all in this period of moral and personal disintegration. What has been said of Trotsky’s integrity, devotion and capacity for struggle remains as true as ever. A biography worthy of his revolutionary genius remains to be written. It seems most unlikely that the socialist movement of the future, where emphasis will be placed upon the solving of comparatively small problems by popular action and in which action itself, rather than ideological thought and contemplation, will be the real instrument of education – it seems most unlikely that such a movement will produce leaders of Trotsky’s caliber. If Trotsky exemplified theory and practice at their best, we must realize that the events of his life span permitted such an integration.
Marxism today is a frustrated movement, turned inward and unable to relax its limbs by activity. Socialist education in Trotsky’s time, meant preparation for life and practice, but that type of education would be worthless today since no action follows from it. Education, which means creation of socialist consciousness, must now actually become part of action itself; an education through doing. But this is only another of the many ways in which our problems differ from the past.
Secondly, the example of internationalism in theory and practice is a particularly valuable gift from Trotsky. This formed a part of his approach to every single problem, and while the “national question”is with us as Trotsky never foresaw it would be (in the form of Titoism, it is with us in a form no one ever conceived of), the solution to this unexpected problem is still possible on an internationalist basis, without any violation of opposition to imperialist war, etc. Trotsky’s internationalism, of course, is contained in his handling of each new tactical and strategic problem, and this brings us to what is perhaps – for us – the most significant part of his life and work.
Trotsky was the greatest Marxist master of tactics and strategy. Any intensive study of his writings on various revolutionary crises (in China, England, Germany, etc.) will quickly reveal this. If his proposals had triumphed, and his criticism had been adopted, all would have been different. Perhaps these writings, largely polemical and critical, will remain as his most useful products for us. Not that we may expect a duplication of the situations analyzed, but we may learn from the approach and method Trotsky used in solving amazingly complex tasks. The care with which he assembled his facts, the sweep of his approach which linked up tactical methods with strategic needs and, above all, his flexibility and rejection of doctrinaire solutions; his capacity for new ideas and experimental ways, his willingness to twist and turn sharply in accordance with his estimate of events.
We are well aware that Trotsky developed his tactics and strategy within the framework of his overall conceptions, but he never permitted himself to deduce automatically tactics and strategy from abstract principles. The general framework of Marxist and socialist thought still exists, but in a changed world. We believe Trotsky would be first to accept this and first to plunge into the work of meeting this new challenge.
 






The article which follows is a critical evaluation of certain social policies of the recent British Labor government and their effects upon social relationships within the nation. It forms a part of a long study and evaluation of the Labor government from 1945 to 1951 written by the author. – Editor’s Note



On the surface of things, the outward relationships between the hierarchised social groups of the British population have undergone no fundamental change. The social comportment of the English “gentleman,” so often described, is unvaried; his dress, speech and manners have not changed; the British workers are perhaps more outspoken and vigorous than in the pre-war period, with a greater consciousness of their importance in the national life, but their outward behaviour has not been radically transformed by the fact that their political party held office. The same generalization may be offered for other social classes or groups of the population. But, as we know, social status and position in Great Britain has always largely depended upon property and wealth, their presence or their absence. The foundation of property and wealth consists of fixed capital, in the form of assets, landed property, stocks and bonds, etc. The mobile and dynamic aspect of property and wealth consists of revenue, income, payments, earnings, dividends, etc., that is, all that which the individual accrues as a result of his ownership of capital. A partial, but important, change has taken place in the holdings and possession of the first element of social status in England (fixed capital, wealth); a still more important and more generalized change has likewise taken place in the second element of social status (income and revenue); both of these changes will be examined below. For the moment, it suffices to point out that such changes have had their inevitable effects upon the social life and habits of great sections of the population, ranging from the landed gentry and aristocracy to the lowest and poorest workers of the oldest industrial quarters. If the landed aristocrat of West Riding no longer rides after his hunting dogs to chase the fox, the impoverished Jewish peddler of the Whitechapel ghetto now has a small business and his home in London’s Golders’ Green, while the dock worker of Liverpool’s slums has moved into a municipal housing project and earns his guaranteed minimum salary each week. These are the form that social changes assume in England: slow, evolutionary, silent and most clearly expressed in terms of concrete factors, such as income, living standards, budgets, food consumption, etc.
The incomes of the rich are, of course, heavily taxed, but it should not be believed that there are not people who live on a lavish scale in England today; the rich, if they so desire, have their capital to spend in supplementation of their income, and many are at present gradually liquidating this capital. The habit and tradition of individual saving, except among the working class and lower middle class, has gone; the attitude being that such savings will be taxed out of existence many case. Those who are rich, but not in active business, cannot possibly maintain the former standard of living on the basis of income in their possession; they spend their capital and, as a result, the inheritance of their children is too small to maintain them. They are obliged to go to work. Those with money and businesses are able to take advantage of the non-taxable expense account provided by the tax laws, as well as the fact that, under the Labor government, capital gains of business were also untaxed. The business man suffered a certain loss of income and freedom under Labor, the heavy inheritance taxes made it impossible for him to accumulate a fortune which he could pass on to his family, but in general he did quite well in terms of real income and was able to maintain a relatively high standard of living. The activities of the London Stock Exchange and the various financial organizations centered in the city of London, known as the City, remained largely untouched by Labor. As an English author remarks:
The defenders (of the City – H.J.) stand firm, their monetary belts drawn a bit tighter because of high taxation, their amusements curtailed because some former avenues of spending have been closed off; but they remain a compact and integrated body. A few citizens of note from their ranks have negotiated with the enemy, but they feel that no one who matters has gone completely over to the other side. [1]
 
The status of the middle-class individual, drawing a salary, certainly declined under the Labor regime, with the exception of that strata of professional economists, technicians, administrators, etc. who found an important place within the government’s planification and control apparatus. His monthly salary did not increase in proportion to the increase of the weekly wages of industrial workers; his importance in the national economy was granted smaller recognition than that of the coal miner or the worker who produced articles of exportation. While the total income of the middle class groups did not fall, their proportion of the national income dropped considerably, as will be indicated below. This relative decline struck the middle class worker or employer at his most sensitive point, his social pride. His living standard likewise declined: Not possessing any capital whose liquidation would enable him to continue to live as before, he also found himself unable to buy those small articles of luxury so essential to a middle class existence. Such articles were not subsidized by the government; on the contrary, the heavy purchase tax discouraged their sale. The various privileges and pleasures he desired – owning and operating his own car, buying his own home, spending his vacations outside the country, in Paris, or at Lake Annecy, etc. – all these were denied to him or restricted by various limitations or prohibitions.
As the Labor government developed its policies and the restrictions continued or grew, the “average middle class Englishman,” the clerk, the small entrepreneur, the civil service functionary, the domestics, the shop-keepers, etc. became more and more hostile towards the regime. It was our personal experience in traveling through England that whereas the conservative voter or supporter, by his social status forming a member of the bourgeoisie itself, would attack the Labor government with arguments of a political and ideological nature, defending his belief in capitalism, the doctrines of his Party and the evils, according to him, of socialism, the petty-bourgeois opponent of the government and the Labor party would express himself in much more passionate and emotional terms, bitterly describing the effects of Labor upon himself, his family and their general social status. The difference in temperament and reaction was striking.
A study of changes of income between 1938 and 1949 for salaried people, including civil servants, clerks, shop assistants, school teachers, etc., undertaken by the Oxford University Institute of Statistics [2] drew the conclusion that an important narrowing of wage differentials between the different categories was to be observed. In all cases studied, except one, the lower down the scale, the higher the increases. The highest in grade had increased its salary by less than the lowest in grade. The fall in the real income of the higher civil servants was especially noticeable. A school principal, for example, in 1949 could only afford a living standard equal to that of a clerical officer before the war; by taking tax and price changes into account, the real value of the differences between wages received by various grades of middle-class employees was estimated to be one half of what it had once been.
Even more striking are the illustrations cited in the series of articles published by Le Monde to which reference has been made. We quote at length from the text of the article of March 15, 1952:
The group most affected is that of the liberal professions, whose annual income is not more than 2 or 3 thousand pounds. According to the Economist, professors, local functionaries, salaried doctors, technicians, journalists, accountants, architects, clergymen and military people rarely earn more than 1,200 pounds per year. This, for a family having three children, leaves them a net income of 992 pounds, against 530 for a miner and 380 for an average worker. And the Economist is able to write: “The winds of austerity are tempered for the salaried person, and the capitalist is protected by his fur coat, but the liberal professions can only shiver.” From this follows the incapacity of this later category to give to its children the education which it itself received and which conditions its social position. How can a judge of the High Court who, with three children has a net income of 2,554 pounds, find the 700 pounds each year indispensable for the education traditional of a “gentleman” from the age of 5 to 18? The reduction of his economic standing inevitably results in the lowering of his children’s social standing.
As for the British bourgeoisie itself, much can be understood about its new social position within British society as a whole by grasping the fact that, confronted with the process of being socially expropriated from its ownership of large masses of productive capital, it chose acceptance of this expropriation rather than resorting to extra-parliamentary means of preventing it, or at least attempting to do so. Who would say that the British bourgeoisie of the 1920’s or 1930’s would have limited its opposition to expropriation from 20 per cent of its national capital to parliamentary debates? This was a risky choice in the sense that the inner dynamic of the Labor nationalization program pushed it onward to the decisive point, as in the case of the steel industry, and a third electoral defeat for the Conservative party would have been an almost fatal one. The most spectacular aspects of the general decline of the British bourgeoisie are those represented by its aristocracy and its section devoted to government and political life. These aspects, certainly the more dramatic and interesting, are often taken for and confused with the bourgeoisie as a whole. But, important as they may be, the real power of the British bourgeoisie, its remaining social power, is represented by its ownership of 80 per cent of the national economy, by British industry, by the network of trusts, monopolies and corporations to which reference has been made.
The decline of the landed aristocracy is an old story in Great Britain, and the dispossession of the political caste of the bourgeoisie by the victory of the Labor Party was neither decisive nor definitive. Under the Labor regime, there was a further consolidation of the remaining private sector of industry, and a strengthening of its capital resources and funds. But it is doubtful whether the British industrialist received much encouragement from these facts. More important, it would appear, was the fact that he saw The establishment of a juridical and administrative procedure, including a social justification in the national interest, by which he could be expropriated from social ownership of his property; he saw, further, the self-expanding tendency of nationalization, the “silent” and "creeping” characteristics of this nationalization; he saw the power of the working class, its organizations and its political party. All this cannot be measured in precise and quantitative terms; it consists of a loss of social confidence and an uneasiness which has been transmitted to all groups within the bourgeoisie.
Finally, there is the question of the British working class in general, and of its trade union organizations. It is impossible to dissociate the two, since the British working class is probably the best organized in the world today, and the outlook and mentality of the British workers has long been conditioned by his membership in the trade-union movement which, for him, has a fuller and more important significance than for workers of other nations. His whole history has been an organic part of the history of the trade unions, and his political activity, expressed by the Labor Party, which in its social composition, structure and functioning is the politicalized consciousness of the 8-million strong trade union movement, took on flesh and blood in the form of the third Labor government from 1945 to 1951. The responsibility of the British Labor Party leader and the trade union chief before the ordinary members – the rank-and-file – of his party or trade union, while far from attaining an ultimate perfection, has always appeared more real, concrete, less bureaucratic than in most working class parties or trade unions.
 
The British worker had many criticisms of his Labor government, but even when certain of its activities which affected him most directly, such as the nationalization of the industry in which he worked, appeared to him remote, abstract and beyond his power to control or influence, he nevertheless persisted in his belief that it was his government in power, and that it had come about through his efforts, his party and his trade-union movement. A coal miner of Wales, for example, whom we spoke to concerning his grievances against the government, explained that he was a surface worker, that he had earned that week £9/3s./11d. for having worked 10½ shifts, or a total of 66½ hours! He could take home with him, after deduction of taxes, etc. £8/17s/2d., which would cover, modestly, the expenses of himself and his family. He was dissatisfied with the last wages reward of the government arbitration tribunal which had arranged a settlement between the union and the Board; he had pension grievances; he wanted a two week holiday instead of one week; he wanted establishment of sick pay equal to a normal minimum wage, etc. But he did not attack the government, as such; he had complaints against its specific methods of operation, and the details of handling affairs, but there was no bitter denunciation of the government, such as one could find widespread among middle-class and professional groups. Other conversations, in 1950 and 1951, indicated that an attitude of criticism, disappointment and deception, and often of apathy, were growing in working class circles toward the end of the Labor regime; the initial enthusiasm had clearly gone.
The international situation weighed heavily upon these attitudes, and often workers questioned in different industrial centers of the Midlands or London areas felt that the government and the Labor leadership had “done their best,” but that circumstances and factors beyond their control had largely liquidated these efforts. The solid achievements of the Labor regime, measured in terms of its social security program, full employment, housing, food subsidies, etc. were already accepted and integrated in the average worker’s life by 1950; what interested him were the new problems posed by the change of events: above all, the decline of his real wages, the soaring of prices and the tendency for all of Labor’s carefully constructed economic structure to fall apart toward the end of 1950. The electoral campaign of that year, emphasizing past achievements and defensive in tone, had not stimulated any response on his part. He remained still loyal to his Party – “A worker who votes Labor will never vote Tory; he may not vote, but he’ll never vote Tory,” we were informed by a young trade-union secretary – but doubt, disillusion and much scepticism had crept into his thinking; the ground was becoming ripe for an internal crisis within the Labor movement and the Party itself.
 
One of the institutions carried over from the war period by the Labor government and by means of which it hoped to assure industrial and social peace within the country was, we have seen, the establishment of the Joint Production Committees in the nation’s industries, including those nationalized. The government encouraged their development, and such an eminent Labor leader as Sir Stafford Cripps had wanted to make their establishment obligatory in every factory. In view of the importance attached to their activity, it would seem possible to evaluate at least partially, the workers’ attitude toward Labor by seeing what his attitude toward these committees were. In his preface to a study largely devoted to these committees, André Siegfried writes:
This is not a minor revolution that England is experiencing in its internal structure. This revolution consists essentially of the fact that the aristocratic England of yesterday has become democratic and, above all, egalitarian. Therein lies the real novelty. It is rapidly liquidating its rich class. [3]
It would appear to be M. Siegfried’s opinion that the institution of joint committees was one of the most important manifestations of the ‘revolution” of which he speaks, but this was hardly the case as the text of the work prefaced by him itself indicates. Waline defines the committees, which he compares favorably, from the standpoint of a conservative, with the Comités d’entreprises in France, as: “an organ of collaboration working in a climate of mutual confidence,” and he cites the words of Mr. Isaacs, minister, who, addressing the Confederation of Management Associations toward the end of 1947, stated:
Sainly understood, the joint committees in no sense contain any usurpation of management functions, no more than an attack upon the normal mechanism for negotiating working conditions. [4]
The fact is that precisely their limited and purely consultative character was responsible for the failure of these committees to develop, and their rapid decline after the war; in visits to coal mines, shipyards along the Tyne, small factories in London area, textile plants in Birmingham, etc., we were unable to find any serious evidence of their activities, beyond occasional routine committee meetings. The workers on the whole had lost their interest in these bodies, and were indifferent. The Conservative Party’s “industrial charter,” edited by Richard Butler and adopted at its party congress in October 1947, categorically pronounced itself in favor of these committees, granting of course that the authority of the head of the enterprise was not questioned, which were to be the means for the workers to participate in consultation, sharing, and partnership in management, as well as to develop a personal interest in their work. However, if the Labor leadership and the Tory Party saw eye to eye on the value of such committees, they did not convince either the trade unions or the masses of workers of their merits; the abundant literature which exists on the subject is overwhelmingly devoted to the mechanics and the academic details of this conception, with a minute proportion to its realization and the citing of examples and illustrations. The committees simply never took on any real life. Writing in the Tribune of October 31, 1947, Ian Mikardo was able to state, with truth on his side, that most of the committees created during the war have ceased to exist; the rest have no more real activity and management has clearly lost interest in them. Mikardo considers that the decline of the committees was due first of all to their purely consultative character, secondly, the fact that the workers had no right to examine the company’s books or no possibility to carry out any direct action in relation to management. This prevented the development of new ideas in the workers’ movement as to its role within the framework of private economy, as well as within that of the nationalized industry. The structure for such a possible evolution was, in part, created by the establishment of such committees, but the inner content was lacking.
 
Why had the government failed, on the whole, in its effort to make the joint committees function effectively? This raises the question of the relations between the trade union movement itself, its leading organism, the T.U.C. and its General Council, and the government. As we have seen, the government proposed that the unions accept a new relationship with it, one in harmony with the government’s industrial policy of auto-regulation for industry and restraint of workers’ demands. Labor proposed that the unions drop their former way of thinking, and their former relationship with the industrialists, in the national interest. It asked the unions not to take advantage of their position under full-employment, and to hold back efforts by their membership to start another cycle of temporary wage gains; it asked, in reality, the unions to share the responsibility of governing with it by adapting itself to a new relationship within the national economy. We have seen how, in general, the T.U.C. and the General Council accepted this policy, and persuaded the large majority of affiliated unions to follow it, until the inflationary pressure in 1950 became too great to hold back wage demands.
As a consequence of these policies, certain conservative trade union circles, as well as a large number of socialist “intellectuals,” economists, technicians and specialists, developed the point of view that the government must, in effect, establish a national wage policy, applicable to all industries, and which would form a part of its planification. Norman McLaren, in an article entitled Les trade-unions au tournant, poses the dilemma of British trade-unionism in the following terms:
Closely linked with the party mandated to govern the country, the TUC decided to do all that lay within its power to favor the success of the experience it itself had helped to set upon its feet. And this is where the trade union movement found itself confronted with the most crucial of problems. The essential function of a labor union is, of course, to struggle for the interests of the working population. English political tradition requires, in turn, that the essential function of a political party be to represent the interests of the whole of the population. By associating itself closely with the Labor Party while it was in power, the TUC ran the risk of being hampered in the pursuit of its labor demands and the party, for its part, risked giving into an excessive care in order to keep those supports necessary to maintain itself in power. [5]
This dilemma was accentuated by the fact that not only did the Labor government desire to represent the interests of the nation as a whole, but its entire policy of economic redressment – in terms of its export program, its investment program, its industrial planification program, etc. – depended primarily upon holding in check that proportion of the national revenue destined for wages and salaries. Those proposing state intervention to fix wage-rates, however, thought they had the answer to this problem. A State wage policy – that is, a centrally coordinated wage policy between government and the trade unions, which would modify, if not terminate, traditional forms of autonomous collective bargaining in each industry – could be, according to its supporters, geared to a national production policy already begun in part with the State ownership of certain industries and the planning of capital investment. This, of course, did not exist in Great Britain, where the General Council of the T.U.C. functions only as a coordinating body which makes recommendations of policy without enforcement powers, and where each trade union continues to be an autonomous body engaging in collective bargaining for its particular industry. The advocates of a national wage policy, made enthusiastic by the prospects of their proposal, recognized it would have to be accompanied by a more stringent price control, control over excess profits, and that the tying of the movement of wages to increased productivity would also mean that the government would have to determine what share of value represented by this increase in total output would have to go to an increase in wages. In a word, the functions and responsibilities of the government would enjoy an enormous expansion. Certain Labor members of parliament were even more specific: they suggested that the government should be able to determine a global figure for “that part of the national wages bill which is fixed, directly or indirectly, by trade union negotiation ... It would then be the function of the unions, acting in concert under the direction of the General Council, to allocate the total, and any increases in it, among the various categories of workers.” [6] Such a proposal would, of course, require the conversion of the trade union movement into a completely federated body, with the central federal authority having the power to negotiate on behalf of all the workers it represented; it would mean that British trade unionism had fundamentally changed its character.
Such proposed schemas – and many partial or complete versions were common during the period of Labor in power – rarely were heard among trade union officials or those responsible for the actual running of the trade union movement; they were the conceptions of socialist intellectuals and administrators who, made enthusiastic and partly blinded by the vision of national and long-range planning which several years in power had given them, were no longer able to think of the British worker as a worker, or the trade unions as the elementary protective organizations of these same workers. The concrete worker, with his demands and needs, had been transformed into an abstract “economic man” who must be fitted into the schema of planification. Professor Maurice Dobb, commenting upon the difficulty of enforcing minimum wage laws and other elementary legislation to protect workers, remarks: “It is a principle which is now fairly well established by experience that a law for enforcement contrary to the workers’ own initiative is almost invariably a dead-letter.” [7] There was no possibility of persuading the British worker to accept such a policy, in variance with his tradition and the concrete and immediate interests which have, until now, determined his line of action. Those responsible for trade union policy, including the General Council, opposed any national wages policy, or any restraint on the rights of individual unions to carry on their century-old activities.
The dilemma remained, of course, and no clear-cut solution was ever reached, nor, given the increasing difficulties of the government as its tenure came to a close, could a solution be reached. The British trade-unions would never consent, without resistance and internal upheavals, to what has taken place in other countries; that is, becoming mere servants of the State. If their functions must change under a government for which they are largely responsible, that part of their function which relates to the protection of the worker does not change; on the contrary, it seems more important than ever in a planned economy. The government, recognizing this, placed the problem before the trade union movement, made its series of recommendations, and left the unions to work out their own solutions. This encouraged the unions to look at wage issues in their full economic context, and to relate them to general fiscal policy as well. A coordinated trade-union policy on wages was out of the question, since trade union congresses have opposed any effort to strengthen the powers of the General Council of the T.U.C. No general formula or solution was put forward, but a typically British trade unionist policy of compromises, partial concessions, adaptations, etc., was worked out, in the concrete. The results of this adaptation we know, and they may be sumarized as follows: (1) A trend toward the levelling of wage differentials during the periods of full-employment; (2) a narrowing of relative differentials in wages according to the skill and quality of work performed within a particular industry, accompanied by the raising of wages for unskilled occupations; (3) the formulation of ambiguous, vague and unclear wage policies on the part of both government and the T.U.C., with the tendency for affiliated unions to take matters in hand by specifying their own wage demands; (4) a growing apart of union leadership and union membership, with the leaders engaging in negotiations at a remote distance from the workers themselves, with the possible exception of the miners’ union; (5) a greater freedom for workers in choice of their job, giving a greater mobility to manpower; and (6) a serious confusion within the trade union movement as a whole as to its precise role in the new situation which, together with the fact that workers came to depend less upon the concerted initiative of their unions than upon their own isolated initiative, forces the observer to conclude that despite the growth in membership and the basic solidity of the trade unions there was a loss in confidence and inner strength of a kind which is difficult to measure precisely. If we consider, briefly, the constructive and positive demands put forward by the trade union movement as a whole during the years of the Labor regime, we shall have a picture of this loss of vitality and drive, if only because of the limited and conservative nature of these objectives.
 
The proposals of the T.U.C. during the years 1945 to 1951 were of the following order: First, to lift the wage standards of the lower-paid workers (the T.U.C. demanded wage increases only for this particular category of workers until June 1950, when it recognized the need to end the blockage of increases in general); second, to adjust those differentials in wages which were considered unjust and inadequate, including the question of equal pay for women, etc. This was the extent of its propositions on the wages front. It considered its ideas relating to production, which aimed at increasing productivity, as being more important and urgent; this, of course, in agreement with the government. In addition to the program of joint production and consultative committees, the T.U.C. advocated the employment of production engineers by management, as well as the establishment of union production departments by the important national unions. The purpose of such a production department would be to advise the different units of the national union, the shop stewards and the joint production committees as to ways and means of solving specific problems of productivity. [8] It cannot be said, however, that these propositions met with a warm reception on the part of the unions or their membership. In reality, production efforts were limited to the participation of top union officials in various investigations, commissions (Working Parties), production groups which visited the United States, etc., together with the limited activity carried out by those joint consultation committees which continued to function after the war. The desire on the part of certain union leaderships to transplant an Americanized conception of the role of the union in the process of production met with such obstacles as to quickly render this suggestion illusory.
At the end of the Labor experience, no fundamentally new viewpoint had developed within the trade union movement, and the multitude of often contradictory tendencies and doctrines still existed, with perhaps a renaissance of purely syndicalist and guild socialist ideas to be noted in the unions concerned with the nationalized industries. The conclusion of Norman McLaren is that:
The very diversity of those currents which express themselves within the British movement, their fluctuations, the absence of apathy thanks to the existence of a still chaotic structure on the whole; all this indicates that the English trade unions still have a long road to travel. [9]
But it is undeniable that the British workers’ movement, as represented by its 8 million organized workers and their unions, retained its full freedom of action and independence, both with respect to the government and to those political views in favor of its integration into the State apparatus that had been proposed.
This brief examination of the social status of the three principal sectors of Britain’s population – workers, bourgeois and middle-class – bring us to a consideration of the more difficult and important question of their interrelationship. If the relative status of the three major social groups was not changed by revolutionary and violent means, such as often accompanies the overthrow of existing property relationships and the substitution of new ones, then what changes could be observed in Britain under the rule of the Laborites? Such changes are generally grouped together under the heading of social levelling which, as we have seen, is the consequence of a particular policy of wages, prices and taxes. The important details of such policies as they were carried out by the Labor Party have already been noted. What can be said as to their results?
The distribution of national income among the different social categories is certainly one of the most familiar and effective ways of judging the process of social levelling, particularly in a hierarchized nation such as Great Britain. This is a complex concept, into which many factors enter, and subject to much disagreement in interpretation. “The distribution of national income,” writes François Sellier in the revue Esprit
[10]:
Depends upon three distinct elements: the spread of the remuneration received by the different social categories, the price structure of the different goods, taking into account that the different social categories, even if monetary income is equal, don’t make use of their income in the same way; and the distribution of the tax burden according to the different social categories. The real distribution of income is the complex result of the combination of these three elements.
To these three elements in the distribution of national income must be added the additional element of wealth in the form of capital, or property, the maldistribution of which – from the socialist viewpoint – is the most reprehensible of all of capitalism’s evils since not only does it add to the income of those already receiving the highest proportion but it arises generally from no effort on the part of those who possess such wealth. Yet the importance of this element has often been underestimated in examining the social redistribution which has taken place in Great Britain. We shall see that the method of an increasingly progressive direct taxation employed by the Labor government, and by its predecessors, as a means of levelling incomes has about reached its uttermost limits; as a means of amassing taxes it was exhausted by the Labor regime. If a greater equalization of incomes is to be achieved in Great Britain by a future Labor government, it would have to recognize that the effects of its taxation policies have partly been blunted by the spending of capital, as well as by the general stimulation of accumulation of capital, to yield revenue and income at a future date. The weapon of redistribution of income by taxation has worn away its cutting edge; further distribution and levelling would require an attack upon the source of unequal incomes which derive from such sources as inheritance and which are unearned. This, of course, involves the basic question of the distribution of property and wealth, rather than that of income. What is the present situation in Great Britain with respect to property distribution?
The studies of H. Campion, Public and Private Property
[11], still remain the basic works in this field although they cover only the pre-war period. His general conclusion as to property distribution has been cited elsewhere. What has happened since 1936, the last year covered in the work of Campion? At that time, a slight tendency toward a redistribution of capital wealth by comparison with the period before the First World War was noticeable, but 75 per cent of the total adult population of the nation still possessed only a little more than 20 per cent of its wealth. We must first observe that it is difficult to obtain contemporary information and statistics, because very little has been done to continue the studies of Campion. Kathleen M. Langley of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics, who has made the most recent studies, up through the year 1947, states that: “It is possible to make reasonably correct calculations of the distribution of property in private hands for the years 1936-1938, but serious difficulties arise when an attempt is made to make similar estimates for the post-war years,” largely because the annual reports of the Inland Revenue authorities and the Estate Duty returns for the deceased no longer give sufficiently detailed information according to age, sex distribution, etc., since the war. [12] Nevertheless, certain tendencies can be described. Death duties have been further increased since 1936, except on estates leaving under £2,000, on which they have been abolished. The trends noted in the studies of Campion have continued since 1936, but not at a greatly increased rate. The top 1 per cent of the population over 25 years of age now (as of 1947) owns under 50 per cent of the total privately held wealth of the nation as against 55 per cent in 1936, a decline of a little over 5 per cent; the share of the top 5 per cent has dropped by the same amount to now possessing 70 per cent of the wealth. The former proposition that three-quarters of the people own only 5 per cent of the wealth must now be amended to read “more than three- fifths of the people.” But it must be borne in mind that this change is due above all to the fall in the value of money rather than to any significant change in distribution. [13] Clearly no sensational change in the distribution of property took place between 1936 and 1947, and in the 4 years subsequent to 1947 no new measures were undertaken which would have affected the distribution in any serious manner.
The one favorable development is the fact that although capital is still very unequally distributed, there was a substantial increase in the number of capital owners since 1914, with 7,750,000 people owning between £100 and £1,000 in 1947 and 2 and one-half million between £1,000 and £5,000. A levelling-up process has ben going on over many decades, but at a slow rate which was not accentuated by the Labor government. Income, never so unequally distributed as property, has tended to level out and to be more evenly distributed at a much faster rate than has property. This has created a paradoxical situation which has yet to be resolved, and which is often ignored by those who make much of the “silent and bloodless revolution” which has unquestionably taken place so far as personal incomes are concerned. Formerly, gross inequality in property ownership went hand-in-hand with an almost equally gross inequality in the receipt of incomes. This was once accepted as a part of the British way of life and the country’s social ethos. But just as the hereditary monarchy of Great Britain lost its most important support when the House of Lords ceased to exist on a purely hereditary basis, so did gross inequality in property holdings lose its principal support as a result of the striking development toward equalization of private incomes. Personal wealth and capital holdings stand exposed today, morally and socially without serious defenses if a determined attack should be made upon them. [14]
This anomalous situation was not touched upon by the Labor government which centered its efforts around the matter of personal income and taxation policy. Another paradoxical situation exists in the field of property ownership which, at some eventual date, will present a problem whose solution raises fundamental principles. We refer to the fact that while the public sector of ownership has expanded to an enormous extent, as a result of the nationalizations, from a juridical and technical point of view this public or statified property is mortgaged to private individuals because of the compensation policy of the government which took the form of interest-bearing state bonds. Strictly speaking, it would be possible to deduce from this situation that the state property represented by the nationalized sector of the economy is “owned” by private persons, but this is a legal fiction without social import, and the really important question involved in this relationship is that of annual interest payments of a considerable sum to the holders of these obligations.
 
On returning to the original three elements which determine the distribution of national income, according to M. Sellier, it is necessary to add certain details to those previously cited before attempting to draw up a balance of the whole picture. The progressive redistribution of the national income began forty years ago, and was carried out in turn by conservative, liberal and, finally, Labor governments. Its principal weapon has been that of the income tax, and the rate of tax imposed upon income has mounted steadily until it reached its height under the Labor government. J-H. Huizinga, in his studies in Le Monde, cites some of the more sensational aspects of this policy: five-sixths of the population, with an annual income of less than £500 now possesses a purchasing power of 25 per cent above that of prewar; the other one-sixth of the population has seen its living standard drop by 30 per cent; a rentier, with an income varying between £1,500 and £1,900 between 1938 and 1949 has seen his real income reduced by 53 per cent by comparison with the pre-war period; a millionaire with an annual income of £100,000 in 1913 (£91,700 after taxation), saw this reduced to £23,000 in 1928, £2,459 in 1945 and £2,097 in 1950. Innumerable other examples of this kind could be cited, but their significance is more sensational than anything else since they do not indicate the situation with respect to the mass of the population, nor that of the distribution of income among the different social groups.
The conclusions of M. Sellier, which are based upon statistics of government reports and the Economist, and which are concerned with the spread of individual revenue and income as a whole, must be cited to give a firmer picture of the general movement of social levelling. He distinguishes individual incomes according to the following categories: earnings of workers, salaries of employees, incomes drawn from capital (profits, interest and rent); distributed profits of companies in the form of dividends and, finally, rents. Taking 1938 as a base year equal to 100, M. Sellier concludes that earnings of workers had increased by 158 per cent, salaries by 125 per cent, income on capital by 68 per cent, non- distributed profits of companies by 48 per cent and rents by 19 per cent. And, taking into consideration the real value of this income, in terms of changes in the value of money, he concludes that purchasing power of the working class increased by 28 per cent, that of functionaries and employees by 8 per cent, while that of holders of income from capital decreased by 20 per cent, non-distributed profits by 29 per cent and that of landlords by 54 per cent. These conclusions which appear too optimistic and which seem not to have taken other factors into account at first glance, must be examined further.
For the tax year 1938–1939, taxable incomes numbered 9,800,000, with a global income of £2,970,000,000 subject to taxation. Approximately 11 per cent, or £306,500,000 of this was taxed away, leaving £2,663,500,000 net income after taxes. Compare this with 1948–1949, to illustrate the new scope of both taxable incomes, the degree of taxation and the revenue in taxes yielded [15]:



Number of incomes taxes in 1948–1949:


  


20,750,000




Gross income before taxation:


£7,800,000,000




Taxation imposed:


£1,057,000,000 (13%)




Net income after taxation:


£6,743,000,000



The range and distribution of these personal incomes are shown in the following table which indicates the enormous growth of those earning incomes of between £250 and £1,000 per year in 1949 by comparison with 1938; note also the effect of the progressive taxation as indicated by the column showing the proportion of income before tax retained after taxation:
In general, the above table indicates the continuation of a process by the Labor regime rather than any radical innovation, so far as fiscal policy is concerned. The workers were conscious of the fact that the raising of taxes by means of heavy taxation of large incomes is a decidedly limited method, whereas the augmentation of the average income of the mass of the population is a much more fruitful way of obtaining results. This policy was pursued with much success.



Distribution of Personal Income by Ranges of Income**




 


Proportion of Income before tax
retained after taxation




Range of Income
before tax


Number of
Incomes




at 1938–39 rates


at 1949–50 rates




£250 to 499
1938:
1949:


 
  1,890,000
10,310,000


 
96.8%
95.7%


 
95.7%
94.7%




£500 to 999
1938:
1949:


 
     539,000
  2,443,000


 
89.2%
88.9%


 
83.4%
85.2%




£1,000 to 1,999
1938:
1949:


 
     183,000
     545,000


 
81.8%
82.1%


 
70.9%
74.0%





£2,000 to 9,999
1938:
1949:


 
       98,000
     219,000


 
70.9%
72.0%


 
53.5%
57.4%




£10,000 and over
1938:
1949:


 
         8,000
       11,000


 
42.3%
45.8%


 
20.2%
23.2%




** National Income, op. cit., page 22.
NB: Incomes not subject to taxation such as certain government certificates, cooperative dividends, investment incomes of charities, etc., are not included; they would not, however, change the comparative figures between 1938 and 1949.



According to official government statistics, the distribution – in terms of percentages – of personal incomes after payment of taxes changed in an important fashion under the influence of the Labor government. The Times of April 18, 1950, stated that: “The main changes since before the war have been the increase in the share going to wage earners ... and the fall in the share going to profits, interest and rent.” The claims of the Labor government may be summarized as follows:



Distribution of Personal Incomes from Work and Property,
after Taxation
[16]




 


1938
Per Cent


1946
Per Cent

1949
Per Cent

1950
Per Cent




Wages


39


43


48


47




Salaries


25


22


22


25




Armed Forces Pay


  2


  8


  5


  3




Profit, interest and rent


34


27


25


25




 


 100%


 100%


 100%


 100%



Expressed in monetary terms, the figures regarding national income and its distribution after taxes, for the same period, are as follows [17]:



National Income
(£ Millions)




 


  


1938


  


1946


  


1947


  


1948


  


1949


  


1950




Wages


1,682


2,857


3,295


3,700


3,862


4,096




Salaries


1,054


1,507


1,702


1,904


2,021


2,164




Armed Forces Pay


     77


   512


   324


   227


   228


   233




Profit, interest and rent


1,448


1,969


1,989


2,049


2,100


2,197




Total personal income
derived from work or
property, after taxation:


4,261


6,845


7,310


7,880


8,211


8,690



M. Sellier, who follows a slightly different system of estimation developed by the Economist (June 16, 1951), arrives at substantially the same proportions of the national income which go to the different social categories. He concludes,
The share of income from work (wages plus salaries) in the sum total of income enjoyed by all physical persons after payment of their direct taxes is therefore respectively 65 per cent for 1938 and 74 per cent for 1950.” [18] He concludes further that the proportion going to wages had increased from 39.5 per cent in 1939 to 47 per cent in 1950, adding the important remark that this does not take into account “gains derived from incomes which were transferred (social services, family allowances etc.
However, an important qualification must be made before it is possible to accept the conclusions toward which these statistics seem to point. A change was introduced by the government economists into the last two White Papers concerned with the question of national income. The tables relating to distribution of national income now shows the distribution of personal income, excluding undistributed profits, whereas formerly it showed the distribution of private income, including them. Successive White Papers have given undistributed profits – which may be defined legally as being income which belongs to the shareholders of a company, but which are not immediately spendable – a more and more inconspicuous place position in their accounts; the point of view of the Laborites seemed to have been that in the given situation they represented nobody’s income, but strengthened the general financial position of industry, thus reinforcing the national economy as a whole. The amount of undistributed profits retained by companies after payment of dividends, interest and taxes on earnings is equal to the amount available to provide for stock appreciation, and reserve funds, out of which dividends can be maintained if normal earnings fall. The role of undistributed profits is therefore undetermined and depends upon the activity of the government and its policy toward such profits. Some critics of the Labor government have automatically attributed undistributed profits to company, as well as attributing amortization and depreciation to the national income of the capitalist class thus presenting – it goes without saying – a completely different picture of the distribution of national income according to social groups; one much less favorable to the working class and to the claims of the Labor government. This, however, strikes us as an unjustified attribution since it ignores the use to which undistributed profits were put, in relation to the Labor government’s program of encouraging the formation of capital for purposes of expansion and reequipment of industry, as well as to the fact that depreciation cannot possibly be classified as income, but clearly belong under the category of formation of capital. Gross domestic capital formation, which is subdivided between fixed capital formation on the one hand and the physical increase in stocks and work in progress, on the other hand, does not include expenditure on the maintenance and repair of plants. Its development during the years of the Labor regime are given in the following table:



Gross Domestic Capital Formation, 1946 to 1950*
(£ Millions)




Capital expenditure on fixed assets:


  


1946


  


1947


  


1948


  


1949


  


1950




Public service vehicles


     14


     25


     34


     42


     41




Road goods vehicles


     72


     75


     71


     75


     75




Railway rolling stock


     22


     26


     30


     31


     30




Ships


     77


     83


     75


     75


     81




Aircraft


–


     16


     14


     25


     12




Plant and machinery and passenger cars


   350


   440


   531


   603


   641




Buildings and Works


   865


1,030


   605


   631


   697




Repair expenditure on buildings and works:  


–


–


   560


   600


   585




Total fixed capital formation:


1,400


1,695


1,920


2,082


2,162




Value of physical increase in stocks and work in progress:


−165


   140


   200


   215


   115




Gross domestic capital formation:


1,235


1,835


2,120


2,292


2,277




* National Income, op. cit., page 43.



We note here not only the government’s active support of domestic capital formation and expenditure, by the transfer of its surplus on current accounts and other transfers, but also – and this, it would seem, testifies as to the role of undistributed profits and depreciation allowances on the part of private industry – the role of capital accumulation in terms of its reactivization in industry, by way of the capital expenditures described in the preceding table. This was, of course, entirely in accordance with the policy of the Labor government, much concerned with expansion and re-equipment of industry. Those who attack the Labor government on the grounds that it contributed, directly and indirectly, to the formation of private capital, thereby unquestionably strengthening the position of private capital in financial terms, forget not only that such was its open policy, but, more importantly, planification as undertaken by the government was based upon a mixed economy concept which assumed a harmonious relationship between public and private sectors of the national economy; the development of one sector would favor the development of the other. It is true, of course, that such was not always the case and a competition between the two sectors over a division of the new capital accumulated had developed toward the end of the Labor government. But, here again, it must be pointed out that the solution of this competition depended upon a series of complex social and political factors, including the international situation; or, in a word, the orientation and tendency of the Labor regime itself. There was no abstract or mechanical division of capital investment funds under Labor; the division took place according to the interplay of the internal forces which operated within the government and the Party, a state of affairs which, it would appear, reflects not only the democratic content of the regime, but the possibility for various viewpoints to exert their influence in a democratic fashion.
We note, in passing, that the rate of formation of capital came to a halt and began to decline from 1947 onwards, but what is of greater importance is the source of this capital formation and expenditure almost all of which was devoted to the development of private industry, the government’s housing program, etc. What is, otherwise stated, the financing of capital investment as carried out by the Labor government? The table which follows gives us the answer to this question for the years 1948, 1949 and 1950.



The Finance of Capital Investment, 1948 to 1950**
(£ Millions)




 


  


1948


  


1949


  


1950




Global domestic investments


2,120


2,297


2,277




Foreign excess or deficit


     30


     30


−229




Total amount required


2,090


2,327


2,506




Surplus on current account of the central government


   310


   313


   481




War Damage payments and other transfers of central government to private capital account


   204


   238


   145




Less: Inheritance and other taxes on capital


−214


−253


−188




Surplus of local authorities and of national social insurance


   135


   189


   195




Depreciation and amortization


   845


1,027


1,124




Increase of taxes on business


   154


  −15


   118




Non-distributed profits


   524


   487


   569




Less: Provision for the evaluation of stocks of companies and public holdings


   185


  −17


−270




Total, less personal savings


1,773


1,969


2,174




Personal savings


   317


   358


   332




Total:


2,090


2,327


2,506



The productivity of British industry increased, we have already seen, by approximately 7 per cent for each year of the Labor regime through 1950, when it began to fall. This increase did not benefit the consumer, but went to the formation of capital. “The real consumable product was more equitably distributed,” writes M. Sellier, “but it diminished considerably.” “The accumulation of capital increased by the amount which had been deducted from consumption through taxation and the increase in prices, in spite of the rise in productivity. If the accumulation of capital can become a form of exploitation in numerous instances by its very exaggeration, it is equally incontestable that the survival of the British economy was permitted only by the large accumulation which took place between 1949 and 1950.” [20] The truth of this statement is incontestable, and is the fundamental justification of the Labor government’s policy; to which must be added that any criticism of this accumulation must also deal with the question of its orientation and its use: namely, for the program of public housing, for the export program, for the development of the nationalized industries, and for the re/equipment and modernization of private industry.
With respect to taxation policy, it has been pointed out that between 1938 and 1950, the percentage of increased taxation imposed upon wages which, it has been stated, increased by no less than 10,850 per cent! [21] Whereas the 1938 government took a mere 2 million pounds in taxes from workers, that of 1950 took 219 million pounds; or stated otherwise, the conservative government only took £2 millions from gross earnings of £1,735 millions in 1938, whereas the Labor government took £219 millions from gross earnings of £4,470 millions. This, of course, still left the wage-earning class with a net income of two and one-half times more than in 1938, without repeating the previously described details regarding the enormous increase of those whose earnings were raised to taxable levels, as well as the important changes within the income tax structure itself in favor of families and those with low incomes. But it is important to give a picture of the tax system itself, as it relates to direct taxes, according to the following table:



Direct Taxes Paid on Different Types of Income and Property*
 (£ Millions)




 


 


1938


 


1946


 


1947


 


1948


 


1949


 


1950




Tax on income
Surtax


  59
    7


   122
       8


   108
       8


   113
     10


   115
     11


   114
     11




Interest and Profits
Tax on income
Surtax
Taxes on profits and excess profits
Social security contributions of self-employed workers


 
207
  43
  15
—


 
   657
     52
   391
  —


 
   604
     55
   286
  —


 
   664
     67
   283
     10


 
   791
     75
   300
     26


 
   821
     79
   277
     26




Wages
Tax on income
Surtax
Social Security Contributions


 
  43
    9
    8


 
   262
     15
     31


 
   228
     18
     33


 
   233
     22
     79


 
   250
     24
   105


 
   254
     26
   108




Salaries
Tax on income
Surtax
Social security contributions


 
    2
—
101


 
   205
  —
   135


 
   179
  —
   197


 
   202
  —
   238


 
   210
  —
   292


 
   219
  —
   296




Total:


494


1,878


1,716


1,921


2,205


2,231




* National Income, page 40.



From this table we see that whereas all taxes on salaries and wages in 1938 made up one-third of the taxes imposed in 1938, the same source provided 40 per cent in 1950; while private industry provided 52 per cent of taxes in 1938 and 54 per cent in 1950. Wages taken alone were 21 per cent in 1938, and 23 per cent in 1950. This would appear to be the correct and objective way of stating the situation with respect to the comparative evolution of the British tax structure as it affected the various social groups and in relation to unearned and earned income. At the same time, this gives the true indication of the Labor government’s tax program which emphasized the heavy taxation of wages and salaries, in order to eliminate as much buying power and pressure on the consumer’s front as was possible, with a relative easing up on the income of private industry in line with the expressed policy of stimulating the accumulation of capital.
*
On the basis of the material presented, what general conclusions may be drawn with respect to the distributive and social leveling tendencies of the Labor government, First of all, the Laborites did not introduce any strikingly new or sensational measure in this field, but simply continued and deepened the process already begun. The possibilities of a further leveling of the national income were small and no important measure could have been taken, in the circumstances, which would not have tackled the more fundamental issue of the distribution of property ownership itself. This, as we know, the Labor government was not prepared to do.
Secondly, as we move downwards from property income to social income, passing through the categories of distributed and undistributed profits, professional earnings, income from farming, merchants’ profits, etc., through wages and salaries and on to social security benefits, pensions, etc. (social income), the percentage income increases are larger for each major group of incomes the closer we approach the bottom; or, as we move from the income of the rich to that of the poor. Our general conclusion is that all the main, historic tendencies toward income equality continued to operate during 1946-1950, but that the general leveling tendencies have been less rapid than in the past, largely because of a faster rise in living costs for the working class than for others. Since before the war, the net effects of income, tax and price movements have all been egalitarian, but between 1946 and 1950, this egalitarian force shifted to changes in income alone. The rate of change slowed still further in 1948, largely because of the government’s wage stabilization policy, and the real value of property income rose proportionately. Beginning with 1949, there was a reversal of the previous tendency for wage earners to gain at the expense of those with incomes from property; a tendency which was related to the government’s attitude toward private industry and the accumulation of capital. This seems to summarize those processes which, both in the concrete and in the general, took place under the Labor government.
* * *
Footnotes
1. B. Watkins, The Cautions Revolution, page 148.
2. Bulletin of the Oxford University of Statistics, 1950, article The Levelling of Incomes, by D. Seers, pages 281–2.
3. P. Planus, Comité d’Entreprtae en Angleterre, Pion, Paris, 1946 gives an account of their extent, technique, system of organization, etc.
4. P. Waline, Les Relations entre Patrons et Ouvrlers dans l’Angleterre, d’aujourdhui, Riviere, Paris, 1948, introduction by André Siegfried.
5. Esprit, No. 188, March, 1952, pages 439–440.
6. A. Flanders, National Wages Policy, page 16.
7. M. Dobb, Wages, pages 208–9; for an excellent presentation of the national wage policy case, see article by A. Flanders, Wages Policy and Full Employment in Britain, Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics, vol. 12, 1950, page 225.
8. This idea is largely borrowed from those American unions which actively participate in the campaign for more production, even to the point of accepting the principles of so-called scientific management, including time-and-motion studies, etc. It should be added that American unions consciously attempt to raise the efficiency of below-standard factories and spend much money for employing highly-paid officials, and educational work by running schools, lecturers, films, radio programs, etc.
9. Esprit, No. 188, page 446.
10. Ibid., No. 188, page 358–9.
11. H. Campion, Public and Private Property, Oxford University Press, 1939; also Daniels and Campion, The Distribution of National Capital, Manchester, 1936.
12. K.M. Langley, article on The Distribution of Capital in Private Hands in 1936–1938 and 1946–1947, The Bulletin, December 1950, page 339–340.
13. Ibid., pp. 348–350; also R. Jenkins, M.P., Fair Shares for the Rich,
Tribune brochure, 1951.
14. The left-wing of the Labor Party has long cherished the notion of a progressive capital levy-tax on wealth and private property as such.
15. Annual Abstract of Statistics, No. 87 (1938–1949), page 242.
16. [There appears to be no note for this anchor. – Note by ETOL]
17. National Income, op. cit., page 19.
18. P. Sellier, Esprit, No. 188, pages 377–8.
According to National Income, pages 26–7, the total personal expenditure on consumers’ goods and services, at 1948 prices, was as follows: 1946 – £7,946,000,000; 1947 – £8,187,000,000; 1948 – £8,204,000,000; 1949 – £ 8,360,000,000; 1950 – £ 8,610,000,000.
This negligible rate of increase (9% in 5 years) is far below the rate of increase of the national income (13%) during the same period; this is the economy of austerity.
19. Economic Survey for 1951, Command 8195, page 44. [There appears to be no anchor for this note.]
20. P. Sellier, op. cit., Esprit, pages 379–380.
21. Ch. Bettelheim, Cahiers Internationaux, No. 34, mars 1952.
 



The situation here is desperate. Not only materially)
because of our not having any clothing and not enough to eat – but
above all from a spiritual point of view! The worst part of the whole
matter is, however, that every German man and woman who hated
injustice and who, on that account, was against Nazism and Militarism
– is today silent. They fought in word and deed against the Nazis
and believed that, after the overthrow of this evil, justice and real
freedom would stay. They did not flinch before prison and
concentration camp. They always pointed the way out to these deeds of
horror and injustice, etc. But where are these anti-fascists today?
They are no more to be found! They are in small. posts, disappointed
and depressed and must recognize that the Nazis are overthrown only
in name, that the Hitlerite spirit is triumphant, and by no means
only by way of the Germans! Everywhere one hears – you must!
Free expression of opinion? No. The Germans are afraid of everything,
of every word – of the CIC, secret service, SuretÃ© and GPU. And
this is precisely the most terrible thing – there is no difference
in the times to be noticed. On account of this, everyone is silent;
those who stood up for truth and right and those who quite obviously
were anti-fascist. Today the lukewarm, the mediocrities who
everywhere and always are up in front, today they speak. But these
men will not help us. (Extract from a letter from Germany)
*
In the first half of this series of two articles on Germany today (Cf. February 1947 issue of The New International) we
described the breakdown of the Potsdam agreement, and the launching
of the struggle between the rival occupying powers for possession of
German resources and industrial capacity.
It must not be imagined that this reversal in the prior trend to
de-industrialize Germany has, as yet, produced any noticeable or
notable results. The overall mass misery of the German people, in
all zones, continues as before, as the nation ends its second
post-war winter. The New York Times traveling correspondent,
Mrs. Anne H. McCormick, graphically reports the situation.
“A tiny trickle of heretofore unavailable goods –
ersatz soap, wire spectacle frames, wooden or composition
soles – s displayed, but it is the barter shop and bulletin boards
advertising articles for exchange that attract the crowds. Production
is beginning, say military government officers, but little evidence
of it appears on the counters of empty shops or in the motley
clothing the people wear ... Nothing new is being built.
“... the population looks worse and works less than
last year. They are thinner, yellower, slower-motioned, more
threadbare. The military government health figures tell a story of
decreasing resistance reflected in worried, pinched faces of women,
hollow-eyed men, weak-lunged children ... With few exceptions, the
whole population is hungry ...” (New York Times, October 20, 1946)
The Allied Central Economic Commission that sits in session at
Berlin set the average German living standard in March 1946 at
one-third below the pre-war level, or equal to the level of 1932 – a
year of intense economic depression. But this was a distant
objective, resting upon the assumption that the Potsdam accord would
be worked out. The reality is far different. The following chart
gives the official ration standards (daily) as of now. Even
these standards of slow starvation are mainly honored in the breach!



American zone


.........................


1550 calories daily




English zone


.........................


1550 calories daily




Russian zone


.........................


1263 calories daily




French zone


.........................


1014 calories daily



Aside from the dubious value of employing caloric intake as a
standard of actual food values, it is perfectly clear that this is a
diet of slow murder, particularly if prolonged for any period. It has
been in effect since October 15, 1946, and rests upon certain
assumptions not always fulfilled – namely, that the Russian zone
supplies its entire food supply by itself; that the British
and American zones supply respectively 600 calories and 900 calories
daily out of their own production. The Allies supposedly are to make
up the difference, but the constant food crises indicate this
systematically falls short of fulfillment.
Furthermore, the catastrophic long range effects of this deadly
diet of undernourishment are already visible. All those diseases that
take hold most easily in an organism weakened by lack of proper food
– tuberculosis, heart diseases, skin diseases, endemic illnesses of
all types, not to mention mental disturbances – are rapidly
spreading among the German population. Lieutenant General Clay has
admitted the existence of over 100,000 tuberculosis cases alone in
the American lone, of which 85,000 are not being treated in hospitals
but are, instead, free to spread infection. The physical undermining
of the German nation physically is unprecedented in European history.
That this should happen “according to plan” is inconceivable
except in the modern world. Fritz Sternberg, writing in the February
8, 1947, Nation) is correct in stating:
“No lengthy documentation is needed to prove that even
the increased food ration of 1,500 calories is absolutely
insufficient. With the workers so undernourished, an increase in
German production to the minimum figure set at Potsdam is impossible.
People must get more than 2,000 calories a day if industrial activity
in Germany is to be revived.”
And he quotes the apt summary of the general social condition of
Germany in the remarks of Dr. Kurt Schumacher, Social Democratic
leader in the British zone:
The situation in Germany is such that 35 per cent of the
inhabitants have not only retained all they possessed before the war
but have become in effect even richer because the others have become
poorer. Another group, about 25 per cent, have not enough to live on
but through connections of all sorts manage to keep body and soul
together. The rest of the people, 40 per cent of all Germans, have
nothing but their food ration cards. Such conditions mean latent
social revolution.
“Connections of all sorts” refers, of course, to the black
market. Only the German middle class that retained some savings can
engage in these “connections.” But all signs prove that these
people are now rapidly exhausting their savings, and selling the last
of their valuable accumulations. The haunting fear of a wild
inflation, followed by a devaluation of the mark that will
wipe out whatever remains of their savings, has been heightened by
wide rumors of impending financial changes in the Western zone. [1]
Butter sells for 200 marks per pound on the black market ($2,
if we accept the 10 cent evaluation of the mark), or three
packs of American cigarettes. Current production, such of it as
remains in Germany, is too minute to alleviate any of the pressures
placed upon the German population, physically or morally. It is a
piddling production, compared to the needs, despite the economic
unification of the British and American zones. The German people
today stand at the lowest and most humiliating point of their
history, in terms of living standards, economic activity, morale, and
cultural life. It is inconceivable for them to sink lower, or to pass
through another such winter as that of 1946–47, without a national
catastrophe. But this poses squarely the entire problem of a
unifiedGermany, with a revived national economy – or, in political
terms, the Moscow negotiations between the Big Powers for a German
Treaty. Potsdam is dead; what shall take its place? This is the issue
which confronts the Big Four enslavers of the German nation.
 
The Moscow Conference
For six solid weeks, the Big Four Foreign Ministers sat in Moscow,
attempting to draw up peace treaties with Austria and Germany. Not
only were the efforts to conclude an Austrian treaty unsuccessful –
contrary to first expectations – but in addition, all efforts to
approach even tentative agreement on the fateful German question have
failed, unless the establishing of strategic diplomatic positions can
be called success. The divergence of views is wide, reflecting the
depth of the imperialist antagonisms over, not only what kind of
oppressive treaty to impose upon the Germans, but, more important, in
which direction Germany shall move in the future.
The question is not one, actually, of whether or not a German
treaty will be drawn up and ultimately signed. None of the
participants in this contest of sinister bargaining – sinister
because it directly involves the fate of 65,000,000 peoples – have
illusions on this score. The retired Secretary of State Byrnes spoke
recently of perhaps two years of negotiations; Britain’s Bevin is
as sceptical; others question whether a formal accord will ever be
reached. The terms of the treaty itself are formalities, embodying
politics and policies that each of the powers are already putting
into practice, or intend to put into practice. The real question is
whether these policies can be bound together, temporarily at least,
by some common denominator formulas, or whether the divergencies will
lead to a premature breaking apart of the Big Four, in turn
precipitating an inevitable war. Since it is our contention that at
the present stage none of the Big Four desires, or is prepared, for
war, there will be no such split. Whether this will lead to the
actual formulation of a general treaty for Germany is impossible to
say. But it will certainly lead, in practice, to a series of
agreements, if only on a day-to-day basis, if only to prevent the
complete disintegration, economically and socially, of the German nation.
The German policies of the imperialist powers then, proceed on
various layers of development, thus accounting for its complexity,
confusion and contradictions. Each power, within its zones, pursues
its own unique goals; but each power is forced to arrive at some
common basis of operations with its rivals, to prevent the situation
from getting out of hand, to hold the German people in check. The
Potsdam Agreement waS such an understanding. Time and developments
buried it. The Moscow Conferences of the future will arrive at some
new understanding, regardless of whether it is embodied in treaty
form, until fresh developments revive the problem in a different
form. But so long as imperialism keeps its hands on the throats of
the German people, the “German question” will be the uppermost
issue in European politics.
What are the basic differences between the Allies in the matter of
writing a German treaty? Pravda provides a convenient source
for listing the major suspicions and accusations held by Russian
imperialism against its “democratic” opponents. From various
articles published in this official source book of Russian
imperialist policy, the following may be deduced:

Most basic accusation of all is that rival Anglo-American
imperialism, with the intention of basing itself upon the Ruhr
industrial potential, is building up a Western Germany and-Soviet
bloc. The positive aspect of this accusation is the demand of
Russia for a share in the control and production of the Ruhr – an
issue that proved to be one of the major points at issue in Moscow.
 
The British nationalization for their zone, and the
modified American version of these plans, are disguised plots – in
the eyes of Russian imperialism – for the restoration of Western
Germany’s war industries. These plans, it is charged,would still
leave the industries under the influence of “private owners and
monopolists” who would remain leaders of German economy.
 
The economic unification of the British and American zones
is part of the scheme to form a Western Germany, under Allied
control, and then – hiding behind the excuse that collapse is
inevitable – to partly rebuild this area, cut off from the Eastern
(Russian) zone, and prepare the stage for a new European war.
Parallel with the process, it is charged, goes the conscious
disorganization of economy so that German industrialists are being
forced to “yield a considerable portion of their property to
United States and British capitalists.”
 
From these charges, there follow a series of secondary,
subsidiary accusations. These themes upon which the Russian press
constantly harps are: (a) Failure of the Western Allies to carry out
the disarmament program; (b) Failure to give Russia her share of
promised reparations from the Western zone; (c) Sabotage of the
Potsdam Accord, and economic unification of the two zones to offset
this sabotage; (d) Failure to carry through the denazification
program and, in fact, conscious protection of important Nazi
officialdom, with a deliberate building up of reactionary political
groups (Christian-Democrats, etc.); (e) and, finally, tendencies
toward erection of a decentralized, federalized and easily
controlled govern-mental structure for Greater Germany. The mere
listing of these points indicates the depth and quality of the
differences between the great imperialist rivals. It will not be
easy to arrive at even a temporary accord; one that can survive more
than a few years. The dispute over Germany is more than a matter of
disagreement on important, even fundamental, issues. It is, at
bottom, an irreconcilable disagreement between the Anglo-American
capitalist-imperialist system and the Russian
bureaucratic-collectivist imperialist system. It is a dispute that
will endure, in varying degrees, until the inevitable war comes; or
until the international working class is capable of solving it in a
different fashion.

Out of the Moscow Conference has emerged the following general
picture of American policy with respect to Germany. It is a policy
that is distinguished by confusion, half-heartedness, unbalance and
that general incapacity to drive through a definite program that so
characterizes American imperialism in all fields.
America desires a long, indefinite occupation for the obvious
purpose of retaining strong positions throughout Europe. America
desires an exceptionally weak central government, to prevent its use
by the German Stalinist (that is, pro-Russian) movement, and to
prevent any state manipulation by a possibly revived German
bourgeoisie. This weakened system is known as a federated German
structure, giving full play to all the centrifugal, provincial and
regional forces (most notorious of which is Bavaria) that exist in
the country. America desires a limited, tightly controlled economic
productivity that will satisfy the imperialist utopia of (a)
providing a satisfactory market for the United States; (b) keep the
population sufficiently clothed and fed so as not to encourage
resistance; (c) yet limit productivity to a sufficiently low degree
that German export competition will not exist. The impossibility of
achieving such a balance accounts for the numerous contradictory
statements and actions (attacks on German cartels, followed by
attacks upon nationalization schemes, etc.) that make it almost
impossible to make any sense out of American policy for German industry.
The truth is that there is no set policy, particularly with
respect to a perspective for the industrial and economic future of
Germany. For the first period of occupation, the notorious
Morgenthau-Pastoralization plan prevailed in practice. Every effort
was made to reduce German productivity to new lows. The political
meaning of this plan, operating in the setting of growing
American-Russian conflict, forced its conscious abandonment. No clear
alternative replaced it. The series of three reports of the Hoover
Commission represent a definite alternative and would mean, if put
into practice, a sharp break with past and present policy, the
re-industrialization of the Anglo-American zone, and the pouring of
vast sums into this area to “prime the industrial pump.” This
alternative has not yet been accepted, even though the tendency is in
that direction.
But it is, at best, only a tendency. The American authorities, for
example, are attempting to sabotage and thwart the proposals of the
British for the full merger (without limitations) of their respective
zones, together with the outright nationalization of all heavy
industries within the two zones, and their operation under a
centralized state system. The British seem anxious to drive straight
ahead and create a clearly delineated Western Germany (into which the
French zone will be forced), with an economic life of its own that
will counterpose one bloc in Europe against the Russian bloc
of Europe that remains behind the Iron Curtain. But American
imperialism continues to waver, to drift from day to day, food crisis
to food crisis. The money it puts into Germany, for materials and
food, is too small an amount to provide the necessary “lift” to
the badly damaged and disrupted economy. This money, then, represents
wasted capital, poured down the drain. Energetic billions rather than
timid millions would change the story. But this appears most
improbable because of the fears of a revival of a powerful competitor
and rival at an inopportune moment; that is, when the entire
capitalist world can only fearfully speculate on how soon (not
whether) the next world economic crisis will occur. American policy
with respect to Germany will thus continue without hope, without
decisive action, without plan. It will be a day-to-day policy,
meeting each new crisis with temporary measures, and guaranteed to
continue the present general stagnation and hopelessness, both
economically and morally.
The prospects for the building up in Germany of a mass, popular
movement of resistance to the occupying forces of all countries, now
seem quite favorable. The activities of the revived German trade
union movement, particularly in the British zone, are important steps
in this direction; above all, the reassertion by the German working
class of its role as leader of the oppressed nation. More and more,
the masses of Germans are becoming aware of the impossibility of
their living under indefinite occupation by foreign powers, and of
the fact that the axis of their struggles to live revolves around the
issue of regaining their independence and freedom to exist as a
nation.

Footnote
1. Now announced as a 90 per cent
devaluation of the mark; that is, one new mark to be
issued for each ten old marks!
 



Marxism in the United States
by Leon Trotsky
Introduction by Albert Gates
44 pages; Workers Party Publications, New York
Workers Party Publications – through the kind permission of Comrade Natalia Trotsky – has just published Trotsky’s valuable and long-out-of-print essay on Marxism in the United States. The essay is now available for the first time in unabridged form. All the deletions made when the work was originally published as an introduction to The Living Thoughts of Karl Marx (published by Longmans, Green & Co. in 1939) have now been reinserted, together with a brief introduction that summarizes its significance for America today.
The essay falls into two sections. Part One is a lucid statement of the general social, economic and political tenets of Marx, and their applicability to the modern world. Written in the clear and unambiguous style that Trotsky so successfully employed in the exposition of popular Marxist conceptions, it is a summation of the Marxist methodology, the basic economic laws of Marxism as applied to capitalist economy, and a polemical retort to those who question the validity and the practical “working out” of these laws. In this respect, it is reminiscent of Trotsky’s famous essay on the 90th anniversary of the writing of the Communist Manifesto. Throughout the work, the correctness of Marxist doctrine is reinforced by wide references to the facts and statistics of American social and economic life, revealing the close attention Trotsky paid to America and his broad knowledge of this country’s development.
The second half of Marxism in the United States is a historic analysis of the Roosevelt New Deal, viewed as a stage in the development of American monopolist capitalism. Familiar figures (Wallace, Roosevelt, Ickes, etc.) appear before the reader, advancing their arguments in favor of New Dealism and capitalism, and then – with analytical precision and facts – are replied to by Trotsky.
 
Nature Of U.S. Capitalism
The essential characteristics of American capitalism, its sources of power and mobility, its contradictions and its contrasts with other capitalist nations, are probed by the author. Altogether, this section makes fascinating reading as an analysis in retrospect of a significant period of American life. If the first part of this work may be described as a classic restatement of Marxist social thought, this part may be described as the concrete application of that thought to the life-stream of American capitalism. The reader is, again, amazed by Trotsky’s close knowledge of American history and development.
An interesting section of the pamphlet, and one no doubt that will be subject to discussion and controversial issue, is that part dealing with “the inevitability of socialism,” an issue long in dispute among Marxist theoreticians. Without entering into this matter during a brief review, it is worth quoting Trotsky’s clear position:
“The lucubrations of certain intellectuals on the theme that, regardless of Marx’s teaching, socialism is not INEVITABLE but merely POSSIBLE, are devoid of any content whatsoever. Obviously, Marx did not imply that socialism would come about without man’s volition and action: any such idea is simply an absurdity. Marx foretold that out of the economic collapse in which the development of capitalism must inevitably culminate – there can be no other way out except socialization of the means of production. The productive forces need a new organizer and a new master, and, since existence determines consciousness, Marx had no doubt that the working class, at the cost of errors and defeats, will come to understand the actual situation and, sooner or later, will draw the imperative practical conclusions.” (page 34 – Trotsky’s emphasis)
Not only does Trotsky draw the conclusion, based upon his study of American economy internally and its external projection upon the world scene, that the laws of Marxism apply to the United States but that, in effect, they apply with almost classic clarity in any analysis of this country. To him, “it is clear that if the miracle of capitalism’s rejuvenation could happen anywhere at all, it would be nowhere else but in the United States. Yet this rejuvenation was not achieved.” (pages 39–40) From this, Trotsky draws the related conclusion that the future growth and radicalization of the American proletariat, as it draws the “imperative practical conclusions,” is guaranteed. It is this thought that Albert Gates develops in his introduction to the pamphlet. There is little question that Trotsky looked upon the American proletariat as one of the mainsprings for the, future development of revolutionary socialism. The entire pamphlet abounds with his solid confidence and grounded belief that the American working class will arise to the problems confronting it.
As a source work for provocative discussions and studies on many problems facing American workers, as well as American capitalism’s relation to the world, Trotsky’s, essay has its greatest value. It deserves to be widely circulated and discussed.
 



Although there is no question that the British Labor Government will surmount the current crisis without the need of either forming a coalition government with Churchill, or resigning and holding a General Election, it is clear that a severe blow has been dealt it – a blow which goes beyond the immediate aspects of the English crisis. In effect, the brand of “socialism” put into practice by Atlee and his Labor Cabinet has been tested by its first crisis and has, as was foretold by revolutionary socialists, failed pitifully. This failure, at the moment, has largely benefited the reactionary forces of American and British politics.
The English crisis is, obviously, due to more than the immediate situation. Just as it was expected, just as it is certain that the Labor Government will momentarily pull out of it, just so certainly can one predict its recurrence. It is a fundamental crisis, lying within England’s social structure, its world position and the steady decline of the Empire. Mrs. Anne O’Hare McCormick, N.Y. Times columnist, is correct in writing:
“The present emergency is not merely a coal strike. Nor is it the consequence of unprecedented cold weather or a failure of the Labor Government ... It is the climax of a series of crises, all symptomatic of what the war has done to Britain and to the entire economic and political structure of the Empire. British post-war policy of production for export and nothing for the home consumer is a policy of desperation. It lessens incentive to work and strains the Spartan spirit to the breaking point, but it is necessary if Britain is ever to be able to pay with her products for the food and raw materials she is obliged to import. Without world trade these islands might as well be sunk in the ocean, another Atlantis lost in the awful flux of the tides of power.”
Under the back-breaking strain of a month of incredibly severe winter weather, storms and snow, English industry came virtually to a full halt last week. Half the plants were closed; the other half operating only partly. Four million workers were completely idle; two million were drawing their unemployment insurance (the pre-war dole had revived).
A Deep-Going Crisis
Rations of bread and other foods were just as short and poor in quality as during the worst of the war periods. The famous British queueing up was on in full force in front of the greengrocer’s and restaurants, together with dimmed out and even blacked out cities and towns. An atmosphere of cold and darkness gripped the islands, though the war had ended, for England, almost two years ago. Transport, power, gas and electricity were in varying degrees of paralysis, as though a hundred atom bombs had struck the island. This is a social crisis that will not be removed by improvement in weather, and the resumption of coal deliveries.
At the conclusion of the war, the English working class overwhelmingly voted into power the British Labor Party. This government had a mandate from the masses to move forward on the road to socialism, to reconstruct a Britain damaged by the war, to modernize and improve the industrial plant and products of the country with a view to raising the living standards of the people. But the British Labor leadership, far from socialist and revolutionary in character, has proceeded to act within the premises and confines of the pre-war Britain – that is, capitalist, imperialist Britain, ruler of India and the colonies. Even the measures of nationalization of various industries (including the crucial coal industry) were steps taken to bolster capitalism. Now we see the results – a failure predicted by the English Trotskyists.
Great Britain today is a declining power, a power in retreat on a worldwide scale, before America and Russia. These two mighty rivals are squeezing her to the wall. England is broke economically, drained financially. To pay for its loans from America, England must export everything exportable. But then, what happens to the desire of the Labor Party masses for the rebuilding of their country, the lifting of their living standards?
 
Bevin’s Statement
That, clearly, becomes a mockery, given the policy of the Labor Government. You cannot build homes, repair dwellings, distribute needed consumers’ goods if the country is to sell everything abroad in order to get dollars with which to pay for American and Canadian food exports. It is precisely this contradiction of a chaotic, unplanned English economy competing in a world of mighty rivals that is responsible for the absolutely hopeless dilemma of British capitalism, administered today by the Labor Party.
Foreign Minister Bevin, in a recent speech, underscored this dilemma. Wailing about the inability of England to make progress at international conferences because of its obvious weakness by contrast with the Big Two, Mr. Bevins said England needs three things:
(1) Coal – England has not sufficient coal even for its own needs! This is the immediate cause of the crisis. In 1946, England mined 35,000,000 less tons of coal than had been dug nine years before, in 1937. There were 100,000 less coal miners working in the Industry: the entire trend of workers was away from the difficult and unpleasant task of coal mining. Two hundred and fifty thousand English miners are over 50 years of age; few youth enter the pits. The coal owners have successfully saddled the nation with the huge price paid to them for the nationalization of the mines they ran into the ground.
The industry is poorly equipped, not centralized or modernized and will be a losing proposition for a long time. An American miner averages four times the daily production of an English miner. Coal, England’s oldest major industry, suffers all the concentrated ailments of antiquated British capitalism. Its symptoms of illness are only the most pronounced.
(2) Manufactured goods for export – English workers will not work hard for export purposes. Furthermore, lack of power hampers full production; not to speak of America’s savage competition and Russia’s shutting of the door to previous markets in Poland, the Balkans, etc. To top this, England has no other power reserves besides its decrepit coal industry.
(3) Financial credits to extend abroad: England came out of the war with $14 billion in debts to America and the colonies, including India. England, far from being able to extend credits, finds herself unable to borrow for her own needs. The American $5 billion loan will shortly be exhausted. American imperialism will demand a heavy price for a further loan. The dilemma is impossible to resolve. The three things that Bevin demands for a strengthening of the imperialism voice are unobtainable.
The response of the British Labor Government is to call upon the masses – the same people who passed through six years of war – for greater “austerity,” “harder work” and “higher productivity.” All this, of course, to continue the export program of British imperialism. We do not think the response will be favorable. The Conservative Party of Tory Churchill, while utilizing the crisis to bait and throw discredit upon the alleged “socialist” program of the Labor Party, is impotent and programless in the situation. It has nothing to offer, except to stimulate the most reactionary circles of British politics for the future.
The Labor Party will muddle out of its current mess, only to face an even greater one in the near future – perhaps when it must again turn to America for further loans and help. But the Labor Party has undoubtedly lost much in popular prestige among its supporters. Next week we shall examine the program proposed by the English Fourth Internationalists as a way out of this situation.
 



IN last week’s article on the colonial rebellions that have passed over Asia and other areas of the colonial world since the end of the war, we described the basic factors behind these mass uprisings by colonial peoples – the weakening of the traditional imperialist powers (England, France, Holland); their necessity to come to some terms with the peoples they formerly held in outright servitude; and the awakened nationalist consciousness of the colonial masses. The answer to the efforts of the old imperialist masters to reinstate themselves in their former ruling positions was mass revolts in Java, Indo-China, Burma, Palestine and the beginnings of a revived popular movement for independence in India, Ceylon and the colonies of the Near East and Africa.
Headed by the 40,000,000 Javanese and the 25,000,000 Indo-Chinese, the first stage was open, armed rebellion that took on the aspects of widespread warfare. The guns of the half-trained but determined fighters of Java and Indo-China soon punctured the imperialist illusion that the down-fall of Japan, automatically re-established white imperialism in its former positions. The fierceness of the resistance forced a sharp change in policy and removed any illusion that the former colonies could be reconquered by force. Instead, after bloody fighting, imperialism approached the conference table and sought allies among the conservative elements of the native resistance and independence movements. It found these elements in the native capitalists, merchants, landowners and middle class intellectuals who, for the most part, stood at the head of such movements as the Javanese liberation front and the Viet Minh Party of Indo-China.
 
Attempt to Compromise
In other colonies, where open rebellion did not yet exist, imperialism hastily approached similar conservative forces in the nationalist movement (Congress Party of India, Wafdists of Egypt, Arab League in Palestine, etc.). Everywhere efforts were made to evolve agreements and compromises, based on concessions that would halt the rising wave of rebelliousness. Imperialism cleverly carries its own logic and leads, or tends to lead, to social revolution – that is, the destruction not only of foreign imperialism, but native tyranny in the form of landlordism and capitalism.
The first efforts on the part of the colonial peoples were only partly successful. They were not sufficiently strong nor did far-sighted revolutionary leaders stand at their head to lead them to national independence. Their leadership, on the contrary, was national bourgeois (India), or at best, radical middle class and democratic (Indonesia). In other instances, the Stalinists played a sufficient part in the movement to call it to a halt before it went “too far” (Indo-China).
The imperialist powers, thanks to the help of America with materials and supplies, rallied sufficient forces to push back the uprisings; imperialism joined hands to hold down the Indo-Chinese in 1945 and 1946. The first wave of struggle came to a halt – truces and agreements were on the order of the day.
 
A Junior Partner
In those colonies where there had not been open rebellion (India, Ceylon, Egypt, etc.), the imperialist power entered into negotiations with the conservative nationalist movements. The pattern was the same everywhere – an effort to make a “deal,” by which imperialism gave up something to the native capitalists and feudalists, in exchange for the right to continue as ruler of the people. Expressed differently, imperialism offered to make the native capitalist class a junior partner.
Such is the character of the various agreements reached, or in process of being reached, in Indonesia (establishment of an Indonesian Republic within the Dutch Empire); in Egypt; in Indo-China at one period when the Viet Nam government was recognized; in India and Burma, where efforts are still going on. These agreements are far short of – in fact, have nothing in common with – real independence. They are structural changes in the previous setup, new arrangements due to a change in the relationship of forces. Imperialism can no longer exist without finding solid and loyal supporters among the colonial bourgeois elements. It must pay a price for this, however.
Thus, the nationalist movements came to a halt under their conservative, capitalist leadership while lengthy negotiations went on. Under cover of these negotiations, efforts were made to destroy the radical wing of the nationalist movements – to drive out the revolutionists and those who wanted to continue the struggle to the end. Men like the Javanese revolutionist Tan Malaka were jailed; the Indo-Chinese bolshevik leader Ta-Thu-Thau was murdered. But, of course, the movement could not be halted so easily, since its momentum and its inner forces were powerful. The present rebellion in Indo-China, in this sense, is probably the beginning of a new stage of militancy and revolutionary activity.
 
Agreements Unworkable
In Indo-China, an agreement had been made. But the Viet Nam government found it could not halt at this point, that it must carry on the fight for the right of the people in Cochin-China to join up with Viet Nam, a right that had been promised by the French. By the same token, French imperialism found that because it had yielded a hand, after sharp fighting, an entire arm was now being demanded. It is safe to predict that none of the other agreements arrived at will have any durability; all will prove unworkable in practice because the dynamics of the forces involved are too powerful to be contained by any “deal.” Likewise, those colonies that have not yet had open rebellions will find themselves inevitably forced to take that path, if they are to gain their freedom. Imperialism has had its day. The questions is – what shall replace it?
If imperialism is to have its way, then a modified form of the old colonial system will be created: a neocolonial system under which the old imperialist master remains in control, but gives an increased share of power and profits to the native reactionary classes.
 
Role of Colonial Workers
But if the masses of colonial peoples are to have their way, then we shall witness an increased tempo in both the scope and rate of the colonial movements of revolt, leading finally to the achievement of complete freedom from any type or form of imperialism. The primary meaning of the events of the past two years, in the colonial world, is the reinforcement and vindication of the Fourth Internationalist idea that ONLY the colonial working class, together with the masses of poor peasants who are united together under the leadership of a revolutionary political organization, can achieve even the democratic revolution. The growth of the Fourth Internationalist parties in India, China, Indo-China, Ceylon, etc., is essential for this.
The democratic revolution in the colonies means the winning of national independence. But the “democratic” bourgeois leaders (Nehru, Gandhi, Soekerno of Java, Ho Chi Minh of Indo-China, etc.) have shown again they cannot accomplish this. The winning of national freedom – the ending of colonialism of the old and new type – depends entirely upon the revolutionary activity of the workers and peasants. The next stage in the evolution of the colonial world will see the transformation of the struggles, after many difficult obstacles are overcome, into broad and even more popular struggles, nationalist and social in character.
 



Last week, in an interview with 150 press correspondents in Washington, the new Secretary of State General Marshall restated his understanding of U.S. foreign policy. While this declaration was essentially a reaffirmation of previous policy, certain characteristics in the Marshall statement are worthy of note. Above all, the militaristic overtones of his remarks (his broad use of military terminology as, for example, his reference to Europe as “the European theatre”) must be pointed out.
General Marshall covered a whole variety of subjects in his talk: America’s role in the United Nations; the problem of the atom bomb and disarmament (disarmament under General Marshall!); the question, of Europe and Germany; the Far East and South America, etc. Above all, he restated the unambiguous intention of American imperialism to continue its widespread activities in every part of the world; to participate actively in all developments and events; and to bolster and maintain the full economic, naval and military power of the American worldwide system. Let us briefly examine some of the highlights:
The United States, Marshall said, will “avoid unilateral disarmament.” To emphasize his point, he called again for universal military training to be adopted by Congress and put into immediate effect. But, he said, any implementation of the general resolution on disarmament passed by the recent session of the United Nations must be based upon a preliminary acceptance of the American proposal (Baruch plan) for atomic energy control. This plan, as is known, is stalemated by the dispute between the American and Russian governments over its terms. Thus, disarmament even of the dubious kind proposed by the United Nations, becomes an impossibility in the given circumstances.
To further dash any naive or pacifist illusions that general disarmament would not begin (didn’t the United Nations – hope of the world – just vote for it?), Marshall added that “the tremendous issues of the peace settlements must be solved before any real disarmament, or even any substantial reduction of armaments, can take place ...” General Marshall, meanwhile, has a solicitous and friendly eye on the size of the military budget for 1947.
On other important problems of American foreign policy, Marshall bluntly reaffirmed the general policies of his predecessor, Byrnes. America will have a worked out plan to advance its interests during the coming Moscow negotiations over the treaties for Austria and Germany; a middle-of-the-road policy will be pursued in China and Asia (Marshall took a crack at the French for their role in Indo-China), but meanwhile the Kuomintang reactionaries and Chiang Kai-shek will get lend-lease in China. In South America, Secretary Marshall reiterated the “importance of forging a hemisphere security system among the twenty-one American nations.” He was conciliatory, in line with the new policy, toward Dictator Peron of Argentina.
The first great test of Marshall in action will come in March, at the Moscow conference, when he crosses swords with Molotov over the prostrate body of Europe and Germany. But it is clear that Marshall represents a hardening of American policy all along the line, with respect to Russia. This does not mean that American imperialism is planning or preparing an immediate war with its rival, Russian imperialism. It means that the long and complex task of preparing the basis for such a war, or carrying out successful maneuvers at the expense of Russia, continues.
 



SINCE the formal conclusion of World War II, movements on a vast scale have stirred the entire colonial world of Asia and Africa. The populations of these subjugated nations, victimized for centuries by European imperialism, refused to participate in any active sense throughout the seven years of war. Only as passive victims, did their work and energies have an indirect effect upon the outcome of the war.
But, almost as if by pre-arranged signal, the colonial masses of Asia and Africa began to fight back against their exploiters from the moment the war ended. In country after country, they utilized the collapse of the Japanese Empire and its brand of imperialism as a favorable moment for exerting themselves. They rushed into the vacuum created by the Japanese surrender and challenged the right of the former white masters to return to power and carry on as before.
Passivity and indifference passed over into activity and open revolt. Java and the Indonesian islands, Indo-China, Malaya, China, India, Ceylon, Palestine – the list includes, to one degree or another, all the colonial dominions and oppressed nations. One half the world, comprising 1,000,000,000 peoples, have been engaged for almost two years in a struggle with imperialism – and the story of this struggle is far from over. But certain conclusions can be drawn at this point about (a) the character and pattern this struggle has taken; and (b) its future and possibilities of arriving at the goal of freedom and a democratic regime for the colonial peoples.
The instant the. war ended, the great colonial powers of yesterday (Great Britain, France, Holland, Belgium) were determined to reconquer and reestablish their rule over those areas of the world they had lost to Japan and her satellites. These “mother” nations had suffered extensive losses during the war. The colonies, so they thought, were the source of economic recuperation; a super-exploitation was planned. Visions of revived sources of raw materials, of rubber, tea, sugar, etc., plantations back in operation, of renewed export markets and opportunities for profitable investments, these visions filled the minds of Europe’s post-war governments and ruling classes. But things had changed considerably.
The motherlands were infinitely weakened by contrast with their pre-war status, particularly those nations (France, Belgium and Holland) that had suffered outright defeat and occupation at one stage of the war. Overwhelmed with home problems of reconstruction, they could not be so violently exacting as on prior occasions when their colonial slaves pressed them for concessions. Furthermore, the colonies had for the most part experienced a definite economic and industrial growth during the war. The factory proletariat of India had doubled, reaching the enormous figure (for that country) of 5,000,000 industrial workers in basic industries. India now has one of the world’s greatest iron and steel works. And England had gotten into debt to the extent of $1 billion To India, formerly its greatest debtor!
In a word, an entire new relationship of forces between the colonies and the motherlands now existed! This held true even for those colonial lands where no significant economic development had occurred. Whereas, before the relationship between the homeland and the colonial had been clear and fixed (just as is the relationship between a prisoner and his jailer), this no longer held. A new relationship had to be established. What would it be? This was the basic problem, in imperialist terms, so far as the colonial world was concerned.
Other changes, to be sure, had taken place. Two great, hungry, grasping imperialist powers had emerged as undisputed victors during the war – America and Russia. Neither of these powers had previously held great colonial territories, but both now had ambitions. Neither proposed to create empires along the old style, but both had developed new techniques and methods.
America, with its economic weight and power and Russia with its political exploitation of oppressed peoples and its social demagogy, immediately began to move in on the old colonial empires. The very existence of this competitive force compelled the old masterlands to reconsider their original plans and to revise their tactics. In the world of 1946 and 1947, the old methods could not work.
Finally, and from our standpoint most significant of all, a tremendous political, ideological and spiritual change had occurred in the mentality and thinking of the African and Asiatic peoples. They had seen the white man, the arrogant and lordly ruler, driven in utter humiliation from his former positions. They had seen his defeat, and secretly rejoiced in it. Now this same man sought to come back, to pick up the traces he had dropped as though nothing had happened! But hold on – not so quickly! The answer to this attempt on the part of yesterday’s rulers to walk back into power was mass revolt in Java, in Indo-China, in Burma and the beginnings of revived popular movements in India, Ceylon and the colonies of the Near East and Africa.
 



Yesterday’s partners in war are stalking one another. The enemy’s safe was cracked, the door blasted open and a preliminary division of the vast loot took place. But much remains, including the safe itself. The oaths and promises of bygone days are discarded: pledges of eternal fidelity and friendship dissolve in the acid of distrust and growing hatred. Hitler is gone; his principal associates are gone. The partners in the democratic crusade stand face to face – and how revolting they find each other!
“Mr. Byrnes” speaks “in the role of American protector of Germany,” according to Mr. Zhukov of Russia’s Pravda. Russia refuses to “carry out the Potsdam accord,” is the counter-accusation of Mr. Byrnes. England, most anxious to end the Potsdam accord by any expediency, supports the Byrnes accusation loudest of all. The French, glancing up a moment from their concentrated task of plucking the last shred of meat from the bare bones of their section of Germany, wring their hands and mourn the growing mutual distrust. The partners stalk each other on the soil of Germany, knives sharpened and muscles tensed. The war ended one and a half years ago. The trend in Germany has been reversed, something not difficult to have foretold. The object of this article is to examine that reversal.
Two unheralded announcements indicated how clear had been the reversal in policy, particularly as concerns America and its western zone of Germany. The Army of Occupation announced it is considering the question of turning over surplus military materials (trucks, jeeps, tractors, bridges, steel, rolling stock. etc.) to the German occupation government. The value of this material, announced as one billion dollars, could hardly be paid for by a bankrupt, stagnant Germany. Therefore, it was clear that a possible loan to Germany was being considered, meaning the opening up of a billion dollar credit to Germany’s account. This has now been confirmed. Secondly, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation announced on October 7, its intention to send an economic mission to “study ways of reviving German industry sufficiently to enable the American zone to repay in exports what it is currently receiving in imported goods essential to its survival.” The primary objective of the twelve-man commission will be to “assist in the revival of the zone’s economy.” Quite a different tune from the proud boast of General Eisenhower, in October 1945, that German industry in the American zone had been reduced to “10 per cent of its capacity”! [1]
The Potsdam Agreement had marked the peak and highest possible point of cooperation between the Allies of yesteryear. Behind its imperialist façade, a pseudo-legal basis was provided for a common policy of outright thievery, plundering and pillage. The four conquerors of Germany shared, to the greatest possible extent, in a parcelling out of the greater portion of Germany’s remaining liquid wealth. Each power, of course, sated his lust in his own unique manner, as has already been described in our magazine. (cf. The New International, May and August, 1946.) Once this process had been completed, the appetites of expanding rival systems necessarily took the upper hand and an entirely contrary process began. We are now in the earliest stages of this contrary process.  
Opposition to Potsdam Terms
The first rumblings against the Potsdam Agreement to cut down and rigidly control German industry came from the British, who saw the loss of their best Continental customer, as well as an indirect but equally dire effect upon the small nations of Western Europe and France. The more positive aspect of Potsdam, the treatment of Germany as an economic unit by the Four Powers, never went into effect. Practically speaking, this was due to the heavy milking by Russia and France which excluded any fulfillment of the Potsdam terms. The lack of raw materials in the American zone (coal, in particular), and a similar lack in the British zone (due to French insistence upon getting the entire output of the Ruhr mines) made these two Powers especially favor and advocate the carrying out of some form of German economic unification. But, for some time now, it was dear that nothing would come of this, except on an entirely new basis. As long back as 1944, Russia had expressed its negative attitude toward common economic plans by refusing to join the Emergency Economic Committee for Europe, an outfit created by the Allies to organize a clearing house in the British zone for exports and imports to a defeated Germany. Early in 1946, the British discovered they were losing 80,000,000 pounds sterling ($320,000,000) per year, in order to maintain the minimum living standards set for their zone. This was an added compulsion to their desire to liquidate Potsdam and its stagnant consequences, replacing it with a new and more satisfactory accord.
Any effort to draw up plans and carry out the economic clauses of Potsdam led to nothing but wrangling and dispute. For example, General Clay, head of the American lone, insisted that complete free trade exist throughout Germany, and that the proceeds of any exports should go to Germany as a whole. When Russia rejected this proposal, he suspended the shipment of dismantled plants to Russia (as provided in the Potsdam Agreement), announcing that shipment would not be resumed until the Four Powers “agreed to treat Germany as an economic unit.” The breach was widening.
On July 7, 1946 the British authorities piously announced that their obligations under Potsdam had been met, but that – in accordance with their prior declaration of alarm (June 12, 1946) that their zone was in danger of complete economic collapse – they were in complete agreement with the American zone commander’s statement that removal of all economic assets from Germany, as reparations, must be halted. All this was preliminary to the opening of negotiations for the merger of the British and American zones, an action now officially completed. Within less than one year the Potsdam Agreement was deader than the proverbial dodo. The Molotov speech at the Conference of Foreign Ministers in Paris, followed by Byrnes’ counter-speech delivered at Stuttgart, formalized its interment, and signified that a new stage had been reached one of open tactical and strategic struggle for mass support from the German people, as an essential (even if long-range) step in the preparation of war. Molotov, leader of Stalinist imperialism abroad, publicly vied with Byrnes, leader of the Anglo-American imperialist bloc, for political control over the whole of Germany and for allies. The actions and policies pursued by the new rivals are today mere aspects of this general strategic aim.
The most practical and clearest step forward in the Anglo-American bid for mastery of Greater Germany has been the unification of the British and American zones along economic and now political lines. This unification is based on a decentralized federal scheme, with central controls through top Allied agencies. The apparatus for a thorough coordination of the economic life of Western Germany has been set up with the aim, as expressed by the American general, Draper, of creating u a self-respecting, self-supporting Germany, able to pay for its food imports in spite of the loss of rich agricultural territory. The small French zone, minus the Saar, will undoubtedly be squeezed into joining this American built federation of western Germany. The process of restoring the entire area into a unit of world capitalism, confronting the Russian empire, will proceed apace.  
The Capacity of Pre-War Germany
It is often stressed that Germany, lying at the heart of Europe, dominates the Continent and that the direction of its economy and the political action of its people are, in historic terms, decisive for Europe. This is true today as before, when properly understood and qualified. With this basic struggle between Anglo-American imperialism and Russian imperialism now on, it is worth reviewing the economic and social resources of the country as a whole, to obtain a clearer picture of what is at stake.
The population of Germany in 1939 (less Austria and the Czech Sudetenland) was 60,000,000 living in a 181,360 square mile territory, or a density of 382 Germans per square mile. [2] This Germany was a vast empire of modern production, second only to the United States, that determined the direction and trend of European economy. Basing themselves upon rich natural resources and basic materials, powerful industries in chemicals, machine tools, synthetics, metals, building materials, etc., were built up. Complex manufactured products, rivaling those of the United States, were sold on the international market – ball bearings, tractors, cars and trucks, electrical equipment, alloys, etc. Clearly defined areas of industrialization – the Ruhr-Essen valley; the Saarland; the Berlin area; the lower Silesia regions – dominated the country. Food was the one essential item in which national Germany was weak. Although it employed the most advanced agricultural techniques to produce enormous quantities (e.g., five and one-half million metric tons of wheat; fifty-six million tons of potatoes; seventeen million tons of beet sugar in 1939), the country had an annual food shortage of approximately 20 per cent, which it had to import from abroad. Food imports averaged about 33 per cent of total yearly imports.
German economy had, naturally, basic ties with the world market, particularly with the United States, England, Argentina, France and the smaller countries surrounding Germany proper. In 1938 German imports amounted to five and a half billion Reichmarks (two billion dollars, if we accept the forty cents valuation of the RM at that time), as against exports of five and a half billion Reichmarks. Imports included wheat, butter, coffee, fruits, raw cotton, wool, oils, some coal, copper, timber, etc. – material for the German mills. Exports were characteristic of this industrial nation-coal, silks and rayons, woolen and cotton goods, leather, paper, dyes, pharmaceutics, glassware, iron, steel and copperware, electrical equipment, etc. In examining the separate zones we shall detail more about the productive capacity of Germany. A solid floor under this vast productive apparatus was provided by 185 million tons of coal, twenty-three million tons of ingot steel, and ten million tons of iron ore (1939).  
Capacity of the German Zones
The rush of the Allied forces across the face of Germany when Nazidom fell had other purposes beyond that of sealing the victory over Hitler. Besides assuring against any possible revolutionary efforts, or the emergence of “dual power” tendencies by anti-fascist groups, the victors were anxious to guarantee occupation of territories allotted by long, prior arrangement. So delicate was the balance of forces that those powers that overran their allotted territories (French and Americans) were obliged to withdraw at a later stage. Then was created the sealed zonal system into which Germany is, still, substantially divided. The character of each zone expresses more than the geographic-tactical proximity of its particular occupant; it expresses to a greater degree the economic and social character of the occupant – above all, what that occupant is after.
The zonal territorial and population division is as follows:



American Zone


..........


42,600 sq. miles


  


17,000,000 Germans




British Zone


..........


37,000 sq. miles


23,000,000 Germans




French Zone


..........


17,000 sq. miles


  6,000,000 Germans




(Western Zone Total)


..........


96,600 sq. miles


46,000,000 Germans




Russian Zone


..........


46,000 sq. miles


20,000,000 Germans



In general, each zone had the following economic capacity and comparative standing before the collapse:
The Russian zone (if we include the areas now occupied also by Poland – a legitimate inclusion since the Russian system merely “farms out” these territories to the equally occupied and equally unhappy Poles), was first among the zones in agriculture, and second in industry. It created one-third of the national income, and its population included 40 per cent of Greater Germany’s agricultural population, and 33 per cent of its workers. In 1936, this area was self-sufficient in food, and produced a 10 per cent surplus for the rest of Germany. It has the greatest proportion of cultivated land and, with the inclusion of Saxony and Thuringia, was a mighty productive industrial unit. Although it was dependent upon the Ruhr for raw materials, it had chemical and light metal industries, iron and steel finishing industries and electrical goods industries. Its total pre-war production was 20 per cent of the German total. Foods grown (in surplus) included rye, wheat, harley, oats and potatoes. There were valuable hard coal resources. Altogether, this zone was rich, productive and well-balanced.
The British zone was first in industrial productivity among the four zones, and third in agricultural production. This zone had 30 per cent of total German resources, and gave forth 30 per cent of total industrial production. It was, as is well known, the industrial heart of Germany, as the following testifies:



Production of mineral ores


 


..........


 


60% of total




Production of coal  


..........


75% of total




Production of steel


..........


75% of total



This area had the greatest food deficit of all zones.
The American zone was second in agriculture, and a poor third in industry. It produced 20 per cent of the pre-war total, had little heavy industry (virtually no steel or metal fabrication), and was entirely dependent upon the Ruhr for metals and semi-finished goods. Consumers’ and commodity manufacturing (textiles, chinaware, toys, leather goods, novelties, etc.) were the principle manufactures. Agricultural productivity was low and backwards, with an exportable surplus only for dairy products.
The French zone was a dismal fourth in both agriculture and industry. To industry, it contributed a bare 10 per cent of the total production. But it had a significant industrial concentration, in the Saar area, and produced 13 per cent of the total steel made, along with 7 per cent of the hard coal mined. In some pre-war years, the Saarland [800,000 population] yielded fifteen million tons of coal. It was second only to the Ruhr and Silesia as a center of industrial production.
To the above we must add the economic loss that Germany has incurred through the forceful seizure of territories by Poland. First, it has meant the expulsion of no less than six or seven million Germans, and their imposition as a pauperized mass upon the other zones. Primarily agricultural in nature, this zone grew 37 per cent of the rye crops, 31 per cent of the potatoes, 29 per cent of the sugar beets, 25 per cent of the barley, 34 per cent of the oats, 20 per cent of the wheat, etc. It had 13 per cent of the cattle and 20 per cent of the hogs. About 25 per cent of German food production was lost when this territory was handed to the Polish Stalinist government.
To this must be added the approaching outright loss of the Saarland by French economic annexation, an event that can safely be presumed during the course of negotiations for a German treaty. In some pre-war years, the Saar Basin yielded fifteen million tons of coal, and it has an estimated nine billion ton coal reserve at present. This area, a 750-square-mile region, ranked third among the Nazi wartime centers of industrial production, and it adjoins the famous Lorraine iron ore fields.
The first essential for Anglo-American imperialism in car rying on its political, diplomatic and economic war against the Russians was to merge their respective zones. This formality has now been achieved, but its working out lies ahead. In the merged zone, American imperialism will, of course, dominate and upon its actions will depend the extent to which a real economic revival takes place. The first positive action taken by America toward restocking German industry was the shipment of 150,000 bales of raw cotton to textile plants in March 1946. In March it was reported that 5,500 plants were under operation in the American zone (as compared with a January, 1946 low of 1,500), but it must be understood that this figure includes small mills, tiny shops producing luxury-export items (leather goods, chinaware, etc.) and hardly represents a serious economic uplift. The same skepticism must greet the report released (December 3, 1946) by the Director of the Economic Division of the zonal military government which announced that industrial production in the American zone of Germany had doubled in the past twelve months! This gentleman must have studied his statistics in the Stalinist Five-Year Plan reports, where an increase from 2 to 10 is known as a 400 per cent gain in production! The same report admits that the October, 1946, figures must register a gain of 60 per cent still, in order to attain the level agreed upon at the Berlin Central Economic Council for greater Germany. Furthermore, the director announced that:
“Although the level of production has risen every month since January (that is, from zero – H.J.) the coming winter months will undoubtedly bring a seasonal decline. This winter will perhaps be more difficult than the last.”
The intention of the American RFC to help finance a partial revival of German industry must be clearly understood in the context within which it is placed today. The RFC intends to advance funds for the purchase of raw materials and the products manufactured as a result (china, chemicals, light machinery, cameras, optical goods, toys, etc.) will be exported, as a means of reducing the high occupation costs. At present, it is clear this revival is strictly intended to be limited in character, controlled by America and reduced to bare essentials. There are many factors involved that will determine its extent and duration – political relations with Russia, and the extent to which negotiations for a German treaty advance; the needs of American exporters for revived markets in Germany, etc. Nor can it be assumed that the merger with the British zone will proceed without friction. Will America intervene in the announced British intention to nationalize all heavy industry in their zone? How can the American zone answer the real needs of the British, namely, huge quantities of food for its essentially industrial population? The merger is, in effect, a bloc preparatory to a concerted drive to win important concessions from the Russians. The French zone, suffering from the most backward and bureaucratic handling imaginable, plays a negligible role in this issue, although efforts will doubtlessly be made to force the French into the merger, in exchange for the right to outright economic annexation of the Saar.  
Trends in the Russian Zone
What are the present trends in the Russian zone? The world is now familiar with the Stalinist technique of plunder, removal and wholesale destruction. But this process is now largely completed – not, to be sure, because of any change in Russian policy but because so little is left in the zone. After the preliminary period of chaotic looting in 1945 came the organized stripping and dismantling in 1946. The removal of plants came in successive waves, the largest being that of March 1946, when 600 plants were shipped to Russia. While production has been higher in the Russian zone than elsewhere (due to the presence of both industry and raw materials), most of what is produced goes to Russia, as “reparations.” The three largest plants in the Russian zone (Carl Zeiss works, Buna works and Leuna works) have about 90 per cent of their products shipped to Russia – the bulk of it as reparations that will be paid for in the future German government; that is, reparations in advance. A sensational report (New York Times, December 5, 1946) described in detail the Russian system of organized companies (or combines) for the systematic looting of their zone. The Russian directors and experts were pictured as “men who could not be deceived; who would not let their plans fail, and who would carry out their orders without worrying very much about the effect on the plant and its workers.” The program of Russian-instituted nationalizations has been completed and behind this façade (a façade, we regret to say, that seems to have particularly deceived the profound thinkers of the English section of the Fourth International – Cf. November and December issues of WIN, their monthly publication), there takes place the open expropriation of the wealth and resources of half of Germany.
“The Russians, according to the report, are gaining vast benefits in that they do not credit Germany for any natural resources absorbed by the combines ... Thus coal, potash and forests and their number taken from nationalized properties go 100 per cent to Russia. Even stocks of coal and potash already produced are not credited, it was said.” (New York Times report, December 5, 1946)
But this fait accomplis by Russian imperialism must now face the test of the approaching Moscow conference for negotiation of German economic unity and a treaty with a future German national government. Can the system created by Russia be made to fit into a unified Germany, or will it disintegrate under the more powerful influences of American and British imperialism? This matter will be discussed in our March issue in connection with the forthcoming Moscow conference.
(A second article follows to complete this study of Germany)

Footnotes
1. The official economic merger of the British and American zones, as of January 1, 1947, has disclosed the extent to which these two powers are prepared to prime German economic life. In 1947, the two powers will make available one billion dollars worth of raw materials and food for purposes of reviving German export trade to German manufacturers. It is estimated that by 1950 three billion dollars will have been invested to place the merged zones on a self-sustaining basis (by Anglo-American imposed standards).
2. Compare with present estimation of 65,900,000 Germans, living in an area of 137,000 square miles or a density of 414 per square mile.
 



Heredity, Race and Society
by L.C. Dunn and Th. Dobzhansky
Penguin Books, Inc., 115 pp., 25 Cents.
Here is a clearly written, simple, yet carefully scientific introduction to the complex and controversial subject of heredity, problems of “race” and the relation of both to society. The authors, professors of zoology at Columbia University – one of them famous for his experiments with the Drosophilia flies – have attempted to give a popular exposition of the mechanism that governs our heredity, the question of individual differences among groups of people and the science of eugenics, or the improvement of the human race by scientifically planned means. In its consideration of these and related problems this small book is successful and readable.
Only in its handling of social problems of race and society, or that overlapping field where theories of race and heredity tend to become social and political problems, does this work fall short of the mark (as, for example, the contention of the authors that “group pride” is the force behind variations in social institutions and systems and the rivalry between them); but, fortunately, these superficialties are few in number.
The book begins with a discussion of the relationship between heredity and environment (“Nature vs. Nurture”) and rapidly disposes of the common fallacies of counterposing each of these factors to the other. Heredity is defined as a factor “determining our general response’s to the environment” about us. “Everything we have learned about heredity,” say the authors, “leads us to think of it not as a blind,’ absolute and inexorable force, but rather as the setting, the particular form of responsiveness with which we meet life.”
 
Nature and Nurture
But just as we have learned, through an enormous scientific and technical development, how to “control some parts of our environment,” so too, “when we learn to know the potentialities of our inherited constitutions and how to place them in proper relation to a controlled environment, human differences may come to be viewed in a new light.” In general, conclude the authors, “modern biology has strengthened the hands of those who try to improve the minds and bodies of men by improving the conditions in which they live. The normal mental and emotional ‘Natures’ are very responsive to ‘Nurtures’ of education and social influences.”
A lengthy section of the book then deals with the actual laws and methods of heredity and its transmission, with descriptions of the famous Mendelian laws and experiments. This well-written and clear section should give any reader a basic understanding of the methods and factors involved, and the whole question of genes, the unit of heredity transmission. The authors neatly dispose of the popular theory of “blood heredity,” raised to such heights by Nazi ideologists. “The most cherished pride of many people is the supposed fact that some fraction of their ‘blood’ is derived from a noble ancestor, or from a passenger on the Mayflower, or from a real or a trumped-up great man or woman ... in reality one may have either more or fewer, down to no genes at all especially from the more remote ancestors”. (page 48)
Perhaps the most interesting section of this work is the concluding portion on race. Here such questions as race classification, how races are distinguished, the “pure” race theory and an attempted definition of race, are taken up. The authors reject the common, reactionary theories and bolster their rejection with facts and scientific argument. “The hereditary diversity of a group, be it a family, a clan, or a race, persists indefinitely. The heredity of an individual is only partly determined by the race from which he sprang. The diversity, the variation, found in a race is more important than the racial averages.”
Finally, describing the long-time trend toward a clear “race fusion,” the authors conclude with the optimistic remark that “regardless of how the problem of the relations between biological heredity, individual and group psychology and culture may eventually be settled, the variety of human cultures will appear to us an inspiration rather than as a curse if we learn to respect, to understand and to admire them.”
As an objective, intelligent and instructive book, written in the best tradition of liberal scientific spirit on a series of controversial questions, we recommend Heredity, Race and Society to our readers.
 



The resurrected German Social Democracy has, as is well known, achieved astounding electoral victories in Germany – Berlin elections, British zone, American zone and – in terms of popular support – even in the largely conservative, Catholic French zone. Its leaders have become the principal administrators in Berlin and, now, the British zone; Germany’s most industrialized and proletarian center.
Its vote in recent elections (see Post-Stuttgart Germany in a forthcoming issue of The New International) has been impressive indeed. There is no question that, as a mass electoral machine, the Social Democratic Party has indeed revived. Its greater significance lies in its transformation into a popular mass movement expressing the general dissatisfaction with Allied occupation policies (that is, the grinding starvation of the people), as well as a bitter antagonism to Russia and its quisling Socialist Unity Party. The recent visit of Dr. Kurt Schumacher to London, where he hobnobbed with Attlee and his Labor cabinet, symbolized the increasing alliance between the British occupation forces and the Social Democratic leadership.
But has the Social Democratic leadership changed from its pre-Hitler character? In what sense has the Social Democratic Party become a meeting place for revolutionary, semi-revolutionary and other valuable material for the rebuilding of Germany’s revolutionary movement? We print below, in full, the letter, as originally written in English, of a young member of the German Social Democracy. Its genuineness and sincerity speak for itself, in addition to furnishing us with, at least, partial answers to the problems of politics in ruined Germany. The letter appeared in the early November issue of Socialist Appeal, English Trotskyist bi-monthly.

British Zone, Germany
First of all I’ve to say, that all following is my own opinion, but that all that I write, can be regarded as the German public opinion for every German in my age and with the same ideas than me. I don’t write in bribery by cigarettes, money, or anything else, but I write in strong hope to see a real socialistic world-regulation in the next future.
The Real Attitude of the SPD
What means SPD? It means: social-democratic party of Germany. When you hear that, you’ll think, that the SPD is a socialistic party on a democratic basis; but that is not true. The SPD is very far of a real socialism, for its leadership are non-socialists, but materialists. The more they speak of socialism, the more they mean materialism. They only are party-members for to get something extra. I think, it will be very interesting for you to be told, that the party-functionaries get extra food – rations from Sweden, as well as chocolate, what another German, except on the black market, can’t get. Farther they look for very good jobs in their profession, and they get them. Some work for a fantastic wage in the party-offices as officials. When you look more and more into the interior of the SPD, you think it is nearly the same than the passed Nazi-party: the same hypocrisy towards the outside – and the same pompous life of the party-bosses, in the inside. The old members don’t concern with all that – but we, the youth, know, what the only one way-out for us is: An international-socialism on the democratic base of Marx and Engels.
The fundament for the left wing in our party is the youth. The same youth, which fighted with the biggest enthusiasm for the nazis and capitalists against the socialistic revolution during the last war, fights for a better Europe, for a better world, for a real international-socialism with the same enthusiasm. We have been on the wrong way once, but once only, that cannot happen to us a second time again. We will not suffer, that the people of the world will be told lies and will be deceived again by the capitalism or their tools, the ruling classes. We will put the words: Workers of the world, unite! in golden letters on our red banner.
The left wing, the real socialists put forward the Ideas of Marx and Engels, of Lenin and Trotsky. The leadership of the SPD exclusive is the right wing, but the first part of the election, which took place at the 15th of September, showed us, that the SPD didn’t get the majority. I think it necessary, to replace the present leadership by young, active members with socialist ideas.
Our Attitude Towards the Communism
When you use in Germany the word communism, everybody will see in that the Stalinism. Nobody will remember the real communism of Lenin and Trotsky. The reasons for that are:

During thenazi regiment in Germany it was strictly forbidden to circulate any anti-nazi-political papers, and the nazi-propaganda didn’t tell us any more than terrible lies about the Russians and their cruelty. The nazis said, that the communists are the worst enemies of the working class, and that the communism means nothing more than blood-regiment, and that the native-country of the communism is Russia.
 
The German PoW’s coming back from Russia now; tell us something about the real attitude of the Soviet Union, about the conditions of life of the Russians, and about the Stalinism, short, they tell us, that it looks in Russia quite as in Germany during the Hitlerism.

And when the German population hears all that, they believe all the worst of the communism. Another reason is, that the right-wing leadership of the SPD doesn’t want any real communist ideas put forward, for these ideas are socialistic ideas they don’t like, and that our leaders don’t support the union-idea, and so they don’t circulate any real communistic papers of Trotsky or Lenin.
I myself don’t like the communism like it is in Russia, and I also don’t like the KPD, for all that is nothing more than Stalinism; but I am a follower of the Trotsky-ideas, and these ideas are the ideas of the left wing of the SPD.
A YOUNG SOCIALIST


Ceylon Trotskyist Parties Head General Strike
According to a report in the British Socialist Appeal, the Ceylon Trotskyists stood in the leadership of a mass general strike that swept the island early iu November of this year. The leadership of the strike was in the hands of the Lanka Sama Samaj Party and the Ceylon Unit of the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India. At this writing, few of the details of the strike are known, nor is the final outcome. The American press, after reporting a few details of the intensity of the strike action (including the beating of the Mayor of Colombo by strikers) lapsed into complete silence, indicating a censorship clamp had been placed on news by the British. Hundreds of thousands of workers were involved, and the city of Colombo was entirely tied up. The strikes affected transport, harbor, tea plantation, etc., workers – in fact, the entire proletariat of the island. The top strike committee refused to negotiate with the authorities until N.M. Perera, head of the Lanka Sama Samaj Party, had been released from arrest for his part in the strike. This is the first mass, general strike to have been headed by Trotskyists in any part of the world – an historic event in itself.
It is likewise reported in the Socialist Appeal that the two Trotskyist movements in Ceylon have begun negotiations for reunification of their separate organizations. A future issue of The New International will publish a thesis of the Ceylon Unit of the Fourth International, dealing with the revolutionary perspectives of their country. We expect to publish further details on the strike development referred to above.
 



The rejection by the Chinese Stalinists (Yenan government) of the new set of peace proposals, and the offer to send an envoy made by Chiang Kai-shek, has brought China’s civil war to a new stage. General Chou En-lai, Stalinist leader of the Yenan government, accompanied his rejection of Chiang’s offer by a denunciation of the recent statement of General Marshall on the Chinese problem. He made it clear that only, if the so-called National Government would give up its recently adopted bureaucratic constitution, and return large territories won from the Stalinists in military operations, would the latter consider a resumption of peace negotiations.
It is clear that the fighting will continue indefinitely, even if only on a minor scale due to heavy winter conditions. The Stalinists, now on the defensive, will attempt to consolidate and protect their holdings while the Chiang Kai-shek nationalist forces will maneuver into position, with vast help and supplies received, from America in preparation for heavy campaigning next Spring and Summer. China’s fratricidal strife continues, at the heavy expense of the Chinese people, and gives every indication of going on indefinitely, without any final issue.
Neither side has the forces needed completely to overwhelm the opponent at the moment. Whatever military strength and superiority Chiang has, thanks to American imperialism, is effectively cancelled out by the inefficiency, bureaucratic bungling, reactionary politics and corruption of his government.
In the light of this situation, the meaning of the recently issued report of General Marshall, former special Presidential representative to China, takes on fresh meaning. Marshall was no doubt fully aware of the hopelessness of a compromise arrangement for the moment, when he issued his report on January 7. Precisely with this understanding did Marshall write his shrewd, diplomatic and hypocritical statement, bent on showing American intervention in China in the best possible light. Marshall’s aim was to depict America as the staunch advocate of Chinese democracy, against both extremes of the right-wing Kuomintang and the “left-wing” Communists.
 
War Aid Continues
The Chinese government of Chiang contains, said Marshall, “a dominant group of reactionaries who have been opposed, in my opinion, to almost every effort I have made.” ... These men are interested “in the preservation of their own feudal control of China.” ... In almost identical language he condemns the Stalinists who “do not hesitate at the most drastic measures to gain their end.” From this condemnation of both sides he drew the conclusion that his mediation efforts failed, because of “extremist elements” on both sides and that, therefore, what is needed is the assumption of leadership by the liberals, “under the leadership of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek.”
But his condemnation of the Kuomintang is highly qualified, because he accepts its recently adopted Constitution as “democratic” and expressed the belief that under its terms a democratic-constitutional government would be created. Yet, as is well known, the right-wing of the Kuomintang wrote this constitution. Nor can Marshall advance one step beyond unqualified support to Chiang Kai-shek, leading agent and spokesman for the Kuomintang and Chinese conservatism.
And finally, as is well known, there is no let-up in the extended military and economic aid being advanced to the Chinese government for its war purposes. While Chiang and his regime may be hard to swallow, it is clear that they will continue to get American support. Thus we must brand Marshall’s criticism of the Kuomintang as hypocritical. While America is still anxious to bring about a negotiated peace, if this cannot be obtained the reactionary Chiang regime will get the fullest support of the new Secretary of State.
On the other side of the fence, holding high the lamp of the Chinese Stalinists, sits Henry Wallace, now New Republic editor. If Marshall has some doubts about Chiang and the Kuomintang gang, Henry Wallace has none at all about the Chinese Stalinists and Russian imperialism! In the New Republic (January 20, 1947), we read the following in Henry Wallace’s Forum:
“We have abandoned, almost by default, the sponsorship of these changes to Russia. We have permitted the Russians to parade themselves before all the colonial peoples of the world as the only enemy of ‘imperialism.’ Almost without a battle we have yielded to the Russians the loyalty of millions of workers and peasants in Europe because they believe that the Russians and not ourselves are their only guarantors against hunger and war.”
These fantastic claims on behalf of Russian imperialism are the basis for Wallace’s denunciation of American policy as a purely “negative” one. That proves how little he understands the present wave of mass reaction in Europe to this very Stalinist imperialism whose praises he sings.
China’s civil strife continues, with no end in sight. Victimized by both sides who, in turn, are bolstered by the two great foreign rivals of the. world (America and Russia), the Chinese movement for national liberation must still find its way to that difficult path of freedom of action unbound by any foreign powers.
 



The strong emotional reaction of the Ceylon comrades to my political charge that their organization “... has gone far along the road leading to capitulation to Stalinism” is easy to understand. In part, it is due to a spontaneous and healthy reaction and recoil before such an unpleasant possibility; in part it is due probably to a failure to understand my statement as signifying, in no sense of the word, any organizational concessions to Stalinism, but rather a serious political tendency to (a) build up the “progressive” role of Russia in the colonial movement; (b) create the illusion that Russia and its parties and organizations play a progressive, revolutionary role in the world. My charge was and remains a political charge and must be understood (and answered) as such. Unfortunately, the heated reply of the Ceylon comrades is not only hardly to be considered as an answer, but it only lends weight, as we shall try to show, to the original charge!
Of course the Ceylon comrades are, subjectively speaking, from the viewpoint of their aims and desires, not Stalinists. However, as they well know, political trends, results and directions cannot be judged in such terms. I maintained, on the basis of several quotations from the Samasamajist, the English organ of the Ceylon Unit, that the Party had a dangerous position, as revealed in its description of the events in Iran (Persia), last year, where the Soviet Union was painted up as a supporter of the democratic masses of that country. The independent aims of Russia (call them imperialist or what you will) with respect to Iran simply did not exist for the Ceylon author! One would have thought he was dealing with the Russia of Lenin’s day. The quotations in my notes, taken from his article, were, I believe, clear and unambiguous – too much so.
In subsequent issues of the Samasamajist that I have seen, the same uncritical attitude toward Russia and its relation to the colonial movement is entirely patent. The activities and role of Stalinist organizations as such (e.g., the Communist Party in Ceylon) have, it is true, been dealt with in a most effective and critical fashion, but the activities and maneuverings of the “degenerated workers’ state” on the international scene are either ignored or glossed over. I have yet to see, in the press of the Ceylon comrades, a critical estimate of Russia’s role in China (surely of great importance for colonial revolutionists); or of Ho Chi Minh and the Indo-Chinese Stalinists; or of Stalinism’s general strategy with respect to the colonial movement.
But let us grant that my charge against these comrades was unfair. A mere reading of their reply to me indicates how seriously off the track they are, how completely they fail to grasp Russia’s role in the world in general and the colonial world in particular. The puppet Tudeh Party, deliberately contrived by Stalin, becomes a mass democratic movement in their eyes. (It has now faded into oblivion until Stalin will conveniently revive it for another crack at Iran.) The Iranian forces of democracy are under the “patronage” (kindly? wise? helpful? friendly?) of this Party and the Soviet Union. And whose side is Russia on? “... the democratic and working class forces (fighting) to organize themselves to overthrow feudal reaction and end British imperialist domination of the land of Iran.” Everyone can read this for himself and then ask himself whether my analysis that these comrades have gone far along the road to political capitulation to Stalinism is an exaggeration. If this is what Russia is doing in the colonial world then, by every ounce of revolutionary common sense, our movement must give it full and unqualified support. But even the most orthodox “Workers’ Staters” have hardly gone this far.
 
Outworn Formulae
Even the Ceylon comrades know better, as is indicated by the glaring contradiction contained in their article. The very next paragraph after that which describes the progressive role of Russia (encouraging the democratic and working class forces) contains the remarkable statement that, “An independent working-class organization is not encouraged; working-class organizations are made subordinate to capitalist parties.” Now, aside from the debatable statement about Stalinism in the colonies subordinating itself to capitalist parties (as in China, for example?), is not the contradiction all too glaring? Surely the Ceylonese comrades are terribly confused and disoriented in their approach to the Stalinist movement. Their confusion lies in their failure to understand precisely how, in what sense and for what purposes Russia attempts to make use of the democratic, nationalist and proletarian forces in the colonies. The publications of the Workers Party, in their concrete analysis of events in China, Indo-China, India and the colonial world in general have tried to answer this question – namely, that Russian imperialism, an aggressive and expanding order, in fundamental conflict with American imperialism, seeks to use, traduce, take possession of, manipulate, control and, above all, subordinate to itself, the legitimate, progressive movements of struggle in the colonies. The comrades in Ceylon, hypnotized by outworn formulas, are blind to these newly revealed characteristics of the Russian system. It is this blindness that makes it impossible for them to see, let alone face, the realities of Russian imperialism, and to conceal all events behind the rationalization of “the safety of the Soviet Union.” The manipulations and actions of the Indian Communist Party and even the minute Ceylon Stalinist movement are related to Russia, not merely the opportunist desires of local Stalinist spokesmen. But the viewpoint of the Workers Party on Russia has often been expressed and we need only refer to it. This is the overall analysis that must be answered.
 
Misconceptions on WP
The comrades in Ceylon suffer from many serious misconceptions regarding the Workers Party and The New International. “The LSSP is not convinced that capitalism has been restored in the Soviet Union,” the article declares. Well, neither are we and we have argued long and loudly against this conception. Nor do we hold that “the Totalitarianism of Fascism and that of Stalinism” have no differences, as the article declares. Is it not clear that the Ceylon party, no doubt for excellent reasons, is simply unfamiliar with the Workers Party viewpoint? To be in a position to attack an opponent, it is elementary to know what your opponent maintains. This job must still be fulfilled by the LSSP and it will be, we trust, in the near future. Material presenting our views is widely and easily available since the end of the war.
Finally, a brief word on the more personal aspects of the article in reference. Regrettable and unpleasant as it may be, the Ceylon LSSP leadership is entitled to its opinion of Henry Judd. I have certainly never claimed to be any “specialist” on the colonial revolutionary movement, nor have I written the many “articles and brochures” on this subject that I apparently am given credit for. The Ceylon and Indian parties did see fit to order and circulate several hundred copies of my one brochure India in Revolt, however. More important is the fact that the numerous accusations against me – riotous imagination, unverified facts, highly colored and exaggerated articles, etc. – are matters that must be proved. Nobody in the movement any longer accepts at face value these denunciatory statements and worthless polemics. Proof and examples are needed, comrades of the LSSP. Name-calling seems to be an unfortunate penchant of yours, as witness the denunciation of those comrades within your own ranks with whom you have split. No objective foreign comrade, seeking to discover the political and organizational basis for this recent split, can find it in your resolutions or articles! We may learn, perhaps, that your opponents are “Parlour Bolsheviks, Bohemians, etc., etc.,” but little else. This sort of thing is absolutely no good for our movement.
So, regardless of their personal estimate of me, I must conclude by reiterating my long-standing respect and admiration for the success and mass work accredited to the Ceylon comrades. They have accomplished things, and shown us how to do things that no other Trotskyist organization can boast of. The problem before them is a political one – that is, will they gain that essential political understanding and clarification without which all their efforts and successes will lead to nothing? It is far from present today, and articles such as the above hardly will be of help. We hope it represents the last expression of its type, and that in the future the pages of our respective publications will be open to an objective, scientific, socialist discussion of our common problems.
 



“There is really very little room for doubt that the
aggregate output of the British community today is from 10 to 20 per
cent higher in volume than it was in 1938.” (The Economist,
August 2, 1947)
The word “crisis” is employed in many contexts and by
most quarters in describing the present economic and social
difficulties of Great Britain. There can be no objection to the use of
this word, certainly, but the sense in which it is used must be
carefully qualified. If, by England’s crisis, is meant the beginnings
of or the approach to a full-fledged revolutionary crisis, a period in
which the class struggle within the country will be lifted to intense
heights and great political events will occur, then the word is
completely misused and England’s situation misjudged. The Labor
Government, despite its vacillations and weaknesses, is still firm and
stable. The masses of workers and, to a lesser extent, the middle
class, still give it their support. The recent Liverpool by-election
for an MP post, easily captured by the Labor Party although at a
reduced majority, indicates no basic switches in political tendencies.
The average Englishman still thinks the Tory Party has no program or
positive counter-plan. There is no serious development of a fascist
movement to be seen.
Nor can the word “critical” be employed with respect to the living
conditions of today. In general, England stands between America and
France so far as its material standards are concerned. It is, of
course, far above Germany. Everybody is working (unemployment is the
lowest in England’s history); there is sufficient food for all, even
though it is monotonous and of poor nutritional quality; all homes will
be warmed throughout most of the winter; and general health and social
services are admittedly at peak levels. Furthermore, England is
producing and, above all in contrast with Germany and the continent,
she is a going economic unit.
 
Nature of the Crisis
Yet it is correct to employ the word “crisis,” provided
we explain in what sense we mean this. It is a crisis that stems from
England’s completely reversed position with relation to the world; it
is a permanent and lasting crisis from which
England, as it is today organized, can never shake itself loose; it is
a crisis of perspective that will determine the development, in the
future, of the islands and their 40 million people. It is therefore a
type of crisis whose effects work slowly, within the body of the
nation, and whose results are—at first—more social and
psychological than political and revolutionary. This slow-working
crisis is quite observable in England today and definitely takes on
objective forms. Some of them are the following:

A widespread and prevalent mood of discouragement, apathy and
lack of energetic optimism as to the future possibility of their nation
exists among all classes and strata of the English. The outstanding
objective indication of this mood is the movement for immigration to
the Dominions and America, the desire for which has been expressed—it
is estimated—by between three and four million Britons of all
classes! (Together with their families, this could amount to 25 per
cent of the United Kingdom’s total population.)
The apparent helplessness and decay of the English ruling class,
now utterly dependent upon the Labor Government for the retention of
its position and privileges; a decay most explicitly expressed in the
incapacity of Churchill and his Tory Party to capitalize on the Labor
Government’s blunders and to develop a counter-program. There is
nothing the Tory Party dreads more than the responsibility of political
power today, given the present context of economics and international
relations.
A reported, and well-founded, drying up in inventive powers,
originality, cultural contributions, etc., among the intellectuals and
other elements in the population.
The rapid and expanding bureaucratization of all forms of social
and economic life, under the Labor Government’s initiative. The
permanent intervention of the government in economic life as the state
capitalist regulative agency is, of course, to be expected and arises
out of the crisis itself. Far more significant is the bureaucratization
of the labor movement and its organs. As the September, 1947, Socialist
Appeal so accurately expresses it, the just-concluded Trade
Union Congress: “... made it clear that since the advent of the Labour
Government, the trade union movement has become even more immersed with
the employers”, their organizations, and the government machine, to the
detriment of any section of the workers forced to defend their
conditions by struggle, and looking to the trade union organizations to
aid them.

“From the Nationalised Boards and the working
parties, down to Regional, District and Factory Production Committees
and other organizations covering economic life and social services, a
complicated web of collaboration between employers, government, and
trade union representatives has been created.
“It is evident from the General Council Report that
its main field of work lies in discussions, proposals, joint
consultations with employers and government on the questions of
exports, imports, production and the utilisation of the labour force.”
Now, the source of this deep and fundamental crisis in
England’s life is a well known fact. It lies in the complete reversal
of the nation’s world position over the past ten years. All those prior
tendencies, so long discerned, have now become realities and brute
facts. Everyone grasps this, but its consequences are only now coming
home to roost upon the nation.
 
What Happened to Great Britain?
From the position of the mighty hub and controlling
factor in a great world empire, the island kingdom has descended to
that of just another major capitalist power, hemmed in by rivals and
hampered by severe internal difficulties. Or, expressed in its simplest
form, Great Britain’s role as a great creditor nation of the world has
been reversed to that of a bankrupt nation, victimized by a world debt
that mounts regularly. Rarely has history known such a startling,
complete reversal over such a brief period.
The crisis of England, proclaim its leaders, revolves around the
unbalance between imports and exports. There is at the present moment,
declares Attlee, an adverse balance of trade working against England’s
favor to the amount of $2,400,000,000 per year. The problem is, then,
how to reduce this unbalance to zero and, if possible, create a
favorable balance.
True as this posing of the crisis may be, it is nevertheless a
deceitful concealment of the real nature of the matter. It throws no
light on why the present unbalance exists (and is growing),
nor does it mention the fact, well known to be sure, that England has never
had, in simple export-import trade balancing, anything but an adverse,
unfavorable balance of trade! The cause of today’s harsh unbalance lies
not so much in a decline in Britain’s trade with the world, but in the
catastrophic decline of the so-called invisible items of previous years
— that is, those sources of revenue flowing from Britain’s position as
a world imperialist power (mother-land of the Empire) which enabled her
to more than overcome the low shown on the simple export-import balance
sheet. Dividends from world investments, profits from the shipping and
financing, accumulated wealth from colonial ownership and overseeship —
such were the decisive items (invisible!) that characterized Britain’s
former position. In the reversal of roles, this is what has largely
gone by the board.
The factors behind this almost annihilation of the invisible items
are familiar. The great losses in wealth and capital sustained during
the war; the powerful emergence of American imperialism both as
forecloser of British investments and market revival; the growth of
both dominion and colonial capitalist classes (particularly in India)
who came to call the tune; the general disturbance of the world’s
trade. But the main point to grasp is that this is a permanent
condition. In line with their analysis of the situation, the Labor
Government proposes the only solution possible for it, given its
character. Export, export, export. The shrill call for increased
exports is heard on all sides. Yet this proposed program, too, conceals
the real nature of the problem.
“We have a crisis in dollar and sterling unbalance,”
says Sir Stafford Cripps, “which only more exports can cure.”
Yet today, allowing for price changes, exports are 105
per cent of the 1938 level, and mounting. Cripps demands—and will
probably get—140 per cent of 1938 by the end of next year; he demands
— and will probably get—160 per cent by the end of 1949. Yet we
unhesitatingly venture to predict that even if England were to double
its 1938 export trade there would be, at best, only the slightest
alleviation in the situation.
 
The Drive for Exports
For the drive of Britain for increased exports can in no
way be confused with the export drives of, let us say, young capitalist
nations anxious to increase their home store of accumulated capital;
nor can it be compared with the export drives of maturing, expanding
capitalist nations (as, for example, the United States) which must make
use of their superfluity of capital. Britain’s export drive comes out
of its desperation, not its health; out of the nation’s fatal decline,
not growth.
The basic trend then of the British export program is guided by the
mere need to live, to keep going, to continue. Its aim is to get food,
sustenance and the raw materials required to—export! The whole
program must thus be seen as part of a vicious and impossible cycle
— forty million English work to produce exports with which to procure
dollars and sterling with which to purchase food and raw materials with
which to work to produce exports, etc., etc. This, then, is the
final trap into which the British people have been led by two hundred
years of imperialism. The fantastic trend of British economy is thus
toward the creation of an enclosed, self-sustaining (at a dull, low
level) economy of survival and austerity.
Let us prove this contention. The entire economy of England is now
geared to the export program, expressed in various terms. “Cutting down
the unbalance of trade”; “resolving the dollar and sterling shortage”;
“balancing exports with imports.” Production levels for export—known
as industrial targets, and constituting a crude and primitive sort of
“planned economy”—have been set by the government, which exercises
control over imports, allocation of materials and labor to industry,
and direction of exports. The Labor Government, in accord with its
export program, is prepared to (and can) bring about shifts in
industrial production, favoring those plants whose products will sell
abroad. The most clear-cut expressions of British state capitalist
development lie in the state’s regulation of the complex export-import
relationship.
To close this gap, conceived as the two blades of a scissors which
must be brought together, the government brings pressure to bear upon
the separate blades—decrease in imports, increase in exports. It is
the application of these separate, yet related, pressures, together
with the resistance that Britain’s workers will offer to them, that
will determine the political and economic evolution of the country over
the next few years.
 
What Is an “Austere” Economy?
Pressure on the import angle is aimed at creating an
“austere” economy for the masses; an economy of work and want. Import
cuts amounting to $700 million have been ordered. This will affect
largely food and meat imports, and must mean additional cuts in the
basic rations (for example, each Englishman is now limited to a weekly
meat ration of 20 cents). This is the largest saving so far imposed. An
estimated $213 million is to be saved by the ban on foreign travel (the
closing-in of English economy will also keep the Englishman penned up
in his island), and the end of the gasoline ration for pleasure travel.
If the situation worsens, there will be other cuts (coal for heating,
gas, electricity, etc.).
From a social point of view, the most significant shift in imports
will be the increase in raw materials imported at the expense of food
and finished commodities. Of the planned $6,800,000,000 imports from
mid-1947 to mid-1948, that consisting of raw materials will be largely
utilized for the export drive. This is intimately linked with the cut
of $800 million proposed by Cripps in yearly capital goods- outlay
within England itself. The phrase, capital goods outlay, refers of
course to such budget items as housing, building of new schools,
hospitals and various public institutions, as well as the equipping of
English industry with new machinery. This phase of the program is thus
the sharpest, most direct drive upon the living standards of the people.
What of the export program? The above measures will not even bring
the two tips of the scissors halfway together; the unfavorable balance
draining away England’s productivity is not even half closed up. We
have already indicated the proposed answer—Cripps’ latest and still
higher export targets. The goal is to export $125,000,000 more each
month, to attain, in theory, the essential balance.
This demands a greater export in capital goods (machinery,
semi-finished steel and building materials, etc.). It may, and probably
will, demand the mobilization and forced direction of labor into
certain industries, with a fixing of the worker to his job. And, as the
austereness of home economy strikes deeper, a system of differential
rationing, according to work performed, will be installed. Such is, in
general outline, the prospect before Great Britain in its struggle for
survival. A turning in of the country upon itself, with the
autarchization of its economic institutions and the bureaucratization
of its social institutions and politics.
Let us grant the complete success of the projected program. The
scissors gap is closed, with the aid of the remaining invisible items;
an exact balance of exports and imports is achieved. In passing, we
consider this most improbable of realization, but it does not affect
our conclusions. What, then, is England’s situation?
Duration of the balance over any period of time would mean, in
effect, continuation of precisely the same economic conditions and
measures that had brought it about. That is, at best, England
— by its economy of austerity—would be making its way, surviving.
Furthermore, it is excluded that England can lift itself above this
balance; i.e., reach a favorable trade balance necessary for
prosperity, since that source of revenue known as invisible items can
hardly be expected to reverse its downward trend. All things may happen
in out world, but the resurrection of the British Empire is among the
category of least likely events. It is this prognosis that stamps our
analysis with permanency. Let alone the fact that, under the best
circumstances, the optimistically grounded Cripps program can hardly be
expected to develop smoothly in the world of today.
Self-evident is the fact that the masses of English workers shall be
expected to bear the brunt of the criminal consequences of long
centuries of policy pursued by Britain’s imperial ruling class. The
story of the coal miners and their industry, after one year of
nationalization, clearly forms a pre-pattern for the future of the
English working class. The coal nationalization can now be seen in its
true perspective—the taking over of a sick industry by the state, at
the expense of the people, as a part of its autarchy program and with
the included objective of intensifying the economic exploitation of its
laborers. How far these powerful and inevitable tendencies proceed will
depend upon the readability of the English working class and its
capacity to gain the support of the nation’s middle class. Otherwise,
the power and weight of the top-heavy state apparatus will grow without
halt. In this sense, of course, England’s permanent crisis takes its
place in the now familiar world phenomenon of developing statification.



“The essence of Mr. Bevan’s position is not that he objects to tanks but that he rates them lower than dentures.” (The Economist, April 28, 1951)
The dramatic resignation of Aneurin Bevan and his supporters from the administration of Britain’s Labour Government has a dual significance which must be grasped separately. On the one hand, it has brought to a head the crisis in Anglo-American relationships. This aspect has, of course, received the greater notice in the world press. It involves both the question of raw materials and the price to be paid for them – both matters now largely controlled by American capitalism – as well as the issue of how extensive and “committed” shall British foreign policy be in terms of American policy. As is well known, it is the charge of Bevan and his comrades that American monopolization of raw materials, plus price control over the world market, have had the effect of slowly but steadily strangling the Labour Government whose economic existence depends on its ability to import, an ability which in turn is dependent upon the delicately controlled economy of the country. The validity of the charge is evident. One need only examine the interim production report of Charles E. Wilson to verify this. The other charge – i.e., the tendency of the Labour Government to capitulate to American foreign policy – is more closely related to what we may properly call the internal, or domestic, significance of the Bevan crisis.
This aspect concerns nothing less than the future and perspective of not only the Labour Government, but the Labour Party itself. This is the real crisis which cannot be surmounted by some tactical gesture or generosity on the part of America, but will be resolved only after a long and severe crisis within the British labor movement itself. Naturally, socialists are far more interested in this side of the question than the more transitory features, and our article will concern itself with this. Put concretely, whatever may have been Bevan’s intentions, he has raised the problem of the future of socialism and the socialist movement in England. Shall the Labour Government, with its accomplishments and its failures, continue along the road of the past six years; shall the limited social transformation already described in detail (cf. The New International, Jan.–Feb. 1951) be sustained and deepened; or shall everything be sacrificed and liquidated? Even though the backsliding against which Bevan has raised his eloquent voice may not be of the kind to liquidate certain structural and juridical changes (such as the nationalizations), every socialist understands that a Tory victory would dissolve the remaining progressive core of such changes and reintegrate them into a purely imperialist, political state structure exemplified most clearly in the person of Churchill.
Thus, when The Economist [1] sneers contemptuously at Bevan’s higher rating for false teeth than tanks (reminding us of a prior episode when the fashionable bourgeoisie jeered at Feuerbach’s emphasis, naive though it was, on the human importance of “food”) there is a certain profound truth in the charge. One may, without losing or sacrificing a thing, correctly pose the issue of Labour England’s future in terms of “dentures” (the whole material, social service, socialistic well-being of the English people) as against “tanks” (the whole program of rearmament, dependency upon a purely military defense position, subordination to America and the Atlantic Pact). There is nothing to fear in accepting the terms of the Tory charge, and analyzing the situation in such terms.
 
How may we best summarize the roots of this crisis? The Labour Party, precariously reelected to office one year ago after a dismal campaign, has steadily lost the original momentum it developed in its great victory of six years ago. The dynamic movement, centered around the original program of nationalizations and social reconstruction contained in the 1945 electoral program, has tended to run down, despite the considerable achievements of Labour’s first five years in power. It would be possible for us to indicate this in many ways and by many details, but its most significant symptom is the drop in popular energy and initiative and the replacement of these initial responses to the Labour victory by widespread apathy, indifference and even hostility on the part of the British working class. Government and party leadership bear responsibility for this.
This process has been clearly and effectively summed up by Professor G.D.H. Cole, founder of the Guild Socialist movement in the ’30s, and sensitive observer of the changing moods of British political and social life. Writing in the New Statesman and Nation (May 5, 1951), Professor Cole poses the problem of how shall socialist democracy effectively counter the organizing ability and capacity of totalitarian Stalinism, with its undoubted successes. In England, says Professor Cole, the same need to organize society effectively exists, and ultimately the same alternative (totalitarian collectivism vs. socialism) will be presented. Cole rejects Stalinism, of course, and suggests that, “The only alternative is to diffuse power, to fling power into many hands, to rely on the people throwing up their own leaders in the groups to which they belong ...”
But – and here is the correct and profound indictment of the Labour Government – this has not occurred in Labour Britain.
“In Great Britain no leadership of this second kind is being built. The Labour Government has not tried to build it. Neither in the nationalized industries nor in the trade unions nor in the Co-operative movement has it given its own stalwarts anything challengingly constructive to do.”
The revolt of Bevan and his supporters, in concrete political, trade unionist and administrative terms, reflects this fatal fact. The resignation speech of Bevan concluded with his statement that Britain had shown the world a possible alternative to uncontrolled American capitalism and Russian totalitarianism. It is the development and expansion of this alternative which have been placed in danger by the dual policy of liquidation of the Labour Party’s internal program and submission to the American international program. To be sure, both issues are tied together and whatever unexpressed illusions may have existed among right-wing Labour Party leaders as to the possibility of constructing their concept of socialism within their own country and the Commonwealth areas have now been dispersed by disagreeable and sharp realities. As the gap between the unorganized left wing of the party, the critical wing which desires to pursue the original course, and the right-wing leadership grew, so did the gap between the right wing and the Tory Party tend to close up. This expressed itself most clearly on the question of a rearmament program, later concretized in the now famous budget for the year 1951.
 
In January of this year a rearmament program of £4,700,000,000 [2] for the next three years was presented and adopted by the Labour Government. In the budget for 1951, it was proposed that £1,300,000,000 of this be spent over the next year. The budget of the new Chancellor of the Exchequer had a new ring to it when compared to the other five budgets presented since Labour assumed power; or, one might say, it had a familiar ring to it in terms of previous Tory and conservative governments. New financing for further nationalizations was not included, diversion of capital funds for either improvement of the already nationalized industries, or further subsidies to either food or commodity purchasing, or strengthening of the various social services – none of these items was included. Instead, the budget [3] was built around the overridng item of military expenditure mentioned above. Capital expenditure is to be diverted to those industries directly related to the rearmament program with the consequence that the expansion of British industry, direct consequence of the planned economy of the past five years, will now come to a halt. Further, as if to symbolize the reversal of the most sympathetic social movement which we have known since the Russian Revolution, the infamous proposal to charge for dentures and eye glasses was presented. [4] This proposal was deliberately provocative in character since the saving involved was a paltry sum. It was understood as such by all concerned, particularly by Bevan, the man who had created and constructed the National Health Service, one of Labour’s proudest achievements.
In a directed economy such as that of Labour Britain, the budget assumes an importance unknown in capitalist countries. It is a social document indicating the perspective and policy of the government. As such, it was clearly unacceptable to those who proposed to continue the building and strengthening of the power of labor in the country. The burden of the shift to rearmament was to be borne by the domestic consumer, the working masses. Herbert Morrison, spokesman for the Party’s right wing, has admitted that any failure by Britain to obtain sufficient materials to sustain the volume of production upon which present planning is based would weaken the whole economy and depress the standard of living. But he has made it abundantly clear, as The Economist is pleased to recognize, that such a fall in production would be at the expense of domestic consumption, rather than the defense and export programs. The budget, then, must be grasped as a tacit banding together of the conservative labor leadership with the Tory imperialists to halt the constructive social program and divert the economy to an active war footing.
The right-wing Labour Party leadership, backed by a majority of the Trade Union Congress General Council, joined in a common front to blast Bevan. The Tories hastened to their support with similar arguments. One of the charges, presented by Attlee, was that Bevan had originally declared his opposition only to the proposal of health service charges, but had then broadened it to differences over fundamentals such as rearmament, and the directed economy itself. This charge is empty since everyone understands that the deepest principle was involved in the plan to liquidate free health service and that this only symbolized the reactionary character of the budget itself. Bevan’s resignation speech committed him to unstinting opposition to the Government’s financial policy, and to the raising of serious doubts as to the ability of Labour Britain to defend itself, from a national point of view, by those methods now proposed and the strategy represented by the Atlantic Pact.
In the inevitable and comparative calm which has followed this break in the party ranks, it is clear that such issues with their complex and far-reaching implications, are now being discussed. If we include the trade-union membership, the British Labour Party now has 6 million members, by far the most powerful, solid and imposing movement in the world of labor. The support of Bevan, which ranges from the active and energetic association of those around him to a general sympathy with his ideas, is enormous. Its actual extent, in terms of votes and numbers, will no doubt be measured at the annual Labour Party conference held in October. A period of many months lies before the party membership in which to discuss, weigh and reflect upon the issues. In prior days, the leadership would unquestionably have attempted to expel Bevan and his friends. Today, it dares not take such a step; at least for the present. It dares not even curb him from expressing his viewpoint, despite the standing custom that National Executive Committee members must share responsibility with the party and its government, or resign their post. The possibility for a full, free and healthy discussion unquestionably exists and will take place. The perspective for the formation of a serious, integrated and constructive “left wing” within the Labour Party has thus been opened up, for the first time since Labour took power. This perspective is not to be confused with so-called “left wings” organized by various muddleheaded “Trotskyist” elements, together with their newly-found Stalinist allies and fellow travellers. Such indigestible sects play no role in the Labour Party beyond creating confusion, and have no place in a genuine left-wing development.
 
We shall make no effort to predict the speed or extent to which this perspective may be realized. In terms of the habits and traditions of the British labor movement, it may very well not be a rapid or sensational development. English labor and socialism customarily build slowly, but they build well. Nor do we know what its precise organizational forms or consequences will be. But some of the questions it must take up and attempt to solve are evident enough to state:

Precisely how shall we preserve those achievements, both in the economy and in the field of social services, which we have already won?
 
How shall we deepen, extend and broaden these achievements, thus giving a still more solid base to Labour Britain?
 
How shall we infuse the structure we have already erected with the democratic socialist content required to solve the problem posed by Professor Cole and others? What do we mean by “workers’ control of production,” and how shall we achieve it?
 
How shall we assert our independence in the “two-bloc” world; what is a socialist foreign policy for today?
 
What is the proper role of rearmament and military defense in a socialist policy of national defense; how can we successfully ward off the threat of Russian attack? What shall be our relations with socialists throughout the world?

In effect, the embryonic left-wing tendencies within the Labour Party not only have the immediate task of fusing together their efforts and energies, but the long-range task of developing their own rounded program and proposals for the multitude of difficulties. In this sense, then, the Bevan development must be understood as but the latest step in the welcome process of socialist regroupment and rethinking which is now going on throughout the world.
* * *
Footnotes
1.
The Economist, because it is a valuable source of economic and political information and analysis, is too often forgiven – especially by Marxists – for its vicious and reactionary editorials and policies.
2. £ equals $2.90.
3. For a systematic and detailed analysis of the budget, we refer those interested to the April 21–May 5 issue of The Tribune, organ of the Bevan group.
4. In passing, let it be noted that the British people actually pay in advance for these items through the heavy taxation and rates they pay in general for the various social services; together with the fact that both these medical items have a particular importance for the working man since the poor diet in England results in a high demand for false teeth and eyeglasses.
 



The All African Convention (The Awakening of a People)
by I.B. Tabata
Johannesburg People’s Press, 1950, 161 pgs.
Our attention has recently been called to this remarkable booklet, the work of a South African nationalist and socialist. It is not our intention in this brief notice to do more than call attention to a work which, while lacking the polish and sophistication of other Marxist studies, more than counteracts this by the depth of its analysis, the concreteness of its suggestions and the feeling of reality and engagement running through its pages.
To our knowledge, it is the first extensive study of South Africa which presents the problems of that country in a revolutionary light, and from the standpoint of an African whose people represent the overwhelming proportion of the population. Unlike so many studies which proceed inward from political generalities and abstractions, this work builds itself outwards from the concrete problems of the African miners, farmers, tribesmen, workers, etc. The great movement of South African nationalism, represented by the All African Convention, thus takes on a shape and form which the reader can readily grasp. The unique organizational form of this movement (a federated and affiliated body of all African groups and movements) is splendidly described, as well as its relationships with other non-European minorities (Indian people, Colored people, etc.) In centering his work upon the Africans themselves, Tabata has supplied a new understanding of that most difficult and complex of all problems common to national liberation movements: the relationship between the masses of workers and farmers and their petty bourgeois leaders or would-be leaders. The details of the struggle for the formation of the present All African Convention supply the bulk of the material presented and take the reader up to the 1950 period, i.e., the period of the infamous Apartheid acts.
To be sure, certain shortcomings must be noted, but they do not detract from the seriousness of this work. International issues or forces affecting the South African white rulers, or the oppressed peoples, barely enter into the development of Tabata’s thesis. More important, his analysis of the reasons behind the unprincipled and changing positions of the South African Communist Party is faulty. No doubt the South African Stalinists are mainly “white intellectuals with roots in the Herrenvolk class,” but their politics cannot be explained in this fashion, as their present opposition position would indicate. A reconsideration of the role of Stalinism, its links with Russian foreign policy and its true objectives in South Africa are urgently required—particularly in view of the false notion that Stalinism supports colonial movements on a progressive basis.
The fact that African nationalism has produced this mature and advanced work, certainly one of the most original documents we have ever seen from the colonial world, cannot be underestimated. In it, the progressive forces of that unfortunate land have a most valuable guide in the long and difficult struggle against imperialist white rule. It merits a wide circulation among those concerned with colonial problems.
 



Karl Marx: Pages Choisies pour une Ethique Socialiste
by Maximilien Rubel
Marcel Rivière et Cie. 1948
The author of this selection of writings by Karl Marx has had in mind far more than the wish to present a new, up-to-date choice from the vast amount of material available. Despite suppression by the Russian government, and the multitude of other persecutions which Marx’s writings have known, a sufficient store exists for the individual who wishes to inform himself, and anthologies of Marx are readily available. What, then could have been the author’s purpose in publishing this extensive collection?
Recognizing that Marxist thought and interpretation suffers from not only the perversion placed upon it by the Stalinist movement, which has twisted it into a doctrine justifying one of the most criminal forms of human society ever known, but also the fact that many of those who still refer to themselves as Marxian socialists have forgotten (if they ever knew) much of the guiding element behind Marx’s thought – what we may call, in a banal phrase – the motivating spirit of Marxism, M. Rubel has undertaken the elementary task of attempting to present Marxism in the light of its creator’s original concepts, thoughts and purposes. He is interested, among other things, in showing the gulf which separates Marx from Stalinism, or any other totalitarian interpretation of the socialist movement; he is interested in showing, through Marx’s own texts, the profoundly democratic, humanist and “ethical” character of his thought; finally, he is interested in revealing the organic nature, the consistency, which Marx carried throughout his life, from his youth to his end.
Rubel explains his purposes in a long, introductory essay which we would criticize on the ground of its length, and tendency to cover too much territory in too superficial a manner. A polemic against the numerous schools of anti-Marxism can hardly be handled in such a way. He further explains the sources of his material, difficulties involved, etc. Even the more familiar texts should be re-read, if only to see how they fit into the true pattern of Marxism. In addition, there are many texts and selections which, at least to this reviewer, were quite unfamiliar. Some deal with such fascinating topics as alienated man, the nature of a political sect, the role of the Party (suggesting quite a different attitude than that of Lenin), the State, character of the socialist society, etc., etc. It is not our purpose here to describe these texts in detail, but only to take note of them for interested readers.
The author has shaped his book, divided under numerous headings, into five main sections. A Prolegomena which contains material, in the form of letters, etc., from the years 1835–1843, including philosophic notes written by Marx at the age of 16! Then follow sections on the Ethical-Materialist Concept of History; the Historic Significance of Capitalism; the Ethical Mission of the Proletariat and, finally, The Socialist City. The work seems to be most careful and scholarly; with references, sources, notes, etc. But Rubel has already made a reputation for himself as an outstanding authority and “Marxicologist.” The socialist movement owes much to him for undertaking this collection which provides the necessary basis for any effort to reevaluate the work of one of the greatest of all thinkers, and to restore its original sense and spirit. It is the most important work in Marxism since the end of the last war, and one can only regret that it exists, as yet, only in the French language.
 



Secret et Violence
by Georges C. Glaser
Editions Correa, Paris, France; 690 francs, 420 pages.
The confession of the repentant Stalinist has become almost as familiar to the Western world as that other brand of confession in the Eastern world. The strong similarities between the two schools has always testified to their common origin. But this novel of Georges C. Glaser – which has created a considerable stir in France – has nothing in common with the political confessions we know. Glaser, German-born but now a French citizen, practises the art of metal craftsmanship at Paris where he has his own atelier. This lengthy novel may be assumed to be the autobiographic account of his life, deepened by his reflections on its meaning and enriched by his amazing experiences. It is, indeed, the first account of the life of a Communist militant, as seen from inwards and experienced from still deeper sources. As such, it is so infinitely superior to the pitiable accounts we have hitherto had that it belongs in a category of its own and must be considered as unique of its kind.
The novel’s hero, Valtin (we do not know if the choice of name is an ironic commentary on the notorious author of Out of the Night) is born “into the Kingdom of Misery” of an industrial suburb of a small German city. The large family is ruled by the brutal hand of the father, prototype of the frustrated German petty-bourgeois so effectively organized by the Nazis. It is Germany after the First World War, the familiar period of inflation, occupation, despair. The young Valtin flees his home and becomes a wanderer, a tramp among the hundreds of thousands of unemployed and lumpen who formed a veritable society of vagabondage at the time. Violence, police, authority, prison – all become familiar to the adolescent boy who, simultaneously, feels himself set apart from his fellow vagabonds, reflective, restless, introverted. He passes through a series of youth and correction homes, always revolting, always opposing. His contact with the famous and utopian Naturfreunde youth movement of the 20’s leads him to the Communist youth and party. He becomes fixed within this milieu. The atmosphere of the Stalinist movement of the 1930’s is brilliantly recreated, the madness of the “Third Period” is seen from within, with its devastating effect upon the personality of the party membership. Street brawls with Nazis and police, preparation of an endless series of adventures, fantastic political proposals – all is described inwardly, as it touches the life of a militant. Valtin’s life is a disorder and chaos; he is never normally employed and has no trade or profession. There is no evidence of any contact with the comparatively stable labor movement of the epoch, represented by the older Social Democratic workers and their trade unions. The feverish and hungry soul of Valtin, and thousands of German Valtins, found a natural home in the party at that time; it could hardly have been otherwise.
Hitler takes power and smashes the party. A new form of madness seizes the leadership which, simultaneously, demands a greater loyalty and subordination than ever to carry out its projects. Acts of despair follow one another. Valtin kills a Nazi and is forced to flee the country. In the Saar, then awaiting the results of the plebiscite which returned it to Germany, he joins in his last effort to work with the party. It is a period of degradation and humiliation. He begins to write, in an effort to concretize his inner and outward experiences. A party functionary informs him, “It is just simply unbearable for anyone to write and show a group of men who struggle without having any ties to the leadership; better a cell which is attached to the leadership even if it is inactive.” Not without much pain and torment, Valtin’s dependence upon the party begins to dissolve; he must struggle to resume and recreate his personality. He leaves for France and Paris.
The next, and most extensive phase of the novel, deals with his discovery of and integration into French life, the life of the French worker, in particular. He finds a profession, becomes a skilled worker. His first contact with a normal proletarian life, the discovery of what it means to produce and work, are movingly described. The French workers, even though supporting the party, have a way of behaving and reacting he has never known. One of them tells him, “Our first law is freedom. You say, ‘Long live the Republic,’ that’s O.K. You shout, ‘Shit on the Republic,’ that’s O.K. too!” Valtin begins to feel himself part of this world, but the war brings an end to this possible harmonious evolution. Now a French naturalized citizen, for he has seen the steady disintegration of his fellow political refugees who sink steadily into the type of Stalinist personality most desirable for GPU activities, Valtin is mobilized for the front.
Then follows five years of life as a soldier, a prisoner of war and transportation into Germany to war in the war industries. Valtin, German-born, must conceal his identity during this period; death at the hands of the Gestapo would be inevitable. It is impossible to describe in detail this period, upon which the novel concludes. Valtin eventually finds himself working in the very suburb where he had been born. Amidst his fellow prisoners from France, Russian slave workers from the East, the Gestapo agents who guard the factory, former communist German workers, now broken – amidst this incredible mixture of human life – Valtin continues that most difficult of all tasks, the findings of his own human personality. His true identity on the point of discovery, he flees his camp and awaits, with other hunted Germans, the war’s end. The allied troops arrive, but Germany and Europe are ruined; it is too late. Valtin, at least, can now return to France, but his friends who have heard the Stalinist slogan of “kill the Boche”? They emerge from their cave in the earth. “They were looking toward the West and toward the East; toward the North and toward the South. They were awaiting a Saviour.”
Despite its conclusion on this pessimistic, if accurate, note of the end of the Europe hitherto known to us, this novel of Glaser is filled with quite another spirit. To convey either the interest or scope of the period it covers would be impossible; we can only hope for its early translation into English. Viewed superficially, we have here a picture of one of history’s most tragic epochs: the decline of the labor and socialist movement, bringing with it the decline and breakup of Europe itself. More important, we have the story of the disruption and demoralization of the revolutionary personality, leading to its final destruction by Stalinism. But still further, in the struggle of Valtin to emerge from his dark night of totalitarian political horror, the author suggests to us a concept of the ethic of work and labor, the autonomous personality of the producer, “the creator, the peaceful seeker after truth.” As a critic has suggested, Glaser is urging us to accept once again those roots which originally attached socialism to the moral belief of the producer, the ethics of work. How does Valtin rebuild his world? His rediscovery is scattered throughout the book, at first unconsciously, later with understanding. It is through the concrete, through his search after the most simple of human gestures, the simplest things produced. The taste of bread, wine, the act of producing work in his shop by means of the tools at hand, the revisiting of old places seen before, but in a different light – all this leads Valtin to the humanization of the socialist and revolutionary beliefs he held, and continues to hold. In this sense, of course, he has much kinship with his Italian brother, Pietro Spina, created by Silone.
 



We know what to expect when the Tories return to power – a great Party of great vested interests, banded together in a formidable confederation; corruption at home, aggression to cover it up abroad; the trickery of tariff juggles; the tyranny of a well-fed party machine; sentiment by the bucketful; patriotism and imperialism by the imperial pint; an open hand at the public exchequer; an open door at the public house; dear food for the millions; cheap labor for the millionaire” – Winston Churchill, Speaking at Dundee, 1908
The third British General Election since the end of the war now belongs to history, and the Tory Government of Churchill has taken the place of the Labor Government of Attlee. Despite the encouraging political results of this election from the standpoint of the labor movement, and which we shall analyze below, the fact remains remains that the entire world labor movement in general and the British working class in particular have been handed a defeat by their enemy, particularly when viewed from the standpoint of social progress. The very fact that Winston Churchill, symbol of all that is reactionary and undesirable not only in England but in terms of the social outlook of the international bourgeoisie – the fact that this man and his “cabinet of Lords” has taken the place of the representatives of labor is enough to cause a profound sense of loss on the part of socialists everywhere, whatever may have been their differences with Attlee and his comrades.
For a socialist, the Labour Party and its leadership; the hundreds of thousands of militants and the millions of voters who constitute its strength – all this is “his”; part of his world, and part of his family of labor, whereas Toryism and its reactionary spokesmen form no part whatever of his reality, and are excluded from his vision except as a hostile and irreconcilable element. Our Labour Government – and it was “ours,” in the most profound sense of the word – has temporarily gone out of existence, and the most far-reaching historic effort toward the democratic building of a socialist society since the days of the Russian Revolution has ended.
We may say, particularly in the light of the paradoxical nature of this defeat, that it has ended “only for the moment,” and this optimistic thought is based upon reality, not upon the need for consolation. But nevertheless, there is a real danger that the evermore rapidly disintegrating international situation may impose its ultimate horror of atomic warfare upon us before labor can resume power and take up again the work of building a socialist Britain; there is the even more concrete and pressing danger that the eager, would-be-liquidators of all the social achievements of the six and one-half years of Labour’s regime may succeed in doing much damage before they are again put back into their proper place. Nor should we neglect the loss contained in the warning of Attlee when he spoke of the danger to world peace which labor’s absence at the various international gatherings and from international organisms would constitute. Despite its tragically mistaken policies in Iran, Egypt and elsewhere, the voice of the Labour Government had a different ring and a different sensitivity to the desires of the masses than that of its successor.
It is against this background of a realistic appraisal of what we have lost, without attempting to minimize it, that we must analyze the political significance of the election itself and the political perspective of the Labour Party.
*
Not the slightest grounds for pessimism or dejection on the part of the labor and socialist movement exists as a consequence of the defeat of Britain’s Labor Government on October 25, 1951. On the contrary, an objective effort to evaluate this defeat and its consequences must convince us that Britain’s socialist movement, now on the threshold of a new and more evolved stage of its history, has all the possibilities of a bright future. The Churchill “victory,” pumped up and decorated though it may be, could never be interpreted as the dynamic and serious upswing of British Toryism; it is but a temporary return to the holding of a state power which it can no longer effectively utilize. The situation of Great Britain in the world of today, i.e., a disastrous conjuncture of economic and political difficulties, is a given fact which would exist whether Labor or the Tories were returned to power. But their resolution represents another story, and we know that the Tory Party either cannot handle these problems, or will handle them in such a way as to revive social problems which the regime of Labor had mitigated, thus heaping a new category of difficulties upon those already present.
The Manchester Guardian summarizes the most pressing issues before the new government in these terms:
We have a winter of cold grates and power cuts before us. Nothing can be done quickly enough to remove that threat. But something can be done and must be done about the steady rise in prices and wages and, above all, about the enormous gap in the balance of payments. [1]
The gold reserve is running down fast and may drop to the danger line by next spring. We are running up debts to the sterling area and debts to Western Europe. Our currency is once more being regarded with nervous suspicion.
Such are the terse facts of the situation which, of course, the Tories claim to have inherited from the Welfare State. If Churchill seriously intends to pursue his rearmament pledges, the overall situation will be that much more aggravated since this demands increased import of materials in short supply on the world market; materials which will not be utilized in the manufacture of goods for the export trade. The forging of weapons of war is shown only on the adverse side of the balance-of-trade ledger. Economically speaking, the “normal” Conservative reaction to its present plight would be the institution of a program of enforced “disinflation” (devaluation), to sop up mass purchasing power – concretely, the liquidation of food subsidies, cuts in social security and welfare expenditures, drastic taxation on the small and middle-class brackets, etc. The classic methods, with all their consequences, are always at hand. There is also the possibility of recourse to the United States, at a price, for a renewed loan; a step which may well have been taken by the time this article appears. But the price, this time, will be the condition that the loan or its benefits will directly boost the rearmament program and its links with the NATO command.
The dilemmas of the new Tory Government will grow inversely as it begins to weaken. Nor should we neglect the fact that the Party itself has its divisions. The “Young Guard” has a different approach than that of Churchill and his Guard of Old Tories. In fact, this Tory Party division will largely determine both the speed and manner of program which the government will impose upon the people of England. It is an important, often neglected, element in the situation. The famous description at the head of our article given by the then Liberal Party member, Winston Churchill, represents Toryism at its classic worst, and still accurately describes the party’s right-wing, or the “Government of Lords,” as Morrison has described it.
 
Much has been made of the fact that Great Britain is now a nation equally divided. Labor, with its 14 million votes, received over 200,000 more than the Government Party; the Liberals voluntarily liquidated themselves and did not attain a million votes; the small groups such as the ILP which, to its everlasting shame, ran candidates even against Bevan supporters, disappeared politically. But this phenomenon is not unprecedented in England’s history – on the contrary, it has been present at the start of every great revolutionary change in the nation’s long history: the War of the Roses, Cavaliers and Roundheads, Whigs and Tories, Gladstonians and Disraelians, etc. Who doubts but that Great Britain has reached another, perhaps the most epoch, crossroads in its history, and that the 14 million workers, farm laborers, youth and middle class people who gave Labor the greatest vote in its history will find the strength and leadership to break out of this impasse which now blocks their way?
On the parliamentary level, the shift in votes of 1 per cent of the liberal petty bourgeoisie may have been enough to turn out Labor and install a Churchill, but the insignificant social weight of this group tells us this was a unique, almost accidental, situation and it will not be repeated when the country must resolve its division in a more stable lasting and fundamental fashion. A cursory examination of any electoral map of Great Britain reveals the unbridgeable social character of this division between the “Greenland” of the rural, farming, estate, etc., districts, and the “Blackland” of the urban, industrial, proletarian and lower middle-class districts. An observer has wittily said, “To reach the centers of Tory power, just step on the accelerator!”
An evaluation of Britain’s Labor Government has already been presented in some detail [2], and a still more exhaustive study of its achievements and its failures must now be made. But whatever “overall” viewpoint one may hold of the Welfare State, who can now deny its profoundly progressive nature as it prepares to meet the onslaught of the Tories in power? Its powers of resistance to the efforts that will be made to sap its structure and change the inner content of such measures of the nationalizations, the health system, etc., will provide further evidence of its support from the British working class. The Tory government will quickly prove itself a class government in the narrowest sense of the word. Beginning with denationalization of the steel industry, it will proceed to carry out its program of negation and destruction of Labor’s six and one half years of work as best it can. Failure or success depends on the capacity of the British labor movement to resist and fight back. Put otherwise, it depends upon the evolution within the Labor Party and within the trade union movement (TUC).
 
The emergence and success of the Bevanist tendency within the Labor Party has often been commented upon. It is the result of a complex of forces which involve the Party’s perspective itself; Bevanism is, in effect, only the start of a gigantic effort on the part of British socialism to reequip itself, ideologically and politically, to break that impasse whose characteristic existence we have already noted. It can only be understood if one approaches it sympathetically, free from sterile prejudices which try to find the roots of Bevanism either in a kind of British particularity or traditional “reformism.” The broad left- wing of the Labor Party contains many currents of thought and action, ranging from pacifism, Christian Socialism, etc., through versions of Stalinism and Stalinism itself.
Bevanism is not only the generalized expression of all doubts and discontents which developed within the Party during its years in power; it is also the place within the Party to which these many currents have come to present their views and to fight for influence. Furthermore, it is here that new concepts of the Party which will influence not only its ideology but its structure itself, as well as touching upon that most delicate of all questions – the relationship between Party and trade unions – will be formulated, discussed, presented, etc. The most conscious and far-seeing individuals in the Party are centered about this vast tendency which has the double advantage of being organically bound to the Party as a whole. Nobody can predict its rate or specific direction of development. But everyone can try to understand what it represents not only for England but the international socialist movement as well.
Finally, within the framework of immediate political perspectives, there is the question of the possible formation of a government of national unity; a policy of coalition. The mystique of coalitionism has a strong hold in England; that policy by which, at the moment when the impasse has reached its most crucial and anguished point and fails to be broken by decisive action by either one of the two opposing forces, a reshuffling takes place, the tendencies most approximating one another within the two parties join forces and a temporary relaxation of the political and social strain is achieved. The feelers of Churchill in this direction were not serious, and were not taken seriously by the Labor leadership, but at a later stage, under more crucial circumstances of either international or national origin, the effort of national coalitionism is inevitable. The Young Guard of the Conservatives, often in serious disagreement with Churchill, will then attempt to unite with the right wing of the Labor Party and the conservative TUC leadership, isolating both the traditional bourgeoisie and the left wing, Bevanist tendencies of labor. Here, too, both the success or failure of such a maneuver, and its concrete presentation, depends upon the further evolution and growth of the party’s left wing. It must find those specific and concrete means by which it can retain its present momentum, develop its counter-program and execute its project; it must find the means of avoiding isolation within its own party and from the trade union masses. Hatred of the spirit which led to betrayal and MacDonaldism runs very high among the British working class. It provides a solid base upon which may be built a forward-looking perspective which will serve British socialism in its new and decisive stage.
November 1, 1951
* * *
Footnotes
1. Now running at £700,000,000 per year. – H.J.
2.
Cf. January–February 1951 issue of The New International.
 



“For the first time in her history, England now finds herself in the part of a subsidized power – the part which in former times she has had played for her, now by Prussia and now by Austria.” (Bertrand de Jouvenel, Problems of Socialist England, p. 34)
The experience of the Labour Government and its related efforts to establish a unique English form of socialism is continuing, although on admittedly shaky legs. The fact that this experiment in socialist reformism takes place under unfavorable circumstances – a general world decline in which all that was formerly in Britain’s favor from an economic standpoint has turned into its opposite – is well known. Nevertheless, the effort continues and deserves the closest attention, both sympathetic and critical, from socialists everywhere.
Like any other significant social movement, the British labor regime has developed its ideologists, historians and intellectual supporters. In their works, if we examine them with care, we can find not only much serious information which will help us to evaluate the regime itself, but also indirect answers to many puzzling problems relating to the ideology, the “conception of life” held by its leaders and the more remote aims they have in mind. This work [1] of Keith Hutchison, at present an associate editor of The Nation and a former secretary of Clement Attlee, fulfills not only its author’s stated purpose, but gives us some clues into the thought processes of the labor leadership itself.
The theme of Hutchison is simplicity itself and contained in the title of his work. It is a comforting thesis – if only it were true! The decline of British capitalism is a fact recognized by all; but its actual fall has yet to be recognized by anyone (except the author). Beginning with the 1880s, and proceeding through the past six decades at a steadily growing pace, British capitalism has been undermined, sapped and weakened so thoroughly that it can no longer be considered as capitalist. With true British boldness and subtlety of thought, our author attempts to point out that this process was largely administered by the British ruling class itself – its Tory and Liberal party leaders. The famous Labor Party electoral victory in 1945 was thus “only a quickened step along a path already familiar.” So confident is the author of his thesis that in an article published in the Fall 1949 issue of The Antioch Review, he firmly contends that Britain’s two major parties, Labor and Conservative, will lose their present “class character,” and political affiliation and adherence will be based upon “temperament.” Naturally, no date is offered for this event, but with the inevitability of that gradualness which has been the ideological heart of British socialism, the construction of socialism is assured.
 
It is our intention to probe the question as to whether or not Hutchison, in this semi-official work, gives us any unintended insights into the nature and character of this British socialism, rather than to take up in any detail the material contained in the book itself. In passing, however, let us say that for anyone not well acquainted with the background material in the history of British labor politics and the evolution of party systems in England, much well presented material, written in an interesting and sedate fashion, is presented here.
Long before the nationalization program of the Labor government, says Hutchison, capitalism was on its way out in England. The “chief evidence” for this statement is (1) the undermining of the free-market system and (2) the redistribution of wealth by way of “... steeply graduated direct taxation and a comprehensive network of social services.” Marx did not recognize this “Fabian retreat of the British capitalist forces before the slowly advancing political and industrial armies of labor” (page xiii). By peacefully surrendering its “political monopoly” the British bourgeoisie confounded Marxism, which sees no possibility of compromise between capital and labor. As a result of this evolutionary process, “the role of the State was changed from that of neutral policeman to social worker and economic planner; it acquired specific responsibility for social security and welfare and became an agency for the redistribution of property and income” (page xiii–xiv).
To emphasize the ineluctability of this process of socialization of State and society, the author works hard at the task of fitting all events and developments in English economic, political and social history into this conception. For example, describing an eight year period of Tory government in the 1930s, Hutchison states that while this government aided the capitalist class “... to secure temporarily a larger share of the cake” (pages 224–5), this gain was accompanied by an intervention of the State in economic affairs running counter to the theory of private enterprise. “If the real test of economic efficiency is ability to make a profit in a free market,” how can we apply such a test when the market, at this time, was rigged by tariffs, doles to industry, legal restrictions on competition and “... deliberate instigation of monopoly?”
It is clear that the author has a most naive, simplified but highly convenient (for him) definition of capital. In part, his understanding of the social system of capitalism is limited to some of its classic secondary features (market, political monopoly of the bourgeoisie, etc.); in part it is based upon a complete misrepresentation of the nature of the State, and the assumption that changes in the role of the State since the 19th Century imply the steady liquidation of the old order. In brief, Hutchison has returned to a primitive Adam Smith notion of capitalism and, instead of tracing the evolution of the British capitalist structure, he has wiped away both this evolution and the structure itself by his superficial toying with definitions.
In this respect, therefore, the book cannot add to our knowledge of either the structural changes in British capitalism, nor to any effort to understand and estimate it today. This is a fault, indeed, since one of the most interesting Marxist theoretical questions today is the exact and precise nature of British society under the now five-year-old Labor regime. Hutchison has given us little or nothing to go by in any attempted analysis. On this score, the only really valuable and interesting chapter in the book (Chapter 18) is that describing the economic problems and choices which faced the Labor government when it first assumed political power. Hutchison describes the various alternative policies that might have been pursued, although correctly emphasizing that all were strictly limited by the hostile surrounding world, which made some element of “austerity” unavoidable. It should be noted, however, that the Labor government, particularly since it has obtained its second and so much less decisive mandate, has consistently pursued the more conservative and rightist alternative described by the author.
I asked the question in the beginning of this article whether it is possible to obtain any insight into the ideologic conceptions of the British labor leaders from this work, even if indirectly. Since I share the viewpoint of those who state that it is both misleading and fruitless to describe the Labor government as simply another species of “capitalist-imperialist” regime, this question is worth pursuing.
 
Is anything revealed about the nature of this British “socialism”? Let us see first what formal conception of socialism exists in the mind of the author and the British labor leadership. Hutchison quotes the remarks of a “left-wing” Tory MP (Quentin Hogg) who wrote in the London Times that, “We are committed to a great experiment – the creation and maintenance of a Social Democratic State.” Although a long period of preparation has been underway, this experiment is still in its early state. The Labor Party, in its 1945 victory election manifesto, was a little more specific about the content and nature of this “Social Democratic State.” At that time, its ultimate purpose was the establishment of the socialist commonwealth of Great Britain – “free, democratic, efficient, progressive, public- spirited, its resources organized in the service of the British people.” Aside from the now familiar measures of economic control (price fixing, rationing, etc.) and social welfare (housing, schools, education reform, national health service, etc.), the manifesto stated its broader and long-range objectives to be as follows: public ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange (various industries, subsequently nationalized, were listed as “ripe” for immediate action); non-nationalized industries must meet the test of “public service”; new capital investment would be subject to government planning, and state control of credit policies would follow hard upon the nationalization of the Bank of England. As everyone knows, the substantial section of this program has been carried out.
Hutchison, stating again his thesis that the groundwork for this program had been in preparation for more than fifty years (“creeping collectivism”), announces in his work that this form of “planned economy” is nevertheless a turning point in British history because it presages a change from a society which was still essentially capitalistic, although tempered by many socialist innovations, to one basically socialist despite numerous capitalist survivals. For while most economic enterprises were still to be privately owned, the decisions of their managers on such major matters as the scale and nature of their operations, the distribution of their products, the disposal of profits, and the investment of new capital, were henceforth to be strongly influenced, and indeed often determined, by government plans rather than by market pressures.”
In pondering this description of their “new society,” as given in the words of its founders themselves, we note immediately some significant characteristics. To begin with, the inroads into both traditional and even contemporary capitalism are not only substantial, but highly significant since they touch upon all fields of the capitalist productive and distribution process: regulation of working conditions; investment and use of capital; quantity and quality of production; rate and distribution of profit, etc. On the face of it, it would be absurd to maintain stubbornly that it is a matter of the “same old capitalism” assuming some new but transparent guise, particularly in view of the surprising extent to which the Labor government has gone to make its program a reality.
But this generally recognized point only carries us to that stage in our analysis where we admit that the Labor government, five years in total power, differs fundamentally from traditional Social Democratic coalition regimes, or social democratic governments. Can we proceed further and state what kind of a regime the Labor government seeks to construct, and how it differs from the aforementioned? In the first place, it is clear that the State plays the leading role in their regime and that, when and if this State development should reach its full height, it would be an all-powerful apparatus, controlling and regulating all forms and expressions of social, political and economic life. Its economic base would be nationalization, its political expression would be that of formal and legal democracy, its social content would be that of a regulated popular welfare extending to all the realms of man’s physical and biologic needs. State, government, public agency, control, regulation, organization, nationalization, planning, economic boards, etc. – these are key words in the Labor government’s program and ideology.
 
Let us concretely examine one important aspect of the Labor Party’s overall program; nationalization, the means by which the economic base of the new regime is to be created. Hutchison is correct in asserting (page 254) that more time is required before we can correctly appraise the nationalization program as a whole, but in indicating his criteria for such an appraisal, he gives us a deep insight into the mind of the Labor leadership. The national boards and corporations set up over the nationalized industries cannot yet be judged for “An intricate piece of new social machinery as it comes from the designer’s hand is no more likely to be perfect than mechanical equipment embodying new principles. Only actual working experience will show, as American engineers say, what ‘the bugs’ in it are and how they can be eliminated.”
Both terminology and analogy here are illuminating. Social machinery, designer’s hand, engineers, etc. Obviously, we have here a conception of production which is thoroughly bureaucratic, imposed from above and having not the remotest grasp of the profoundly socialist concept of popular control, direction and handling of industry by the masses of workers themselves. The “Social Democratic State” system of the Laborites is thus bureaucratic at its core. The Antioch Review (Fall 1949) provides us with an interesting factual picture of the National Coal Board, which took over Britain’s basic coal industry on January 1, 1947. It gives us a portrait of Hutchison’s “social machinery” and the “designer’s hand” as well.
The National Coal Board consists of nine members, appointed by the government. This is the summit of the administrative pyramid. Below, we find eight Divisional Boards, which operate as consultative committees. In turn, the Divisional Boards stand in command over forty-eight regional areas, below which are the individual coal mines with their responsible managers. On these various hierarchical levels of control, the various departments of finance, planning, etc., are reproduced. In all, the industry now has 35,000 functionaries and administrators reaching from the mine to the National Coal Board. What consequence? “In the main ... the industry is operated, as a business, by its former managerial class, reinforced by economists, civil servants, scientists, and others brought in from outside.” (page 277)
It is astounding what little interest Hutchison pays to the workers of England, and their living institutions – unions, cooperative, etc. In his portrayal, they are given no roles beyond that of carrying out the plans and commands of the bureaucracy. In his description of nationalization, its successes and failures, they simply are not mentioned. In the concluding chapter of the book, the author acknowledges that “nothing can be done without the positive consent of the workers,” but even his formulation indicates the passive role of agreement or disagreement they are to play. Any idea of the workers commanding the situation, shaping both social and economic policy through their own institutions, etc., is an utterly foreign notion in the ideologic head of Hutchison, or the bureaucratic type for whom he writes.
It is interesting to note that in Western Germany, where the Social Democratic proposal for nationalization of industry along the British lines is bitterly opposed by the ultraconservative, Ruhr industrialist regime of Adenauer, a measure providing for a far more extensive voice of labor in the management process was proposed by the Christian Socialists and is under discussion. The New York Times aptly described it as a “cold socialization” measure, emphasizing, from another aspect, its bureaucratic, “from above” character. It would give labor a voice in plant management regarding plant conditions, business policy, production methods and a veto over all management proposals for solutions to these problems. Labor, in turn, would provide a core of “experts” to express its standpoint on all issues. The principle of “codetermination” between workers and management with respect to economic and welfare policies is established, and the law proposed states that shop councils shall have equal rights with the owners “in setting managerial questions of contracts, social welfare, production programs, purchasing and distribution.”
An interesting contrast with British nationalization, where the overthrow of individual ownership has not been followed up by the indispensable workers’ control over nationalized industry! In Western Germany, workers’ control is proposed (at least, to a greater extent than in England), without the indispensable nationalization which forms one basic element in a socialist method of production. Interestingly enough, German industrialists – citing the “State Socialism” program of Bismarck – endorse the proposed law on the grounds that major concessions must be made to labor to prevent nationalization. Actually, a combination of nationalization with the workers command; wherein both social order under which one may say the workers’ command; wherein both outward form and social content harmonize in a socialist sense.
Bonn “cold socialism” and British “cold nationalization” both belong to the category of bureaucratic social regimes. If the British labor government by its program of nationalization and social welfare has taken us many steps forward (as indeed it has), and commands our sympathetic understanding and friendly criticism (as it does), it has by its own acknowledgment and definition failed entirely in solving what must be a key issue for socialists; namely, to so raise and develop the social and socialist consciousness of the workers who support the regime that they shall become an organic part of that regime, regulating its activities through their own decisions; controlling its productive and state apparatus at all levels of decision – in a word, preparing the dissolution of the domineering State itself by learning how to execute every function and deed of that hitherto indispensable, but happily no longer required evil creation of class society.
* * *
Footnote
1. The Decline and Fall of British Capitalism, by Keith Hutchison, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York 1950, i–xiv; 274 pp.
 



Le Communisme Yougoslave
by Louis Dalmas; preface by Jean-Paul Sartre
Terre des Hommes, Paris 1950, i–xliii, 220 pgs.
The question of Yugoslavia, or “Titoism,” has had a most curious evolution, scarcely foreseen by those who concerned themselves with the issue when it first burst into the world four years ago. Not only in retrospect, but particularly from the standpoint of today, the analysis made of Titoism by all parties and political tendencies of the left – regardless of the viewpoint they proposed – seems to have been marked by shortsightedness, superficiality and a failure to grasp the full significance of this development. The outstanding example of this was, of course, the so-called “official” Trotskyist movement which generally outdoes all others in ignorance, incompetence and narrow-mindedness. With the same degree of violence with which they formerly embraced Tito and all his doings, they now denounce and attack this latest in a long line of “traitors” (the same Tito) who has sold himself to the American camp! But no one takes these people seriously, and everyone understands that their real bitterness against Tito is the fact that he refused to create a “new international” into which they could cheerfully liquidate that pitiful body known as the “Fourth International.” In reviewing any work on Yugoslavia, such as that offered by Louis Dalmas, the real question is: has the socialist and revolutionary left properly understood this development, has it made proper use of it in its own socialist interests, has it established the necessary objective and subjective climate within which it can exert certain influence on Titoism and assist it along the path of its own evolution?
From such a standpoint we propose to review this work of Dalmas and measure its contribution in accomplishing this task. The author, known as one of the leading “Titoists” in France, is concerned with much more than a mere description of the rupture with Stalin, and the facts of Yugoslavian economic, political and social life thereafter. He has a theory of Titoism, which he presents with force and conviction, and which he considers to be essential to an understanding of the greatest problem of all: how to bring about a revival of the now defunct international revolutionary movement. Therefore, despite many naive and impulsive remarks of a subjective nature which mar the book throughout, his work demands a serious and earnest consideration.
The problem of Titoism is an international one which will certainly have a long and profound development except for those individuals adept in the art of political abstraction who think that the Stalinist-influenced masses and parties can brusquely leap over their Stalinist history straight onto the pinnacles of revolutionary socialism. In this sense, then, it is absurd to be “pro-Titoist” or “anti-Titoist”; to “prove” that Yugoslavia is a “workers’ state” or a “national-Stalinism.” The real fact of the matter is that both in terms of internal political ideology and international politics, Titoism has already passed beyond its early characteristics which permitted it to be defined more or less correctly, if abstractly, as a Stalinist movement, or a bureaucratic clique seeking to retain power by a neutralist position in a divided world. Titoism must now be redefined as a legitimate and serious international tendency, politically and ideologically, within the revolutionary movement; it must be recognized as the first of many other similar developments which, springing out of the world of Stalinism, must be accepted as harbingers of new, hitherto unknown, ideological currents with which socialists must sympathetically collaborate. Another and parallel example is that ideology represented by the British Labor Government, which, although originating in the capitalist world, nonetheless has characteristics strikingly similar to that of Titoism. This, however, is a theme for another subject and we must return to the work of Dalmas.
The work may conveniently be divided into three sections: the preface furnished by Jean-Paul Sartre, which must certainly be considered as an important political statement on the part of this leading European intellectual; the historic and factual account of Titoism given by Dalmas and a concluding section in which the author advances his “theory of Stalinism” and the place occupied by Titoism in this theory. Needless to say, these sections are of highly unequal value. This is a work requiring concentrated patience and effort by the reader, particularly if he is to overcome his indignation at some of the absurdities of Dalmas ... and Sartre! Both, it becomes clear, are saying perhaps more than they themselves are aware of.
The preface of Sartre, complex, difficult and expressed in the pseudo-philosophic language associated with the philosophy of existentialism, indicates a serious reflection and study by the author not only of the Yugoslavian question, but of Marxist doctrine in general. Sartre attempts to penetrate the complex questions of the relationship between “objective” and “subjective” factors in revolutionary history – both before and after the social revolution, and the place occupied by the Titoist revolution in this schema. It is impossible to detail his argument here, certainly the most provocative and interesting part of the book. We must limit ourselves to its broad outline, as well as some comments thereon.
Sartre finds the struggle of Tito against Russian Stalinism progressive and revolutionary because, in his terms, it marks a rediscovery of the subjective factor in revolutionary consciousness, as opposed to what he calls “Stalinist objectivity.” “In a word,” he says, “the pressure of objective circumstances and the contradictions of objectivism itself have led them [the Titoists – H.J.] to reevaluate the subjective, in spite of themselves. But this reevaluation, in its turn, demands a theoretical revision: they must rethink Marxism, they must rethink Man.” (pg. xlii) Precisely. And it is on this point that both the critics and supporters of Titoism have gone astray; the one and the other accepting Titoism “in itself,” divorced and unrelated to the world, deprived of any inner dynamics, bare and abstract. This reviewer includes himself among those whose approach to the problem was guided by sectarian considerations. Nobody, says Sartre, can foresee today what will become of Titoism; no one can yet grasp its total and final significance. “It is for this reason that we must place our bets on it. When the die is cast, nothing continues and man disappears. What measures the human grandeur of an enterprise is the fact that one may bet for or against its chances of success up to the end.” In the additional sense that Titoism has broken apart the vast, frozen icefields of Stalinist ideology, we cannot but agree with the spirit of Sartre’s fundamental approach to this issue.
The first phases of the revolution, pursues Sartre, are marked by grave contradictions, particularly between the subjective desires of the workers and objective economic and social realities. The Stalinist leadership has been unable to “constitute a theory of subjectivity adapted to the new phase of the revolution” to resolve these contradictions. Calculating ideological specialists are created by Stalinism, and what Rosa Luxemburg described as the masses acting as their own executive organs of conscious action fails to develop; on the contrary, is stifled. In Korea, for example, “The revolutionary consciousness of the Korean masses has become, for the Soviet leaders, an objective element in their calculations.” (pg. xix) In enlarging this conception, Sartre develops at some length what we may describe as the psycho-philosophic process behind the various trials which have taken place in the Soviet satellite lands (Rajk, Kostov, etc.); a most interesting description, we may add.
But in the last few pages of his lengthy introduction, Sartre stumbles and stumbles badly. It is here that he must give both an evaluation of Titoism and an estimation of its consequences upon the Stalinist movement internationally. He accepts the “socialist” definition of the Titoist state implied throughout the book (although even Dalmas is constrained to admit the possibility of its degeneration into a “police state”), and commits the even more serious error of splitting apart the “state” of a socialist society and “the movement of collectivity”; i.e., the organized revolutionary masses. Falsely calling upon Rosa Luxemburg this time, Sartre quotes her well- known remarks about the conservative role of the Social Democratic leadership as against the labor movement and concludes that the task of the workers’ organisms in Yugoslavia is to “demand a greater number of powers than the State has attributed to it”; i.e., conduct a running battle with the state apparatus. This analogy between state and party is, of course, false and an evasion of the primary issue in any evaluation of the Yugoslavia regime: namely, if the mass, popular organisms of the masses do not in themselves constitute the state, in what sense can one speak of a workers’ or socialist state? This key question has been treated elsewhere (cf., for example, our article in November–December issue of The New International), and we shall not touch upon it.
Finally, Titoism in its break with Stalinism has advanced much further than Sartre, or his friends, in analysing the role of Stalinism. The noticeable cooling off of the pro-Titoists (under the guise of Tito’s reorientation toward the American camp) is really attributable to the depth and extent of his split with Stalinism, whereas the band of European intellectuals feel far deeper ties to the Stalinist movement. What a monstrous and capitulationist formula Sartre develops when, denouncing the idea that one should look forward to a split in the Communist movement over Titoism, he says, “... we cannot even say that a worker joins the Communist Party; we must rather say that he is born in it, for to be a proletarian and to be a Stalinist is all one.” (pg. xlii) At most, one must hope that Titoism, in disturbing the assurity of the Stalinist worker, may give rise to a reawakening of his consciousness. This conception of the impossibility of any revolutionary activity outside of the limits of the Stalinist world is no doubt Sartre’s conclusion from the check of the French RDR movement, and is shared by many, including Dalmas. But is this not in full contradiction with the development of Titoism itself? Up to now, it. has been a simple affair for all leftists to proclaim their readiness to defend Yugoslavia in case of an isolated war involving a frontal attack by Russia (a highly dubious and hypothetical situation, at best). But are we not correct in questioning the durability of their position in the event of a general war, with Yugoslavia occupying, formally at least, a place in the camp of the West; put otherwise, may we not suspect a more basic tendency present among the pro-Titoists, namely, the tendency of capitulation to Stalinism?
These matters are handled more crudely and naively by Dalmas, who contributes the bulk of the book. This man, whatever his sincerity may be, is a master confusionist who, alas, has succeeded in confusing himself most of all! He substitutes enthusiasm for analysis and emotionalism for politics. His theoretical efforts never rise above the level of vulgar rationalizing for his preconceived notions or better said, his obsession with the belief that Stalinism constitutes the only revolutionary force in existence. This forces him to make certain statements of such an extravagant nature – for example, his monstrous accusation that the Independent Socialist League, because of its denial that the Stalinist movement is a legitimate working class movement, is in an anti-communist bloc with the State Department and gives a “... so-called Marxist cover to bourgeois anti-communist repression” – that the reader is obliged to hold back his temptation to abandon the book. Dalmas, who admires Tito beyond belief and imagines him to be of the class of the great Marxists, renders serious disservice to all those concerned with an objective analysis of Titoism by his vulnerable manner of writing and reporting. He relies solely upon official government sources, admits he has never verified any of the descriptive material he presents and accepts verbatim whatever is told him.
There is little purpose in listing the many dubious statements made by Dalmas. However, in justice to him, it should be remarked that he gives a detailed and factual account of the early beginnings of the Titoist tendency, and the factors behind the split. It is his evaluation of the regime, its relations with the workers and its internal politics which receive either little or wrong attention from him. If Titoism marks a progressive break away from Stalinism (undoubtedly true), the task of socialists is to assist this evolution rather than bringing it to a halt midway. If Dalmas' description is correct, then Yugoslavia today is far more of a socialist and workers' state than Russia was under Lenin and Trotsky! This holds for all spheres of the country’s life, too. The author contributes nothing to helping the Yugoslavs in their “rethinking of Marxism.”
In fact, Titoism has outstripped the Dalmasian type of pro-Titoist, in many respects. Whereas Titoism is clearly deepening the gap between itself and Stalinism, Dalmas is most anxious to narrow that gap. Surely the author must disagree with the present evolution of Titoism; perhaps he is ready to place his small coin, like the Trotskyists, on the new hero of despairing people, Mao Tse- tung. In any case, the essence of Dalmas’ book is more concerned with his “theory of Stalinism” which, in his words, may be summarized as follows: “... communism is not necessarily Stalinism, but at the same time Stalinism is also communist.” (p. 143) From this, the corollary that the task of the socialist today is to make Stalinism independent of the Kremlin (that is, early Titoist). Expressed with much less sophistication, this is the same theory as that advanced by Deutscher in his biography of Stalin. It is a theory of political capitulation to Stalinism as the inevitable “wave of the future.” As such, unfortunately, it is highly prevalent among European left-intellectual circles some of whom – our author included – even describe it as a position of independence between the two blocs! (Cf. pg. 210–11) With these people, one must start almost from the first teachings of Marxism: the labor movement as an independent movement not handcuffed to a state; what is meant by revolutionary consciousness and activity; what is a workers’ state, etc. Titoism, because of its inner dynamics and its response to objective circumstances, will surely remain in existence, even in event of war. Let us hope that other and more fruitful contributions to understanding and influencing it will be made.
 



Memoires d’un Révolutionnaire (1901–1941)
by Victor Serge
Editions du Seuil, Paris 1951. 417 pp. 600 francs.
The memoirs of Victor Serge, extracts of which have already appeared in various publications, including The New International, have been awaited with much interest. Finally, although unfortunately still only in French, the complete edition is now available, with the exception of certain pages covering his last years in Mexico. This thick volume covers the vast and amazing expanse of time – several epochs rolled into one – between Serge’s birth, of Russian parenthood, in Brussels (1901) [1] and his final place of refuge in Mexico City (1941).
Somewhere in the beginning of his memoirs, Serge describes that predominant feeling which he possessed his entire life: that of living in a world from which there was no possible escape, but struggling without cease to find the impossible. And in this impossible world, he writes, he spent his childhood listening to conversations about “... trials, executions, escapes, roads to Siberia, great ideas constantly called into question, the latest books about these ideas ...” (p. 8).
Consider for a moment the historic terrain crossed by Serge during these long years; this will give some idea of the richness and the fascination contained in this book. The growth of the international socialist movement before the First World War, together with the Russian revolutionary movement; the anarchist and anarcho-syndicalist movements of France, Belgium, Spain, etc., the First World War itself; the Russian Revolution from its Kerenskyist phase down to the Stalinist destruction of the Left Opposition (and all other opposition); exile and isolated struggle against the Moscow Trials; the Spanish Civil War and the Second World War; the collapse of France and ultimate flight to Mexico.
And Serge, as worker, revolutionist, journalist, man-of-letters, novelist, participated in all of these, actively and convincingly! Son of a Russian Nihilist and member of the “Will-of-the-People” group, raised in the atmosphere of a rather primitive and mechanistic anarchism, he learned early to “... think, struggle, be hungry.” In Paris and Belgium, he moved in anarchist, libertarian and syndicalist circles, with a definite antipathy toward socialist and Marxist tendencies. The Russian Revolution swung him to the Bolshevik side and he engaged actively in political duties during the civil war, the NEP period, etc. He quickly became critical of events in Russia and rallied to the Trotskyist opposition. This cost him several years exile in the Russian hinterland – not under concentration camp conditions – from which he was eventually saved by a campaign abroad organized by European intellectuals. Serge was actually both a Russian revolutionist and a French- European writer and intellectual, a duality which accounts for his miraculous release by Stalin! To one or another extent, he collaborated with Trotsky and the then Trotskyist movement in exposing the Moscow Trials, although (as we shall see) his own political orientation turned in a different direction. His contacts, acquaintances, experiences, information, etc., were truly enormous and covered the entire expanse brought to life by the Russian Revolution.
Readers of The New International are already quite familiar with much of the life and record of Victor Serge. What is less known is his opinion on many of the controversial events of the Russian Revolution (Kronstadt, Makhno, etc.), as well as other political features of his life, such as his disagreements and ultimate break – rather, a partial break – with Trotsky. Since a good three-quarters of his memoirs are concerned with Russia and the Revolution, the reader will find much material on these issues. The question is, how must we evaluate them? The essence of Victor Serge makes it impossible for us to give a definite, clear or simple response to this question.
In one respect, Serge’s memoirs are easily – too easily – subject to criticism. He is not a political analyst or theoretician; nor a systematic or original thinker. His style and method are impressionistic and subjective, lacking both clarity of expression and documentation. This is no source book for historians, nor reference work for scholars concerned with the Russian Revolution! One always has the uneasy feeling that Serge’s “quotations” are either from memory, or concise summaries of his impression of a quotation or statement. There are never any references to which the sceptical or interested reader may go himself. For example, he claims that both Lenin and Trotsky signed an ultimatum addressed to the Kronstadt strikers which stated, among other things, “Surrender, or you will be machine-gunned like rabbits.” Where, how, when, etc.? The very expression seems totally unlike both men, yet Serge offers no reference, no possible way of checking the matter. Or, Lenin (p. 144) is quoted as having said to one of Serge’s friends, “This is Thermidor. But we won’t let ourselves be guillotined; we’ll make Thermidor ourselves!” The expression and its implication seem impossible. Similarly, his evaluation of the “Workers’ Opposition” doesn’t gibe with the known facts. And one may easily doubt a considerable number of other impressionistic, exaggerated, emotional and offhand statements scattered through the work.
Thus, unfortunately, the memoirs have been used by unpalatable sources which make a profession of anti-Bolshevism. But have not those who sought in Serge an authentic voice of evidence of Bolshevism’s original sins violated the spirit of his work? Absolutely. For, despite his often bitter and harsh criticisms of Russian Bolshevism, he stands solidly on the ground of the revolution itself, and evokes those special circumstances – well- known to objective people – which drove the Bolsheviks to employ ever harsher measures against their opponents. In fact, a substantial section of his work is devoted to describing the agency of the civil war, the famine, isolation, backwardness, etc., of early Russia. Serge even recognizes the meaning of the famous slogan raised during the Kronstadt episode, “Soviets without Communists.” To enforce further this fundamental position of Serge, we need but point to his support and admiration for Trotsky, his adherence to the Trotskyist opposition and his activity in its behalf. No, Serge was no anti-Bolshevik of the contemporary school. Certain confusions and contradictions in his memoirs cannot replace the clear meaning of its general line. Similarly, his often changed relations with Trotsky (in retrospect, he was certainly right as against Trotsky on many issues, such as the premature formation of the “Fourth International”), cannot be discolored by his fundamental solidarity with the man he admired most of all.
But this does not quite establish the necessary balance, since Serge’s sharp criticisms of the Bolsheviks remain. How shall we evaluate them? Today, as is well known, there exists no systematic and organized critique of the theory and practice of Russian Bolshevism, written from a Marxist and socialist standpoint. At best, there have been some suggestions, tentative remarks, half-formulated doubts, etc. But a serious work which, while rejecting the vulgarisations which are so common today, would nonetheless assess the question if there was something inherent in Russian Marxism which facilitated and aided its transmutation into Stalinism – such a work does not exist. It would be hard to imagine a more promising (and formidable) task than that of collating, synthesizing and evaluating the progressive criticisms of Bolshevism, and attempting to draw fruitful lessons from that greatest of all revolutionary experiences!
Here, aside from its own value and interest, lies perhaps the true value of Serge’s memoirs. With all his shortcomings and weaknesses, and in his own fashion, Serge has indicated possible ways of reexamining Bolshevism and the revolution. Not merely through the specific events and personalities he describes, but also through the practice and functioning of the first workers’ state and its leading party. For Serge, the human element, the individual (Man), was the weakest point of Bolshevism. His viewpoint on this question is a coming together of his early anarchist beliefs, with the ideas, the neo-humanism, of European intellectuals like André Gide. For Serge, much in the practice of Bolshevism and Leninism made it possible to corrupt and break men; not, to be sure, by the familiar methods of bourgeois society, but by the instrumentality of power. Lenin, he tells us, referred to the men of the Cheka (revolutionary state police) as made up of “sinister imbeciles”! Did the Bolsheviks overestimate the “objective factor” in history? Serge brilliantly defends Trotsky against the charge of Jesuitical morality, yet he doubts many of the concrete actions of the regime undertaken as measures of “self-preservation.” Unfortunately, he halts halfway; he does not pursue his criticism to the end, and does not offer us, in the concrete, other standards. Yet, at a time when an attitude of subservience toward these events cannot be justified by the fact that so many have completely disowned what they once accepted, in Serge’s efforts can be recognized a true and correct beginning of a reevaluation which, one day, must take place. Acceptable as a part of this task is the optimistic note on which his memoirs end where, reaffirming his belief in socialism, human justice and individual freedom, he urges us to learn from “... the passion, the experience and even the mistakes” of his now destroyed generation.
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. Victor Serge was actually born in 1890.
 






These notes and observations were made during the course of a trip through Western Germany during July of this year. As such, they possess the customary merits and demerits of “first observation.” Nothing has been added or changed, with the exception of a concluding section. A trip through this “New Germany” is certainly one of the most interesting and curious experiences available today. – H.J.



* * *
Saarbrücken/Saarland, July 3:
“Ein schaffendes Volk,” these Saarlanders! If work, energy and activity are acknowledged characteristics of the German people, then the people of this hotly-disputed region possess them in excess. In their gloomy capital city, with its main streets reconstructed only to hide away the ruins of the side streets, they rush about on feet or in the street cars, on their way to factory or office. The Saar is rich in coal, rich in steel mills to convert Lorraine iron ore into steel, aided by Ruhr coke and Saar coal. The smoke of the Völkingen and Dudweiler mills drifts over the capital city whose post-war officialdom sits in collaboration with the French authorities. Dull-grey coloration everywhere; an active but depressed people, conscious of the renewed struggle over their tiny territory begun by a revived Germany and a despairing France. The circumstances have changed, but the language is an old and familiar one. No new solutions over Saar sovereignty have been offered, from all sides pious respect is paid to the concept of the Saar problem resolved within the integrating framework of a “United Europe.” But we find no one who believes in its realizability ...
M. Grandvaal, Haut Commissaire representing the French government; Johannes Hoffman (better known as “Joho”), Minister-President and champion of the current position; the Saar Landtag of 50 members; Chanceller Adenauer and Dr. Kurt Schumacher – those are the protagonists in the violent, heated debate. The 900,000 Saarländer (coal miners, steel workers, small farmers, merchants and industrialists) are largely passive and silent, hostile or sceptical of all proposed solutions, waiting for the possible crystallization of something new. This does not come ...
The current Saar regime was elected in November 1947, i.e., the period of Germany’s deepest social and economic depression. But four years have profoundly reversed this situation, and new elections in November 1952 may thoroughly overturn the present Landtag of 50 members. (27 CVP – Christian Democrats; 18 SPS – Social Democrats; 3 DP – Democrats; 1 KP – Stalinist; 1 independent.) The angry, determined voice of Kurt Schumacher blasted the Saar social democracy in 1947 when it accepted the French policy of alleged “political independence under French economic integration.” This voice has not ceased since, and the presence of Germany’s outstanding post-war personality is evident in every corner of the Saar. Even Adenauer dared not recognize the February 1950 agreement between France and the Saar.
The new pro-German party (Democratic Party) was rudely suppressed, revealing French political determination. The Saar is “christlich, sozial, deutsch,” was its motto. It proposed a simple reintegration into Western Germany. Its leaders were merchants, business men, professionals, stifling under French competition. There is no “neo-Nazi” movement in the Saar; too Catholic, conservative and traditional for that development. The socialists are in turmoil; Schumacher’s bitter tongue reaches far. Their coalition with the Catholics broke up in April 1951 over issues of an inner, social program. Their brother party in Germany, which they disowned in its hour of distress, has not forgotten; what shall they prepare for?
A cautious observer gave these estimates of public opinion: 15 per cent of the people want continuation of the present status; 15 per cent favor total reintegration with Western Germany; 70 per cent would like a true political independence and autonomy (like that of Luxemburg), with free economic ties with France and Germany. Most often this is expressed as “European unity” within which the Saar finds its normal place. Thus, 70 per cent favor a utopian solution which no party accepts and all ridicule as unrealizable! An anomalous position for a conservative population which shares the universal distrust of political figures and their parties. No fresh voice can be heard in the Saar, attempting to formulate concretely and realistically the confused ideas of the 70 per cent. Is this why the “Saar debate” in Paris and Bonn arouses so little response, or rather, a cynical abnegation. We are Western Europe’s favorite milch cow, say the Saar people. They will not decide according to our wish. Of course we are German, not French; but we do not think in terms of a purely Germanic solution.
A plebiscite is demanded at Bonn. The atmosphere for a plebiscite hardly exists today: the French claim the last elections served that purpose. But would the alternative of the 70 per cent be included in the plebiscite – or only “Germany” or “France”? Neither new elections nor a plebiscite are likely to break the frustrating bonds which surround this tiny region. Its malady is the European malady; the inability to unite under existing circumstances. Saar coal wants to join French iron ore with Ruhr coke, but its force of attraction is much too weak.
A hard-working people, they say at Saarbrücken. Catholic, moral, middle class concepts, unable to enjoy leisure time, demoralized by the endless international tug-of-war and the frustration of their hopes after they had given themselves first to one then another seducer. An atomized people, unaccustomed to pull together or formulate common hopes; centered on family and home life. The Saar coal miner has no resemblance to the Welsh, Scotch, American or Ruhr miner. A hard-working, sad people, living in dark towns and cities.
In the Saar one can find all of Europe’s diseases, but none of the even faint signs of perspective and hope which exist elsewhere. It is best to travel further on. It does not always pay to exaggerate one’s powers to schaffen!
 
Koblenz/Germany, July 6: A wearisome train ride through the Saar, entry into Germany proper, and finally contact with the valley of the Rhine at Bingen; then transfer for the famous boatride on the Rhine to Koblenz. Past the Lorelei now doubtfully enhanced by the presence of a physical “Lorelei” who combs her “goldene Haar” (at union wages) for each passing ship. A German seated next to me mumbles a few words against tourists, Americans with lack of imagination, commercialism.
At the Saar-German frontier, a first taste of the Adenauer burokratische Staat. A 1½ hours’ stopover for passport and customs’ inspection, filing of currency forms, etc. We count 10 to 11 bureaucrats (train controllers, police, customs officials, passport inspectors, etc.) busy at work on this train of perhaps 150 travellers. The Saarlander are given a workout; bags completely emptied, each morsel of coffee, tea, chocolate, etc., registered, listed and taxed; unfriendly attitude of officials toward countrymen who “don’t want to come home.” Obviously deliberately organized effort to annoy these people. Every bureaucrat in his own, peculiar uniform. The angry housewives, on their way to visit relatives, tell me, “These Germans love uniforms.” A discreet silence.
At Koblenz, a small Rhineland city for administration, our first taste of changes and developments in Germany since the last visit in 1947. At first glance, there is not much changed: A desultory group of French soldiers wandering about, characteristic ruins of homes, stores, buildings; poorly-dressed workers waiting for crowded streetcars. But certainly it has changed, and a walk through the city indicates this: the normal activity of a busy city, stores crowded with goods, housewives, school children, all the characteristics of a normal life. The streets have been cleared, the large avenues have resumed a partial elegance, the gaping walls of ruined buildings are blocked off by neatly piled stones, only the small side streets retain piles of rubble. The hopeless and tragic appearance of the “alles Kaput” days is gone.
But here we gain our first really new and striking impression. The stark newness of many things: shops and stores, theaters and movie houses, banks and bureaus, cafes, hotels and restaurants. Along the main and shopping streets, they crowd closely against each other, separated perhaps by a row of ruins. All are shining now, long lines, sharp corners, gleaming facades, fresh painted, desperately “modern.” Inside, flashy metal decorations, terribly clean and orderly, not conducive to a feeling of ease. Is this clash between “Kaput” and completely new responsible for the strange feeling a traveller has everywhere in Germany? There is no continuity, no growth between the past and this eerie present.
Nor does it take the technical knowledge of an architect to see the cheap, superficial and facade-like quality of the construction. Of new housing, apartments, projects, there are very few. This is get-rich-quick capital at work; movie houses, restaurants and cafes, night clubs, anything to draw attention away from the ruins, but executed in a planless, individualist, private-enterprise fashion. It has nothing in common with a systematic effort to reconstruct a ruined city. A visit to the city’s living quarters indicates that it is each man for himself in the effort to solve the housing problem. Some of the smaller units built before the monetary reform of 1948 are already sagging and collapsing. Shabby material, poor foundations, hasty work, everything Ersatz. We shall see more of this; it is the new Germany under the Adenauer regime, guided by the Allies.
 
Bonn-am-Rhein/July 7, 8: The Rhineland city of Beethoven and Marx, the young student. A Catholic city of pensioned officials and rentiers, mixed with 6,500 students (to whom they rent rooms), and suddenly dragged into the daylight by its conversion
into a capital city. The hasty erection of stores, cheap homes, cafes, etc., is still more noticeable in this city which appears ill at ease in its suddenly assumed political role. Here, all is “new” or ruins. Try though it may, Bonn can never possess the appearance of a true capital. Yet, this Adenauer regime feels at home here and the city’s personality reflects the regime: Catholic, conservative, bureaucratic, maneuverist, impotent, facade. We watch some of the new construction work, cheap offices for the various ministries. A quick pouring of a cheap concrete mixture into a mold of boards forms the basis for a wall; much pre-fabricated material; the work goes forward rapidly.
The new Bundeshaus (Parliament) of the Federal Government, an attractive modern building, built with more seriousness than other work, excellent furnishings. We attend two sittings: one over the “Saarland Question,” the other over “Schumann Plan Ratification.” The house is full, the debates heated, the assembly far from being an impotent body under occupation domination, thanks to the opposition of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and its leading voice, Dr. Kurt Schumacher. The socialists furnish a strong opposition to the government’s reactionary policies, and speak with a certain air of aggressive confidence in their future. The party of Adenauer is clearly on the decline and the future will pass it by since a new order of questions now exist.
The Saarland debate provides the socialists with the opportunity to illustrate their approach to the question of German nationalization (see conclusion), and to attack the government for its failure to preserve the nation and its resources; their opposition to the Schumann plan, which they have analyzed in detail and clause by clause, not only gives the party an opportunity to attack the government’s relation to the occupation powers, but also to present their independent economic proposals and solutions. The socialists reject the Schumann Plan because it is not presented on a basis of equality; it is “... the solidarity of the victors against the defeated.” Germany, which produces more than 40 per cent of the coal and steel envisaged under the plan, is to be represented by only 2 out of the 9 members on the High Authority. The Schumann Plan is a part of French policy toward Western Germany, enforced by American decentralization and decartelization politics toward the Ruhr. The socialists have carefully dissected the Plan, and exposed its narrow nationalism behind its ostensible steps toward European economic unity. The supporters of Adenauer appear considerably uncomfortable under attack; it is clear that their support is based upon the strategic choice that participation in the plan will forestall a future socialist nationalization of the industries involved. The solid socialist bloc in the Bundeshaus is a constant challenge to an outmoded government which dares not respond to the demand for dissolution and new elections.
Reichs Kanzler Adenauer; Dr. Kurt Schumacher – there are the two protagonists. What a contrast of personalities they form! Adenauer, old but well preserved; a large and expansive looking Rhinelander, staunch Catholic, gentleman, astute, conservative, German aristocratic tradition, excellent relations with the Allies and other foreign powers. Schumacher, the outstanding personality produced in postwar Germany, feared by his opponents (numerous!), devotedly backed by his party comrades. A harsh man, no doubt, as his opponents complain, with a scharfes Wort for everyone, but the one man who has renewed German working-class and socialist vitality and drawn the links between a nationalism with a progressive social content and the new socialist movement of the country. His role in reviving German socialism cannot be underestimated. A man of great will, with a perspective, but marked by his years of suffering under Hitler. He is physically brought into the Bundeshaus by one of his comrades, but he stands erect and scorches Adenauer with his sharp tongue and angry voice. The latter is Chancellor, but Schumacher dominates the chamber; the government’s plans and projects are obviously drafted and projected with both eyes on him and his opposition. His harassing of this traditionalist, reactionary, false “free enterprise” cabinet never ceases. The Stalinist spokesmen vie with the neo-Nazi spokesmen in vulgarity and coarseness of expression and thought. Neither count for much in the body. In manner, word and tone both exemplify the worst in German political life: loudness, resounding phraseology without content, vulgarity.
The socialists have moved their headquarters from Hanover to Bonn; a new, shiny and attractive party center; a friendly welcome despite different viewpoints, with helpful discussion and explanation by the international representative and other comrades. Much current information and taking of position available in pamphlets (largely reproduction of Schumacher speeches), but absence of theoretical or historical material. The party does not have a theoretical journal of its own, although the weekly Neue Vorwärts partly fulfills this function. We have our first sense of inner-party difficulties and problems: cleavage between young and older members; contradiction between local (municipal) and national policies; absence of ideological roots; confusion as to perspective, etc. (see conclusion). The party now numbers 1,000,000 members throughout Western Germany and is clearly the largest, strongest, best-organized movement in the country. Very weak among the youth and students, however. Many local organs, and smaller publications. It is sheer insanity for any socialist, of any shade of opinion, not to participate completely in the life of this party.
A visit to Bonn University and discussion with students. Frustrated hopes of the past 6 years are heard from all sides; true, they were naive to begin with (pacifism, United States of Europe, true democracy, etc.) but defeated naiveté turns into sour pessimism and cynicism. These students have lost the drive we noted among them in 1947, even though their material conditions were far inferior then. They are concentrated now on their studies, careers (keeping out of the ranks of Germany’s unhappy intellectual proletariat), material things, livelihood. They dislike the government, the state, all parties. Political clubs are numerous, but poorly attended. Only the Catholic youth groups have a certain success; virtually no Stalinist groups. We get the impression that the students, who showed signs of breaking away from their traditional isolation with German society during the years immediately after the war, have once more retired within themselves. If they no longer form the aristocratic elite of the past, they are nonetheless apart from German political and social life. Time lacks to sound their cultural interests or development; Sartre and his doctrines are still flourishing among them, however.
 
Duesseldorf/Rhineland, July 10, 11, 12: An agreeable trip to this city, gateway to the Ruhr, on the famous Rhinegold Express. The fields appear in excellent shape; much more agricultural equipment in sight than in France. The Rhine wines are as fine as ever. A stopover at Cologne to see the Cathedral, spared by American technique of precision bombing. The rest of the city is still pathetically destroyed, with little reconstructed.
Duesseldorf, once known as the Paris of Germany, is still an attractive city. Large avenues (Koenigs Allee), parks, lakes, a faint resemblance to modern Paris. The regional differences between Germans (even from city to city within the same region) never fails to impress. The spoken language, appearance and dress, but most particularly, the personality change drastically. An important center of commerce, industry, government; socialist and trade-union centers likewise.
A visit to the Socialist Party headquarters; evidence of party activities, construction of centers in all centers, towns, factory units, etc., of the neighborhood. There are over 50,000 party members in the city and surroundings. An equally valuable visit to Hans Beeckler [sic!] house, national center of the German trade-union movement (DGB). Friendly officials of the center provide much material on reconstruction of the trade-union movement, and freely discuss the newly-adopted Mitbestimmungsrecht (Co-determination law), which has confronted the union movement with a new perspective and new problems (see conclusion). A conflict appears to be brewing between the socialists and the trade- union leadership, including its new president (Fette) over specific issues which include the Schumann Plan, political influence in the unions, etc. The DGB is a completely unified movement, but this does not mean that political and ideological influences do not express themselves within it. Catholics, socialists, Stalinists, etc., are all alive and active within the unions. The responsible functionaries are mainly young, vigorous types, much interested in the outside world, broader views than their American colleagues, political; many socialists.
Our first contact with one of the leftist, revolutionary groupings in Western Germany: the Independent Workers Party (UAP), formed this year at Worms from an amalgam of former Stalinists, Titoists, Trotskyists, various ultra-leftists. Impossibility of discussing with the leaders who, unfortunately, are away. However, it is not difficult to verify previous impressions about this group received from their press (Freie Tribune) and other sources. In no sense of the word a party (several hundred isolated individuals); sectarian positions on all questions; an attitude of hostility toward the Socialist party which precludes any possibility of friendly collaboration (they consider the party of Schumacher in the same light as the pre-war reformist party!); a concentration on winning over the miserable Stalinist movement of Western Germany. The group has had no success and failed to develop since its premature foundation; it is disoriented and evidently starting to fall to pieces. To complete the dismal picture, the indigestible so-called Trotskyist elements within it have begun their factional struggle for “power” and acceptance of their Russian position.
We stay at the home of socialist comrades. Comrade B. explains to us the problem of living in the inflationist, uncontrolled economy of Adenauer. He shows us his monthly pay form, as a city employee. Its story is a revealing one as to actual living conditions. He supports a wife (housewife) and one child. Here is his situation.
He earns 406 Marks (roughly $100) per month; this is exceptionally high pay; average is about 250 Marks ($60).
From this are deducted the following taxes:



Income Tax


 


26 Marks




Church Taxes [1]


  3 Marks




Sickness Insurance


36 Marks




Additional Insurance


  9 Marks




Union Dues  


  3 Marks




Pension Dues


16 Marks




Berlin Emergency Tax


  3 Marks




Total Taxation


96 Marks



His take-home pay is therefore only 310 Marks, after all deductions; amounting to almost 25 per cent of his earnings! Unmarried men are taxed one-third of their income. Das Geld ist sehr knapp, say the Germans everywhere; it is universally true – no one has any money. Here are some elementary statistics on living standards, incomes, etc., as of today. Real wages are 33 per cent lower today than they were in 1936. City food prices (1938 equals 100) have risen to 174 in 1950, and 234 in 1951. In general, living standards are about 10 per cent below that of France.
Incomes are fantastically distorted. More than 6 million people earn less than 100 Marks ($25) per month; 86 per cent of the employed population earns under 400 Marks ($100) per month (or, 60 per cent of the total income), whereas the remaining 14 per cent earn up to 8,000 Marks (or the other 40 per cent of the national income). Sixty per cent of those working (or, 20 million) earn 400 Marks or less per month. The Social Democratic Party publication, News From Germany (April–May 1951) has published the excellent material we reproduce below: Changes in the Social Structure of German Society.
The present social structure of Western Germany is that of a modern industrial class state and the following statistics prove this.



Population of the Federal Republic = 48 million
of this, employables, not independent = over 16 million




54 per cent of the population is Protestant,
46 per cent of the population is Catholic,




27 per cent of the population lives in cities,
less than in the Reich before the last war.






Distribution of trades and professions




 


per cent




Manual workers


about 44




Salaried employees


about 14




Public officials and employees


4–5




Independent


about 24




(incl. owners of means production,
that is capitalists in the old sense
– rough estimate)


7




Pensioners


about 14




About 38 per cent of the workers live in towns.
About 6 per cent of the workers live in the country.

The process of transformation from agricultural to industrial and export state began around 1890 in Germany very rapidly.

1882 – 43 per cent of the population employed in agriculture.
1950 – 20 per cent only of the population employed in agriculture.

The number of dependent workers (wage and salary earners), in the total of all employed persons rose from 60 per cent in 1895 to 91 per cent in 1950. In 1882 about 40 per cent of those employed in production were independent, in 1920 only 20 per cent.
During the same period the number of salaried workers and officials rose from 6 per cent to 18 per cent, and of pensioners and disabled from 6 per cent to 14 per cent.
This development, inherent to capitalism, was influenced and interrupted by outside factors after both the world wars.
Today the whole population and social structure is out of balance. The population pyramid has become deformed. Dependence upon foreign markers has increased. In both 1918 and 1945 Germany was stripped of all foreign capital, of export markets, colonies, merchant fleet, etc.
After 1918 the total loss of foreign assets was around 35 million gold marks.
After 1945 this loss was about 13 million gold Marks.
The flight of capital is estimated at 3 thousand million marks already. Reparations and dismantling after both world wars were not the most severe loss from Germany’s national assets, except for the reparations and dismantling after 1945 in the Eastern Zone.
The social contrasts are clearly shown in cultural fields:

90 per cent of the West German population attend elementary and secondary schools.
2 per cent are academically educated (universities).
3 per cent approx. of the students come from the working class.
Only 2 per cent from manual laborers.

Income and, Standard of Living
The classification of income and property, and of the standard of living shows even more clearly the social cleavage. Approx. 75 per cent of all workers, employees and officials have a net income of up to 250.— DM. The average West German income is 250.— DM, the number of dependent employees is in a ratio of 4 : 1 to the independents, but their total incomes are in ratio of 1.5 : 1.
Of the income below 350.– DM 80–85 per cent is used for the following fundamental necessities: more than 48 per cent for food, etc., about 20 per cent for housing, of this 9 per cent for rents, about 17 per cent for clothing.
Of the remaining 15 per cent, only 7 per cent is used for all types of cultural needs, the least being spent on books. Cultural needs are therefore shrinking. Neither is much being saved.
In this family we see, in a still more striking form, that evidence of discontinuity between all forms of German life, thought and activity. A young socialist, active, eager, responsible secretary of an important trade union, anxious to develop both his political life and his personal education. He lives with an older man, a Social Democrat of the pre-war, pre-Hitler school, mistrustful to the point of disagreeableness toward his young comrade. In the party groups, I learn, the conflict between the two generations is a serious affair. It is not a simple affair of two generations which clash because of normal differences due to age; it is a difference of mentality and psychology. Worst of all, a transitional age group (those in their 40’s or late 30’s) seems to be missing; these generations were Hitlerized and do not participate in political life. Hence, the characteristic gap. The old Social Democrats, educated in the reformist traditions of Kautsky, Hilferding, the Weimar Constitution, etc., cannot understand these dynamic, younger socialists with their absence of theoretical training, knowledge and tradition (of any kind!). “They were raised under Hitler,” they say, “and don’t understand democracy.” By that, they mean the concepts of Social Democracy during its most reformist period. On the other hand, the younger elements confuse education and training in theory with the stale doctrine of reformism during the 20’s and 30’s! There is no contact between the two groups; a vast hole was formed by the Nazi epoch and no abstract education can fill it up. Perhaps the most significant achievement of Schumacher has been to bridge partly this gap, and hold the party together by giving it a national viewpoint and program, thus lifting it out of the field of traditional municipal and local Social Democratic politics (which constitutes the main activity of the Old Guard). The young socialist generation, active trade unionists, party functionaries, etc., are the real life of the party.
But what education shall they be given? In reflecting on this question, we feel the inadequacy of the traditional ideas of socialist education; not only that of the reformist school, but of the radical socialist schools. Abstract doctrine can never shape these comrades into a coherent group of socialist leaders; they are primarily concerned with the concrete experience of their own activity: trade-union work, co-determination in the factories, organization and administration of economic and social institutions, etc. A new type of socialist is emerging everywhere; those who cannot recognize this fact will never touch them. With all his failings, our young socialist friend (unhampered by false, doctrinaire hangovers), rooted in the concrete but anxious to deduce broader truths from this concrete, is worth a hundred of the resentful Old Guard, weighed down by their sterile traditions. But much more must be said on this matter ...
 
Essen/Ruhr, July 13, 14: The city of Essen lies in the heart of the Ruhr district, that territory of valleys and hills constituting Europe’s greatest industrial concentration. The train speeds past huge factory units, coal pitheads, bureaus, freight yards – all the signs of an enormous and active industrial center. Innumerable coal towns are scattered about; cities are linked together by their factory suburbs. Essen is the industrial and administrative heart of the Ruhr; in all directions trails of black smoke and a vague haze of soot.
Essen itself has a tragic appearance, completely destroyed. Of all the cities we visit, Essen most resembles the ruined cities of 1944 and 1945. Huge areas covered by skeleton walls, much rubble, people still in huts or cellar caves. On a hill stands the remains of what must have been an elaborate and gaudy Jewish synagogue, probably the reformed group. A new memorial in front of it tells us that the 2,500 Jews of Essen were gathered here before being shipped to their death. The building is sealed, scorched and blackened – by the Nazis, or by the bombing? A woman, waiting for a street car, approaches and suggests that perhaps, someday, the synagogue will be rebuilt and opened. She accepts our comment that that depends upon the German people. She describes the entire city as a memorial to the dead. But on the city’s outskirts, the smokestacks of the Krupp Werke are busily producing. It is not possible to remain very long in this city. On our way out, we pass a large group of unemployed gathered around the Arbeitsamt. Many of them tell us they are refugees, from the East – poorly dressed, rather depressed and desperate looking. They live on an insignificant relief; there are still 1½ million unemployed in Western Germany.
 
Hamburg/North Germany, July 17–21: The trip to Hamburg from Essen is a long, but interesting one. We stop at various cities on the way for a brief tour, or to spend the night: Bochum, Dortmund, Münster, Osnabruck, Bremen, etc. The industrial cities appear to be highly active (people speak of a partial boom), the administrative and commercial centers are more sedate. But everywhere, the Germans walk as all industrious, individualist people do: in a straight line, never stopping, their minds set on their goal. There is none of that relaxed, street-corner informality of France here. In Dortmund, we begin to feel the pinch of insufficient travel funds: prices are considerably higher than we expected (particularly hotels, which range from 6 to 10 Marks for a night). Food is high; coffee impossible.
After the smoking city of Bochum, we leave the Ruhr, touch on the northern fringe of Sauerland, a beautiful rolling strip of the northern plain and the Totenburger Wald, and pass rapidly through the first towns and ports of northern Germany. Bremen forms the American enclave of the north, a busy port now receiving the numerous American military formations on their way southwards. The people watch in the streets, but say little or nothing; it has become a familiar sight, even in reverse. The approach to Hamburg takes us through a corner of the famous Lüneburger Heide, the heather region of the north. Our first impressions of the city are that of an immense seaport, active, well-built-up, cosmopolitan atmosphere. We are not wrong; Hamburg is one of the most advanced, international, sophisticated cities of the country. Our visit here is worth every moment of it ...
Several long and valuable discussions with Dr. H., who welcomes us with generosity and spontaneity. An old Marxist and socialist, now in the Social Democratic party, he describes the difficult and bureaucratic atmosphere to be found in local formations, where the old party leadership dominates. The city of Hamburg forms a Land by itself, thus creating a double administrative apparatus (city and Land), as well as having a considerable revenue from taxes and port activities. Conditions for the creation of a bureaucratic apparatus are more favorable than anywhere in Western Germany; the Social Democrats who hold power locally have not missed their chance. We learn of the incredible story of recent weeks where students of Hamburg University, demonstrating for retention of reduced student fares, were set upon by Burgermeister Brauer’s police and fire department as “communists”! German students as “communists”!
Many left-wing socialists in the SPD have become seriously demoralized by the behavior of the party bureaucracy, and the grip retained locally by the older elements. They are pessimistic and lack a sense of the concrete possibilities. Will the party win an absolute majority in next year’s general elections and thus form the government of Western Germany? They are sceptical and doubtful, although they do not exclude the possibility; or the alternative of a coalition government with one or more of the refugee parties. The Christian Democrats are in decline; the Stalinists have been badly beaten throughout Germany, but the perspective is for a rebirth of the more reactionary, rightist groups. In Hamburg we are first entering the territory of the various so-called neo-Nazi parties and groups (SRP, etc.). We discuss in detail alternative possibilities, the need to have a clear outlook and perspective, to engage in concrete work. The elements for a broad left wing in the SPD certainly exist, but the will to create it, the leadership and the leader, appear to be absent at present. Too much pessimism and abstentionism in this milieu!
Why is this? Much of the explanation is at hand; despite wide belief in these circles that war is not at hand and the Russians are far weaker than is generally accepted, there is a great sense of Western Germany’s inability to play an important role because of its unfavorable position in the world; an even greater sense of frustration, lack of contact with one another and with international circles, lack of any centralizing theoretical or political journal. Much interest in Bevan and his movement, with the hope that it may stimulate regroupment efforts elsewhere. Lack of initiative and drive, largely due to the overwhelming occupation with gaining a living under adverse conditions, long hours of work, fatigue, etc. The German radical intelligentsia has a difficult time of itl
We hear a discussion on the issue of German remilitarization (Wiederaufrüstungspolitik) (see conclusion). Everyone assumes that there will be some form of German militarization, that it is inevitable – in fact, that it has already begun. Considering the ever more frequent appearance of thousands of young Germans in new, blue-colored uniforms in all the principal cities of the country, there would seem to be much truth in this! These men have enlisted in the Bundespolizei, but the charge is that they form basic cadres for the new army. In appearance and uniform, they resemble the old Wehrmacht soldiers, down to the peaked cap – only the color has changed. The issue, we are informed, is no longer, shall there be remilitarization, but what form shall it take; what tactical and strategic goals shall it have? We find no agreement over this. The American proposals are denounced as half-way measures which defeat their own purpose and only serve to provoke the Russians. There is not much clear thinking on this issue; our friends consider war, per se, so futile and incapable of settling anything that they automatically transfer this feeling to the belief that Germany is indefensible and helpless in the given situation. We question them as to their views on the concepts of a popular army, people’s militia, etc., the views of the old Jaurès in his famous book. They are interested, but seem not to have reflected before on such a concept.
Dr. B., a highly cultivated socialist, thoroughly trained in economic subjects and administration entertains us with stories of his experiences with the Russians. The Germans know the Russians better than anyone else; you must learn to outdrink them, they say, or you are lost! There is no hysterical denunciation of the Russians as such, but an effort to understand them as human beings and to find their weak points. This man has no fear of them; given support and a policy, he would be prepared to meet them on their own terrain. He describes for us the industrial and economic problems of the Ruhr, the revival of the Ruhr barons (“the most cynical bourgeoisie in the world”), the effect of American policies in the Ruhr, the false economy of Western Germany. There are many highly capable left-wing socialists like Dr. B., who, somewhat discouraged and isolated, are unable to exercise their talents in this stagnant land of Adenauer. Would a socialist electoral victory bring them to the front? The party could never depend upon its Old Guard to carry on a progressive government; much would change with such a victory.
This lively, energetic Hanseatic city is certainly one of the intellectual and political centers of Germany; its atmosphere is much freer than that of other German cities. Huge areas are entirely razed, but large parts of the city were completely untouched by bombing. The style of bombing was different here, and what is left forms a genuine city. The port area, the old city, St. Pauli and various suburbs give a personality to Hamburg we have not found elsewhere.
 
Hanover/Saxony, July 20: A trip to this commercial and administrative center of Saxony; a few brief hours passing over the Lunebürger Heide, a beautiful agricultural territory. In Hanover, we are told, the most perfect German is spoken, with a clear and elegant accent. There is much industry, “Volkswagon” factory and assembly plants (old model car is 3,000 marks; new model for export is 5,000). The Hanoverians are active, rather aloof, distant. We remember that Saxony is the center of revival of the new reactionary movements (SRP of Remer, etc.), that it has a tradition much different from Berlin, Hamburg, the Ruhr. Yet, until recently, it was the headquarters of the Socialist Party, and SPD strength is a major factor in the whole territory. The city was badly damaged by the British; there is much facade reconstruction in the center; a huge reconstruction and building show is being given.
In a discussion with local socialists, the issue of perspective is frankly (and somewhat pessimistically) sounded by an excellent left socialist, G. He does not believe the party can win the next elections, that too many neo-reactionary forces (encouraged largely by the Americans) can prevent such a development; the evolution of the trade-union movement and the concretization of its newly-won Mitbestimmungsrecht (see conclusion) are more important. He warns against an abstract interpretation of this new law, and the assumption in Marxist circles that it must necessarily create a layer of bureaucratized worker-delegates. Integration of all left socialists in the party through practical and concrete work (he holds an elective county position, unknown in America, which brings him into contact with a multitude of people), seems his central idea.
We visit a Bundesschule located in a town outside of Hanover. These are regional trade-union schools, organized all over Germany by the central trade union (DGB). Systematic courses of 2 or 3 weeks length are held without letup; picked worker delegates, secretaries, etc., attend these courses in trade-union problems, organization, co-determination, legal rights, etc. Nothing so thorough or organized exists to our knowledge elsewhere. It is a true trade-union school; a part of the broad revival of German workers’ education; very impressive and important.
 
Nuremberg/Bavaria, July 23: A long and very beautiful trip to Nuremberg, broken off for short stops at the university city of Göttingen, Fulda, Würzbörg, etc. We are back in the American zone of occupation, our first return in six years! In the train (travelling first or second class) are the first GIs we have so far seen; Nuremberg is full of them, wandering about, seemingly lost and with nothing to do. (A GI in a foreign land seems to cultivate the air of not belonging there.) The long rolling hills and woods of the Fränkische Schweiz through which we pass for hours seems to us one of the most attractive parts of all Germany.
The Nuremberg we last saw was one of the most battered cities of the country; the old medieval city of Hans Sachs was a pile of garbage, with most people living under the pile. We were anxious to see what had happened to all of this in 6 years. This is apparently one of the few cities where a coordinated municipal effort has been made to disperse the ruins of the past and resurrect the old city. Restoration of the medieval towers, walls, churches, etc., is evident everywhere; the famous Dürer Haus is back, as well as the statue of Hans Sachs. The toy, leather and other light industries are said to be restored also. These Bavarians are not political types; the socialist movement is feeble in southern Germany. They are lighter, moreready for adventure than their northern countrymen. At the moment, they are quiet and remain with their traditional conservative, Catholic and reactionary parties. The presence of numerous Americans in uniform is a part of the scenery, just as much as the ruined structures of the city’s suburbs. A mutual indifference.
 
Munich/Bavaria, July 25: The university city of Erlangen, slightly north of Nuremberg, has taken on a new appearance (and prosperity) with the transfer of the huge administrative center of the Simens Werke, German equivalent of G.E., from Berlin to the city. Testifying to the real capabilities of German industry, a series of excellent apartments for the employees, have been built. The capital exists, when the big firms want to make use of it, but neither municipalities nor cooperative associations can lay their hands on any. En route to Munich we pass through the dense agricultural areas of southern Bavaria, Augsburg and cross the Danube at Donau; agreeable countryside approaching Munich and the Alps of Austria and southern Germany.
Munich itself is a jammed city of perhaps 1,000,000 now; the characteristic Munich type seems partly drowned in the mass of refugees from Silesia (many of whom have a strong Polish appearance), the Czech Sudentenland and the east generally. The city is a center of refugees, and refugee organizations: Russian, Ukrainian, Czech, Polish, etc. It has lost much of its former personality, not at all a bad thing. The socialists are stronger than before, under left leadership, but many people are on vacation and there is little occasion for discussions. We visit the severely damaged city; little reconstruction in sight. The old churches are still unrepaired, but the famous Deutsche Museum has been restored. Placed on an island in the river, this scientific and natural history museum is completely fascinating: realistic reproduction of the interiors of coal and iron ore mines, halls of communications, transportation, etc. Where else but in Germany could one be conducted by a guide through a hall of ancient musical instruments and have this same guide sit down and demonstrate each instrument with Beethoven, Bach, etc.? New halls in the museum indicate new development in German physics and research work. This place alone warrants a visit to the city.
The Bavarians seem to have no political life worthy of the name; they live on an easier level than their brothers to the north. It is easy to understand why American visitors feel more at home in southern Germany; it is a kind of glorified mid-west region.
 
Frankfurt-am-Main, July 28, 29: A long night trip through southwest Germany to this commercial, business and administrative city which bears most heavily the mark of the war, the occupation, and its consequences. The “American way of life” is in evidence on each street, each corner, each building. The city is the departure point for tourists, business men, officials, military people, etc. Every act here has an official character, dimly related to some decree, directive, law or authority. Reactionary nationalists and leftwingers avoid this city, feeling it is not a part of the new Germany. After a short, somewhat boring stay we take the train back through Saarbruecken, en route to Paris. The tour is over; is it possible to find any consistency in this multitude of observations?
 
Paris/France, August 1951:
Conclusions: The time necessary to digest the multitude of registered impressions and observations has passed; what rough conclusions may be drawn from this trip? We shall resumé them under three headings: (a) The question of rearmament; (b) The Social Democratic Party and its perspective; (c) Co-determination and the unions.
Rearmament: “The Allies made war upon us because we were too militarist,” writes a German liberal publication. “Now they attack us for being too pacifist!” The lesson that war does not pay was thoroughly driven home by the Allies, particularly the Americans. Now the same gentlemen complain bitterly about the unwillingness of the German to “defend” himself, to take up arms again. The irony is a little too evident and lost on no one.
Yet the general German attitude has considerably evolved since the period of the Ohne mich (“without me”) movements, when the rearmament issue was originally posed. In point of fact, German rearmament is now inevitable and the only question is just what shape, form and extent it will assume. Actually, the elements of rearmament have already begun, but the process of conditioning the population to its acceptance is not yet complete. But they will be completed, and the young German men (like so many others) will once more know the feel of a uniform and a rifle. How many is another question. But the American determination to rearm Germany, despite the coolness or hostility of other Atlantic Pact members, gives rise to other factors not exactly welcomed by the same power: we refer to the mushroom rise of genuinely reactionary, chauvinist movements, organizations of Wehrmacht veterans, etc. The American conception of a rearmed Germany consists of subordinate forces with limited armament, within an Atlantic Pact framework; an essentially defensive force to meet the first shock of a Russian advance. An army, in a word, fitting the conservative, weak, cooperative Adenauer government. But other gentlemen have other ideas! The revival of authentic chauvinism, militarism and expansionism eastwards (beginning with reconquest of lost territories) follows automatically. To be sure, all German veterans’ organizations are not reactionary; most express legitimate pension, and other demands of the veteran mass. Further, only 1 out of 10 veterans belongs to any organization, so far. But the fashion in which American policy conceives rearmament automatically releases the most hostile and traditionally reactionary forces within Germany, whether the Americans like that or not!
What is the position of Dr. Schumacher and the SPD on the question? Naturally, it has had a rapid evolution since the question of remilitarization was first posed. But one aspect has remained consistent: the question cannot be considered in the abstract, apart from the general international position of Western Germany, the occupation status, the problem of Ruhr ownership, the kind of rearmament proposed, German economic life, etc. The SPD has rejected rearmament as conceived of by Adenauer and the Americans; it has equally rejected an absolutist and abstract “anti-rearmament” position such as put forward by pacifist organizations, the new UAP movement, etc. How, instead, has it aproached the problem? The essence is contained in the principal speech of Schumacher, early this year, which was widely distributed in pamphlet form: Gleiches Risike, Gleiches Opfer, Gleiche Chancen! (“Equal Risk, Equal Sacrifice, Equal Chances.”)
This brochure describes the conditions under which German rearmament can take place: the absolute independence of Germany in relation to the remnants of the occupation and its controls; an ending of the reactionary, anti-social policy of the Adenauer regime within Germany; the practice of a program of social reforms and measures to end unemployment, uncontrolled price structure, etc., solution of the Saar question; an ending of the Schumann Plan in its present form and the policy of the allies in the Ruhr; support of the SPD campaign for German reunification. For Schumacher, only the German masses can decide the issue of rearmament, along with the other issues before them. The sine qua non of such decisions is complete restoration of national independence; it is in this context that one must understand the alleged “nationalism” of the party spokesman and his party. [2]
Put in such a fashion the question of rearmament becomes a social and political question, centered about the inner political life of Germany itself, and the struggle for a Social Democratic electoral victory and the creation of a progressive regime in the country. Rearmament then becomes an even more concrete question: under whom, what kind of an army, socially and politically speaking; what conditions will be fulfilled first of all, etc.? The real struggle, then, in Germany has become one of how rearmament shall manifest itself; not the issue of an abstract principle. This is how it must be understood. And it is here that we can best touch upon the question of what is the perspective of the Social Democratic Party of Germany.
The Social Democratic Party and its Perspective: The party now has one million members, and is at the height of its post-war influence. Any socialist who stands outside its ranks is clearly wasting his time (and that of other people). It is the most important and progressive party in continental Europe. Some sectarian circles of Trotskyists and others similar to them are fond of describing the SPD in terms of the old, pre-war, Weimar Republic social democratic reformist movement. Blinder nonsense could not be spoken. The party is a mass of contradictory tendencies of a greater or lesser potential development: old reformist elements, a mass of enthusiastic but uneducated socialists, a splendid layer of trade-union responsibles and organizers, a scattering of left-wing socialists, two or three isolated and thoroughly sectarian grouplets (Funken, etc.) living a useless existence, a section of youth. The new social basis of German capitalism make it impossible for the pure reformist element to advance the illusions of an “organic growth with capitalism” as they once did. This is a new kind of socialist party, which must find a new social base and program.
That base, of course, can only be found by conquest of power over the real economic life of the country: the heavy industries, the Ruhr, the credit machinery, etc. At the same time, the socialist interest in the trade-union movement is far different from that of the pre-war days. The socialists today want to see the unions become instruments in this same struggle for control over industry and its products; hence their development and pushing of the co-determination issue. The circumstances of life in Germany oblige the socialists to advance the most progressive, militant and practical kind of economic and social program; and to prepare to put it into effect. The perspective of the party is to take political power throughout Germany, to form the government, and to carry out their program much as the British Labour Party executed its program. This includes wresting of the Ruhr industries from private ownership and their complete nationalization; institution of a controlled economy of prices, wages and profits; a reformed tax structure to accomplish equalization of wealth and a series of social reform measures affecting housing, education, pensions, etc. Why should not the party carry out such a program if it receives the popular mandate from the German people? Speed the day of elections and electoral victory!
Co-determination and the Unions: “Co-determination” is now operative in all the coal and iron and steel works of Germany having 1,000 or more workers. It is the most significant development in European post-war labor history. To prejudge it as a “bolstering of capitalism,” or an employees’ concession to curb trade-union development, or a revival of pre-war Social Democratic Arbeitsgemeinschaft policy, would be to misunderstand grossly the situation and preclude a progressive development of this instrument for workers’ experience and training in the techniques of industrial management and commerce. Indicating the “algebraic” character of the entire concept, the law itself does not define but simply declares that Mitbestimmungsrecht exists in specified industries, etc. Obviously, the future will see what concrete content is given this juridical formula; the struggle for the decisive 11th man representative on the managerial council has already begun. Further, the unions and the SPD have joined together to demand the extension of this system to all German firms and industries having 300 or more workers. The heart of the matter seems to us the fact that co-determination has provided a framework within which not only can the best workers’ representatives gain invaluable experience for the future, but also a managerial and economic consciousness on the part of the mass of workers can be enhanced. This should not be underestimated.
* * *
Footnotes
1. In Germany, the church institutions are supported by direct taxation which a member must pay unless he resigns from his church.
2. The reference here is, of course, to the hypocritical attacks upon Schumacher’s “nationalism” made, above all, in the American bourgeois press. Schumacher’s position from the socialist standpoint is quite a different matter. – Ed.
 



It is commonplace knowledge that the Asiatic world, with its countless masses, has undergone a most profound transformation since the Second World War. Just as acceptable is the proposition that this transformation will continue into the indefinite future and the fluidity of the Asiatic world will remain. With varying degrees of skill, a dozen authors, journalists and historians have furnished the details of this historic change and described the men and forces at work. It is no longer possible, however, to refer simply to a “state of flux,” and let matters go at that, as so many have done.
Whatever validity there may have been to former concepts of the timeless and all-absorbing Asia, which occupied the role of static subject in world history, it is no longer possible to accept such premises. The only possible approach to a re-understanding of the Asiatic and colonial world is the concept of an Asia now, for the first time, entering world history as a positive factor. Otherwise, the new driving forces which have arisen in post-war Asia cannot be understood. Much more than Japanese occupation and colonial rule has been cast aside in the great revolt that has disturbed the East since the end of the war. All traditional concepts of Asia have been violently overthrown and a number of new concepts, proposed in place of the old, now struggle for authority and power. These new and unexpected forces demand critical examination. They are responsible for the fluid situation in which, at best, one can point to certain tendencies and directions, without the possibility of stating with any degree of certainty or accuracy what ultimate form that may settle down to.
 
Nationalist India, finally freed from British rule, and Stalinist China, ruled by a new conqueror and a new social force, represent the two clearest paths yet to be seen in the entangled Asiatic world. Both have emerged, after long gestation, as expressions of revolt against Western imperialism. But both have absorbed so much of what was backward in the old Asia and so much of what is backward in the world as a whole, with its drift toward totalitarian decay, that – in different ways to be sure – Nehru’s India and Mao Tse-tung’s China must be considered deformations of the freedom and social resurrection so desired by the Asiatic masses.
The wide and sweeping torrent of the Asiatic freedom movement has been diverted and divided into rival channels; Indian capitalism, largely influenced by both Britain and America; and Chinese Stalinism, largely dominated by the Stalinism of Russia. Neither can be instruments for Asiatic self-realization and liberation.
If the significance of the struggles of the colonial peoples may be given a single and central objective, we would describe it as the desire to create a democratic and radical society, moving toward socialism and vigorously attacking the thick crust of accumulated backwardness and social misery. They desire the application of the most advanced social theories to meet the needs and desires of a billion colonial people. The central problem of Asia is still the problem of land relationships, the peasantry, of agrarian economic and social relations.
 
For widely divergent reasons, which require separate and distinct analysis, neither Nehru nor Mao Tse-tung can offer a rounded and consistent solution to the agrarian revolution. Further, such problems as industrialization, trade and commerce, the formation of fresh capital, social emancipation and education, have different meanings to different social orders. It cannot simply be said that Asia must catch up with a Western world now in decline and in chronic distress any more than the example of Russia, whose totalitarian form becomes ever clearer, can be held up as a model.
In this sense, both Chinese Stalinism and Indian national capitalism are reactionary solutions for Asia. Both are as much products of a general world decline, and the specific evils this decline has produced in Asia itself, as they are products of national movements for liberation from Western domination. It would be more accurate to say that both are distortions of the Asiatic freedom movements.
Given their present regimes, democratic socialism cannot hope for a bright future in either China or India. Those who divorce the sweeping social upheaval in China from its actual Stalinist leadership are in serious error, for the ruling Stalinist class, limited though it may be by the concrete material circumstances, represents a power conscious of its objectives and capable of manipulating the raw material it controls. Aside from their vastly different social and historic origins, both regimes have bureaucratic ideologies, reject democratic approaches and solutions and tend toward employment of totalitarian and authoritarian methodologies.
In India, this has been most clearly illustrated in dealings with other nations and peoples (Pakistan, Hyderabad, Kashmir, etc.); in China, by internal economic and social practices of the regime in relationship to the peasantry and working class. Reactionary and tyrannical practices, originating in the deep past of an Asia that has been feudal or semi-feudal within and ruled by imperialism from without, may easily be found in both lands. Similar tendencies may be found in all the newly-awakened lands of Asia: Indonesia, Viet Nam, Korea, etc.
 
Each country of Asia has broken sharply with its historic past, but all to one or another extent – are threatened with the same crisis and decline so familiar in European and Western history. To this must be added the threat of national-Stalinist regimes, a recognized trend in world decline. This truth is basic for understanding the circumstances surrounding Asia’s entrance into world history.
Marxism is obligated to examine carefully the basic reasons for this unexpected outcome to the collapse of Western rule over Asia. It must examine, in detail, why the end of imperialism has not ushered in the glorious Asiatic renaissance so desired by supporters of the colonial freedom movements. This is a task for extensive research and analysis, but we should like to suggest, in summary form, some basic reasons for this situation:

Liberation has been interpreted by bourgeois-nationalist, Stalinist and non-socialist forces alike, as being synonymous with nationalism at a time when the nation, considered as a progressive concept, has already had its day. The act of becoming a nation is, for a colonial land, filled with revolutionary content. But subsequent stabilization and consolidation, under the type of regime represented in China or India, or any of the reactionary forms of present society, quickly drains this revolutionary content away. Instead the birth of the nation degenerates into tragedy, and progress is halted.
 
The decline of Western imperialism and Western empire has occurred in an unforeseen manner. As a corollary to this, the effort of world Stalinism to fill this gap was not expected. The conflict between Russia and the United States has created a new framework which acts as a vise strangling the entire world, including those colonial areas already free and those still struggling for freedom. Although the “cold war” offers no possible benefit to the people of Asia, it tends to subordinate their own needs to the struggle; it narrows down world development and makes it possible for Asia to break out into world history only under most unfavorable circumstances.
 
The specific and peculiar manner in which the British Empire exploded, expressed by the sudden relaxation of its hold over huge colonial areas and the creation of working agreements with the native bourgeoisie in India, Ceylon, Burma, etc., had the effect of decreasing the power of the colonial people to struggle independently on their own behalf since little or no popular mobilization was required. By the same token, the dependency of colonial landlord and capitalist classes, particularly in the case of India, upon their own masses lessened considerably, in proportion with the catastrophic tempo of British decline. This same national ruling class, shifting steadily to the right, unexpectedly received the welcome gift of political and social power, which it now employs against its own masses, as it fell heir to the retreating English.
 
In the past, a deceptive and misleading force, but one of powerful magnetic attraction, existed in Russia. Today, this force has been largely replaced by that of Stalinist China, whose upheaval and appeal directed to impoverished and backward masses has an even more dynamic attractive power than that of Russia, the world power. It is perhaps correct to state that the Asiatic world now sees Russia through the China of Mao Tse-tung, where the universally hated regime of Kuomintangism has been destroyed. It is worthy of note that the attitude of Asiatic socialists and revolutionaries who are highly critical of the Stalin regime is considerably softer and more sympathetic toward that of Peiping.
 
Democratic socialism, independent of foreign influence and acting as a genuine expression of popular needs, has as yet failed to develop as a serious force in any Asiatic or colonial land. Together with this, the fact that the working class has nowhere played a specific or leading role has contributed to a situation in which Marxist theory and practice have failed to advance or to challenge Stalinist leadership anywhere.
 

The end of colonial empire is now a well advanced process. The question is, what shall take its place? It is most unlikely that the United States will be able to re-establish a new empire system, either on a colonial basis or through the medium of sweeping economic domination. If we leave aside those areas in Asia which border directly upon Russia, it would appear equally impossible for that country to summon up the required strength to create its own, specifically Russia, Asiatic empire.
Thus the end of empire leaves the whole question of Asia unresolved. It likewise places a question mark over that sector of world economy represented by Western Europe, which became the most powerful concentration of world economy because of its orientation toward, and relationship with non-capitalist, undeveloped areas. Those nations constituting the imperialist sector of world economy now have the problem of existing in a world in which their economy and technology have lost both meaning and purport. How shall France, England, Holland, Belgium, Italy, etc., reorient their empire- founded economies? Again we see the link between Eastern and Western worlds, in terms of historic perspective.
This same problem of economic orientation is crucial for the colonial world. How shall the dependent colonial economies exist in this new world without their old supports? The answer to such questions will determine the basis of Asia’s future political divisions. In China alone the problem is somewhat different since Stalinism has had a relatively independent development and its actual relationship with Russia is far from determined. In every other part of Asia where it has acquired political power (Manchuria, Korea, etc.), Stalinism has wholly and directly been dependent upon Russian power.
Of the capitalist powers still involved in Asiatic affairs, only the future of the United States is not yet determined. The British cling to Malaya and the island rock of Hong Kong, but these are, at best, last outposts on the continent. The U.S. White Paper on China is a relevant case history of our relations with all of Asia and, examined from this standpoint, we see how the U.S.’s prime concern with strategic considerations resulted in an essentially negative and self-defeating policy. The Point Four proposal of President Truman, still in an anaemic form, deserves to be analyzed as an example of both the difficulties inherent in establishing imperial power today, and the state- directed character of modern ventures into colonial development. But all this together hardly makes a vigorous or clear-cut policy!
Within the nationalist movements throughout Southeast Asia we see today the creation of a new and dynamic force in the form of popular socialist parties. Its hostility toward both its own national rulers and toward Asiatic Stalinism is a distinguishing feature of this movement, which is both democratic and socialist in origin. Is this the true heir of militant, revolutionary nationalism? Does this force perhaps presage an all-Asia political development historically somewhat akin to the Labor and Social-Democratic movement in Europe and the Western world?
While it is true that a reformist movement in the classic European sense is unlikely (this would contradict our viewpoint that Asiatic capitalism has a dim and crisis-ridden perspective), it would be a gross error, in our opinion, to deny the possibility of a mass, popular movement in Southeast Asia bearing many resemblances to European Social Democracy. We know how powerfully European reformism came back in postwar Europe, despite the absence of what had generally been considered economic prerequisites. Its revival, although temporary and already past its peak, fulfilled a political need, created by the absence of a mass revolutionary movement and the presence of the Stalinist movement. Essentially the same kind of vacuum now exists in Southeast Asia, with the additional factor that such a movement would necessarily rise on a program much to the left of its European counterpart because of the fact that the bourgeois- democratic revolution is not completed in the Southeastern Asiatic lands.
Such a development would be highly welcome to revolutionary socialists for obvious reasons. It would revive the flagging spirits of broad masses who are beginning to succumb to the same lethargy-producing confusion so clear in Europe. It would provide a “new way” to those who spurn both the Stalinist and pro-American paths. Yet it would be premature at this time to predict confidently such a formation, and it would further conceal the fact that these democratic, socialist groups (the Socialist Party of India is the leading element of such a tendency) have nowhere reached full maturity. They must fight for their life against persistent Stalinist penetration, while conducting an equally bitter struggle against reactionary and conservative nationalism. It must also be pointed out that the acquisition of national independence more or less by default, without any decisive struggle, as in the case of India, has meant that great masses of people have still to become involved in some kind of fresh and current public action, the only experience capable of developing a spirit of initiative and autonomy.
Thus an Asiatic expression of social democracy or democratic socialism runs the risk of being born without wide mass support. Of necessity it must create such support. Its test will be its attitude toward the social questions and the practical solutions it proposes; together with its attitude toward the struggle of the “cold war.” With understandable, realistic and drastic answers, the submerged peoples of Asia will remain indifferent and political struggles will continue to have their present abstract character of maneuvers among top leaders; not to mention the attractive force Stalinist China will exert on Southeast Asia.
 
From an international point of view, and just as decisively from an internal standpoint, we thus discover three forces at work in the struggle for mastery of the Asiatic world: expanding Russian and world Stalinist power; expanding American economic and strategic power, allied with conservative and reactionary nationalist classes (Philippines, India, Korea, etc.) whose stated objective it is to form a Pacific counterpart of the North Atlantic bloc; and, finally, loosely organized socialist and democratic movements, as well as militant nationalist forces, which, in a timid and hesitant fashion, project the concept of an independent South Asiatic Federation of Peoples, free from Russian, American and imperialist influence.
Just as the slogan of an independent Western European Federation could, if correctly applied, advance the socialist and democratic cause in Europe, so it is our opinion that the concept of a Southeast Asiatic Union (India, Ceylon, Indonesia, Burma, etc.) could serve socialist and revolutionary objectives throughout all of Asia. Here again we see that intimate tie-up of world problems, serving as further evidence of Asia’s lasting involvement in world history. The conference organized in 1949 by Nehru did not advance the cause of Asiatic unification, but rather pushed it back. Nehru and his equivalent in other countries conceive of such a union only in terms of American organization and backing, something for which they are not yet prepared to commit themselves openly. When socialists speak of such a union, they place emphasis upon its independence and self-reliance.
Basically, all the arguments advanced for the concept of an independent Western Union apply to an independent Southeast Asia Union. This idea must be developed and elaborated by the socialists and democratic elements of Asia itself, so that it becomes a living part of their program, as well as a living counter-slogan to the Stalinist program of unification under Russian-Stalinist domination. It would appear of vital urgency for independent revolutionists in Asia to discuss this question if they are not to be swamped between the American and Stalinist waves.
 
To conclude then, the continent of Asia is in a highly fluid state and no one can foresee what ultimate forms the present transition will lead to. We must examine, analyze and describe, but understand that as yet no fixed or determined direction can be seen. Old states and old ruling classes, as in the rest of the world, have been upset, together with old social forms.
But the revolt of Asia is part of a world process and must be viewed as such. For the first time in many hundreds of years, Asia has re-entered the main stream of world history. It can now help in determining the future, and no one would dare attempt to calculate the future without giving Asia a major place in his calculations. For the moment, large sections of Asia remain outside of the political and social battleground on which the “cold war” between Russia and America is being waged, although the latest example of Viet Nam indicates how this “war” is spreading and devouring everything.
Nevertheless, there is a respite for Asia. It is Asia’s opportunity.
 



If Comrade Berg has received the impression from my review of Guérin’s work that I do not consider it of great merit or value, then he has indeed correctly understood my opinion. The sectarian and mechanically contrived approach of Guérin, to which the review called primary attention, hardly constitutes “a very small item in the book.” The two volumes of the work are completely permeated with this, both in form and content, as anyone can easily see for himself by examining the table of contents alone. That Guérin did much original research work in uncovering material about the left wing of the French Revolution is undeniable and I thought this had been acknowledged. But even this work is ruined by the use Guérin attempts to make of it in bolstering up his sectarian hypothesis. Marxian historical writing is not devoted to stale scholarship, as Guérin would be the first to insist. Guérin attempts to use his “facts” in his running two volume polemic against Robespierre. But he does not succeed, because everything is out of balance.
Henry Judd
 



Writing in June, 1919, Lenin spoke of the newly established Soviet Republic as follows: “A more democratic state, democratic in the true sense of the word, a state more closely connected with the toiling and exploited masses, has never existed before.” [1] Particularly in his polemics against “the renegade Kautsky” written at this period, Lenin emphasized the democratic nature of the Russian revolution and the regime it produced by not only scornfully rejecting the “hypocritical and limited” democracy of the liberal bourgeois regimes which Kautsky had come to support, but, more importantly, by defending the Soviet regime on its own democratic merits and values. Lenin was never content to prove the democratic character of the Workers’ Republic by contrast with other regimes; he demanded that it be judged as it actually was, as it functioned and lived.
We are now informed, in certain quarters, that a new Workers’ Republic, Yugoslavia, now exists and that socialists the world over should take heart from it. This great new “Workers’ State,” is in danger, threatened by what these same quarters designate as another “Workers’ State,” although somewhat degenerated. A devoted, but somewhat naive Trotskyist comrade from the island of Ceylon who recently visited Yugoslavia and who, in a series of amazingly sycophantic articles put in her bid to the title of “Anna Louise Strong of Yugoslavia” has rung the alarm:
“If the genuinely revolutionary forces do not rally to the defense of Yugoslavia, one of the great perspectives opened up for the world working class since the Russian Revolution of October 1917 will be choked out by the falsifiers and revisionists in the Kremlin.” (The Militant)
The cold indifference of the world working class to the plight of Marshal Tito should have made this comrade pause and think twice, but apparently not. The fact of the matter is that these articles of Vivienne Goonewardene, together with other writings of the pro-Titoist elements now to be found in left wing socialist circles are far more revealing about the authors’ thinking, political demoralization and utter lack of comprehension of what constitutes socialism than about anything else.
The purpose of this article is to contrast the structure and functioning of the Russian Workers’ State, under the Bolsheviks and Lenin and Trotsky, with the Yugoslav “Workers’ State,” under the Yugoslavian Communist Party (YCP) and Tito. An unfair and invalid comparison? Comrade Goonewardene, evidently foreseeing such an effort, warns us that,
“To try to discover in the Yugoslav movement the same organizational forms that arose in October 1917 in Russia is to waste time in abstract theoretical argumentation.”
To be sure, this author does believe in her own rather empty observation since she has assured us in the preceding paragraph that,
“The national liberation committees organized by this People’s Front [in Yugoslavia] ... could be defined as Soviet forms.”
Whether this is the case we shall see later, but no matter – we obligingly accept the observation that slavish imitation of Russian organizational forms is not required to establish a Workers’ State. Factory councils in Germany, the shop stewards’ movement in England, trade union committees in other lands – Lenin recognized all these as legitimate expressions of workers’ power. We, too, are interested in the political and social content of the forms described, not in their organization or structure. A reading, or a re-reading, of those volumes of Lenin’s Selected Works (Vols. VII, VIII and IX) dealing with the actual formation and building of the Soviet State in its earliest years, is not only a remarkable and refreshing lesson in what constitutes the life and essence of socialism, in practice, but it should prove to be a sobering refresher to those hypnotized by Titoism. The differences between the two regimes “leap to the eyes.”
But let us get down to particulars. In what respects do the respective regimes differ? And what evaluation must be made of these differences? Why must we reject the conclusion of another Trotskyist, Gerard Bloch, whose writings on this subject are the most ignorant and insolent of all, that,
“The attitude toward Yugoslavia can become just as decisive a touchstone for judging revolutionary organizations as was the attitude toward the October Revolution thirty years ago?” (Fourth International, July–August 1950)
A contrast between the regime set up by the Russian Bolsheviks, a genuine Workers’ State which set out to build a socialist society, and the regime of Tito as it operates and functions to-day should not only provide answer to the vulgar Titoist worshippers of the so-called Trotskyist movement, but other and more serious comrades of the revolutionary movement engaged in studying this problem.
The nature, feel and quality of the regime set up by any alleged workers’ or socialist movement is clearly the essence of the matter. The actual and concrete structure of the regime – its state institutions and organs, its administrative bodies, its constitution and electoral apparatus etc. – must be examined as they are since such an examination offers many clues as to the direction in which the regime itself is moving. A socialist analysis cannot avoid judgment on this question of direction, i.e., are the essential requirements for creation of a classless, socialist society being prepared? The testing method has been provided for us by Lenin who, in summing up the objectives of the Russian regime, wrote as follows:
Our aim is to draw the whole of the poor into the practical work of administration ... Our aim is to ensure that every toiler, after having finished his eight hours `lesson’ in productive labor, shall perform state duties gratis ... (Selected Works, Vol. 7) (Lenin’s emphasis)
Why this emphasis upon popular taking over of administration by the masses? To begin with, Lenin felt that it was precisely this lack and shortcoming among the Russian masses, due to the country’s general backwardness, inexperience with democracy and its forms, low cultural level etc., which offered one of the greatest sources of infection and danger to the continued health of the Workers’ State. Over and over again in his writings of this period we find him warning and chiding the workers and poor peasants about their unwillingness, or hesitation with regard to the “administration of things and affairs.” Take this well-known and characteristic remark of his:
Very often delegations of workers and peasants came to the Soviet government and asked what to do with such and such a piece of land, for example ... And I said to them: you are the government, do as you please, take all you want, we will support you, but take care of production, see that production is useful. Take up useful works, you will make mistakes, but you will learn. (Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 7, p. 278.)
His articles and speeches of the period of War Communism, the NEP epoch and after are replete with the same simple theme: run matters in your own interests, depend upon your own initiative, the state is yours, and yours alone is the task of building socialism, etc. There is no question whatever that he was guided by the basic socialist philosophy so brilliantly expressed by Marx and Engels in one of their earlier works which, despite later modifications and changes in both language and refinement of thought, still constitutes a guide to the essence of socialism. After explaining that human progress now demands as a safeguard the appropriation of productive forces, Marx and Engels point out that those who do the “appropriating” will determine its nature.
Only the proletarians of the present day, who are completely shut off from all self-activity, are in a position to achieve a complete and no longer restricted self-activity, which consists in the appropriation of a totality of productive forces and in the thus postulated development of a totality of capacities.
Up until now, all appropriations have only achieved a “new state of limitations.” That of the working class, however, must be different:
In all expropriations up to now, a mass of individuals remained subservient to a single instrument of production; in the appropriations by the proletarians, a mass of instruments of production must be made subject to each individual and property to all. (German Ideology, pp. 66–97)
And, contrary to the usual reactionary description of socialism as the crushing of the individual into a dull grey pulp, as well as to emphasize their previous view, Marx and Engels added:
With the community of revolutionary proletarians on the other hand ... it is just the reverse; it is as individuals that the individuals participate in it. It is just this combination of individuals ... which puts the conditions of the free development and movement of individuals under their control ... (ibid., p. 75)
Sufficient, then, to establish this great and yet simple truth regarding – the nature of socialism which all too many comrades, disoriented and demoralized by many factors, appear to have forgotten. We note in passing that not a word appears in any of these writings we have quoted to the effect that “nationalization of industry” constitutes the basis for either socialism or a Workers’ State!
But we have not yet gotten down to particular cases. Enough of these abstract and ideal generalities. Was there “self-administration on the part of the popular masses in Russia?” Was “socialist democracy the common property of all?” And are both “self-administration” and “socialist democracy” the common property of the Yugoslavian people? This is what concerns us.
Precisely how did the Russian revolutionists go about the task of realizing Marx’s principle of socialism as a free association of producers, themselves directly managing and controlling production? The great instrumentality of popular administration of the new state was, of course the Soviet, that most popular and democratic body of the masses whose role Lenin declared to be to “... organize and administer the state in every possible way.” (Selected Works, Vol. 7, p. 134) The Soviets and their related institutions (Councils of National Economy, Executive Committees of local, urban and rural Soviets, gubernia and city Soviets of Workers’ Soldiers’ and Peasants’, Soviets of the Village Poor, etc.) were actual state organs and the “sole form of state power.” For Lenin, the Soviets were “... the proletariat organized as the ruling class,” holding, exercising and maintaining full state power. In an analysis of workers’ participation in the country’s administrative bodies (December 1920), Lenin revealed that 61.6 per cent of the following major Soviet bodies directly concerned with production and management of industry was made up of workers: Presidium of Supreme Council of National Economy and Gubernia Councils of National Economy; Collegiums of Chief Committees, Departments, Central Boards and Head Offices; Collegium and individual managements of factories. (ibid., p. 60) It must be borne in mind that all these bodies, committees, etc. formed a part of the vast pyramidal conglomerate of Soviet administrative bodies, elected on a free basis by the masses of people.
In notes entitled Rough Draft of Rules for the Administration of Soviet Institutions we note once more Lenin’s constant concern with popularizing and strengthening the Soviets. This is what he proposed in 1918:
With a view to combating red tape and more successfully discovering abuses and also exposing and removing dishonest persons who have penetrated Soviet institutions, the following rules are established:
Every Soviet institution must display outside as well as inside its premises, in a manner visible to all without having to obtain passes, notices indicating on what days and at what hours the public may attend. The premises in which people are received must be so arranged as to be freely accessible without any necessity of obtaining passes.
The public shall be received also on Sundays and holidays.
The Commissariats for Labor, State Control and Justice shall organize everywhere information bureaus, which shall be freely accessible to all without having to obtain passes and free of charge, and which must also be open on Sundays, the said Commissariats widely to inform the public on what days and at what hours these bureaus are open.
It shall be the duty of these information bureaus, not only to give all information asked for, orally or in writing, but also to draw up free of charge written declarations for persons unable to write or unable to draw up such declarations clearly themselves. It shall be obligatory to enlist for the work of these bureaus representatives of all parties eligible for representation on the Soviets, as well as representatives of parties which are not represented in the government, and also representatives of the non-party trade unions and non-party unions of the intellectuals. (ibid., pp. 450–453.)
In other words, the Soviets were bodies functioning as the state power in all fields; bodies to which workers, peasants and other members of the population as a whole could come and present their problems, proposals, etc. to people in whose choice and election they themselves had participated. This was the essence of Soviet democracy. Freedom of press, freedom of speech, the right of assembly, etc. for the masses of people were exercised through the Soviets and their related institutions. In this article we are not, of course, immediately concerned with the question of what happened to the Soviets, i.e., their death and destruction under the Stalinist regime; we are drawing a contrast between the early days of the Russian Revolution and Yugoslavia today.
And what are the corresponding administrative bodies in Tito’s country? We do not demand an aping of the Soviet forms; we do demand that the supporters of Tito, those who insist upon his regime’s socialist character, show us a corresponding class institution which, as the “sole form of state power” expresses the rule of the proletariat, poor peasantry and the masses.
They cannot do this because no such institution or its equivalent exists in Yugoslavia. On this fact and this fact alone we could rest our denial of the socialist nature of the Tito regime. The total absence of democratic organs of popular rule excludes the possibility of socialism in the country and justifies our contention that Yugoslavia is of the same general type of regime as Stalinist Russia. [2] But, we shall hear at once, what of the famous Yugoslavian “Committees of National Liberation?” Don’t these fulfill the requirement you demand? Are they not the organs of popular power in the country, corresponding to a Soviet system? Let us see about this.
Tito would have us believe this! In an article entitled The Political Foundations of the People’s Democratic System, Interior Minister Georgescu stated that,
“Through the organs of the people’s power and the new state machine, the people’s democratic state can successfully carry out the functions of the dictatorship of the proletariat.”
Appropriating many of the familiar arguments of Trotsky, the Titoist leadership carries on a constant campaign against “bureaucratism” and in favor of a “greater initiative on the part of the masses.” Curiously, however, this virulent campaign is directed solely against the bureaucracy of another country, the USSR! There it is an organic disease; in Yugoslavia it is limited to poor administrative techniques or rude and faulty officials of the state.
But aside from this, what of the claim that the “Committees of National Liberation” function as organs of popular power and thereby fulfill the role of Soviets? Is there any truth in this? Absolutely none, and we shall quote Louis Dalmas, one of the most serious and staunchest defenders of the Tito regime in evidence. Dalmas claims that since 1942, these “Committees” have functioned as the state power, first in a dual power capacity during the period of nationalist struggle against the German occupation, and later as the full state power itself: But, as Dalmas points out, these “Committees” have undergone an evolution during this process! First, the total purging of all non-Titoist elements, bourgeois and radical. Many socialist comrades, utterly confusing the issue, justify these purges on the grounds that they were directed largely against “bourgeois and monarchist” elements, conveniently ignoring the fact that these elements were already thoroughly discredited; and had no support in the country, and the more important fact that Tito wiped out revolutionary socialist, moderate socialist and national minority opposition at the same time, while laying the basis for his one-party state regime. The purges were the means by which the new state base was set up; this was its true function. By November, 1945 (we again quote from Dalmas), the Titoist “Popular Front “bloc” was ready to receive 96 per cent of the votes in the election held that month. All was ready for the final and decisive step which emasculated, once and for all, the “Liberation Committees” and made them routine appendages of the new Titoist state.
In 1946, this final operation took place. We again depend upon Dalmas who does not seem to grasp the facts he presents. By decree of the Central Committee of the Yugoslavian Communist Party (YCP), a discussion on the role of the “Liberation Committee” was called to a halt and the YCP reorganized our State apparatus as well as all the economic institutions.” (Les Temps Modernes, March 1950) Note well that after the purge of all non-Party elements, bourgeois or radical, the Party by decree “reorganized our State apparatus.” We ask Dalmas and his friends: how could the Party reorganize the State apparatus if it were not already that State apparatus itself? If the “Liberation Committees” had been the “organs of state power,” as you maintain, how could such a “reorganization” from outside have been possible? The answer is obvious – the “Committees” never held state power, never functioned in any other way than as organs for the YCP. When Tito had used them, he purged them of both their form and content and “reorganized” them as adjuncts to the new “state apparatus” set up by the Party. After 1946 (or rather, since 1946), the “Committees” have been nothing but political fronts to forward the work of the economic, political and social institutions of the state machinery created by Tito.
Lacking the basic element of socialist democracy, i.e., popular state organs of workers and poor peasants – it is only consistent that all other institutions and policies of the Titoist regime should be dominated by the same spirit of bureaucratic totalitarianism. We shall consider some examples of this, without exhausting the field.
Addressing delegates of the Moscow trade unions and factory councils, Lenin spoke as follows:
Your factory committees must cease to be merely factory committees; they must become the fundamental state nuclei of the ruling class. (Selected Works, Vol. 9, p. 411)
And in his famous polemic against Trotsky on the trade union question, consider the role Lenin gave to the unions:
... protection of the material and spiritual interests of the entirely organized proletariat. (ibid., p. 9)
Our present state is such that the entirely organized proletariat must protect itself, and we must utilize these workers’ organizations for the purpose of protecting the workers from their own state, and in order that the workers may protect our state. Both forms of protection are achieved by means of the peculiar interweaving of our state measures with our agreement, our coalescence with our trade unions. (ibid., pp. 9–10.)
How is this role fulfilled?
But the trade unions are not state organizations, not organizations for coercion, they are educational organizations, organizations that enlist, that train; they are schools, schools of administration, schools of management, schools of Communism. (ibid., p. 4)
The heart of Trotsky’s error, says Lenin, is his failure to grasp that:
the trade unions are a school of administrative-technical management of production ... trade unions are a school, a school of unity, a school of solidarity, a school for learning how to protect one’s interests, a school of management, a school of administration. (ibid., p. 68)
According to the program of the Bolshevik Party, the trade unions had a highly significant function to perform:
the participation of the trade unions in the management of economy and their drawing the broad masses into this work are the principal means of combating the bureaucratization of the economic apparatus of the Soviet government and render possible the establishment of genuine popular control over the results of production ... they must eventually actually concentrate in their hands the entire management of the whole of national economy as a single economic unit. (ibid., pp. 73–4)
Workers’ Control over production in Russia meant, “control, supervision, accounting and the distribution of goods” by the working class and its institutions. The famous thesis of Rudzutak on the tasks of the trade unions in production, which Lenin defended against Trotsky, outlines in great detail the tasks, powers and responsibilities of the unions as they function side by side with the state economic management bodies. It is much too lengthy to quote here, but we refer our readers who may be interested in studying this account of the functions of a genuine trade union, in a Workers’ State to Lenin’s Selected Works, Vol. 9, pp. 23–26.
What is the story regarding workers’ control, trade union authority, factory councils, etc., in Titoland? Our informant Dalmas assures us that no conflicts exist between the unions and the various bodies of state planning. In seeking to assure us of the “harmonious relationship” between workers and State, Dalmas gives away the entire story because, as Lenin explained in his polemics with Trotsky in a backward, unindustrialized, primitive, overwhelmingly peasant country, such as Yugoslavia (Dalmas points out the striking social resemblances between the two countries after their respective “revolutions”), it is impossible to dissolve entirely the sources of conflict between the State and the masses since these sources lie precisely in the general backwardness. Unless Yugoslavia, in a mere five years, has advanced at such an astounding speed toward socialism that all conflicts have been resolved, Dalmas’ statement is absurd on the face of it. The simple truth is that the conflicts are repressed and kept down by the bureaucratic and oppressive state apparatus of the regime. In five years, for example, no one has ever heard of a single workers’ strike in a single Yugoslavian factory!
But, we shall indignantly hear, what of recent measures regarding workers’ control, etc.? Are you not ignoring the many progressive measures taken by Tito, particularly the “epoch-making new law” adopted by the Yugoslav National Assembly (unanimously) which introduced workers’ control and management of all industry? According to this law, Workers’ Councils are to take over the administration (planning of work bookkeeping, records, etc.) of the national economy. Workers’ Councils, elected by direct secret vote of all workers and employees of factory, mine or other enterprise: (so the law says), will be responsible for the appointment of Management Boards on which Trade Union representatives will also sit. This, said Marshal Tito in his speech to the National Assembly, together with the program of decentralization of the state apparatus, marks the “beginning of the withering away of the state in Yugoslavia.” (Yugoslav Newsletter, June 26, 1950) It contrasts with the Soviet Union where, as Tito informs us, “Soviet workers take no part in the running of the factories, a function still performed by state-appointed directors.” Voila!
Our eager critics should think the matter over a moment or two. To begin with, they should at least wait a decent period to see how this newly-adopted law actually looks in practice and in operation. Will critical and oppositional candidates be permitted in the elections? Will they have a press to express themselves in? (There is no opposition press in the country, as Dalmas admits.) Just how will the Workers’ Councils function? These, and other questions, cannot be answered yet since no material or evidence exists, but any trained Marxist knows that the complexion of a regime does not automatically change with the passage of a new law.
More important, it, has never been our contention that a regime, constructed along anti-democratic and authoritarian lines, moves forward in a constantly hardening line of naked and brutal repression. Particularly when confronted by external threats, such regimes often make concessions to the people and this law is unquestionably an important juridical concession to gain popularity. How it works out, we shall see in the future; meanwhile, we retain all our skepticism, particularly upon examining the law a little more closely than its enthusiastic supporters. The Yugoslav Newsletter quoted above declares that,
“The bill does not eliminate state functions in the management of the economy completely, but it does, however, render them less inclusive (?); they will, furthermore, be decreased as workers take a growing part in management.”
This elastic formulation of “state functioning” is deliberate, indicating the state bureaucracy will manipulate this law as conditions require. It does not mean the end of state management of production, but merely, its modification and adaptation because of changed circumstances. This is further illustrated in the remarks of a worker of the Ivo Lola Ribar plant near Belgrade who remarked, according to the government Yugoslav Bulletin (July 7, 1950):
We Yugoslav workers are proud that we are the first workers in the world who have been entrusted with the management of the factories, mines and other industrial enterprises we work in. This will without doubt be the basis for new achievements in work.
Entrusted? By whom? The state, which can recall its trust at will, can it not? The whole move must be greeted with the utmost skepticism and distrust. It emanates from above (the state), and has no deep roots below (the workers and their independent institutions). Furthermore, such a law enacted without a simultaneous creation of a democratic atmosphere, having freedom of discussion and expression, guaranteed rights to a critical and oppositionist minority among the workers, an opposing press, etc., can have little meaning. That basic proletarian democracy which does not exist in all the institutions of the state or party or class cannot be suddenly injected, from above, into one of the institutions.
People’s Courts and related judicial bodies were one of the features of the Russian Revolution. In these courts, the trade unions played the leading role as a study of the Soviet decree, Regulations Governing Workers’ Disciplinary Comrades’ Courts, November 14, 1919 (Code of Laws No. 537) will indicate to the student of revolutionary law and discipline. Particularly in questions of labor discipline (desertion, lateness and absenteeism, etc.), the trade unions themselves were considered to be the only correct manner in which justice and firmness could be properly administered. Contrast this with the basic juridical system prevailing in Yugoslavia, as described in the New York Times: A “People’s Assessors” system has been instituted. Lower courts now have two “People’s Assessors” sitting together with a state-appointed career judge. The lists of nominees for “People’s Assessors” were drawn up by the party (YCP), and then presented to the labor unions for approval by a show of hands. It should be added that in the field of civilian law and application of justice, this same type of court – a typical state court – exists, in contrast to the “Workers’ and Peasants’ Courts” which the Bolsheviks established in addition to and apart from the above-mentioned Workers’ Disciplinary Courts.
The story of the Red Army is too familiar to bear repetition here. Its method of democratic organization, election of officers, etc., have often been commented upon, particularly during the revolutionary days of Trotsky’s leadership. Suffice it to say that by contrast, the Yugoslavian army, with the Marshal himself at its head, can stand no comparison and is organized exclusively after the Stalinist model in the Soviet Union. Resorting again to our chief source of information about Yugoslavia, Louis Dalmas, we cite his remarks that the “Liberation Committees” have no control or power, according to constitutional law, over either the army or the police (Les Temps Modernes, April, 1950, p.1833). Both these institutions are under the centralized authority of the respective top state bodies and ministries. We note in passing that the UDBA, State Secret Police, has 40,000 recognized members, according to Dalmas. [3]
We come at last to what is perhaps the key and most telling contrast of all: the question of the Party. It is not necessary here to review the decisive significance the Party had for Lenin, or the development of the Russian Revolution. What concerns us is the role Lenin felt the Party should play in strengthening the Workers’ State and building socialism. Perhaps it is no better summed up than in his speech on The Party Crisis, where he simultaneously warned that a split between the Party and the Russian trade unions in which the Party was in the wrong would certainly result in the overthrow of the Soviet government in Russia:
Communism says: The vanguard of the proletariat, the Communist Party, leads the non-Party masses of the workers, educates, prepares, teaches and trains the masses (the “school” of Communism), first the workers and then the peasants, in order that they may eventually concentrate in their hands the entire management of the whole of national economy. (Selected Works, Vol. IX, p. 36)
The Party was, in other words, the driving force behind the Revolution and the animating factor in all the new, untried institutions created by this event. Vanguard though it was, in the sense that it expressed the roundest, clearest and most far-sighted point of view on the great social and economic problems of the day, it could not possibly exist apart from the workers and peasants who had made the revolution. Precisely at a moment in 1921 when Lenin felt the Old Guard of the Party was already tending to become a “privileged veneer” in the country, he proposed a new influx of proletarians into the Party because this was the source of health and life. At the same time, democracy, freedom of discussion, the countering of opposing or varying viewpoints, etc., were considered absolutely vital. Here is an example of how opposing groups within the Party were treated, during the period of the Party’s greatest creative vitality:
... We started the widest and freest discussion. The Platform of the “Workers Opposition” was published in 250,000 copies in the central organ of the Party. We weighed it up from all sides, we elected delegates on the basis of this platform, and finally we convened this congress ... (ibid., p. 130)
Or, to again illustrate the organic ties between Party and mass, consider Lenin’s remarks on Purging the Party, written in September 1921, when the Party underwent a review of its entire membership:
In some places the purging of the Party is proceeding mainly with the aid of the experience and suggestions of non-party workers; these suggestions are being heeded, and the representatives of the non-party proletarian masses are being treated with due consideration. This is the most valuable, the most important. If we really succeed in this manner in purging our Party from top to bottom, “without respect for persons,” the gains for the revolution will really be enormous.
The toiling masses have a fine instinct for the difference between honest and devoted Communists and those who arouse a revulsion of feeling in one who obtains his bread by the sweat of his brow, who enjoys no privileges and who has no “open door to the chief.”
Purging the Party with the aid of the suggestions of the non-party toilers is a great thing. It will give us important results. It will make the Party a much stronger vanguard of the class than it was before; it will make it a vanguard that is more strongly linked with the class ... (ibid., pp. 253–294)
What a pitiful picture Marshal Tito’s monolithic morass makes by contrast!
As long as our revolutionary Party leads them (the masses – H.J.), no one will be able to effect such a change (return to capitalism – H.J.). And none of the leaders would try to do so, for they are leading a people and a Party from which Comrade Tito and the other leading comrades emerged. As long as Tito’s heroic heart is beating, as long as the hearts of his comrades from the period of struggle for the development of the Party are beating, etc., etc, ... (On New Roads of Socialism, Milovan Djilas, Belgrade, 1950, p. 14)
The Byzantine tone, the nauseous glorification of the chiefs and lesser chiefs, the air of infallibility, the emphasis on the all-exclusive role and leadership of the Party – all are characteristic of that vast historic phenomenon we associate with Stalinism; counter-revolution, not revolution. Let us review briefly the history and nature of the Yugoslavian Communist Party, again utilizing our chief source of information, Louis Dalmas.
Tito has headed the YCP since the year 1937; thirteen years as chief of the Party. He succeeded to the leadership during the period of the infamous Moscow Trials and was reputed to be one of the staunchest and most loyal of Stalinists. That is to say, he was trained, educated and rose to power as a bred-in-the-bone Stalinist; his entire political and personal psychology and way of thinking was – and remains – Stalinist. More important, as Dalmas recognizes (Les Temps Modernes, March 1950) he has brought along with him to the summits of state power a group of supporters and loyal admirers who have worked hand in glove with him for a dozen years or more. A majority of the present Political Bureau of the YCP has held this post for a dozen years or more, through all the developments and events calmly following, without dissent or opposition, the leader who expresses their own cravings and desires. The whole history, evolution and methodology of the YCP is typically Stalinist – periodic purges of unknown and voiceless “enemies,” glorification of the top leadership, concealment of any and all disagreements from the masses. It is a Party completely without the illuminating history of any serious discussion or disagreement, comparable to the famous discussions of the Russian Bolshevik Party. It always wears the same face, same leadership, same unanimity.
What constitutes the support and composition of this party? Undoubtedly, a section of the working class and the poor peasantry –  particularly if the Titoist state has given them certain responsibilities and privileges such as we have indicated throughout this article. More important  – and perhaps the driving force behind its unquestioned social dynamism – is the youth –  working class, middle class and peasant youth alike. The illusion of glorious prospects of development (including, for some, their material realization in the form of absorption into the State machine); the appeal to national pride in all forms; the release from parental and family restraint, etc. – all these factors have made it possible for Tito to rally much of the nation’s youth and energy behind him.
As for the true Party, the top Party, this consists of the old and tried cadres with twelve to fifteen years of Stalinist-cum-Tito training behind it; the army and police officers; the diplomats, journalists, official ideologues; and, most recent of all, the newly formed cadres running the nationalized industries, state stores and organs of distribution, state collective farms: etc. All have in common one thing: they hold, manage, control and direct the levers of command. This is the true portrait of the Party of Tito.
The contrast we have drawn has had one simple objective: to deny the contention of those who find a progressive parallel between Yugoslavia today and the early Workers’ Republic of Russia and who call the land of Tito either socialist, democratic or proletarian. By no means do we claim to have drawn a final or detailed outline of the new state itself. One could, for example, write quite a revealing study of the foreign policy of Titoism, not merely detailing the peculiar diplomatic history of the regime but – and – this is infinitely more important –  analyzing the internationalist propaganda of Titoism and its approach to the international workers’ movement. Again, a striking dissimilarity would become clear. The revolutionary, internationalist propaganda of the Bolsheviks, directed toward aiding and supporting the spread of the revolution, cannot be contrasted with the sickly, narrow-nationalist and bureaucratic approach of the Titoists and their foreign press. Throughout all of it (and there is a good deal of it!) runs the same thread and theme; protect our regime from Stalin and his Comintern; save our State; do not let them destroy us. Its appeal is an effort to mobilize popular support for the preservation of the Titoist bureaucracy, their government and their privileges. It has not a single genuine internationalist tone in it, and is thoroughly demagogic.
In drawing our conclusions, we must also warn against any idea that we have tried to draw a black-and-white picture of contrasts between Russia and Yugoslavia. Not at all. The very fact that, for example, Lenin’s, writings, of the period are filled with the harshest criticisms against his own regime indicates how clearly he understood the vast gap between ideal and reality. Bureaucratism, lack of popular initiative, already existent tendencies on the part of the Old Guard to demand privileged positions and conditions – all these well-known features were not only conscious to Lenin’s mind, but his various proposals, some of which we have mentioned, were put forward in order to remove these distortions of the Workers’ State. To a great extent, what is involved is the “spirit of the matter,” which influences the direction and development. The Soviet Republic was permeated by the spirit of popular democracy and all its numerous institutions likewise. Lenin, both political and spiritual head of the Republic, set the pace and tone in his writings, speeches and proposals. Regardless of what happened later, the direction in which the new Republic moved was socialist.
The complete absence of any popular democracy, socially, politically and administratively, indicates for us that the direction in Yugoslavia is away from socialism and Workers’ Statism. It is not a regime in which the masses are the ruling class. Those who think in terms of a popular evolution of the regime along democratic lines with a relaxation of restraint are the most deceived of all. Since the regime is founded upon a denial and destruction of popular state organs, self-administered by the masses, it must follow that it can never make such a leap as the turning over of state power to such organs as would negate its own continuation. The regime, in a word, must seek self-perpetuation; i.e., must retain, strengthen and eternally hold on to that state power which it now has in its grasp. This is the essence of the matter.
* * *
Footnote
1. Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. IX, p. 445, his emphasis.
2. A note of warning to those who think that this statement means that the two regimes are exactly alike and parallel in every detail. This is not our thought at all. It is, again, a question of direction and movement. The Tito regime follows the Stalinist path of development; it is approximately where the Stalin regime was in the early 1930’s and obviously could not have reached the same “perfection” as that of its big brother.
3. For the sake of brevity, we are omitting many other secondary features such as differentials in wages, the role of specialists, etc. We cannot avoid a comment, however, on the claim that the various nationalities within the Federated Republic (Croats, Slovenes, etc.) enjoy full freedom within the framework of the Federation. Delmas, less naive than others on this point, refers to various “rights” transferred down to the federal republics by the House of Nationalities; he does not imply, as do others, that among these “rights” is the most fundamental right of all: that of the right of separation and secession from the Federation. It simply does not exist.
*
Note by ETOL
1*. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Stanley Plastrik.
 



A correct position on the “War Question” has always been of the utmost significance for any socialist organization. It is unnecessary to emphasize this. The discussion in our press (in Labor Action – Ed.) is proof of how close this most complex of all problems lies to the heart of every socialist. More important, it indicates how false it is to take it for granted that Marxism has solved this question once and forever, or that a routine presentation of traditional ideas suffices to answer the dissatisfied. This I believe, holds true for both the so-called “pro- and anti-war” advocates. The issue of the correct socialist position on war is with us and will remain with us for a long time to come. In one of the finest Marxist works on the war question – Trotsky’s famous set of theses entitled War and the Fourth International – the author states that the first prerequisite for a successful struggle against the war is “... the correct understanding of all the conditions of imperialist war and of all the political processes that accompany it. Woe to that party which confines itself in this burning question to general phrases and abstract slogans! The bloody events will crash over its head and smash it.” (pg. 30)
As is often the case, a fundamental discussion began around a comparatively isolated war situation which, however, directly or indirectly posed all the important elements needed to derive a correct position. Whether the Korean war is concluded by America’s act of isolating and crushing the Korean Stalinists, or whether the Korean war leads to similar wars which finally congeal into the dreaded World War III, we can already visualize with sufficient clarity the basic political and social issues at stake regarding which Marxism must attain clarity and work out an effective program. It is highly doubtful if this clarity and program exists today. The discussion in our press reveals a certain dissatisfaction which has important origins and cannot simply be dismissed as traditional social patriotic deviations. In part, the special features of the Korean episode which have made it particularly difficult for socialists to propose a “positive” program may account for this dissatisfaction. But the principal “special feature” – the complete absence of any independent, non-Stalinist or non- American labor or socialist movement within Korea – is hardly unique to that country. It is characteristic of the entire world. If Korea occupies the same preliminary world war role that Spain did before World War II, one has but to compare the Marxist program and analysis developed during these two events to see the difference. Perhaps a more important characteristic of the general dissatisfaction we have mentioned is inherent in the position itself, i.e., the question and doubt as to whether it is a position based upon reality or utopianism; whether its analysis is correct and concrete and whether it offers a perspective. Far from fearing such questioning and criticism, Marxism should welcome it. The socialist position on war has a long history and evolution; it must prove itself over and over again. Our political convictions must be renewed and tested in open controversy with our critics, particularly those who feel that while revolutionary socialists may hold one position publicly and “officially,” they have quite another position secretly and “personally.”
 
To begin with, there has been an amazing lack of concrete analysis of both the war question and the “international situation.” From the time that Marx analyzed in detail the foreign policy and diplomacy of Lord Palmerston and the Crimean War, and offered his advice to the effect that proletarian strategy and tactics demanded first hand knowledge of international intrigue and deviltry, the socialist movement has always devoted a considerable attention to such matters. In our press today we find little or no analysis of the myriad of factors, certain of which have definite influence upon both the tempo and nature of the war events, which complicate the world scene. The divided policies of American imperialism, for example, which cause a split behaviour in all American activities between the ultra-reactionary elements of the bourgeoisie (represented by Republicanism in politics and MacArthurism in military matters) and the liberal-imperialist wing of the bourgeoisie (represented by the Truman wing of the Democratic Party and the new Acheson-Marshall combine in military affairs) – neither the nature nor consequences of this division have been analyzed. The foreign policy of the Soviet rulers has been completely ignored, nor has much attention been paid to the various possibilities in which the war may present itself both to America or to socialists. For example, are we correct in assuming the quick overrunning of Western Europe by Stalin in case of war; or does the possibility of a “neutral” Western Europe, a truce between the Kremlin and the bourgeoisie of France, England etc. exist? Have the unstable relations between Stalinist Russia and Stalinist China an influence whose importance we have missed? Has the Russian strategy of isolating America on an international scale any chance of success? These are some of the questions largely ignored by us. By contrast, we note how the pamphlet of Trotsky on the war question begins with an elaborate and concrete outlining of the international situation, and the possible lines of development, at the moment of the pamphlet’s publication. While it is not the purpose of this discussion article to undertake that task, we believe it is a necessity.
The revolutionary socialist attitude toward imperialist war has more often than not been grossly misunderstood (by proponent and enemy alike), or over-simplified by such false formulations as “neutrality,” or “indifference” or an “equating of both sides.” We note that this same kind of treatment is rather widespread in the present discussion, particularly in the ranks of those who propose a reversal of our opposition to the war.
The essence of a socialist opposition to imperialist war is founded upon its “dialectic attitude,” in the words of Trotsky, to the relationship between war and revolution. (See Trotsky’s development of this position in War and the Fourth International). The validity of the whole position hinges on the realizability and possibility of a “growth of the revolutionary movement.” This is what differentiates the socialist position on war from a position of “defeatism” and all other positions. To justify a continuation of this position at the present time, with required modifications that we shall suggest, is equivalent to defending the socialist perspective and the continuation of a revolutionary movement. But this justification cannot rest upon a purely theoretical base; it must be concrete and responsive to the realities of the given situation. Put otherwise, there must be an examination of those different circumstances in which the problem of war and revolutionary perspective is posed now by contrast with the past.
 
Some of these differences are obvious and have often been noted – the division of the world into two blocs dominated by two great powers each of which, within its own bloc, is so powerful as to allow for little freedom of action or movement on the part of those nations enclosed in the bloc; the emergence of Russian Stalinism, and other Stalinist nations such as China, as full-fledged imperialist nations, properly understood, with programs of conquest; and, most important of all, the recognized absence, except for uninfluential grouplets, of an independent revolutionary and socialist movement steering its own course between the two blocs. There are other differences, but these are the most important to recognize.
Now, certain conclusions follow from this. First of all, our traditional definition of war in the capitalist world as being a “struggle for a redivision of the world” is not quite accurate. Not only because, by our own definition, a war between the American and Russian blocs will be principally a social war between two different forms of society, but also because the issue is one of complete control, not “redivision” of the world! The Wallace scheme for redividing the world between the two powers proved Utopian because “one world” is the real stake. In passing, we might note that this is what gives this potential war its essentially reactionary and imperialist stamp.
Secondly, the political and revolutionary struggle against Stalinism (defined by us as a new social form, anti-capitalist and anti-socialist) demands a different strategy than in past wars or war situation where, generally speaking, the anti-war struggle unrolled against capitalist society or one of its forms. The nature and “quality” of the enemy (Stalinism) presents us with a different situation from, let us say, that created by masses of workers and peasants organized in the opposing capitalist armies of the past.
Finally, and bearing in mind the suggested relationship between the war question and a revolutionary perspective, we must ask ourselves the concrete meaning of the admitted absence of any real “Third Camp” forces, unless we wish to make of this concept of an independent socialist force a threadbare fetish whose existence or non-existence has no bearing on our concrete tactics and strategy. We are suggesting that, actually speaking, the discussion of respective positions on the war question is simply another form of discussing the problem of how to revive and rebuild a socialist movement.
Unfortunately, much of the discussion – pro-war, anti-war – which has appeared in our press fails to consider either the changed situation, or the concrete situation. Comrade Shachtman’s article (Labor Action, 9-4-1950) excepted, one has the impression of re-reading an old polemic dating from World War I. On the one hand, we find the most illogical use of outworn analogies which neglect the fact that one cannot deduce a position from an analogy, but only use it for the purpose of supporting a position already presented. Furthermore, the only value of an analogy – such as the famous Franco-Prussian War etc. – is if it has significant elements in common with the existing situation. But all those who propose a position of political support in the event of war insist upon the “uniqueness” of the present situation which, they say, compels a change in a hitherto correct position! On the other hand, those who reject this political capitulation to the American camp – and I certainly agree with this stand – have not been particularly convincing, particularly in their efforts to fulfill that basic requirement of a Marxist position – the gap between the analytical, theoretical motivation and the actual, concrete perspective of the position proposed.
In part, this is due to a failure to grasp the essential fact that we now live under permanent “warlike” conditions, in which society and social life are shaped for “warlike” purposes. That is, a socialist group no longer faces the circumstances of 1914, let us say, where imperialist war was not a tactic or strategy of bourgeois society, but rather a gigantic and qualitative reversal of normal social life and could, therefore, be opposed by socialists more in the realm of theory, abstraction, principle etc. than in the realm of daily life. This was the natural day of a Jaurès, a Debs etc., but it has gone. A struggle over the issue of war today is an organic part of our common strategy and tactics, rather than a programmatic or “principled” issue. If we agree that the two great nations today (and tomorrow) exist primarily for the purpose of waging war on each other, in a thousand different ways, than we must also agree that socialists must accept this as their framework of existence, and attempt to develop their activity in accordance with this totally new situation. To those who hold the view that there is nothing else to do but support America, it is of little value to prove conclusively what they already acknowledge, nay, propose: that this means an end of the socialist movement, or what remains of it. What it is necessary to prove is that the revolutionary socialist movement not only justifies its existence (and not in the sense of historic abstractions, but in terms of our concrete problems), but that given a certain course of action and activity, it has a future and perspective! Let us try to make this more specific.
 
To accomplish this task, it is necessary to repose the problem of war and the revolutionary socialist movement in new terms. This requires the abnegation of our past terminology and formulations. Those formulas, slogans etc. of the capitalist-imperialist war epoch have not the same sense for us today, either orientation or practical value. They only serve to confuse our thought, and demagogically arm our opponents. But in abandoning this manner of posing the problem we are required to substitute another approach. We suggest the following tentative propositions:

For the international socialist movement to live, progress and succeed, defeat of the worldwide Stalinist movement is an absolute requirement. As socialists, we are unconditional opponents of both national Stalinism, in its imperialist Russian form, and the international Stalinist movement which seeks to create a Stalinist world. This is the starting point of our thought and action.
 
Just as fundamental to us as the struggle against Stalinism is the question of how, by whom and by what methods this struggle shall be led. It is on this issue that we separate ourselves from all other opponents of Stalinism, who do not recognize the existence of both a “reactionary” and a “progressive” form of combating Stalinism. We are concerned with a lasting, durable victory over Stalinism which goes beyond the dubious scope of a military victory. By no means is a military struggle against Stalinism (Russia) excluded, under the conditions of the subordination of such a military struggle to a progressive political and social program. Our opposition to the position of the “pro-Americans” is not that they propose a purely military program against Russia (such a program cannot exist), but that this is in combination with a reactionary political and social program (that of American imperialism).
 
For, under the conditions of today, a war between America and Russia can only be evaluated as a reactionary war, waged by both or either side for its own version of “one world” rule. Given the social, political and economic nature of both regimes, their respective programs and aims, this war could not be understood in any other sense, regardless of local or momentary issues such as that of Korea. It is possible to conceive of a defensist position in such a hypothetical circumstance, as for example: A course and development of the war, in which Russian imperialism should succeed in isolating America from the world during the war itself by administering a series of defeats whose consequence would be a transformation of America’s role to one of a struggle for national survival and independence. Linked with this, to be sure, is the not-at-all excluded possibility that the American bourgeoisie, in its conduct of the war, may prove to be defeatist in reality; i.e., incapable of winning because of its manner of conducting the war.

I repeat that these are only hypothetical projections, but they are worth bearing in mind precisely because they illustrate a rejection of that demagogic claim of our opponents that we are “indifferent” to the fate of our country. On the contrary, it is our concern which refuses to let us place this fate in the hands of our bourgeoisie, and which must oblige us to have a flexible policy, guided by a concrete analysis of the actual circumstances and the “direction” of events.
The above propositions, representing at best a starting point for us, are largely negative in character, except for the first proposition which I have deliberately placed first. They explain why we reject political support to the present war; that we are neither “indifferent” nor “neutral” to the fate of our nation or other nations; that we have no confidence in our regime, etc. But is there another side to this position; is there a perspective? And what of the specific problem of those nations which are, more or less reluctantly, involved in one or the other bloc? What of Western Europe, or England, toward whose labor government we have a sympathetic and friendly attitude?
 
It is here that we are obliged to return to the basic thought of Trotsky concerning the relationship between a socialist policy on the war question and the growth of the revolutionary movement. Or, to put the problem more truthfully, the revival and recreation of a socialist movement! In our opinion, there is not the slightest contradiction between an opposition to the war on the broadest base conceivable, and the continuation of the fight to reestablish the socialist movement in terms of a renewed ideology, theory, strategy and tactics. In these terms, the participation and activity of socialists in any and all shades of progressive and democratic movements, which find their justification in the desire to defend or extend the existing democratic base of society, is the concrete and specific manner in which socialist opposition to war must express itself today. This means, among other things, that the real test of a socialist today is not so much his support of a pro- or anti-war position, but his willingness to support and assist any democratic, progressive tendency or current, no matter how slight or insignificant. But can we not be more specific about this “struggle for democracy”? Is it merely a question of daily, more or less indicated tasks?
It is that, and more. Obviously, this kind of a struggle must offer a perspective. If, for example, we can no longer oppose the rearmament of the British Labor Government on the old basis (and no one will contend that this rearmament is motivated by purposes of imperialist “reconquest” or profits, we assume), but must base our opposition to rearmament on the solid political ground that this is not the way to save England, that it can only lead to both military illusions and eventual disaster, we must at the same time offer a larger concept, related to our actual world and not simply the abstraction of “building socialism.” We would propose to call this a program for a popular victory over international Stalinism, based upon the activity of masses organized in their democratic institutions. In England, for example, this means a struggle for the deepening and extending of what has already been achieved by the existing government and not a retreat in the name of rearmament requirements. In other countries, the solid political core of the program for victory over Stalinism is the work to bring together and unify those scattered socialist forces which exist, with a broadening out of this activity by participation in those forms of democratic life that exist.
It may well be objected, isn’t this simply saying continue the struggle for socialism? Partly, yes, but it is placing this struggle within a new framework which we have already outlined. Furthermore, reality compels us to recognize unfortunately that there is little possibility of either halting the present disastrous rush toward war, or the war itself. Political and social life will then be expressed exclusively in terms of the conduct of the war and all problems related to it. Needless to say, it will be a long, complex and bitter struggle, filled with surprises and the unexpected. It is impossible to foresee what nuances and re-formulations in our political program will be required to achieve a popular, democratic, socialist victory over world Stalinism. But one thing is clear: a socialist position toward the war question is anything but a position of abstention from the social atmosphere which the war breeds. Issue by issue and detail by detail, we shall have to work out our way for bringing a lasting and progressive termination to the war.
November 1950
 



La Lutte de Classes sous la Première République
by Daniel Guérin
(Vol. 1, 511 pp., Vol. 2, 472 pp.) Collection “La Suite des Temps,” NRF, Gallimard, Paris.
The problem of writing history from a Marxist and revolutionary viewpoint is hardly a new one, although a field in which, unfortunately, little progress can be noted. On the one hand, those few efforts to set up scholarly Marxist societies or institutes for historic research have either petered out for reasons beyond the control of their initiators, or degenerated into reactionary and propagandistic centers of little or no value, as is the case with the famous Marx-Engels Institute. From another angle, the capacity and possibility for “objective” and meritorious Marxist history has never been subjected to a definitive test since those few who have made contributions in this field have been men of such outstanding talent and ability that, so to speak, their very personalities and creativeness made success inevitable and their works worthy of study.
Thus in the field of historic writings Marxism has several great historians to its credit (Marx, Engels, Mehring, Trotsky, Pokrovsky, Kautsky), but no substantial, well-developed school of historians exists or has existed. This may argue well for the insistence of Marxism upon the relationship between history and the making of history, but it cannot convince those who question Marxism as a science of society capable of writing a penetrating, revolutionary history of that society.
Daniel Guérin, author of Fascism and Big Business, and a long-time militant in the socialist movement of France, devoted five years to his elaborate, two-volume history of the French Revolution as seen from the standpoint of its inner class forces and struggles. While accepting the remark of the well-known French writer Raymond Aron to the effect that objectivity does not mean impartiality, but universality, it is questionable whether Guérin’s achievement will rank high in the field of Marxist history.
It is regrettable that Guérin’s work has not received the attention it merits, if only for the thought and reflection it provokes on the problems facing revolutionary historians. The New International has likewise erred in not recognizing the energy, devotion and care which Guérin has given to this absorbing task of reevaluating the Great Revolution. While we cannot hail the results of the author’s work with equal conviction, it must be recognized that the effort made by Guérin has much to teach us.
It is not the intention of this review to give a detailed or critical account of the two volumes. For those interested in such a review, by a scholar and specialist in the field, we refer to the work of R.R. Palmer of Princeton University (in The Journal of Modern History, Vol. XIX, No. 4, December 1947). An evaluation of Guérin’s sources and an estimate of his critical polemics against the classic analysts of the French Revolution (Michelet, Jaurès, Mathiez, etc.) may be found in the article of this reviewer who approaches the work from the standpoint of modern historical scholarship. We shall concern ourselves here only with the manner of approach and the spirit in which Guérin has carried out his work.
 
Proletarian Historian
It must be said in all frankness that Guérin’s execution leaves much to be desired. He has given us a splendid example of sectarian and doctrinaire historical writing carried out to such a degree that, at times, one feels he is reading a fantastic anachronism. Guerin describes himself as a “proletarian historian” whose purpose it is to analyze the Great Revolution from a proper “class” view. No previous historian has done this; no one has applied Marx’s concept of the permanent revolution (later developed in Trotsky’s theory) to an understanding of the 1789-93 period. Michelet wrote his history from the viewpoint of a “moderate democrat”; Jaurès was actually a “bourgeois republican” whose work failed to reach the level of good Social-Democratic history; Mathiez was blinded by his petty-bourgeois ideology which led him to glorify and misrepresent Robespierre – i.e., the petty-bourgeois leader of the revolution.
These men have written “bourgeois” history; Guerin sets out to write “proletarian,” revolutionary history which he sadly interprets to be Marxist history. The hero of his work is the sans culotte, the bras nu – the proletarian. But since Marxist history has a class and revolutionary objective, Guérin does not spare us his conclusion. The French masses today must reject the French Revolution as it was; it did not constitute a step toward their ultimate liberation.
“An authentic Marxist analysis should contribute to detaching the modern proletariat from the bourgeois orbit, by showing the false light in which the French Revolution has ordinarily been presented to it and revealing that even at that time, though in rudimentary forms, the struggle was engaged between rich and poor.”
It is clear from both context and general tone that by “struggle” Guérin means the main struggle. In fact, at one point Guérin insists that the same problems, in essence and content, exist today!
 
Confusing Revolutions
This approach – to put it mildly – dominates these two lengthy volumes. But it assumes a specific and detailed form. It is true, as the author tells us, that we may much better understand a former revolution in the light of a later one. Properly understood, the experience of the Russian Revolution helps us to penetrate the nature of the French Revolution more rapidly and with greater ease. But if we wish to transpose the content, terminology, situation and conditions of the latter to the former, then, far from understanding, we end up in a monstrous distortion and an absurd caricature of what we are studying.
This, regretfully, seems to have been the result achieved by Guérin. He confuses Marx’s early formulation of the “revolution in permanence” with Trotsky’s elaborate working out of the conception; he confuses primitive, ideologically weak and undeveloped san culottes of 1789 (or rather, to be more exact, a small leftist vanguard of this broad, indeterminate and embryonic class) with the Bolshevik-led proletariat of Czarist Russia; he fails to understand that the divisions within the ranks of the bourgeoisie (Jacobin vs. Girondin, etc.) were of far greater importance to the French Revolution than divisions within the ranks of the working class; he fails to understand the difference between the narrowly commercial and plundering aspects of the foreign wars engaged in by revolutionary France and their objectively historic results in battering down feudalism, etc. In a word, Guérin looks at the French Revolution from the position of a man who would examine the stars by doubling over and sticking his head between his legs. The rush of blood to the head (in Guérin this takes the form of angry indignation directed at the bourgeois leaders, Robespierre, Saint-Just, Danton, etc.) would tend somewhat to influence what is seen.
 
Error in Method
How well it would have been for Guérin to have paid attention to Engels’ remarks on the Marxist technique of writing history, or to have taken the examples set by the great Marxists! Engels pointed out that Marxism, far from oversimplifying and denaturing the process of writing history, required an analysis, synthesis and fitting into a whole of an infinite variety of facts, forces and currents; that the basic tenets of Marxism were levers and instruments for sifting, ordering and organizing the material of history so as to give a broad, overall view not with the impossible aim of achieving an alleged “objectivity,” but a universality – i.e., the place of this or that event or happening in the history of mankind. In this respect, of course, every Marxist (except Guérin) has understood the French Revolution as one of the most progressive, revolutionary and glorious events in human history. To say that a Robespierre is a “reactionary” because he was not Lenin or Trotsky is to make a mockery of Marxist methodology. May we merely note that even Guérin recognizes that the death of Robespierre marked the definite halting of the revolution’s progress, even in bourgeois-democratic terms.
Is it necessary to say that an embryonic struggle, a foretaste of the future class struggles of 1832, 1848 and 1871 already existed within the context of the French Revolution? Surely recognition of this situation cannot have been the compelling factor in the arduous labors of the author. Jacques Rous, the Enragés and Herbertistes, Babœuf and his supporters all take their place in the history of the revolutionary working class, but let that be a properly understood place. The fatal error in Guérin’s methodology is his effort to impose the criticism, standards and possibilities of the Russian Revolution upon the French Revolution.
 



Les Temps Modernes, Nos. 46–47, August–September 1949
Special Issue on Germany, 374 pp.
Director, Jean-Paul Sartre, 30, Rue de l’Université, Paris vii.
This brief review is only to bring to the attention of our readers who have a reading knowledge of the French language what is surely the most valuable survey on contemporary Germany yet produced. In this double number of Les Temps Modernes, the magazine published by Sartre – incidentally, one of the best socio-literary magazines produced in the world today – has assembled a series of articles and documents on Germany which give the reader a collective, overall view of that land. The outstanding merit of this work, edited by Elie Gabey, is the fact that it is entirely the product of German authors, journalists, critics and writers.
The issue is divided into three sections: War and Resistance Movement; the Occupation; and Germany: Year Zero, a section containing a cultural and sociological survey of the country today. There are articles on the type and quality of the German resistance movement, written by participants who objectively weigh its failure; studies of German soldiers in action and German occupation techniques; reports on the politics of occupation, including some written by SED members and supporters; and, finally, studies of German literature and its new problems, the “Jewish question” in Germany, German contemporary science and art, including an article on the revival of psychotherapy and psychoanalysis since the end of the war.
To single out a few of the outstanding articles is not easy, but we may mention Hugo Buschmann’s article on the resistance movement; a study of German refugees in Germany by Marnix (who estimates there are now 14,000,000 refugees within the Western zones); Otto Hess’ piece on how the Stalinists took over the University of Berlin; Eugen Kogon’s excellent study on German reactions to the problem of the concentration camps, and many interesting pieces on problems of German art, literature, etc. Nor should we neglect to mention a fascinating study by Hilde Thurnwald, a trained sociologist, on family life in Berlin.
The editor of this issue has done well to include several pieces written by German Stalinists. The reader is once more struck by the leveling effect that Stalinism has upon both thought and style. The resemblance between Stalinist “intellectuals,” no matter how diverse and unrelated is their respective national origin, is something deadly to behold.
The diversity of opinion and attitude of those Germans who live in the Western part of divided Germany is, under the circumstances, a sign of recovery and health. Many viewpoints, ranging from liberal and religious intellectuals to Social-Democrats and revolutionary socialists, are represented.
It would be impossible to comment on all that is contained within this issue except to repeat that it is unquestionably the best study of Germany yet to appear. This is the real Germany, seen from within! Copies may be obtained by writing to the address of Les Temps Modernes, listed above.
 



India, Pakistan, and the West
by Percival Spear, Ph.D.
The Home University Library, Oxford University Press, 1949.
In the last century a number of British scholars and historians produced notable works, scholarly and urbane in content and style, describing the vast sub-continent that had fallen into the hands of the Empire. To be sure, these works carefully skirted the manner by which the conquest had taken place and concerned themselves largely with the complex history of this strange and fascinating land. The purpose of this school of literature was to make India accessible to the Western World in acceptable term?. Not until much later, when the first wave of German specialists began their studies, was it realized that the 6,000-odd years of Indian history and thought had roots not so easily accessible to bourgeois historians.
But the social and national struggle of India, centering around the Congress Party and Gandhi, in turn produced a new type of literature, political and sociological in nature. Problems of economy, irrigation and agriculture, politics and government, were dealt with. Class analysis and class rivalries tended to blot out the traditional approach to Indian affairs. It appeared that broad divisions such as Hindu and Moslem, or Buddhism as opposed to Mohammedanism, were to be erased in the heat of the anti-imperialist and class struggles. The issue of caste faded before that of class.
Unfortunately for India, however, a sharp reversal of the historic trend set in. The reasons for this are well worth a detailed study which has yet to be made. The catastrophic division of India, now an accepted fact, took place. It is only natural under these circumstances that a corresponding reversal of literature dealing with India should accompany this; a throwback to a previous period when English historians objectively described traits of Hindu and Moslem, Hindu theology, Hindu caste and Buddhist doctrine. Such is this recently published work of Percival Spear, a fellow at Cambridge University.
As a historic and fairly illuminating introduction to the religious, communal and social problems of India, no fault can be found with this work. Spear finds that India has “twin souls” – Hindu and Moslem – and it must be admitted that the degree, and depth of this distinction was sadly underestimated by socialist and Marxist writers. The main scope of this short book is to trace and outline the nature of this difference. Like English historians of the classic school, the author has an admirable skill in concentrating, digesting and summarizing a great mass of material and presenting it in the cool, somewhat ironical manner associated with such writers. His portrait of Hindu and Moslem soul is undoubtedly largely influenced by E.M. Forster’s Passage to India. There is little economic or social analysis in this work and the influence of such factors is glossed over except for the casual remark (p. 91) that “...most of the industrial resources and nearly all the capital and skill of united India were in the hands of the Hindus.”
In the concluding chapter, from page 212 onward, there is an admirable summary of the fantastically difficult problems, in all fields, which confront the ruling Hindu society – the caste problem, now brought to the forefront by the social reform bill proposed by Nehru; the problem of Hindu theology in relation to Western concepts; the problem of historic Hindu culture and its effort to survive. To this must be added, of course, the problem of tightening relations between India and Pakistan which constitute a permanent menace of war between these two areas of the sub-continent. In restating lasting problems in the light of the division of India, this work has perhaps begun a new phase of the vast literature dealing with the most important nation in the Asiatic world.
 



A Communist Party in Action
By A. Rossi
Translated from the French.
Yale University Press. 267 pp. $3.00.
This study of Rossi is a disappointment, both in form and content. Published originally in French (Physiology of the French Communist Party), its publication now in English will not have added much to the growing literature on the sociology of Stalinism. Physiology is supposedly a study of the functional processes of a living organism, but the author fails to earn the pretentious title he has given his book.
The author, a former leader of the Italian Communist Party, has gone over ideologically and politically to Social Democracy (French SFIO), and writes from the viewpoint of anti-Bolshevism and an apparently extensive admiration of the late Leon Blum. The Popular Front epoch of France (1936–39), whose objective, according to Rossi, was the integration of the French masses into national life, marked the last great effort of French revolutionary movements to set the nation on a progressive path. It failed because of the blindness of the bourgeoisie, Stalinist equivocation and party routinism. Then began the great war, with the revival of French Stalinism. It is this period with which Rossi is concerned.
His analysis of the French Communist Party is restricted to the period between mid-June 1940 and the end of December 1941. It is based upon a minute study (carried to pedantic lengths and often annoyingly repetitious) of newspapers, brochures, tracts, leaflets, documents, etc., issued by the French Stalinists during this period when the party underwent a crucial turn from a position of “defeatism,” as understood in the Stalinist manner, to one of “resistance and defensism,” occasioned by the Hitler attack on Russia (June 1941), again conceived in the Stalinist way. Rossi informs us that he is not writing a history of the party, but that as a sociologist he is presenting a cross-section of the “communist world,” to consider its structure and “physiology.” In his promising introduction, Rossi tells us that “Communism is a complete world, a living and complex world which one must study like any specific ‘society’ ...” This world possesses its own laws, its “physiology,” its specific reactions. Rossi has chosen his point of concentration (1940–41) only as a springboard for penetrating deeper into the party’s doctrinal roots, policy, psychology, etc. In a burst of enthusiasm for his own work, he informs us that he is only doing what sociologists and anthropologists do for primitive societies, objectively, scientifically and profoundly. Alas, Rossi has spoken too quickly and his achievement falls impressively short of his promise. We have here a routine and academic description of French Stalinism; it is not physiology, nor even comparative anatomy. It is abstract anatomy, the detailing of the organisms of a dead body.
It must be noted, however, that Rossi has assembled invaluable material not only on the structure and functioning of the party, but also on the technique of “changing the party line,” and the imposition of party will on the blind membership. Furthermore, much of the documentary evidence included in this volume (particularly in the lengthy appendices) contain overwhelming evidence of the Stalinist policy of collaboration with the Nazi conquerors of France in the earliest phase of the war. Some of the documents, such as those related to the party’s effort to resume publication of the then suppressed L’Humanité, are fascinating in their evidence of Stalinist cynicism, subservience before the Nazis and flexibility in principle.
Yet even here one important and essential fact must be noted, and this is characteristically ignored by Rossi. That is, the uniqueness and specific nature of Stalinism, which distinguishes it from its rivals and all other tendencies seeking state power. The attempt to resume publication of a legal L’Humanité failed because the Nazis demanded one price which the Stalinists refused to pay: removal of the hammer-and-sickle symbol, and a change of name.
Even though all readers would have known this was the party publication, they refused this demand of the German occupation forces because to the party the name and symbol are both traditions of the party’s goal: power and control in the country. It is significant in this respect to note that in the early days of defeat, the party seriously expected that it would quickly arrive in power, thanks to the general disrepute in which both the bourgeoisie and socialists of France were held.
While the documentation provides rich sources of material for further and future studies, the author is unqualified politically to handle his own material, or to draw any worthwhile conclusions from them. His own point of view is a vague humanitarian socialism which he associates with the French socialist movement from its utopian, Jaurèsian and Blumian days. All sectors and classes of French society must be assimilated into a new national community based upon the progressive and creative role of each. The Communist Party, however, represents an element which cannot be digested; Rossi employs the well known “foreign-nationalist party” utilized by Leon Blum to describe the Stalinists. But this ambiguous term is weak since it does not indicate the functional relationship existing between French Stalinism’s foreign (Russian) ties, and its national (internal) program and activity, the goal of which is power in France as part of a worldwide Stalinist form of society.
Let us give some examples of Rossi’s superficial approach and incorrect physiology. In discussing the Stalinist “road to power,” Rossi, who treats of French Stalinism in terms of the Russian Bolshevik Party, states the goal is the traditional “dictatorship of the proletariat.” The Stalinist manipulation of words (people, popular democracy, etc.) is merely sleight-of-hand for the time-honored concept of Marxism, and has no other objective than deceit. We submit that such an approach not only indicates Rossi’s unacquaintance with this Marxist concept but, more important, indicates his incapacity to penetrate the field of Stalinist sociology. Stalinism does employ new terms, to which it attaches new meanings; this is true, but these semantic changes have sociological significance and point to new objectives and goals having nothing in common with historic Marxism.
It is clear that Rossi’s approach insists upon operating within the framework of anti-Bolshevism and anti-revolutionary Marxism in precisely the same terms as orthodox Social Democracy approached these problems. Rossi is thus only a superficial Kautsky, at best, and lacks the training and vast historic knowledge of his master.
The truth is that much of Rossi’s polemics have already been written for him by Kautsky, Abramovich and others, with the qualification that these authors, in any case, directed their attack against the properly delineated enemy. This is why Rossi’s work seems to miss fire constantly. To cite several other instances, Rossi describes the subordinate character of the party’s conspiratorial and clandestine existence, emphasizing the dominant factor of its links with the mass movement which it constantly seeks to strengthen through its agitation and propaganda. This perfectly valid point, however, leads us to the far more serious problem involved in Stalinist sociology, namely, how does the party retain and strengthen its mass links despite numerous betrayals, shifts in party line (and Rossi himself admits how the party retained its full cadre strength despite the two fantastic shifts made in the period that he covers). Rossi does not even pose this question, let alone suggest a response.
Furthermore, in describing the fierce and fanatic loyalty of the party membership, Rossi draws that vulgar and lifeless analogy with ecclesiastical organizations and religion. This issue, one of social and historic psychology, is closely related to the objectives and potentialities of Stalinism, but Rossi cannot see the special features of the movement he misunderstands and is therefore obliged to fall back upon worn-out patterns.
In his chapter headed A New Kind of Party, he concludes that the party has produced a “new kind of Frenchman,” hitherto unknown in the history of that country. Pointing out that France’s revolutionary movement has always emphasized the individualistic, dramatic and improvising side of activity, Rossi raises the interesting question of why the land of Babœuf, Lamartine and Jaurès now contains within itself a hard core of Stalinist cadres, led by such unrevolutionary French types as Thorez, Duclos et al. The reader will search this book in vain for any response.
Valuable as it may be for primary and secondary source material on a highly important phase of French Stalinist history, and thus capable of enhancing our political understanding of Stalinism, this book does not rise above description. The sociology of Stalinism is a field crying out for Marxist study and interpretation.
 



So long as British imperialism and its Empire are only in a state of decline and disintegration, rather than being put entirely out of their misery, there will be a Perfidious Albion to carry on the long tradition of treachery and cynicism associated with the Empire. His name today is Ernest Bevin and he seems hell bent, over the issue of Palestine, to outdo his numerous predecessors in hypocrisy and fraud. We do not know whether Bevin’s particular vileness is due to his oft-rumored personal anti-Semitism, but we do know that even the original Albion might have shuddered at some of the special sliminess of Bevin.
Britain is waging war, at second hand, against the new born state of Israel. This is the blunt fact of the matter, and all else is concealment. British imperialism holds the key to continuation of the war or a temporary truce and arrangement. Her close ties with the three leading Arab states of Transjordan, Iraq and Egypt are the medium, by way of treaties, by which Britain supplies the arms and equipment for the Arab invaders of Palestine. Britain has built these armies and now maintains them.
Other facts are well known: the supplying of English officers (the Arabs’ strongest and key army, the Legion of King Abdullah, is officered in its highest ranks by Englishmen); an $8 million yearly subsidy goes to Abdullah, the ambitious monarch whom Britain set upon his throne with a gift of a large hunk of the former Palestine Mandate. There is no question that Bevin desires a victory of its Arab armed forces over Israel and the imposition upon the Jewish people in Palestine of a greater Trans-Jordan, absorbing all or most of the present state of Israel and within which the Jews would be a national minority under the rule of Abdullah. This greater Trans-Jordan would then be entirely the product and creature of British imperialism and the bulwark of its Near East strategy, with Abdullah a grateful and obedient Quisling.
 
Britain Shifts Strategic Positions
An Empire dies hard. The behavior of Britain in this situation is the consequence of its desire to hold on tight to historic positions, while shifting the centers of defense and power. The new, semi-independent status of India, Ceylon, Burma and, to a lesser extent, Malaya, have given new importance to the Near East within what remains of the Empire.
“British diplomacy was striving mightily this week to prevent the British system of Middle East defenses, so laboriously contrived and so painfully defended during the past thirty years, from being shot to pieces over-night in Palestine.” (New York Times, May 29.)
This lies behind the British actions. The physical withdrawal of British troops from Palestine has not changed these strategic interests since, in effect, the Arab Legion is now assigned the role of the very same troops that have been withdrawn! What are these interests? They may be summarized as follows: (1) Protection of the Suez Canal, still the route to the Middle and Far East. (2) Naval domination of the eastern Mediterranean, by holding on to the island of Cyprus [1] with its naval bases. (3) Retaining control over a valuable source of food, raw materials and – above all else – oil; not to mention protection of one of the few remaining areas where British financial investments are still untouched. (4) Control over an important buffer area, to be used as a protection for British colonies in Africa and a defense against possible Russian imperialist advances into the Mediterranean. A system of alliances with the three Arab nations mentioned above has the fulfillment of these strategic purposes as its aim.
 
Opportunity for British Socialists
The activities of Bevin and his UN representatives have been carried out to place the Arab armies in the best possible position for winning a quick victory over the Jewish state and thus reasserting British power in the Near East. This has been the objective of all the ambiguously worded UN resolutions for “truce” offered by Britain, and all her appeals to American opinion. As a consequence, the clash between American and British imperialism over Palestine has reached new heights. For the moment, America (for a variety of reasons) is backing the Israeli state but in the long run this backing will crumble before a common fear on the part of America and Britain that only Russian imperialism will benefit in the end by a continuation of the present conflict.
Although there is every reason to believe that there is much dissatisfaction with Britain’s vicious role in the Near East in England itself, there have as yet been no open or direct manfestations of this. To our knowledge, there have been no popular demonstrations or meetings held protesting against this criminal policy by the Labor Government and its imperialist Ministers. A splendid opportunity exists, nevertheless, for revolutionary socialists and particularly for the English Trotskyist party to work against this policy and to grow in strength and influence not only by denouncing the imperialist actions of its government, but by championing and supporting the elementary right of the Jewish people in Palestine to national freedom and independence, if they so desire. Will they accept this opportunity, or remain silent as they have in the past on this issue?

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed edition “Cypress”.
 



Dear Editor:
Although motivated from opposite viewpoints, the critical letters of comrades Goldman and Hall published in last week’s Labor Action, equally reject Labor Action’s editorial stand on socialist policy with respect to the Marshall Plan. In my opinion, these critical letters only serve to bolster the approach of Labor Action, and do not challenge its validity. Recognizing the difficulty and complexity of the problem, Labor Action attempted to avoid the equally undesirable doctrinaire-sectarian approach (that of Hall), and the short-sighted, narrow conception (that of Goldman) by evaluating the overall meaning of the Marshall Plan and properly placing, within the framework of the Plan, the aspect of material and economic aid which is apart of it. While it is true, as Ben Hall remarks, that Labor Action’s position is much closer to that of Goldman than his own, this is irrelevant since the fact is we reject both approaches!
 
Goldman’s Position
Let us consider the objections of our critics. First, those of comrade Goldman. According to him, Labor Action is opposed to the Marshall Plan “... because of the motives of its proponents”; and, in the same vein, because the “conditions and strings” attached to the ERP Bill make it necessary to oppose it. Goldman has read our editorial, no doubt,but he apparently has not understood why we are against the Marshall Plan in general, and would have voted “no” on the ERP bill in particular.
Let us reiterate the basis of our opposition. Considered as a whole,the Marshall Plan in all its aspects is the concretization of American imperialist strategy in our day. Our principled opposition to imperialism makes it mandatory to oppose the Plan of imperialism; the Marshall Plan IS imperialism, the imperialism of 1948. The “conditions and strings” in the ERP Bill itself are of SECONDARY importance; they are but the symptomatic evidence of the disease itself and certainly do not determine, by themselves, our attitude towards this Bill. They help us only to diagnose its real nature. If Goldman would but take the trouble to read the ERP Bill itself, adopted several weeks ago by Congress, he would understand this. He seems to think the Bill is a simple act of Congress appropriating $5½ billions for material aid, and nothing else. Let him read the Bill, its preamble stating its purposes, the various clauses and conditions etc. and he will learn why,in the concrete circumstances, we consider this specific Act part and parcel of the imperialist cloth of the Marshall Plan and why, therefore,we express our “no confidence” in American imperialism and its Plan by voting against the very Bill which symbolizes the Plan itself.
But, at the same time, Goldman is just as wrong when he interpret sour position to signify that we would oppose such a Bill or a similar one “... even if our vote means the defeat of the bill proposing aid.”There is nothing in the editorial justifying such a conclusion, particularly since it discussed a specific bill on which a specific vote had taken place in Congress under the circumstances of today. Although far too much emphasis has already been placed upon this question of Congress, voting procedure and parliamentary tactics (all of which is subordinate to the real issues involved), let me try to make one thing clear, if only to avoid further misunderstanding. There is nothing that says our present attitude toward this particular bill must be eternal and never-changing. If the inconceivable circumstance (to me, at least, inconceivable) had arisen where ours would be the decisive vote, determining whether any aid at all would go to the peoples of Europe, then in my opinion it is quite conceivable we would vote “yes,” because THEN the issue would be one of aid, or no aid, rather than the actual, now-existing issue of a vote of confidence or no-confidence. But it is obviously the latter issue which was involved in the real vote that took place, not Goldman’s imaginary vote. Thus it seems to me that comrade Goldman has failed to properly relate the Marshall Plan (Truman Doctrine, ERP Bill, military aid et al.), and the immediate question of economic aid to Europe, hence his argument.
 
Hall’s Position
Our differences with comrade Hall are more serious. Although he shares with comrade Goldman the fallacy of equating economic aid to Europe with the Marshall Plan, he carries his principled opposition to an impossible extent, falling victim to that system of “logic by extension” which invariably leads to absurd extremes.
If imperialist war will be the continuation of the imperialist Marshall Plan (as Labor Action has stated), then how will Labor Action’s policy on the Marshall Plan mean continuation of its opposition to imperialist war, when and if it begins? The implication of this “devil’s logic” is that since, according to Hall, Labor Action is at present critically supporting the Marshall Plan, it will therefore critically support the war that follows from it!. What is wrong with this, of course, is that Labor Action does NOT give “critical support” to the Marshall Plan, as does, for example, the Socialist Party.
We have explained, over and over, that we are against the Marshall Plan, but we are for full material aid to Europe, supplied and furnished by the present, capitalist government. Contradictory? No more “contradictory” than any other immediate demand (such as a housing program, higher social and unemployment insurance etc.) Marxists make upon the government. Why should comrade Hall be for a housing program from the government – one which would yield huge profits to contractors, etc.? His position is reminiscent of that of some early Marxists who,“on principle,” voted against any and all government legislation. They quickly abandoned this when its absurdity became apparent. We raise the demand of full aid to Europe in the same sense as any immediate demand upon the government, regardless of its composition. Is this the same as the Marshall Plan, or support of it? Hall, by attaching as a qualification, “... in principle, the necessity to install a working-class government to aid the non-imperialist reconstruction of Europe” makes out of our immediate demand a transitional slogan whose realization lies in the future, whether near or remote.
But why must the question of aid to Europe become a matter realizable only under such circumstances?The imperialist character of Marshall Plan aid lies not in the actual physical food and material itself, obviously. Material goods are “neutral.” The question is, how are they utilized, for what purposes and by whom?That issue will be resolved by the evolution and pursuit of the class struggle in Europe itself and by our concrete struggle against all efforts by America to make use of these goods for its imperialist purposes. Is it not legitimate to also point out that carrying out of Hall’s slogan means, practically speaking, no aid to Europe today?
“The chief task of American socialists in regard to the Marshall Plan is to expose these (humanitarian) pretensions,” says Hall. We disagree, because we conceive of TWO chief tasks, of equal importance: (1) To oppose American imperialism, its imperialist Marshall Plan with all its connotations and implications, its war aims and its pretensions. (2) To fight for economic aid to the masses of Europe AT THE SAME TIME, as absolutely vital and essential for the revival of the European revolutionary movement, the only movement that can possibly defeat Stalin’s obvious intent to conquer the entire old Continent. Does Hall accept the validity of our second proposition? How interesting that in his entire article there is no mention of the danger of Stalinism and, least of all, of a general strategy for overcoming this danger! Why? Because Hall is looking at the world through only one eye and this one eye sees ONLY American imperialism. We see the twin, dual and equal menaces of both American and Russian imperialisms and this gives us a truer picture of the situation.
The revolutionary movement is pressed harder than ever on two sides by the great weight of the two Powers. If this movement is to survive and grow, it must be able to maneuver and tack within the free space still left to it. This “free space” exists because of the contradictions between the two Powers. One of these contradictions, at the moment, compels American imperialism to pour billions into Europe for its reconstruction and stabilization. We would be supreme idiots not to take advantage of this. No, we want this aid to Europe, we demand more and more of it! It will help our class brothers there and give them the possibility of lifting themselves up once more and gaining that bare physical and moral level from which they will have the strength to combat, on an independent basis, both imperialist war camps. Prostitutes, Black Marketeers and paupers can’t make a revolution!
Thus we must reject Goldman’s position because it would mark a break in our consistent political opposition to American imperialism; and thus must we reject Hall’s position because it would shunt aside to another planet the need for a concrete struggle on behalf of the European workers. The position of Labor Action is: against the Marshall Plan as a whole; for the fullest immediate economic aid to the peoples of Europe.



 


Comradely,
Henry Judd



 



Three years after the end of the war, the formal partition of Germany into eastern and western sectors has become a certainty, an established fact. After three months of secret negotiations, the three occupation powers of the Western zones (America, France and England), as well as the three Benelux nations (Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxemburg), have signed a pact on the future of their section. This pact must now be ratified by the Six Powers present at the London Conference.
Although a sharp propaganda struggle will take place in the French National Assembly, with a joining together of the de Gaullist and Stalinist forces to oppose ratification, there is no question but that all powers, including France, will agree to the terms. The London Pact, then, will become the law of the land and a truncated Germany, split between the Allies (45 million German population) and Stalinist Russia (17 million Germans) will result.
 
Terms of the Six Power Pact
What are the essential terms of the pact?

Creation of a decentralized Federal German Government by early next year, under overall Western Powers controls, and brought into being step by step: a conference of top German political figures, a constituent assembly elected by September 1, a constitution written under Allied tutelage to be voted upon, etc.
 
Continued and indefinite occupation of all zones of Western Germany, even under the so-called independent, self-governing German Federation.
 
Creation of an international authority, consisting of Americans, French, English and Benelux representatives, with German “advisors,” to control the use of the Ruhr’s production of coal, coke and steel in accord with the role assigned to Germany under the Marshall Plan. The Big Three have the decisive vote on this international body, and the Big Two (America and England), by controlling votes from their respective zones, actually have a majority of 8 out of 15 possible votes!
 
Allied and military government control at top levels shall remain in strict force during the entire period of the Pact’s operation – that is, the indefinite future. An illustration of what this means is contained in a New York Times’ dispatch (June 8):


“The first steps in the formation of a Western German state will be taken in Frankfort on the Main on June 15.
“On that day ... the Military Governors of United States, British and French zones of occupation, will meet the State Presidents of the three zones. They will authorize the German leaders to call a constituent Assembly to write a constitution for the state and will outline to them the type of constitution on which the three Western powers agreed at the recent London conference.”

Such is the essence of the new Six Power pact. What has been the general reaction to it, particularly among the Germans and also the Russians? Except for the most conservative and provincial German politicians – those, for example, among the corrupt politicians of Bavaria whose real interest lies in an autonomous Bavarian state – the proposals have aroused nothing but dismay, hostility and, at best, reluctant acceptance. The universal reaction was that an alien solution, meaning the definitive division of the German nation, was being shoved down their throats by foreign powers. The most backward forces of provincial autonomy and decentralization are encouraged – actions which can only lead to further disintegration of the German nationality. The control over Germany’s richest area,the Ruhr, was being taken out of the hands of the nation and turned over to foreign powers. Even the Social Democratic Party, which has collaborated everywhere with the military governments, labeled the Pact “a one-sided foreign decision which lies beyond any German responsibility.” The general attitude, however,i s that little or nothing can be done about the matter.
 
Russians Create Own Set-Up
The Russians and their Stalinist supporters in the SED party have naturally reacted more sharply and openly. On one level, the Russians have resumed their sniping warfare to force the Allies from Berlin and redoubled their terrorization of the Berlin population. More important, the Russians have indicated their political and governmental response to the moves of their Allies. The Presidium of the “People’s Congress” – organized by the Russians – denounced the Pact as “a final step in the dismemberment of Germany” and then proceeded to add its bit to this final dismemberment by proclaiming itself as “the sole existing all-German (!) and democratic representative of our people.”
The next step will be to announce that their People’s Congress is the all-German government, thus outbidding the Allied Constituent Assembly in brazenness and contempt for the German people. The Stalinist party will henceforth campaign in western Germany for adherence to this alleged all-German government created and blessed by Moscow. In contrast with western Germany’s decentralized regime, Stalinist eastern Germany will be a highly centralized state apparatus, organized along the approved 1948 totalitarian models of the GPU and the Kremlin, and with the perspective of expanding and seizing power over Allied Germany.
The proposed Pact is reactionary, imperialist, undemocratic and vicious in each of its points. Its indignant rejection by the German people is entirely correct and any political movement that accepted it would place itself in an impossible position. The immediate motive for these proposals is the necessity for ending the drift in German politics and providing some form of state framework for the carrying out of western Germany’s economic role in the Marshall Plan. The Ruhr, above all, must provide the steel and coal required by France to rebuild its economic base in Lorraine, northern France and the Saar. If western Europe and France are to be stabilized, and provided once more with sufficient military strength and power to stand up against a possible Russian march, then the economy of western Germany must move once more. Within the framework of this Pact for Germany, new hope is offered to the German capitalist class to participate once more in the life of Europe and the sharing of profits. That all this means a definitive division of Germany is unimportant to both the Russians and the Allies who, after three years of effort, have finally driven to this point. After all, the powers have not only split. Germany – Europe and the world as a whole have been split!
 
Democratic and National Aspirations
Yet the fact remains that only in western Germany do real prospects remain for the revival of an independent German labor movement which can be influenced by revolutionary ideas. In Stalinized and terrorized eastern Germany, the GPU is supreme and the air itself strangles the possibility of political life. While maintaining its general position of complete hostility to all the forces of occupation, and demanding the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Germans oil; while pressing for a democratic, all-German constituent assembly to crown the regaining of national independence as a political goal, it is also clear that major effort on the part of any German revolutionary elements will have to be concentrated in the soon-to-be-born state of western Germany. There, above all, as an example for Stalinist Germany and as counter-blows to the fake “unity” program of the SED party, a struggle for democracy within western Germany must be conducted.
This means total rejection of the proposed Pact, together with very concrete demands in its place, such as the demand for a freely-elected, democratic Constituent Assembly instead of the entirely reactionary form of Assembly proposed; the demand that this Assembly shall submit its proposed constitution to a popular ratification and that it shall have sovereign power in western Germany, with its decisions not subject to any form of military government veto. Likewise, the proposed “internationalization” of the Ruhr, which is only a formula for robbery of its resources, must be fought under the slogan of retaining this area and its wealth as constituent parts of the German nation and its resources.
The issues with western Germany are clear, and a revolutionary group, no matter how small, can prove it has a practical and possible alternative to imperialism; an alternative bound up with democratic and national aspirations.
 



Has the Stalinist movement begun a new campaign for control and mastery over the European continent? Has the period of lull and retreat that began with the electoral defeat in Italy several months ago come to an end? While it is not yet possible to answer this question with absolute certainty there are many indications that a new phase in the Stalinist program for the conquest of Europe has begun.
We know, of course, that the retreat of Stalinism after its defeat in Italy would only be a temporary matter, in any ease. As a social system whose significance spreads far beyond the confines of Russian borders, Stalinism may be temporarily pushed back at given points,but can never be definitively defeated except by a force which would destroy it by means of its social superiority. This force could only be the socialist revolution, a non-existent force in Europe today. The only serious rival that Stalinism must face at the moment, therefore, is American imperialism which can only contain or check it at this or that point.
But Stalinism has its ups and downs and its road to power in Western Europe is far from easy or sure. In this sense there is a strategy and tempo for attempted European conquest which is largely determined by the Kremlin dictators and the Cominform bureaucrats operating out of Belgrade.
 

Thrust Towards Western Europe
After the Italian elections, a period of reorganization, retrenchment, hardening of the Stalinist party ranks, consolidation, etc., was ordered from above. This took many forms. The parties in Eastern Europe and Italy, with the Hungarian CP in the lead, were purged of “unreliable elements that had entered en masse since the end of the war,” and more rigid membership standards have been introduced. This meant a purge of opportunist, careerist and haven-seeking elements. Important Italian leaders were demoted – that is, punished; Gottwald was kicked upstairs to the presidency of Czechoslovakia and sharp warnings were issued about the abuse of governmental power. Simultaneously, a completion of nationalization and the erection of the new state apparatus in all the conquered countries was carried out, so that they now form substantially one solid bloc, unified elements in the Kremlin pattern. The Kremlin theory, clearly, is that a solid base in eastern Europe, tightly bound together by economic treaties, similarly patterned Stalinist regimes and the cement of GPU terror, will provide the best possible background for thrusts into western Europe.
By western Europe, of course, the Stalinists have primarily France and western Germany in mind. Since their major strategic effort for some time past, and in the future, will be the struggle against the Marshall Plan. It is quite natural that their efforts will be concentrated in those two countries key to the success or failure of this plan. France is to receive the largest share of Marshall Plan aid during 1948, while the revival of the Ruhr’s productivity is essential from the viewpoint of American imperialism. Thus, the early indications of a new Stalinist offensive are centered in these countries.
In France, where government policy has failed to drive back the inflated price levels (there has actually been a 2 to 5 per cent increase since the formation of the present Schuman cabinet), the labor movement is demanding revision of minimum wage standards, and both federations of labor have called for a 20 per cent general increase. Despite the fact that productivity in heavy industry is now above the 1938 level (the first country in post-war Europe to attain such a goal!), all the evils of inflation and high prices are still present. There is therefore enormous and justified discontent among the workers, making it possible for the French Stalinists to largely retain their influence among the workers despite their major defeats of last year and the general tendency of political stagnation even in the French Stalinist party.
Thus, in their stronghold of Clermont-Ferrant, the Stalinists were able to lead the rubber workers into aggressive strike action, spread this action into various key cities of France and pull off a one-hour general strike demonstration. All this was probably preliminary to more serious and widespread battles undoubtedly on the Stalinist schedule. It was a form of testing the mood of the French proletariat at this moment, and the response has undoubtedly been encouraging to the Stalinist leaders. While this does not necessarily mean a new wave of strikes similar to those of last winter, it does mean that the French working class is about to resume its class struggle – still under Stalinist leader-ship – over the issue of who shall benefit from the recovery brought about by the ERP program.
 

Struggle for Germany Nears Climax
Germany, of course, provides the real center for the renewed struggle between Stalinism and American imperialism for control over Europe. There the Stalinists are in the midst of a militant campaign, basing itself on the desires of the German people for national unification, against the Allied occupants of western Germany. The struggle for Berlin rages more violently than ever and is definitely approaching a climax.
The first steps in the formation of a western German state and the currency reform carried out by the Allies as a means of completing, on an economic plane, that splitting of Germany already carried out politically and geographically, has stimulated the Stalinists in Germany to new heights. They will shortly announce formation oft heir own German state which, henceforth, will wage war for absorption of the balance of Germany by any means conceivable.
Without necessarily adding up to a major effort or gamble on the part of Stalinism – such as an attempt to actually seize power in one of the countries of western Europe – all this seems to indicate active and aggressive days ahead for the Stalinists and their machines. To what lengths they will go is, of course, unpredictable. Stalinism operates on many complex levels – ranging from the organized squads and groups of gangster and criminal elements to the manipulation of great masses involved in social struggles. Its temporary respite and regrouping seems to be drawing to an end and, in view of the incapacity of European capitalism, aided though it is by American capitalism, to solve any of the major economic problems of Europe, the vast and restless Stalinist machine finds more than enough sources to feed its criminal appetite.
 






The following is an interpretation of the Czechoslovakian coup of the Stalinists, submitted in resolution form by the three undersigned comrades, which should be read in conjunction with the discussion material on the same subject published last month. The point of view of the Editors was expressed under Notes of the Month in that issue (The Czech Coup As Test of Theory). Aspects of the question not covered in that editorial are the particular themes of the present discussion. In addition to longer contributions, which as usual will be published depending on space availability and quality, short letters of comment are also invited for our correspondence columns. The Workers Party Bulletin, which is a discussion organ on sale to the public, is also open to longer articles not used in the NI. – ED.



*
(1) The events in Czechoslovakia are of great importance for the additional light they throw on the role of Stalinism as a social revolutionary (or, in another sense, counter-revolutionary) force in destroying capitalism and instituting bureaucratic collectivism. The evidence presented by the Czech events strengthens the view that under favorable international conditions, the Stalinists are capable of overthrowing a capitalist state (as Italy or France) and establishing their party dictatorship by means of an insurrection that bases itself upon the proletarian masses, in the same manner as fascism based itself upon the petty-bourgeois masses.
(2) Czechoslovakia was the arena of struggle between three social forces in the period since its liberation: the bourgeoisie, striving to maintain capitalism; the proletariat, striving to achieve socialism; and the Stalinist bureaucracy, striving to achieve bureaucratic collectivism. As in every decisive struggle for class domination, the central objective of each social force was the control of the means of production. For the bourgeoisie this meant private ownership. For the Stalinists this meant nationalization with bureaucratic control. For the proletariat, this meant nationalization with democratic control by the workers. The Stalinists’ struggle for nationalization clashed directly and immediately with the bourgeoisie. The proletariat supported the Stalinists in this struggle, accepting the Communist Patty as a workers’ party and seeing in its nationalization measures the beginnings of socialism. Clashes between the new bureaucratic-collectivist managers of the economy and the organs of workers’ democracy, like the Works Councils, were confined to isolated enterprises and, in the absence of an anti-Stalinist revolutionary movement, remained subordinated to the struggle against the bourgeoisie.
(3) In the February events in Czechoslovakia the state power was not overthrown and replaced by a new one since the essentials of state power were already in the hands of the Stalinists. The February action represented the final step on the Stalinist road to total state power by means of eliminating the opposition parties and establishing the dictatorship of the Communist Party. In its purely political aspects it is similar to the coup of Hitler in 1933, carried out with the support of Hindenburg and the Reichswehr generals and supported by the petty-bourgeois masses, or the coup of Louis Bonaparte on the 18th of Brumaire basing itself upon the army and state bureaucracy and supported by the peasantry. In its social aspects ihe Stalinist coup is, of course, decisively different. Unlike the coups carried out in Bonapartist and fascist regimes, which left the social basis of the old regime intact, the Stalinist coup served as ihe last stage in the destruction of the social power of the old ruling class.
(4) The real Stalinist revolution took place during the liberation of Czechoslovakia by the advancing Russian army and the uprising of the resistance in Prague. These events placed the Stalinists in control of the police and the army – the essence of state power.
 
Stalinists and the Masses
(5) The ability of the Stalinists to dominate the state apparatus after the Russian armies were withdrawn was made possible by their considerable mass base, predominantly composed of the industrial proletariat.
(6) The Stalinist coup, carried out by police measures, became an easy unopposed victory due to its support by the bulk of the proletariat and large sections of the poor peasantry. The Stalinists brought the pressure of these masses to bear through techniques traditionally associated with the proletarian struggle for power –  street demonstrations, work stoppages, workers’ militia, and extra-legal seizure of key points by the Action Committees.
(7) The fact that the masses participated in the events in a restrained, orderly and disciplined manner was the result, not of their disinterest or apathy but of the absence of serious opposition. The minority of the workers who were apathetic or even hostile could play no role in the absence of an organized means of showing their feelings. In the absence of an anti-Stalinist, revolutionary socialist party, the Stalinists experienced little difficulty in controlling the working class. To see a “fear of the masses” on the part of the Stalinists in the Czech events is to conceive of the revolutionary action of the proletariat in terms of spontaneity and to discard our traditional view on the role of the party. Especially is this true where the Stalinists lead the masses in a struggle against the bourgeoisie.
(8) A majority of the industrial workers of Czechoslovakia have followed the Communist Party almost continuously since 1920. The only other party they have known is the Social-Democracy, which has stood at the extreme right wing of European reformism since the First World War, and has often participated in coalition governments with the usual disappointment of its working-class followers. Out of a population of 14 million, more than a million Czechs and Slovaks (overwhelmingly the former) belonged to the Communist Party before the coup. This is a higher percentage of the population than composes the membership of the Russian CP. In the 1946 elections to the National Constituent Assembly the CP polled some 2,702,452 votes and won 38 per cent of the seats in the Assembly, while the Social-Democracy won 13 per cent of the seats. The trade-union movement was almost totally under CP leadership, as were the factory committees.
 
Why Workers Supported CP
(9) Because of the tremendous lowering of socialist consciousness and understanding, which is a principal feature of our epoch, the Czech workers accept the Communist Party as a revolutionary and socialist movement. In the absence of a genuine Marxist party, the CP appears to the workers in this light mainly as a result of its anti-capitalist role: (a) The CP has waged a policy of destruction of capitalism and the political power of the bourgeoisie; (b) the CP policy of nationalization has given the workers a feeling of liberation from capitalist exploitation and, despite bureaucratic domination, a voice in economic control; (c) the CP has waged a struggle against all the old symbols of reactionary power – the Church, the landowners, the big banks, the newspaper syndicates, etc.; (d) the CP has taken the progressive and popular side in many secondary matters like education, cultural organisations, etc.; (e) the CP represents Russia, which, despite misgivings the workers may have (offset by references to Russia’s backwardness), appears to them as a progressive, pro-working-class, socialist force, while the enemies of the CP represent Anglo-American imperialism, long considered centers of world reaction by the socialist workers of Europe; (f) in the top leadership of the CP stand old labor veterans, like Zapotocky, who have appeared before the masses over several decades as leaders of workers’ struggles. As a consequence the bulk of the class-conscious workers see the program of the CP as a program of socialism. In addition to these reasons, many workers, and a large petty-bourgeois and peasant following, have been attracted to the CP as a result of its national chauvinism, expressed through Pan-Slavism, above all, since the expulsion of the German and Hungarian minorities gave the Stalinists billions of dollars worth of land and houses to distribute and many bureaucratic posts to dispense. The susceptibility of the Czech workers to racist propaganda is one of the terrible aftermaths of Munich and the Nazi occupation.
(10) The presence of the bulk of the proletariat in the Stalinist camp cannot afford a basis for our support to it, as both the Cannonite and Johnsonite brand of self-styled orthodox Trotskyism contend. The support of the Stalinist struggle for power cannot be put on the plane of “making a mistake along with the masses,” in the sense of the July Days of the Russian Revolution. Support of the Stalinists in such circumstances is to help the workers to commit mass suicide and to destroy all possibility of a free labor movement, the best soil for the re-education of the workers in revolutionary Marxism.
 
With the Anti-Stalinist Camp
(11) The Stalinist coup was aimed at achieving a totalitarian state and all opposition to it, short of that by avowed fascists, was progressive. The correct course of the Marxists in the Czech events therefore, was to support any democratic opposition to the Stalinists, especially such as the demonstration of the Prague students.
(12) In countries where the big bourgeoisie has been expropriated, as was the case in Czechoslovakia, there is a very favorable possibility of organizing a mass, popular, anti-Stalinist movement upon a democratic basis, and with less chances of its domination by bourgeois reaction. Marxists must not withdraw from such an anti-Stalinist camp merely because reactionary elements attach themselves to it. Wherever Stalinism becomes the immediate danger, as in Czechoslovakia, even the most conservative bourgeois democrats must be supported against it.
(13) It is false to describe such a popular, anti-Stalinist opposition as a “bourgeois restorationist movement.” The petty-bourgeois and peasant masses, plus the anti-Stalinist minority of the proletariat, will not struggle against the Stalinists in order to restore the Skoda and Bata families to their industrial properties. These elements of the population want freedom from police rule and from Stalinist domination of every aspect of their lives.
(14) The struggle between the Stalinists and the bourgeoisie in Czechoslovakia never reached the stage of mass struggles only because the domination of the Stalinists was so complete that the bourgeoisie considered it an irresponsible adventure to oppose them. Had the relation of forces been less one-sided and had a mass struggle broken out, there is no reason whatsoever to believe that the Stalinists would not have utilized measures associated with revolutionary proletarian warfare to achieve their victory. The complete domination of the mass movement by the Stalinists under conditions of military conflict does not become less but greater, as a consequence of military rule on both sides.
(15) The further the country in which the Stalinists struggle for power is removed from the pressure of the Russian military power, the more must the Stalinists rely upon the forces of the proletariat to achieve the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. Stalinist policy is therefore carefully attuned to keeping its proletarian mass base in countries like Czechoslovakia (and many more times so in countries like France and Italy) until the Stalinist dictatorship is firmly established. Stalinism, however, does not appear openly as a separate force, apart from the working class, as long as the bourgeoisie remains the main obstacle to Stalinist power. Though there was considerable friction between the aims of the Stalinists and the desires of the workers in Czechoslovakia, due to the dominant role of the CP in the government and the economy, this friction was overshadowed by and subordinated to the dominant struggle between the Stalinists and the bourgeoisie. This experience once more underscores the fact that wherever Stalinism is a mass movement that is waging a struggle against capitalism, the proletariat, as such, is incapable of playing an independent role, except where there is a sizable anti-Stalinist, revolutionary socialist party to give the workers a program. In the absence of the latter, opposition to the Stalinists from the workers’ ranks can only be incidental, local and isolated, and easily eliminated by the Stalinists through control of the trade-union apparatus, levers of information (press and radio) and, in the last analysis, armed detachments.
(16) Marxists must frankly recognize the terrible consequences of supporting a camp which opposes itself to a Stalinist-led proletariat, especially where the struggle reaches the stage of a civil war. This cannot be minimized by saying that we have often opposed movements that had the support of the bulk of the workers. The crucial difference is that in the past all of these movements (Roosevelt, People’s Front, etc.) were of a reformist character or of a social patriotic character and sought to preserve capitalism rather than destroy it. Under conditions of a Stalinist struggle for power, the proletariat in the Stalinist camp does wage an anti-capitalist struggle, but as part of a deadly anti-socialist and anti-democratic movement. To oppose ourselves to such a Stalinist-led proletariat by supporting a camp that contains bourgeois elements and yet seek to break the workers away from the Stalinist illusions requires that we work out tactical problems such as we have not confronted in the past.
 
Role of Marxist Party
(17) The role of a tiny revolutionary Marxist propaganda group in conditions like those of the February events becomes extremely difficult. Its policy must, however, be guided by these two main lines: (1) support to all anti-capitalist economic measures, with constant emphasis upon workers’ democratic controls in economy, and (2) support to all pro-democratic political measures, without regard to their past bourgeois-democratic associations, like freedom of the press, assembly, organization and speech for all classes and for all parties, except avowed fascists.
(18) The socialist ideal toward which we strive was placed upon a scientific basis by Marx, especially through linking its achievement to the struggle of the proletariat against wage slavery. The proletariat remains for us the only class which can overturn the rule of the bourgeoisie. The fact that under given historical circumstances the proletariat has in some countries fallen victim to illusions about the nature of the Stalinist parties and that a Stalinist-led proletariat can overturn capitalist rule to institute not socialism, or even a step toward it, but totalitarian bureaucratic collectivism, does not afford a basis for rejecting the proletariat as the bearer of the socialist struggle. However, where the proletariat does enter the Stalinist camp, our prime loyalty is not to the class as it is but to our socialist aims and to the kind of proletarian movement that must be created if our aims are to be realized. Given the terrible consequences of social retrogression, in both its capitalist and Stalinist forms, the Marxists in the countries under the Stalinist heel and in the countries torn by a civil war between the Stalinists and the semi-fascist bourgeoisie as in Greece and China, must be prepared to devote themselves to preserving the program and lessons of the socialist struggle and teaching it to necessarily small circles, especially the youth, to again re-establish the revolutionary cadres. However, even though a small group, the Marxists will enter every struggle that promises to defend or enlarge those freedoms necessary for the rebirth of a free labor movement and a new mass revolutionary party.
(19) The fate of the proletariat, and of the people as a whole, in the countries that have fallen victim to Stalinist rule cannot but penetrate to increasing numbers of workers and intellectuals in the rest of the world, especially to those in closest proximity to the Iron Curtain. This knowledge will contribute greatly to clarifying the terrible illusions that still persist among the masses as to the nature of Russia and the Stalinist parties. Such a growing clarity on Stalinism will greatly facilitate a counter-offensive against the influence of the Stalinists among the masses in countries like Italy and France. Such a counter-offensive can be successful only if (a) Western Europe experiences a period of economic revival which eases the most pressing problems of the masses; and (b) a socialist regroupment takes place which produces strong anti-Stalinist, anti-reformist parties.
(20) The extent to which Stalinism can make further inroads upon the masses of Western Europe depends in an increasingly decisive manner upon the future development of the American working class. The emergence of an independent labor party with a firm anti-Stalinist and anti-capitalist orientation would have a resounding effect upon the masses of Europe, including those behind the Iron Curtain. The developments in the American labor movement in the next years will be crucial for the future of European labor and, consequently, of Europe itself.
 



Ten thousand miles across the Pacific and America has come abegging Madame Chiang Kai-shek, China’s “First Lady.” Hat in hand and artificial smile on her face, Madame is asking for nothing less than $3 billions, at the rate of one each year for the next three years; The reception has varied thus far from a cool welcome to a downright frosty atmosphere in Washington, and Madame finds it slightly more difficult to produce the smile after each fresh interview. We freely predict that it will be entirely wiped off her face by the time the plane takes off to deposit her back with her nervously waiting Generalissimo. Time runs out on the General and his ’Missimo, and a couple of the world’s most high-powered scoundrels and despicable frauds are about to be put out of business.
Since the end of the war, the sum of $2½ billions has been spent by American imperialism to bolster up the Chiang-Kai-shek-Kuomintang regime in its struggle against the armies of Chinese Stalinism. Everyone is familiar with the results. Operating behind the guise of a vast, popular and democratic people’s movement, the Stalinists have moved from victory to victory and are preparing a perhaps final rout of the so-called official Nationalist government. But what else could have been expected? To anyone having the slightest acquaintance with Chiang and his regime, the result was foregone; the only question was how long would it take? Already, the Chinese Stalinist leadership talks with that confidence which emanates from power and their plans for China become broader and deeper in scope with each new rout of the sadly demoralized forces of the Chinese dictator.
 
Triumphed in Counter-Revolution
The regime of Chiang and his consort, the Madame, was born in reaction and anointed with the blood of tens of thousands of Shanghai’s workers. Andre Malraux has made this story familiar in his famous novel, Man’s Fate. Chiang triumphed as the counter-revolution in 1927, and his counter-revolution has proceeded without end for the past 21 years of his hold on power. There is no need to detail the personal stories of Chiang and his Madame – much is known about them, and the personal evaluation of them by General Stilwell in his War Diaries as corrupt, rotten and utterly power-mad individuals holds true throughout their careers. It is difficult to imagine a couple whose greed, desire for political and social power, ambition and aggressiveness can match that of China’s “President” and “First Lady.”
The regime they have constructed over 21 years matches the structure of their personalities. A clique of politicians, doing the political work of an infinitesimal group of bankers, exporters and brokers, landlords and bureaucrats – this is the essence of the Chiang regime. In this era of political filth and moral corruption, it is doubtful if any regime in the world has sunk as low as that of Chiang. Surrounded by his murdering body of personal guards (the Green Shirts) and exercizing dictatorial power in appointments, legislation and juridical authority, Chiang (always with the smiling Madame at his side to exercize the necessary powers of charm) was a necessary and obliging cover for the corruption underneath.
As war and emergency relief passed through the various echelons of his administrative bureaucracy, his underlings dipped into the “gravy train” and helped themselves. Socially, Chiang’s policy has been complete reaction – crushing of the labor movement, enforcement of traditional landlord power and procedure (he has proved incapable of even developing an agrarian program in opposition to that of Stalinism, thus guaranteeing his social and military defeat in advance in his war with the Stalinists), denying of the most elementary democratic procedures (there has never been a popular election in China’s history since Chiang took power) and refusing to consider the most meager reform measures.
I would say without much hesitation that Chiang Kai-shek and his Madame are the two most universally despised, hated and spit upon people in China today. These two bankrupts cannot even rally one serious segment of any of China’s social classes to their banner! Their “supporters” (we mean those now fleeing to southern China, Hong Kong and Burma!) consist of the following groups and types:

Generals, warlords and military students.
 
Bankers, factory owners and merchants who deal with foreigners.
 
Landlords, gentry, judges and administrators.
 
Criminal elements of the cities (brothel keepers are ardent pro-Chiangists!).

We doubt if the whole unwholesome crew amount to 2 per cent of the entire Chinese population of 450 millions.
 
Handwriting on the Wall
And now Madame is here, to plead her cause! The handwriting is on the wall and she knows it. She is far too shrewd to know otherwise, yet she hopes to secure enough aid to create – with the aging Chiang – a regime in southern China. But the rottenness is too far gone. And what may be the final act of her overlong political life again shows her in her accustomed role of treachery and cynical bargaining. In exchange for the $3 billions she demands, she is offering American imperialism full rights over China! Nothing less than a revival of extraterritoriality, special privileges and everything associated with the early and most hated imperialist methods in China is what Madame proposes to America. Even those privileges which the Chinese bourgeoisie itself fought against, and partly succeeded in destroying, would be restored if only $3 billions are shovelled out!
“I’d Like to Get You on a Slow Boat to China.”
This is Madame’s tune, but Uncle Sam imperialism will not fall for the seductive voice. He knows she represents nothing any more, that her power is crumbling fast. American imperialism would not hesitate one moment if it thought seriously that the expenditure of several (even 5 or 6) billions more would not only retrieve the situation, but would actually gain it a decisive foothold in China. Truman’s hesitation and coolness has no ideologic or moralistic motivation; it is the consequence of his thinking on the problem of China as a risk: a poor investment, to be written off with a pious wish.
Let the Madame return to China and to whatever miserable fate awaits her. Everything about her and what she stands for is hypocritical and corrupt; the departure of this pair of scoundrels and their supporters will be no loss. The real tragedy, of course, is the colossal victory that Stalinism’s conquest of China will represent for Stalinism. The meaning of such a victory will have to be assessed at a much later time, when Mao Tze and his fellow Stalinists more clearly reveal their policies and politics. Meanwhile, the lot of China’s workers and peasants, who are about to exchange the yoke of one reactionary regime for another, despite the obviously tremendous social differences between them, is something that demands much thought and reflection.
 



A little over twenty years ago, a handful of Chinese Communist Party members and leaders, in a state of utter dejection and demoralization and entirely without influence, fled hastily from Hankow to the southwest of China. The last act of their series of criminal adventures – the Hankow “Soviet” – had just been played out with the crushing of the Hankow proletariat. The new master of Kuomintang China, the dictator Chiang Kai-shek, had established his indisputable authority. In remote Hunan province, this same handful of Stalinist political adventurers began their struggle anew, but on a different political and social basis. This time, they organized peasants into roving bands, loosely knit into a so-called Red Army, and vowed to continue their struggle.
Twenty-odd years later, the historic circle is about to be completed, even in the literal sense of the word! This band of several thousand guerrilla fighters – many of whom were originally pressed into service, and who constituted a unique combination of peasants and tough Stalinist leaders with a savage determination – has now grown to a mass organized army of perhaps 3,000,000 soldiers, organized and led by a political movement which itself numbers perhaps 3,000,000: the Chinese Communist Party. Pursued by Chiang’s original Nationalist armies, then harassed by local warlords in Chiang’s pay, the original Hunan and Kiangsi peasant forces staggered 6,000 miles over mountains to the deepest and remotest hinterland of China, Shensi province, far in the northwest. There, over a period of years, Stalinism worked out its program for China, adapted to their view of the nation’s special needs and circumstances.
During the course of the struggle against Japanese invasion and the war itself, Chinese Stalinism finally took root and found other means of solving its basic problems – lack of contact with the industrial centers of the Chinese seaboard and Yangtze valley areas; lack of arms and munitions; lack of a worked-out program for conquering the peasant mass without entirely alienating the middle layers of the backward areas over which they ruled. It cannot be denied that the Stalinist leaders – Mao-tze-tung; Chou En-lai and Chu Teh – proved far more successful in manipulating broad masses of backward peasants than in handling the problems of the proletariat and its relations with China’s capitalist class and imperialism. Trained in the Stalin school, they have the necessary lack of principle and the required suppleness to execute whatever turns and twists the Stalin “general line” demanded in the past.
 
The Failure of Chinese Capitalism
But, at this moment when power over all of China and its 450 million people apparently lies within their grasp, it must be recognized, even by them, that they had a most helpful – in fact, essential – ally who did everything possible to smooth and virtually guarantee their path to victory. We refer, of course, to the assassin, Chiang Kai-shek, his cut-throat wife, “Madame,” currently sulking in Washington, and the despicable crew of Kuomintang landlords, bankers and warlords who surround this loving couple. Is it conceivable that Stalinism could today stand at the threshold of social and political power if the murderous Chiang regime had not consistently conducted itself in such a way as to lose every shred of popular support in China? The failure to institute a democratic regime, to solve the eternal land problem, to build up China’s industries, to settle accounts with the foreign imperialists – all this made it inevitable that a new force arise and confront these unavoidable issues. Stalinism has proved to be that force and this is the whole of the disaster and tragedy that China faces today.
Put in a more theoretical way, Chinese capitalism, represented by Chiang and his corrupt Kuomintang Party, has proved incapable of handling the simplest and most basic needs of the country, the historic tasks of the democratic revolution. Chinese capitalism thus takes its place unreservedly in the ranks of world capitalism as a national segment of an international social order that can no longer live and breathe. But backward, chaotic China, whose masses have gone through more hell in the past ten years than any other nation in the world, must be organized, unified and dragged out of its backwardness if it is to survive. If the Chinese bourgeoisie has proved incapable of this, and if the proletariat has likewise been unable to perform this task (and this is the case in China since the defeat of the revolution in 1927), then the conditions have been created for the successful intervention of another force, neither capitalist nor socialist, in the proletarian sense. This, obviously, is the role of Chinese Stalinism.
But just as the return of Mao-tze and his Stalinist clique to the seaboard areas of China from which they fled 20 years ago marks the completing of a geographic circuit, so does it mark the completion of an ideological circuit. Politically and socially, this is not the same Stalinist leadership which left once before. At that time, even if in an incorrect and erroneous manner, it represented the working class and had its roots and origin in it. This is no longer true. These men will re-enter the Yangtze valley cities, Shanghai, Hankow, Nanking, etc., as conquerors over an apathetic and indifferent proletariat, upon whom they will seek to impose their preconceived plan for the totalitarian organization of a Stalinist China. They come at the head of a vast conglomeration of peasant irregulars, partly impressed and partly motivated by Stalinist land reform and bound together by a staunch layer of Stalinist soldier-regulars. Their basic aim is to assume control peacefully over a submissive proletariat.
 
The Course of Chinese Stalinism
How else can we explain why this clique fails to cal! upon the seaboard proletariat to rise up and administer the coup de grace to Chiang? The more easily the armies of Mao-tze slice through the territories still “held” by Chiang, the closer they approach the industrial cities, the more apprehensive Chinese Stalinism becomes and the more it reveals its true social nature. Yes, Chinese Stalinism is destroying feudalism and its remnants as it marches; just as it will destroy whatever remains of advanced Chinese capitalism and foreign investments. In this sense, the victory of Chinese Stalinism may be describes as a “social revolution.” That is, it is fundamentally overturning the existing social relations of ancient China. But in its place, what is to be substituted, providing Stalinism has its way? It offers only the social order of Stalinism, at present drawing its support from the land-hungry peasant mass and later holding its power on the basis of the now- familiar technique and pattern of Stalinism. Broadly speaking, the future image of a Stalinist China can today be seen in the land of Jugoslavia. This means, of course, the enslavement of the passive seaboard proletariat under the gigantic and bureaucratic apparatus of the future.
Chiang Kai-shekism is finished and it remains only as to how it shall be buried. It is of little relevance whether a “coalition” peace government is formed (with the Stalinists running the show), or whether Chiang clings to life over another few months. The final blow to his regime has been administered by the announcement of ECA Administrator Hoffman to the effect that America was fully prepared (even anxious!) to do business with the new China in the making. No loss, this. But the creation of the new China is another problem and, indeed, poses innumerable questions not only for the imperialist world but for revolutionary socialists.
America, obviously, is counting upon the development of a Titoist tendency in Chinese Stalinism. Once Chiang has been disposed of and the civil war ended, the problem of reconstruction will face the new ruling group in all its force. Above all, this requires capital, in enormous quantities. Can Stalinist Russia supply the capital goods and equipment essential for the construction of a productive China which is, in turn, essential for the Stalinists if they are to build up their totalitarian state?
To ask the question is to give the answer. Only American imperialism is in a position to supply masses of capital and this knowledge has tended to lull the State Department in estimating the real nature of the disastrous defeat they are suffering. Precisely how this will work out cannot yet be seen, but there is little doubt that the U.S. will “do business” with the new China, and thus hope – temporarily at least – to neutralize the effect of this Stalinist victory by weaning the new Chinese ruling class away from Russia and encouraging whatever Titoistic trends it may develop.
The consequences of this Stalinist victory will reverberate not only throughout the world of capitalism, but within the ranks of the labor and socialist movement itself. If the bourgeois press is still so dazed and partly oblivious to what is happening in China that it seeks consolation in the thought that, after all, what happens in China is not decisive for the world, then it is also true that the labor movement has only begun to reflect on the meaning of these events. Yet these preliminary estimates are worth consideration and we shall do this in the concluding part of this article in next week’s issue.
 



It is doubtful if Russia and Stalinism have suffered more consistent and more humiliating defeats since the end of the war than those to which they have been subjected by the workers and people of Berlin. Every effort of Stalinism to bulldoze and beat into submission the over 3,000,000 people of this fantastic city has been, until now, crushingly defeated. There is every reason to believe and hope that Stalinism will be unable to conquer Berlin, barring the unlikely step that the Russian troops simply take over by force of arms and precipitate a world war. This is surely Stalinism’s worst and bitterest political defeat in many years, and there cannot be too much praise for the people of Berlin who have defied the world’s most powerful totalitarian machine.
Close to 1½ million people voted, under innumerable threats and provocations inspired by the phony Stalinist government created several weeks ago in the Russian image. “Whoever refrains from voting, has chosen life over death,” announced the Berliner Stalinist Zeitung, in demanding an election boycott. Only 14 percent of the eligible voters in the Western districts chose Stalinist “life.” The rest of those who failed to vote came from the Stalinist sector of the city where, naturally, there were no polling booths.
The American State Department hypocritically stated its admiration of the “civic courage” of the Berlin people who, it said, “had earned the admiration of the democratic peoples of the world.” This, from the same government which gracefully held back its armies a mere three years ago so Stalin could have the honor of occupying Berlin and then set its name to the infamous Potsdam agreement which provided the basis for the present occupation of the city and led to the present crisis. This is the, type of watery propaganda which the Berlin people can well afford to ignore. If American imperialism is attempting to horn in and garner credit for this successful struggle against Stalinism it is because it is increasingly nervous about certain developments in the struggle which it does not care to see.
 
A Working-Class Victory
It is entirely wrong to believe that this victory at the polls was a conservative, rightist, “democratic” – in the bourgeois sense of the word – demonstration against Stalinism. The facts are otherwise. This was a working class, pro-socialist and generally leftist victory over Stalinism. The Social Democratic Party of Berlin in the eyes of the people, represents a left-wing and progressive political movement against Stalinism and – in Berlin, at any rate – it has very consistently and sharply combatted the Stalinists. (Whoever heard before of Social Democrats organizing defense squads and throwing Stalinists physically out of meetings?) A vote for the Social Democracy in Berlin was both anti-Stalinist and anti-western occupation in the sense that this Party has, throughout western Germany, become the medium by which general dissatisfaction is expressed. The other parties are most closely bound to and with the occupation authorities, particularly the Christian Democrats. Therefore, a supporter of the occupation would naturally vote for these parties and not for Social Democrats. Look at the results:



 


   


1948


   


(Western Sector)
1946




Social Democrats  


65%


51%




Christian Democrats


19%


26%




Liberal Democrats


16%


11%




Stalinists  


–


12%



The Social Democracy, in other words, literally swamped its opponents two to one and received a clear mandate to continue its struggle against the Stalinists, but in a socialist manner. Of course, the Social Democratic leadership immediately violated this clear mandate by proposing a continuation of the present city coalition government with those two parties whom the population had just decisively repudiated. Such actions, of course, lie in the very nature of Social Democracy which resist all efforts to force it into independent action.
 
Symbol for All of Germany
But those efforts and pressures will continue. The Berlin which resists Stalinism today is not the fear-ridden and trembling Berlin of six months ago. Instead, it has become a symbol for all of Germany and the German people who look toward the city not only for its courageous struggle against the Russians and their German quislings, but also as laying out the road towards independence. This is the important thing.
Berlin has become a mass political movement, with many important political and social implications. A Germany, crushed by the war and the occupation, is fighting its way back and – with the workers in the lead – beginning to organize its former social and political life. This process, particularly in a political sense, has gone furthest in Berlin whose workers have known how to take advantage of antagonism between America and Russia to their own advantage and in their own interests.
Six months ago, an Allied withdrawal could only have resulted in a total Russian occupation of the city and, subsequently, a disastrous effect upon western Germany’s people. Now Stalinism is on the defensive and the real impetus of the struggle no longer lies in the hands of the occupation forces and their handful of troops, but in the Berlin population itself. This is the essence of the victory and the meaning of Berlin today.
Just how far this initiative and independence of struggle will develop cannot, of course, be foretold. Today it is strong, because the Berlin people have a new confidence in their power and feel that they have become a center of Germany’s entire struggle. Even the Social Democrats demand a doubling of the airlift supplies – a demand which every socialist should support. The most disconcerting factor in the situation is the absence of a revolutionary party in the city, or even of a left-wing, strongly critical of the leadership, within the Berlin Social Democracy.
A socialist wing in this Party would press for Increased independence from the military authorities, for a doubling and trebling of the airlift (do we remember how leading Airforce authorities at first said it couldn’t be done?), and – most important of all – begin the organization of defense squads, armed and trained, to guarantee the retention of its victory and its freedom. It would demand, of course, dissolution of any coalition government with the bourgeois parties.
It is precisely this tendency for Germany’s anti- Stalinist movement to free itself from dependency upon the western Allies which the State Department is aware of, and fears. Can one imagine General Clay giving arms to the anti-Stalinist workers of Berlin? Far easier is it to imagine his arriving at a “deal” with the Russians at the expense of these workers. Yet such is the real movement throughout Germany today where, as economic life and production grows stronger, the workers’ movement and all national institutions stand up once more on their own feet. It will still take a long time before all this matures into a force sufficiently powerful to assure the defeat of Stalinism and, at the same time, be a force independent of the Allies. But such is the inevitable tendency, and the Berlin electoral victory is a major step along this line. We are learning valuable lessons about how Stalinism can and will be defeated.
 



Last week we described the economic and productive revival of the Ruhr, Europe’s greatest industrial concentration center, and the struggle for its products now freshly revived among the great powers. Secretary of State Marshall has indicated that the British and Americans intend a full speed ahead course for their plan, despite the French objections, and that the latter can only expect minor concessions which change nothing in principle. The Ruhr, then, is about to enter upon a new phase in its existence – a period of trusteeship nominally held by Germans, with strict supervision and regulation of distribution by America, first of all, and the other powers.
It would be a mistaken idea to believe that this new phase means a step in the direction of a revival of the old German, monopolist and cartelized Ruhr heavy industry – the economic heart and soul of the Nazi Empire. The old cartels have definitely been smashed, and they will not return because they symbolized – above all for America – German power and rivalry. Even if the new Ruhr trusteeship employs many of the former owners, plant managers, superintendents and personnel (the question of whether they were or were not Nazis plays no part in their choice by the military governments as trustees), this does not mean a return of the old system because these men return to work and management under entirely different circumstances and conditions, with a new role to play. Dream and conspire as they will among themselves for a revival of the Ruhr cartels, the real power is held by America and Britain which will determine the limits of production, set the market possibilities, and intervene whenever necessity demands it.
Behind the new Ruhr trusteeship stand cartels and monopolies, but they are those of America and the about to be created government monopoly of England. The Ruhr trusteeship cannot be the powerful rival and the mighty industrial Empire that once existed under an independent Germany.
This, then, is the imperialist solution to the Ruhr problem. Stalinist Russia is firmly and coldly squeezed out of the entire proceedings; France will be partly quieted by concessions and bribes; the German capitalists are offered a chance to resume business again; and the American colossus, by its sheer weight, effectively controls the management, distribution and productive levels of this whole area. The Ruhr solution then is a clear illustration not only of the real international relationships of our time, but proof of where real power resides. At the moment, it is a big victory for American imperialism and partly offsets its current defeat in China, for example.
 
Various Proposals for Solution
So much for the imperialist way of handling such affairs. Are there other proposed solutions? It is well known that among the Great Powers themselves there are variations in how to handle the future of the Ruhr. The British, for example, are not particularly keen on the American technique of recreating, under new conditions, the old Ruhr managerial caste. They go along, however, because they believe a future west German government will nationalize the Ruhr industries much in the same manner that coal has been nationalized in England, and steel is about to be – that is, under the direction and control of a governmental body and its bureaucracy. Rapidly becoming familiar with the techniques of such bureaucratic nationalization, and assuming it will take place under a Social Democratic government (prototype of the British Labor Party), the British believe such an achievement will best serve their purposes of reviving the great pre-war English- German trade which, in effect, dominated western Europe.
Equally well known is the so-called "internationalization" of the Ruhr proposed by French imperialism, and rather widely supported by types like Dulles, some American liberals etc. While this "internationalization" has never been more than vaguely explained at best, its cardinal principle is clear enough: to destroy the juridical basis upon which rests the claim and demand of the German nation as a whole that the Ruhr remain THEIRS, as a part of the sovereign wealth and possessions of the land of the German people. Under such a type of "internationalization," of course, this historic ownership would be destroyed, and replaced by a so-called international ownership, consisting of the powerful nations who would manage, control and run the Ruhr, sharing its products according to their will. In the hands of powers like France such a formula would merely be a legal basis for any power to claim future ownership rights over the industries and resources of any nation it may have conquered. It is simply a scheme for French imperialism to gain a veto hold over the Ruhr and, as such, was rejected by America which wants the Ruhr to move and produce.
These “nationalization” and “internationalization” proposals all have a common basis in the imperialist framework, and are simply variations due to the particular desire of a particular imperialism. They are frauds. Yet for socialists the Ruhr solution remains as pressing as ever. Within Germany itself, even the Social Democracy – noted for its timidity – opposes the return of the former Ruhr magnates and the resurrection of the former managerial groups in any form. They demand, first of all, unconditional recognition of the fact that the Ruhr and its industries – extractive and manufacturing – belong to the people, to the German nation, despite its present division and its defeat in the war. Such a demand is correct and must be supported.
The German working class has built and created this great center; it is theirs and must remain theirs. They are the ones to determine its future, how it shall be controlled and what it shall be used for. In their hands, we can rest assured its coal will go to revive silent factories and its steel to rebuild destroyed cities. Tied in with the Marshall Plan, or held in escrow by French imperialism, its products will go to rebuilding Europe's newly proposed western defense system.
The Ruhr then belongs to the German nation – this must be the first and foremost slogan of socialists. Take it out of the hands of the imperialist powers. Secondly, to assure that it shall never again be used by German capitalism in the form of monopolies, cartels, trusts etc., once its possession by a sovereign German nation has been won, the entire area must be socialized under the control of the miners who dig the coal and the workers who run the steel plants. Within Germany itself, then, the solution of the Ruhr problem is part of the struggle for the creation of a new, independent German state – free of and unhampered by any occupying forces – and making out of this state a democratic, socialist republic run by the masses of people.
 
Suggesting a Broad Perspective
But the problem of the Ruhr goes still further, and its solution along socialist lines is unfortunately rather remote. As the world’s greatest industrial concentration, the Ruhr means far more than the rebuilding of Germany itself; it is a vital part of Europe and has always been the heart of its (the whole Continent’s) existence. The Ruhr is an international center of production, and its wealth forms a part of the life blood of a vast continent. It is not enough to have the Ruhr operate in a progressive manner within the national borders of Germany itself. A unified and integrated European economy would make out of the Ruhr its foundation, producing coal and steel for all of Europe. Looking beyond national borders, German socialists must propose that the Ruhr become such a foundation for an independent and united Europe, free of both Russian and American influence, and – with the power given to it by holding the Ruhr – capable of living its own life.
Just as the solution of the Ruhr problem for the Germans cannot be separated from the need for an independent German government which has the power to freely settle the future of the Ruhr (a power it hasn’t today and will never receive from the occupants); so the European solution for the Ruhr problem cannot be separated from the struggle for an independent Europe, free from Stalinism and Marshallism, and so federated that it can best utilize the resources of this mighty area in the name of all of Europe. A nationalized Ruhr, sovereign property of an independent Germany, and economically integrated into an independent and unified Europe – this is the broad perspective that European socialists should offer as against the plans of imperialism.
 




After Gandhi’s Death
Gandhi has been cremated and his ashes scattered in India’s holy rivers. Hardly had this been completed than the struggle and regroupment in India’s internal politics, set in motion by his death, began. The first actions of the Indian cabinet, temporarily united over the popular issue of punishing his assassins and striking a blow at communalism and violence, were to arrest various fanatic leaders of the Hindu community who, it is obvious, were involved in a widespread conspiracy and plot to force an extreme anti-Moslem position on the Indian government.
The Cabinet outlawed all private organizations which had organized their own armies, and communal organizations (except the most notorious and influential of them, the Hindu Mahasabha, which can be easily understood if we refer to it as the KKK of India) based on religious “hatred and violence.” The effectiveness of such a decree is more than questionable, on many grounds. In the first place, the cabinet and government have stepped in to block and halt popular mass demonstrations that began against these communal organizations. When the workers and masses in India’s large cities, in their anger and indignation at the reactionary murder of the leading advocate of communal peace, attempted to destroy one of the leading sources of communal hatred, they were met with denunciation by Nehru, India’s Prime Minister, and often by police shots and violence when they attempted to take matters in their own hands. This is a now familiar story, particularly with weak and unstable governments attempting to establish themselves in power.
Furthermore, the entire conservative leadership of the Congress Party, known as the High Command, is closely linked up – and always has been – with Hindu communalism in general, and the Hindu Mahasabha in particular. This holds particularly in the case of 72-year-old Sardar Patel, the Congress political “boss,” whose anti-Moslemism is notorious. The investigation of the crime is being conducted in secrecy and little has actually been revealed, except that the net can easily be cast over men in the top and highest places in Indian life. We predict that only popular pressure and indignation will produce all that has been uncovered. The government will make every effort to calm matters down, proceed in secrecy and not raise too much dust. A popular demand of the hour would undoubtedly be for publication of all that is known.
Finally, behind the thin front of cabinet unity, the storm of conflict is clearly brewing. Gandhi, supremely skilled at reconciling all political tendencies within the Congress (particularly in bringing Nehru to heel at Patel’s feet!) is now gone. Nehru faces the supreme political test of his career – to remain the tool of Patel and his majority in the cabinet, or to proceed on his own! It is an issue of the extreme conservative, capitalist-industrial ruling Hindu class – which more or less knows what it wants and where it is going – versus a liberal, middle class intellectual and radical whose title of India’s High Priest of Confusion has been earned by many years of hard effort along such lines. Nehru is a minority in the cabinet, but a very popular face-saver for a collection of outright reactionaries. Will he capitulate and remain, or start a new opposition? No clear answer can be given to this, since much depends upon popular reactions to events, new alignments within the country, and the evolution of the present difficult economic situation. Gandhi’s death ended the Gandhi epoch of India’s history and began a new period whose characteristics it is much too early to see.
*

A Rump Germany
Deny it as it will, the action taken last week by the combined British and American military governments in setting up a bizonal economic administration for the two zones is nothing less than the creation of a rump Western Germany, a major step toward the splitting, of Germany as a whole. This action, expected since the end of the London Conference, creates an administration including an economic council and various other bodies having many economic powers. It will have no formal political powers, but, as the New York Times remarks, “... in a wrecked land where transportation, food distribution and finances are of the most urgent concern, those powers are great. Moreover, the economic administration has the form – if not the name – of a political regime.”
This step means that Western Germany (later to include the tiny French zone which will form a Trizonia organization as soon as the French have been sufficiently bribed by economic concessions from the Saar and Ruhr} is now substantially unified, under imperialist control, preparatory to its being fitted into the workings of the Marshall Plan and the economic projects for Western Germany contained in that plan. Forty million Germans are being organized by the Allies against their will, for an Allied version of “unification” – that is, split.
Is this a real step toward a re-united Germany? Both zones still remain under total control of the occupying powers and 6,000,000 Germans in the French zone, together with 20,000,000 in the Russian zone are to remain split off from one another and the new Bizonia. Furthermore, the various powers of the new administration are strictly subject to Allied veto or approval and in no way constitute the powers of a sovereign, independent administration or government. All these bodies, finally, are to be elected indirectly and will function in the shadow of the occupation authorities. This is a “unity” solely to facilitate application of the Marshall Plan, which requires a minimum of organization out of the current economic chaos if any progress is to be made. Even in its rump form, the Allies will find they are beginning a process which, in the future, others – the German people themselves – will remove from their hands and complete with a real unification of the country – that is, a unification that will end the split with the Russian zone and re-establish the sovereignty of the German people.
 

The Franc’s Ups and Downs
The drastic devaluation of the franc of France from a rate of 119 to the dollar to approximately 300 will have other effects than further encouragement of the American tourist trade. Already its stimulation to raise prices still higher (and, incidentally, the increased tourist trade will also be a price stimulus!) is shown by the fact that industrial prices rose 35 per cent in January, and food prices rose 9 per cent during the same month. The reason is obvious. Devaluation enables France to compete more equally in the foreign market, but imports of food and materials now cost more, since it takes so many more francs to buy the foreign currency with which to pay for these imports.
What is the French government aiming at with devaluation? The only solution to France’s economic difficulties lies in a greatly expanded productivity. But the government of Schuman and the Socialists does not look at it this way, nor can it. Its devaluation and currency manipulation aim to decrease purchasing power by wiping out a surplus of currency. Productivity for France is tied up with America, now the major supplier of French raw materials, imports of foods, etc. This means French economy is dependent upon the Marshall Plan, a plan not yet in operation nor likely to be for some time. The problem of the French government, then, is to hold on until the effects of the plan can be felt – thus the devaluation, which means increased prices and reduction of an already greatly reduced purchasing power so far as the workers are concerned. The Americans who go to France this year and receive 300 francs for each dollar bill should not be surprised at the undoubted cold and aloof reception they will receive from the French people, struggling between shrunken incomes and rising prices.
For most of them, 300 francs represent almost a full day’s work!
 



Gandhiji, as he was known to the masses of India, was a great man. There can be no question about this. If we are prepared to speak of him as one of the great individuals of the 20th Century, we do not mean this in terms of his historic importance, but rather in terms of his personality, his character and example. Gandhi cannot measure up to men like Marx, or Lenin, or Trotsky, but he is far above a Wilson, or Roosevelt, or Churchill. Trotsky described Gandhi as a “false prophet,” which is correct, if we understand him to mean that Gandhi was a prophet who was wrong, but nevertheless a prophet. The ironic violence of his death may be the ultimate decision on the Utopian character of his doctrine of “non-violence,” but it also contains another reminder of the reactionary violence, ever increasing, prevalent in our times.
The eulogies to Gandhi from the leaders of today are false and hypocritical. They are eulogies to the old, conservative Gandhi, not the young Gandhi who marched to the sea and made salt in defiance of British imperialism. The spectacle of Churchill shedding tears over the Mahatma, the man whom he once insulted as a “naked faquir” and cast in jail, crowns the long career of an outstanding cynic. Gandhi, in his own way, spoke for the oppressed masses of a nation striving for freedom. The more consistent and militant his voice was during those days, the more strident and vicious were the voices of the imperialists directed against him, with Churchill in the lead. Nor do we recall the eloquent Roosevelt speaking for India’s cause at any time. Morally, spiritually, in terms of honesty and personal traits, Gandhi was as far above these men as he was below the great socialist leaders whose thoughts and actions he opposed, and feared.
What was Gandhi’s great role in Indian life and world history? It cannot be found in his social, political or religious thought which was primitive and thoroughly reactionary. His belief and practice of orthodox Hinduism, together with his own special development of the doctrine of “ahimsa” (non-violent passive resistance) have small interest in and of themselves, and concern us only insofar as they express important political characteristics of the nationalist movement founded and led by Gandhi. Gandhi’s social conceptions, based upon a false idealization of Hindu antiquity in which the spinning wheel, caste life and Asiatic backwardness reigned, were utterly reactionary. But his social thought, again, had little importance in relation to his practice. The man who opposed, in thought, all forms of industrialization and modernization of India; was, in reality, the closest friend, spokesman and champion of India’s rising industrial class (mill owners, bankers, merchants and manufacturers) and waged a shrewd fight in their behalf against the oppressing British master. The historic measure of Gandhi, thus, lies not in his doctrinaire attributes, nor his thought and theory. It would be too easy, and false, to estimate him on these grounds. It must be sought elsewhere.
It is in his role as organizer, founder, leader, spokesman and tactician of the Indian nationalist movement against imperialism that we find the answer. Gandhi, ultimately, will be remembered as the man who lifted India’s broken masses to the heights of national consciousness and gave its people a sense of the importance of the fight for national freedom. He gave meaning to the fight against British imperialism, he launched the great campaigns of the 1920’s and 1930’s (non-cooperation, etc.) and forced the world’s attention upon the crimes committed by imperialism against hundreds of millions. Gandhi was the highest possible achievement of nationalism, pure nationalism, possible in our century. His type will never return. The young Gandhi was a truly heroic national figure.
But, this objective evaluation must be completed by underscoring his limitations very definite in nature. His tactics and doctrine were important as symptomatic of these shortcomings, being determined by the weakness of the national bourgeoisie for whom he spoke. Gandhi organized the masses, it is true, but simultaneously he manipulated them. He threw them into battle with Britain, unarmed and untrained, and never hesitated to sound a retreat if matters seemed to be getting out of hand. He never aimed higher than compromise victories.
Was Gandhi’s life and career a success? Did he achieve his objectives, even in a limited way? The answer can only be no, in all respects. The unquestioned esteem in which he is held by people everywhere – not alone the Indian people – is a tribute to his personality, and also indicates the widespread sharing of his desires for peace, fraternity and brotherhood. But unfortunately, more is involved in a questioning of his career. Is India free and independent? Only in the strictly limited sense that direct foreign rule has been replaced by indirect foreign rule which how shares a partnership with the rulers of India itself. Has national unity been achieved? The threatening catastrophe of war between India and Pakistan answers this. Have the multitude of social, economic and political problems of the sub-continent been solved? Clearly, Gandhi’s career ended amid tragic circumstances, not success. Gandhi, who knew this, was prepared to die. He died a martyr to failure, not a hero of success. His lifetime saw the start, rise and extinction of the narrow nationalism he represented. It was tested and failed.
 
Struggle for Gandhi’s Image
But this does not mean we should dismiss his role or his career. India’s future, in fact, would not permit this. The entire conservative clique who surrounded Gandhi at his end will seek to seize his image and dangle it before the country as an emblem of social peace, conservatism, discipline and submission. Ignoring the militant nationalism of the youthful Gandhi, the Indian bourgeoisie will attempt to venerate the old Gandhi of extreme conservatism. Will it succeed in this? The fact that not a single major problem of India has yet been solved – beginning with that of complete national freedom and ranging through the series of social and economic problems – indicates the impossibility of this. Gandhi launched nationalism, but others – the socialists and revolutionists of India and Pakistan – must carry through where he could not because he never accepted the essential relation between the winning of national freedom and the winning of socialist freedom. We respect and recognize the loss of Gandhi, the nationalist leader who started 400 million people on the long and difficult road whose ascent only others, wider and more profound in perception, can now complete.
 



It is paradoxical that just at the moment when the Marshall Plan shows signs of finally taking on specific shape, with the approval last week by the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee of an actual bill for recommendation to the Senate, the plan itself, as originally conceived of, is rapidly dying from lack of interest and boredom! The Marshall Plan bears a resemblance to the famous Al Schacht, the ball-playing comedian, who tied himself into a knot winding up and then let fly with his famous pop-out slow ball!
From a propagandistic and political standpoint, all the ineptitudes and weaknesses of American imperialism, that would-be world beater, have been shown up in the handling of the Marshall Plan. The whole conception of European recovery, organized along majestic lines with America pouring its wealth and material into the collapsed veins of the Old World has given way to aknock-down brawl over how much, what conditions and by whom administered. And simultaneously with the evaporation of the grandiose Marshall scheme there has been a definite, tangible economic recovery in many countries of Western Europe over the past three months!
While Western Europe must still seek and accept aid, it is clear that the need is decreasing (coal production in England, France and Germany is steadily upward, and crop prospects for spring and next autumn’s harvest are excellent due to the extreme mildness of the winter) and that the capitalist powers of Western Europe will feel more able to resist American demands. While the donor has been quibbling over the details, the future beneficiary has grown stronger and America will find, perhaps to its astonishment, that its help will go, not to a broken-down beggar, grateful for each crumb, but to a dignified gentleman now more able to take care of himself.
 
Bill Names Conditions
All the more ironic, then, is the fact that precisely at this moment the Senate committee proposes to attach obvious and provocative strings to the bill just voted out by it. But first, the terms of this bill, contrasting with the original Marshall-Truman proposals: the committee recommends $5.3 billion, for one year starting April 1. Truman had originally drafted a five-year plan, then dropped down to $6.8 billions for 15 months. The Senate wants to be able to review the ERP within one year, before giving another dime. The Senate has removed administration from the hands of the State Department and given it, in effect, to a congressional committee of 14. Thus the link Marshall wishes to establish between the working out of the plan and the State Department, actual administrative organ of American imperialism, is broken – a sharp defeat for him and Truman. Finally, where Marshall cautioned about conditions, the Senate committee, as we shall see below, outdid itself in listing such conditions. With all this, Senator Vandenberg is more than cautious about the future even of this bill! The House has yet to be heard from. “I have received no assurance of any nature regarding the health or mortality of this measure,” said Vandenberg. It comes belatedly into the world, but its condition is that of a prematurely-born infant.
The bill proposed by the Senate committee provides for the cutting off of any aid to any nation “out of step” with the program. What are some ,of the “out of step” considerations? A summary indicates what is meant by being “in step” with America’s ERP proposition:

Each of the 16 European nations involved must sign a multilateral treaty with the United States, accepting the pledges and production goals contained in the ERP itself.
 
Each country must submit, for approval by the American overall administrator, “programs for the increased production of coal, steel, transportation facilities and food.”
 
The American administration has power, at will,to halt aid to any nation which he considers to be violating the agreement. The meaning of this is concretized in the clause that terminates aid “because of changed conditions,” which, further concretized, means if a nation has the misfortune to come under Stalinist control or rule, or any other political regime not quite satisfactory to America. Popular elections will shortly be held in Italy, then France and, long before ERP has run its course, all the 16 nations involved. This clause, if finally adopted, will be held over their heads like a club. De Gasperi, Italy’s Prime Minister, has already used it in the opening rounds of his electoral campaign. In passing, we might raise the question as to whether aid to the Greek monarchy would cease if that miserable dictatorship were to become a popular republic? Changed conditions?
 
Treaties must provide for promotion of industrial and agricultural production to permit the nation concerned to become independent of outside economic aid. What can this mean? That will depend upon the concrete evolution of economic factors, always to be judged, however, in a unilateral fashion by the American administrator. He may decide that recovery has advanced to a sufficiently high point in a given country, but the working masses of that country may have different ideas about the meaning of the word “recovery.”
 
Finally, treaties must facilitate transfer to the United States, for stockpiling purposes, of raw materials deficient here. This, of course, is to further tighten American control over such deficient and rare materials as uranium, manganese, oil, tin, etc.
 

Confirms Imperialist Character
Considered in any light, the Senate proposed bill is striking confirmation of the imperialist character of the Marshall Plan as conceived of by America’s political leaders. It proposes terms which infringe in more than one way upon the national independence of the 16 countries involved, since aid to be given is at a price, a price which is not even clearly set in advance, but is obviously subject to raises as dictated by American political interests!
Even a socialist is entitled to be surprised at the cold-blooded and open character of the “strings” attached to this bill. It will certainly not sit well in the 16 European capitals, and will further provide European Stalinism with agitational material for its mills. For those who, like Labor Action, support the idea of full and unhampered material and economic aid to all European countries, an important part of the task of fighting for this kind of action is the exposure and condemnation of such terms as those proposed in the Senate, and shortly to be debated in the House.
 







Continuing our discussion forum on the problem of Palestine, we are publishing two additional communications from oar readers which present a viewpoint sharply different from that held by Labor Action. We are also presenting a reply to the communications received, defending our original editorial stand. In view of the fact that the five letters published have been exclusively AGAINST the Labor Action editorial, we can see no possible objection to the fact that Henry Judd’s article, in the name of the editorial staff, is somewhat longer than the limits set in the discussion.
Contributions from our readers, not exceeding 1,000 words in length, are still welcome and will be published in the order in which they are received. – Editor



* * *
The editorial statement Palestine Tragedy, originally published in Labor Action, has stirred up a good deal of discussion and controversy. This exceedingly complex question (except to those with preconceived answers and thus possessing that comfortable sureness common to all doctrinaires) was not “solved” by our editorial, not was it it intended as such. The fact that our statement announced the beginning of a discussion in Labor Action suffices to indicate it tentative character. Yet the publication of no less than five letters from readers, all of whom disagree substantially with the editorial, convinces us that we were on the right road, our critics are in serious error.
We shall not reply to each individually – all, from the calm presentation of the problem in Sylvia Weiss letter to the unforunate demagogic outburst of Leon Shields, advance the same position of support to partition and offer basically the same arguments. Our remarks are intended to cover all letters, and are not to signify an end to the discussion in Labor Action, but rather an interim defense.
Leon Shields is, in any case, consistent and clear. Whereas the other contributors advance the position that the Jews are engaged in a struggle for national existence, that this right is theirs, that the right of self-determination and separation is theirs etc. (all of which statements we acknowledge, accept and grant!), Shields is the only one who draws the political conclusion from his analysis that socialists must support this struggle, arms in hand, and he urges a campaign for arms to the Jewish fighters in Palestine. Comrade Findley, however, thinks our slogan of “Cease Fire” is an excellent one! More arms and cease fire, somehow, do not jibe. Thus we see even among the “pro-partitionists” a bit of confusion. This does not necessarily reflect on our critics, but merely indicates the difficulty and complexity of the problem.
Beginning about the time of Trotsky’s recognition, in 1939, of the progressive character of Jewish nationalist aspirations as distinct from Zionism, the Workers Party, and Labor Action, alone among revolutionary socialist and Marxist organizations have steadily evolved a new, flexible, non-doctrinaire approach to this question. Having rejected as outmoded the former orthodox position (Lenin and Kautsky) according to which assimilation would settle the “Jewish Question”, in light of its basic analysis of the revival of nationalism when related to the socialist struggle, the Workers Party and Labor Action, as against the entire Trotskyist movement, championed the right of the remnants of the Jewish people, survivors of Hitler, to free immigration to Palestine. Then the Workers Party developed a concrete political program for Palestine itself, around the slogan of a common Arab-Jewish struggle against imperialism, and for a solution of the inner Palestine problem by means of a sovereign Constituent Assembly. The essence of this position was recognition of a fundamentally common progressive link between Arab and Jewish nationalist aspirations, but only under certain circumstances we shall specify below.
 
Not National Struggle
Now a further step is proposed to us by our critics – namely, we should champion the current struggle of the Jewish people in Palestine against the Arabs, on the grounds that it is a progressive national struggle (in the Leninist sense, according to several of our critics) and therefore must be supported. We consider this proposal to be entirely wrong and must reject it, regardless of our appreciation of the spirit in which it is made. Why? Because it is false that, in the circumstances under which the fratricidal semi-war in Palestine is being fought, the issue is that of a national minority attempting to win its independence from an oppressing majority. Such an analysis of events in Palestine, a distortion of reality and an oversimplification of the problem, is precisely what must be proven by our critics, not merely asserted! It can only be done by abstracting Palestine from the world, the imperialist world concretely, and attempting to make us believe that the issue in Palestine is 500,000 Jewish people seeking to win freedom from one million Arabian exploiters – a case of Poland, let us say, fighting for separation during the days of the Czarist Empire. In this superficial picture, of course, the Mufti is equivalent to the Czar, and some individuals like Shields have permitted themselves to be so far thrown off balance as to imply a “defense” of the dead Revisionist Jabotinsky who, you see, was so broadminded towards the Arabs that he was willing to have coins printed in Arabic and Hebrew, no less! (The military forces in Germany are so “fair” towards the Germans that they allow all money to be executed only in German).
Simultaneously with his recognition of the progressive nature of revived Jewish nationalism, Trotsky warned of the trap Palestine could prove to be, under Zionist leadership. In our opinion, this trap was set and has now been touched off. This constitutes, in part, the Palestine tragedy. Why? Because nationalism, like any other social force, is neither progressive nor reactionary in and of itself. Nationalism is a force in our world which can, under given conditions, be directed toward revolutionary and democratic goals and thus become part and parcel of the socialist struggle. But if nationalism is made use of by and becomes subordinated to imperialism, or if nationalism seeks to gain its object at the expense of and over the body of another people, then it is being exploited for reactionary purposes. What is the case in Palestine today? Abstractly considered, the struggle of the Arab masses against imperialism, as well as the struggle of the Jewish masses against imperialism is progressive and must be supported. But there must be a struggle against imperialism, and not against one another!
The attempt of the Zionist movement and its supporters to assert its will and achieve it ends against and at the expense of the Arabs in Palestine is every bit as reactionary as the attempt on the part of the Arab League, and its supporters to prevent the Jews from winning their national aspirations. Palestine, gripped within the embrace of world imperialism, is the scene today, of a fratricidal struggle which is equally reactionary and wrong on both sides because it can only benefit imperialism, which snatches up and utilizes, for its own ends, both Arab and Jewish nationalism. Can the Jews attain national statehood fighting the Arabs? No, they can only succeed in becoming the slavish tools and dupes of imperialism, American imperialism in this instance. Can the Arabs win their freedom by destroying the Jews? No, for they must then accept a role as agents to British and, eventually, Russian imperialism.
What conditions are necessary for a progressive nationalist struggle? It must be directed against imperialism and its agents. It must be carried on independently, in a political scene of any third imperialist force. Its aims must be achievable without the trampling under foot of the rights and aspirations of any other people. In our opinion, not a single one of these conditions holds in Zionist-led struggle in Palestine. It surely does not hold for the Arab side. The Jews have the right to separation, partition, say our critics. Even when the exercise of that right, under the conditions, means fratricidal war with another people, the calling in of foreign arms and support to win the war, the conquest – at least in part – of the opposing people, and the continued subjection of the country to imperialism – that is, UN control instead of British mandate? Such is not the exercise of a democratic right, but submission to a false policy and the springing of a trap. Do our critics believe that the UN partition, which they propose we accept, can be effected, put into practice, in any other way? The events since November 29, with the steady capitulation of the Jewish leadership to UN and American imperialism, give the answer. An independent struggle is possible in Palestine, yes, but never one of Arab against Jew so long as imperialism still dominates the scene. This holds true alike for both Arabs and Jews.
 
Example of India
Findley demands that we look at India. We willingly accept his request because it illustrates our point. The differences that is, not the similarities which Findley believes prove his case. In India, says Findley with complete truth, Labor Action accepted the partition of that country into the Dominions of India and Pakistan. Not only did we accept it, but long before (again, alone in the Trotskyist movement) we championed the right of the Moslem people to self-determination, that is, separation. But the division of India, took place under entirely different circumstances than the division of Palestine. (1) India’s partition took place simultaneously with the necessary withdrawal of British imperialism; in fact, the two were intimately bound up – withdrawal of imperialism to the position of indirect rule made possible partition – that is, (2) an agreement, an understanding between the two rival political leaderships of the Hindu and Moslem communities. Is this the case in Palestine? Is imperialism withdrawing from the scene, as in India? Pray, do not tell us the British mandate is ending – yes, to be replaced by the UN “mandate”, controlled by America. Has there been an agreement reached between the two communities, or is the partition purely something proposed by the external, foreign agency (UN) and accepted by only one of the communities concerned? If the proposed division of Palestine was similar to that which occurred in India last year, we would have accepted it. It is the differences that preclude such a course. Suppose Britain had proposed an Indian division unacceptable to the Hindus, but accepted by the Moslem League. And that then the Moslems, armed and supplied by the British imperialism, had gone to war to effect this partition? This, which fortunately did not occur, would be closer to the picture at present represented by Palestine.
Finally, Findley demands that we concretize the meaning of the original editorial, and clarify some of its statements. Let me briefly, elaborate. The slogan “Cease Fire” is clear enough. It means that both sides are to end the fratricidal strife and to seek, by all possible means, to arrive at a satisfactory and peaceful solution. As an agitational slogan, this is directed equally against both leaderships and all organizations now doing their best to enflame the situation; its positive goal is to arouse popular support among both Jewish and Arab workers who have all to lose by continuation of the war to the extent that they, shall force their leadership to half. What other slogan could be used by a revolutionary vanguard among the Jewish and Arab workers today? None of our critics proposes any, except Shields who shouts for “war.” (No nation has won independence without violence, he informs us, forgetting that this violence must be directed against a real enemy and oppressor.)
 
After Cease Fire
But we do not stop with this slogan. Once firing has ceased, the basic problem still remains, although it will be well on its way to solution because it will signify a popular will to arrive at a solution. Is it not obvious that it is intervening imperialism (the remaining British and the anxious American interventionists) who are stimulating the firing? What next? The answer suggested in the editorial no doubt needs elaboration, which we propose to offer. Comrade Findley does not demand blueprints, but at least “hints” of what is meant by “assurances and concessions” on both sides. Here are some that spring readily to mind:

A solemn declaration by both Arab and Jewish political leaderships that henceforth the problem of Palestine is no longer in the hands of imperialism (UN, etc.), but is the exclusive concern of the two peoples involved. A declaration of Palestine’s independence from the world of imperialist intervention.
 
The complete renunciation by the Zionist movement of its aim to make a Jewish state out of the whole of Palestine, and its recognition p£ all the democratic rights and freedoms that belong to the Arabs as well as the Jews. This means the open abandonment of the long-held Zionist political goal.
 
Simultaneous with the removal of imperialism’s hand, an attempt to solve by mutual agreement the problem of the inner relations between the two peoples inhabiting the country. Does this signify partition? Important and basic as this issue is, it is not the question, as our critics believe. We oppose partition; we oppose unconditionally a UN partition which can only be enforced In the reactionary manner we have described. But we recognize that partition may be, even probably can be, a step towards a solution. The editorial definitely stated this. “... the status quo of partition can be conceived of as a possible transition to a solution ...” This will depend upon the conditions and circumstances under which a partition is arranged, carried out, agreed upon etc. Labor Action is absolutely not against a partition solution of Palestine as a “lesser evil” to continued and expanded warfare between Arab and Jew which, to us, is the “greatest possible of all evils.” But this partition cannot be a UN imposed partition, backed by combined Jewish-imperialist bayonets! It this not clear?

It will be said: But clearly neither the Arab League nor the Zionist leadership will accepts such a program. Granted. We are as aware as the next that such a program for reconciliation and common struggle against common enemies must be imposed upon both leaderships, by their own peoples under socialist leadership. But is not the first step toward the implementing of such a program the arming of a few socialist Arabs and a few socialist Jews with a correct ideological, political and social understanding of what is needed? This has been and will remain the modest aim of Labor Action, predicated upon its rejection of both blind Zionist chauvinism and the equally blind denunciation of progressive nationalism by the orthodox Trotskyist parties. “Down with partition,” say the Cannonites (SWP), but dare not take the next step of supporting the Arabs who are engaged in fighting partition. “Support partition,” say our critics, most of whom fear to face the need for its enforcement (with Shields’ exception). We reject both ideas. “Cease fire, join together through mutual concessions and assurances, cast out imperialism, and settle your own problems, by your own partition, if needs be.”
 



The tragic death of Mahatma Gandhi, assassinated by the hand of a young Hindu fanatic, brought to a peak the crisis caused by the partition of the Indian sub-continent and the continuing fratricidal war between rival Hindu and Moslem communities. The immediate effect of this black deed has been the release of powerful emotional feeling among the masses of India, expressed, in great demonstrations of sorrow and mourning for the man who enjoyed a popularity and, esteem unknown to the Western world. At the same time, popular action was taken against various organizations and newspapers connected with the Hindu Mahasabha, the reactionary movement of fanatic Hindus who desire war with the Moslem community and their subjugation to Hindu rule. This, too, reflects the symbolic significance of the slain Gandhi, so far as he represented the widespread desire for an end to communal warfare and strife. But it would be wrong to believe that an era of Hindu-Moslem good will and accord can come about now. Gandhi’s death opens the way for a political showdown in the ranks of his Congress party, now the ruling party of the Dominion of India. Gandhi was the binding link between the openly reactionary, capitalist-industrialist wing of the party and its popular, middle-class democratic wing headed by Nehru, the Prime Minister of India. The right wing, anxious to quell India’s rising labor movement and establish the authority of capital throughout the country, has already thrown out the hint that “left wing forces” were involved in Gandhi’s assassination, This is an omen of sharp future struggles over power, relations between India and Pakistan, the labor and radical movement, etc., already in preparation. Gandhi’s death opens a new phase in the history of India – a phase in which nationalism ceases and internal class struggle takes over. It will be marked by major political regroupings impossible as yet to fore[see]. [1]

Note
1. This article seems to end here in mid-word. On the line below it says “Continued on page 3”. However, while there is a long article about Gandhi on page three, it doesn’t appear to be simply a continuation of this article.
 



In a historic announcement before the House, of Commons, the Foreign Secretary of the British Labor Government, Ernest Bevin, proclaimed the intention of England to create an open “Western bloc” of European nations as an essential part of the struggle against Russian expansionism. This statement has been greeted enthusiastically by Winston Churchill, actually one of its originators and long its champion, and by the American State Department, which declared that “the United States heartily welcomes” the proposal.
Bevin’s proposal that a “consolidation of Western Europe” in the form of the organization of a coalition, shaped by permanent and binding alliances with France, Belgium, Holland, Luxemburg, Portugal and Italy – all such alliances to be modeled after the existing Treaty of Dunkerque between France and Britain – marks the final end of so-called British insularity and continental “balance of power” politics.
More significant, the step must be understood as part of a world policy urged upon England by the United States, as supplementary to the European Recovery Program. The Treaty of Dunkerque is an alliance calling for military and economic cooperation and consultation in case of war between any third power and England and France. The intent, therefore, to extend this treaty to all of Western Europe, is nothing less than the creation of a war bloc on a grand scale, aimed at the eventuality of war with Russian imperialism.
The bluntness of Bevin’s speech further signified an end to prior British tendencies to act as “peacemaker” between America and Russia, and the decision definitively to subordinate British foreign policy to that of America. His denunciation of the Stalin regime was deliberate and intended to make this break clear to all.
Although Britain is the formal spokesman in launching this planned Western bloc, the voice of American imperialism and the State Department speaks loudly and clearly through the lips of Bevin. This does not mean that American pressure has forced, a reluctant England to present his stand – in fact, the interests of British imperialism coincide with the creation of such a bloc. But the true driving force behind the plan is unquestionably America, the leader of the anti-Russian world bloc. At a later stage, revived Italy, the Mediterranean countries of Turkey and Greece, as well as certain Scandinavian nations will be brought into the bloc.
The British plan is a logical and expected extension of the American Marshall Plan. It can only be understood in this sense, and assumes a striking similarity to the series of treaties and alliances now being signed, under Russian supervision, by the Balkan nations. The two great world blocs of rival American and Russian imperialism, embracing to one or another degree every last country of our planet, both have lesser blocs within their framework. Stalin is building his Balkan-Eastern Europe bloc as feverishly as Truman builds his Western Europe one. For what purposes? War, surely and inevitably – no one doubts this any longer.
 
The Elder Statesman
Now, why is the Western Europe entente conception a consistent extension of the Marshall Plan? Why did the American State Department so spontaneously give its blank check endorsement to the plan of the British Foreign Office? Why did Secretary of State Marshall announce his approval after its consideration by the Truman cabinet?
In part, the answer to these questions has already been given. Any plan whose objective is the “creation of a Western European bloc solidly across the path of the Soviet Union” (PM, January 25) cannot but have the enthusiastic support of American imperialism. Yet there is more involved, and for this we must examine the testimony of Bernard Baruch, the 77-year-old American “elder statesman,” who – in his own way – comes as close to presenting the broadest and’ clearest description of the historic destiny American imperialism has set for itself as any individual we know. To realize this, it is only necessary to contrast the sweep and scope of his conceptions with the penny-pinching and narrow-minded ideas of Herbert Hoover, whose imperialist horizon is strapped tight to dollars and taxes. Socialist thought respects the measure of a true opponent, of the Baruch type, but can only have contempt for a Hoover. Let us see what financier-banker Baruch suggests. In the long run, imperialism will tend to follow his plan and reject that of a Hoover.
We are concerned here only with his international program, not his domestic plans, important and bound-up with his other ideas as they undoubtedly are. Baruch speaks out fully for ERP, but realizes that it cannot be held to a narrow economic base but must fit into a much wider strategic conception. It must be broadened out into a far-reaching political and military alliance of America and Western Europe. The United States, said Baruch, must guarantee to buy up all excess raw materials throughout the world and, with this vast warehouse under its lock and key, take the lead in forming the nations of Europe into a “political, economic and defense union,” whose preservation is to be guaranteed by America. In their concreteness, Baruch’s proposals went far beyond the rather vague statements of Bevin at London. As an “elder statesman,” without direct responsibility, his position permits him to concretize what is implied by others. The two speeches must thus be considered together.
 
“Promise to Go to War”
Baruch lifted the discussion on the Marshall Plan to the heights of international strategy. ERP is but an economic beginning, in his eyes, of a long-range program which must aim at the total reorganization of Europe under American hegemony. “We must develop a global strategy for American peace-making.” The European union under American leadership shall be guaranteed up to the point of “a firm promise to go to war-in joint defense if any of them are attacked.” War with Russia, of course, is meant. The Marshall Plan “must be fitted into a larger structure of foreign and domestic policy, rugged enough for the uncertainties ahead.” Baruch advocated the creation, under Truman, of a general staff to supervise the working out of his international strategy.
In outline form, the Baruch plan presents the goals set by American imperialism over the next decades. European unification under American rationing; global strategy aimed primarily at capturing control of all raw material resources; and preparation for war against rival Russian imperialism. This is a broad program, hardly realizable over a short time. In offering itself as the organizer of the Western Europe bloc of nations, British imperialism, takes its place in the schema laid down at Washington. The unfolding debates on the Marshall Plan continue to serve the function of revealing the theory and practice of imperialism.
 



Although the original report that President Truman planned a special message to Congress, asking for enactment of lend-lease military aid to the countries of Europe receiving aid under the Marshall Plan proved to be premature, it is clear that such action – in one or another form – will shortly be taken.
This inevitable “next-stop” development illustrates one of the illusions held by those who urge wholehearted and uncritical support to the Marshall Plan as such. That is, their false conception of the Marshall Plan as a mere, single act of Congress providing for billions of dollars worth of food and materials to Europe. The actual act adopted by Congress is merely one part, one aspect, of the whole plan itself which is vast and sweeping in scope. The plan is really a broad historic strategy, with political, economic, military and social implications. Bit by bit, this strategic conception of the most far-sighted (from their point of view) American imperialists will unfold before our eyes. We are now witnessing the preparations for stage two – the military guarantee to bolster up the economic aspects of the plan for the rehabilitation of Western European capitalism.
 
Toward Military Intervention
If the political objective of the ERP is the rehabilitation and stabilization of Western European capitalism, to suit the needs and necessities of American imperialism, then it follows with perfect consistency that this program must be underwritten in military terms. A series of events have begun which must end in ever growing military interventionism.
First, five nations of Western Europe (England, France, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg, signed the Brussels Pact which formed a loose military alliance and defensive pact. On the same day this Pact was signed, Truman told Congress, “I’m confident that the United States will, by appropriate means, extend to the free nations the support which the situation requires. I am sure that the determination of the free countries of Europe to protect themselves will be matched by an equal determination on our part to help them to do so.” By“appropriate means,” of course, arms and munitions was meant.
A provision was written into the Marshall Act itself providing for the standardization of military equipment in the various treaties which each recipient nation must sign.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Spaak of Belgium visited Washington and openly suggested that Congress be asked to provide weapons for Belgium and other signatories of the Brussels fifty-year pact. It is also rumored that important military figures from Norway and perhaps other Scandinavian countries are in Washington for similar consultations.
 
Await Initiative from Abroad
Secretary of State Marshall then told a news conference that the project of sending armaments to Europe was under “active study.” The heads of the armed forces were working on this project, labeled as military lend-lease revival. Then the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee asked the State Department to draft such a bill for its consideration, while broad hints were sent around that the European Marshall bloc should prepare a balance sheet on military needs, in much the same manner used for the balance sheet on economic needs.
Then came the denied report of the Truman special message – but this step appears to be scheduled for later on. Truman undoubtedly desires the initiative to come from the Marshall bloc itself, in the form of a request which he will promptly fulfill. Besides, it would not be wise to prematurely speed up the military phase of the Marshall Plan, particularly when its propagandistic aspects of food shipments must be emphasized now. The next step will, in all likelihood, be the passage of a revived military lend-lease bill and, ultimately, the actual creation of a sweeping military alliance in which America pledges immediate support in the event of an open Russian attack upon one of the bloc.
These facts carry their own message. They should be carefully considered by those critical of Labor Action for its critical attack upon the Marshall Plan and its refusal to give it blanket endorsement while, at the same time, insisting upon the necessity of economic aid and rejecting the sectarian position of simply being “against.” It is not so much a problem of “for” or “against” as of clearly understanding what the whole strategic orientation of American capitalism is, at the moment. That may be summed up as hegemony of Western Europe and active preparation, on all fronts, of war with Russian imperialism. The Marshall Plan, narrowly considered, is a part of this orientation; more broadly considered, it is this orientation. If “war is a continuation of politics by other means,” then war with Russia will be the planned continuation of Marshall Plan politics, by the medium of military guarantees and alliances.
 



The results of the Italian elections gave the American press, and the world supporters of American imperialism, their first cheering news in many long months. A wave of optimism is sweeping over political leaders and spokesmen who, a brief few weeks ago, were sunk in gloom and despair about the westward surge of world Stalinism,
The election results and bare statistics apparently justify the smiles that, so it was said, lit up the face of the Pope and his escort, We shall see whether all these cheers and shouts are entirely justified, but first the actual statistics:
 
How They Voted
Out of the 26 million Italians who voted for members of the Chamber of Deputies (that section of the new Parliament for which the largest number of people voted), the final vote was as follows:




Christian Democrats:12,752,000 votes – 48.7 per cent
Stalinists: 8,026,000 votes – 30.7 per cent
Saragat Socialists: 1,861,000 votes – 7.1 per cent




The balance of votes was scattered among various parties to the right of the Christian Democrats. On the basis of this vote, the party of de Gasperi has an absolute majority in the Chamber of Deputies, and close to it in the Senate; thus, it can claim a sweeping victory and proceed to the setting up of a government ini ts own image which may, or may not, include representatives of other parties.
So far, it is clear, the conservative Christian Democrats (much to the right of the French MRP of Bidault and Schumann), the Pope and American imperialism well may chortle over their great victory, particularly since they hardly expected it! A blow has been dealt at Stalinism by its major rival, and the onward march momentarily brought to a halt. Momentarily, we repeat, for this was a blow from the right, from conservatism, reaction (in the form of the Catholic Church), and imperialism.
Let us probe the statistics a bit further. Stalinism indeed lost, but not so much as one might expect. The only basis for serious comparison we have are the 1946 Constituent Assembly electoral figures. If we contrast the two, we see – to begin with – that in actual votes the Stalinists gained, not lost! They received about 7,500,000 in 1946 (it can only be approximately estimated since there was likewise a Stalinist-front slate in 1946, but at that time the right-wing Saragat Socialists were included in it), which means they gained half a million actual votes. But, since more people voted this time, one can estimate that the percentage of the Stalinist vote declined by about 2 percent – a not very large figure.
Actually, the real defeat of the Stalinists lies in the field of strategy, where they failed to achieve their coveted goal of a majority or, at least, a plurality vote. The fact nonetheless remains that Stalinism represents a formidable mass party of 6,000,000 people, on the whole the working class, poor peasantry and most oppressed people of the Italian nation. Nothing can conceal this blunt fact. Since the de Gasperi regime cannot solve the social and economic problems of these masses, it is idle even to speculate about the “finish” of Stalinism. A strategic defeat, yes; a fatal blow, no.
We must therefore reject as not worthy of serious consideration the loud and vigorous victory claims of American imperialism. Stalinism can easily cope with, survive and outlast such defeats. But, at the same time, we consider that the Italian elections did chalk up a far more real and substantial victory for the Italian people.
 
Significance of the Saragat Vote
We refer, of course, to the surprisingly large popular vote attained by the Saragat Socialist Party, the anti-Stalinist, ring-wing Social Democratic movement founded in opposition to the pro-Stalinism of Nenni. This Party, whose principle publicist is the famous novelist Ignazio Silone, staged a surprising comeback at the polls and emerged as an independent force to be reckoned with.
What it the significance of its 2 million votes? It lies, above all, in the fact that enormous numbers of workers turned away from Stalinism, in the Northern Italy industrial cities, but refused to go to the Pope, or clericalism, or American imperialism (despite threats and letters from their American kin). In the key city of Milan, for example, the Saragatists received 250,000 votes and ran the Stalinists a close second. We do not support or agree with the political program of Saragat – that goes without saying – but we hail this vote as proof that substantial numbers are prepared to vote for socialism but not Stalinism; prepared to fight for democracy, but not the reactionary Papist clericalism.
The coming struggle in Italy will not take place merely against the Stalinists. The latter, clearly unable to take power now because of their defeat, will launch a campaign of strikes and sabotage. But there will also be a reactionary threat from the Right, in the form of the new government, which will attempt to slip over anti-labor legislation, stall off the land demands of the peasantry and, in general, serve the common interests of the Papacy and America. The Saragat Socialist Party cannot dodge such issues. That is why it must become the arena for intense political struggles. That is why this Party, its vote and its future prospects, offer the one bright spot in the entire Italian political scene.
*

A Note on the RDR
Our Paris correspondent, Vincent Care, has sent us a sober and objective report on the newly-founded RDR movement in France, published in this issue of Labor Action. In a previous issue we have called attention to the vicious characterization of this movement by the Social Democratic New Leader. We must now deal briefly with another unwarranted attack not only on the RDR but on those French Trotskyists who have joined it.
Paul G. Stevens, writing in the Cannonite Militant (March 22, 1948) on the formation of the RDR, informed his readers about Franc-Tireur, publication of the RDR. “This paper, since its foundation during the resistance, has been close to the Stalinists, but recently aroused Stalinist ire by advocating a united front against de Gaulle between the CP and the SP.” He further quotes from the first RDR manifesto (published in toto in Labor Action) which takes its stand equally against Social Democracy and Stalinism. One is justified in concluding that on March 22 Stevens considered the RDR, whatever its faults and despite its failure to register or request permission for existence from the Cannonite central office, at least as an anti-Stalinist movement. So far, so good.
But by April 12, 1948, Stevens had changed his tune. The RDR has become suddenly a “pro-Stalinist movement”! Yes, believe it or not, the RDR – viciously denounced in the Stalinist press, berated over and over in the Social Democratic press – is a pro-Stalinist tendency in France! What caused this change on Stevens’ part? It appears that the party Stevens supports in France, the PCI, had meanwhile expelled Demazière, leader of the anti-sectarian wing of the PCI, together with 45 percent of the Party. This left the PCI with a handful of a few hundred isolated comrades.
Slanderer Stevens announced that Demazière is a notorious “pro-Stalinist” who proposed “... a line of adaptation to the Stalinist policy dominant in the French mass movement.” Labor Action, therefore,has an unprincipled alliance with Demazière, the pro-Stalinist, since Labor Action (as everyone knows) is pro-Truman!
We ignore the question of Labor Action’s pro-Trumanism – there is, after all, a limit on what must be replied to. We reject, however, the slander of Comrade Demazière as “pro-Stalinist.” After the war, and including last year, we had many serious differences with Demazière and his supporters, above all on the question of their attitude toward Stalinism. We spoke of this openly and frankly in our press. But this was last year, and Demazière has come much closer – along with many others – to our general point of view on Stalinism and other questions. Slanderer Stevens ignores this. We cite but one evidence. In his letter to the PCI, announcing his intention of adhering to the RDR, Demazière writes:
“The RDR, slow in coming into the world, seems to enjoy very lively success in its first days. My profound conviction is that it must develop seriously in the weeks to come to the point where it will rapidly reach a membership of some tens of thousands. It is the symbol of the confusion reigning, of the bewildered searchings of thousands of workers, intellectuals and petty bourgeois who do not wish to choose between Truman and Stalin – that is, between the innumerable evils of putrefying capitalism and the inhuman issue of bureaucratic and terroristic collectivism, as the form of society following such prolonged degeneration.” (our emphasis)
Is that the “pro-Stalinism” you’re talking about, comrade Stevens? Incidentally, comrade Stevens, isn’t it true that the Fourth International leadership supported the Stalinist Popular Front bloc in the Italian elections?
P.S. – Those interested in obtaining the full letter of Demazière to the PCI may obtain it for 15 cents from the Workers Party, 4 Court Square, Long Island City 1, N.Y. (Bulletin, Vol. 3 No. 2)
 



Henry Wallace was speaking at a radio broadcast when the news of Stalin’s response to his “open letter” came through. A bulletin on Stalin’s statement was handed to him. According to the United Press report,“in a voice quavering with emotion, Mr. Wallace said he was ‘overwhelmed.’”
“I am humble and grateful to be an instrument in this crisis, in having been able to bring about this offer for a settlement of our differences,” he said huskily.
We can appreciate Henry’s emotion! This leader of the army of Giddeonites has received his long-awaited sign of recognition from on high for his good deeds, and he is stirred to the depths of his being. Swept away by the evangelical side of his campaign (ably stirred up by the group of cynical Stalinists who surround and direct his every movement), Henry has evolved steadily since the launching of his crusade in the direction of becoming a full-fledged neo-Stalinist. He means it, every last word of it!
It would be a huge joke, this sucker game, if so many serious matters were not involved. On one side we have a naive, slightly ridiculous figure (precisely because of his oh so obvious sincerity) feeding carefully toasted and browned questions into the mouth of the experienced, shrewd and receptive Holy Father himself – the fatherly Deity who can be both stern and kindly, and speak with forked tongues of lightning or as gently as a Biblical ewe. “You are truly for peace, are you not?” asks cousin Henry, “Why of course,”i s the kindly response. “Then let us have a general reduction of armaments, outlawing of all methods of mass destruction, resumption of unrestricted trade, free movements of citizens, students and newspapermen between and within the two countries” (that is what Stalin gagged at, slightly, when in his reply he wrote that, “... nor can it be said that certain formulations and comment, in the open letter do not need to be improved ...”). To which benevolent Joseph promptly replied that, “... Mr. Wallace’s program could serve as a good and fruitful, basis for such an agreement ...”
 
Behind the “Peace” War
The Kremlin has launched a gigantic, international“peace” campaign and all its stooges are singing the melody, in or out of tune. The campaign, as we indicated in last week’s Labor Action, is not entirely without a real desire to re-open negotiations with American imperialism and attempt to settle specific issues. When Stalin says he is for “respect for the sovereignty of individual countries and non-interference in their domestic affairs,” that is simply his Wallaceite way of saying to America, cannot you agree to stay away from the Russian-occupied and dominated land of Eastern Europe, the Baltic and the Balkans? Stalin is not only anxious to give cousin Henry a helping boost; far more important for him is to attempt to maneuver American imperialism into a momentary and satisfactory settlement of at least the outstanding issues. Stalin lists the principle issues in his letter:

Atomic weapons; peace treaties over Germany, Korea, Japan, etc.; world development of international trade “excluding any sort of discrimination” (translation: long term loans to Russia), etc.

But while cousin Henry is only too keen to talk, ask more stooge questions and burble and gurgle with joy over the words of his Heavenly Father, the voice in Washington – where real power resides – is silent. From the center of imperialism there is only rebuff and reiteration of the “no negotiations” statement. Truman has no intention of seeking a settlement until, at the very least, the effectiveness of the Marshall Plan in operation has been such as to restore a stability and balance in Europe so great as to give America the upper hand in such negotiations, while simultaneously robbing the Stalinists of all powers of initiative. This is patent.
The situation of last year and early this year, where Stalinism could knock off such countries as Czechoslovakia at its ease, must be reversed before Truman and Marshall will settle down to horse-trading. That may take a year or so. It is this fact which so embarrasses Truman and which enables cousin Henry to work to the hilt his demagogy of “Peace Crusader,” encloaked in a white robe from on high.
 
When and How to Use UN
“Only through the UN will we talk,” says Marshall. A sidelight on the role of the UN in international affairs is provided by this. Everybody knows that when and if there is ever to be a deal worked out, the UN will have as little to do with it as it has to do with bringing peace to Palestine. If they are ever to be, negotiations will take place precisely as Stalin now proposes, with hardened experts of both powers swapping back and forth over a table. When it was convenient – that is, when American imperialism was anxious to make settlements – it ignored the existence of the UN (over Germany, Palestine etc.). During that period, Stalinism demanded the settlement of all issues through the UN because, actually, it wanted nothing settled! Now the situation is reversed, and Stalin wants to talk facts and turkey, but the opponent wants to run to the UN!
And so the game will proceed, month after month and year after year, through winding and torturous ways. Many a cousin Wallace will be nudged into life, built up to ask his stooge questions and then tossed away by Stalin. Many a proposition and counter-proposition will be launched, examined and tested before the ultimate eventuality of war must be faced. But none of this means peace and this must be recognized by all of us. World Stalinism and American imperialism are irreconcilable in the end, and cousin Henry’s emotional tittering only blinds the fact that what is needed is a complete break, with equal resoluteness, with both. The real function of the cousin Henry of this particular moment was well stated by Stalinist foreign expert, Joseph Starobin, in his Around the Globe column in the Daily Worker. He remarked that Stalin’s note was also addressed to the Republican candidates, “... particularly in view of the likelihood of a Republican presidency next January.” Uncle Joseph would gladly part with cousin Henry’s last Gideon Society Bible if he thought he could get Taft in the White House!
 



Comrade Gates is correct to imply that the above quotation [1] appears somewhat contradictory. This is due to incomplete elaboration of its meaning on my part. In Czechoslovakia, the Stalinists came to power in the way described in Labor Action, but also managed to throw the cloak of “legality” and “constitutionality” over their actions, primarily because of the absence of any resistance. This was secondary. The intent of the article on Italy, of course, was to point out that even this pseudo-legality is impossible in Italy, that what the Italian Stalinists sought to accomplish by an electoral victory – the peaceful winning of state control – is out of the question. Open civil war would result in Italy. —



 


H.J.





Note by ETOL
1. This refers to a passage in Judd’s article Italy’s Crucial Election:
“The Italian Stalinists seek to come to power legally and constitutionally. Above all, they would like to gain 51 per cent of the votes, form a government under the new Constitution – perhaps invite a few Nenni Stalino-Socialists and even some liberals to participate – and having peacefully gained control of the state apparatus, set about their job of building a totalitarian slate in Italy. This was their road in Czechoslovakia.”
This was quoted by Albert Gates in the letter this text is responding to.
 



Of far greater importance than the question of who won the now-concluded Battle of Diplomatic Notes between Washington and Moscow – and whether Molotov was guilty or innocent of a breach of diplomatic “courtesy” in revealing Ambassador Smith’s letter – is the profound reaction this event had among the masses of people everywhere. Perhaps nothing has served better to illustrate the understanding prevalent everywhere that the problem of war or peace is, in essence, the problem of the struggle between the two great world rivals,American and Russian imperialism; as well as the universal longing and desire for an end to the present uncertainty and the assurance of real peace.
The eagerness, almost pathetic and deeply emotional, with which great masses of people seized upon these notes and wove into their contents their own desires and wishes is a reaction that socialists everywhere must understand and make use of to the full. From Moscow, the UP reported how, “Russians crowded five and six deep in front of newspaper bulletin boards ...” Workers, mothers with children, army officers read the dispatches and then, “As they read, they nudged each other, and made such comments as: ‘Good, huh? Good!’For the first time in months, many of them beamed at those among them who obviously were foreigners.” Another source reports how, “For twenty-four hours people on both sides of the Iron Curtain in Europe breathed more easily at this faint hint in days of mounting tension of relief from the haunting fear of war.”
The same reactions were prevalent in America and are familiar to all of us. The slightest possibility of a relaxing of the calculated strain between the two monsters was seized upon everywhere as an opportunity for hope and rejoicing. As we all know, within twenty-four hours this had all ended, dashed to bits on the sharp rocks of Washington and the Kremlin and the vicious words of Molotov, Truman, Marshall and company. Since that moment, the great issue – so far as the press is concerned – has been, who “won”? Meanwhile, the rapidly dwindling interest in the entire matter is passing away and soon “normal” relations of struggle and strain will return.
 
Stalin Wins Propaganda Battle
It is not difficult to reply to the question, “who won?” Strictly on the propaganda front, Stalinism scored a victory as should be obvious to all. Surely President Truman outdid himself in this turn. Impulsively launching an ambiguously worded note on the sea of diplomatic conflict, he gave the shrewd diplomats of the Kremlin an opportunity to launch a campaign for settlement of the basic issues that divide the two great Powers precisely at a moment when American imperialism has not the slightest desire or interest to make a deal! “The Soviet Government ... is in agreement with the proposal to begin ... discussion and settlement of the differences between us,” said Mr. Molotov in reply to Mr. Smith’s remark that, “So far as the United States is concerned, the door is always pen for full discussion and the composing of our differences.” All the ludicrous protests that Molotov “revealed” a diplomatic note will not do away with the fact that his proposal to discuss put Truman strictly on the spot and smack up against the wall.
Blunderer Truman, of course, spent the next few days explaining that no invitation for a conference was in tended, that nothing had changed and that the note was not a bid (who knows what it was?). Simultaneously, the consternation created by this secret action in the capitals of the 16 Marshall Plan nations had to be calmed down. But the world Stalinist press, with its gang of fellow travellers, was furiously at work claiming that Russia, which wanted to talk peace, had been repulsed by a belligerent American administration. Meanwhile, a tentative and temporary settlement was not one bit closer than before.
It is difficult to imagine what Truman had in mind in launching his note. American imperialism is, at the moment, on the offensive everywhere. It has begun operation of its Marshall Plan, and is feverishly re-building its military forces while preparing for military guarantees to Western Europe. At the moment, it desires no relaxing of the tension but, on the contrary, hopes to drive Stalinism still further back behind the Curtain by screwing up its pressures on all fronts – economic in Western Europe, military in Greece and China, etc. It wants no negotiations, now. Only an examination of the mind of Truman and his “advisors” might provide an explanation to why Stalin was handed this propaganda gift.
 
They Cannot Bring Peace
Part of the motivation behind the Kremlin’s eager acceptance of this gift is obvious and has already been stated. A fool – which Stalin is not – would have grasped the chance. But there are other motives. There is little doubt that the Kremlin, at the moment, is willing and ready to negotiate. There are many reasons why this is true. Stalin would be quite willing to sit down and work out a deal with American imperialism. How long it would last – in fact, whether one could even be worked out – is beside the point.
Right now, Moscow is consolidating behind the Curtain. A part, an important part, of this process is the upbuilding of these areas industrially and economically,in accord with Russian plans, of course. A successful deal with America, from Stalin’s viewpoint, would involve recognition of the Kremlin’s hegemony over Eastern Europe and the Balkans – acceptance by America of a division of Europe into twain, such as Wallace now advocates. Secondly, once this division is agreed to, Stalin would like the resumption of greatest Eastern and Western Europe trading and commerce, above all to get capital goods for the occupied lands.
Likewise, all reports make it clear that internal Russian economic life is not going too well. Machinery and capital goods, above all, are needed. Now that the Marshall Plan has become a fact in Western Europe, why should not Stalin offer to trade a quiescent attitude onthe part of his Stalinist parties in Italy, France, etc., in exchange, let us say, for several billions of long-term American loans? Why not? The struggle between these two imperialist rivals in Europe, as elsewhere, will assume more and more a struggle of production, productivity, for the next period – in preparation for the next military and political battles. Thus it seems to us that Stalin would be far from adverse to a serious and very concrete discussion with Truman. That it shall not happen today is clear. But tomorrow? The basis for a temporary agreement definitely does exist.
Would it last, even if worked out? Would it mean peace? Of course not. Great masses might hail such an arrangement as meaning “final peace,” in their illusory hope and yearning, but it would not endure. The basic political slogan of Labor Action – “Neither Washington nor Moscow” – has no meaning if it does not teach us that neither of the great rivals will bring anything but war, ultimately, and constant tension, currently. The great peace and anti-war potentiality whose existence is so obvious, must be directed into independent paths that lead away from Stalinism and American capitalism; to self-reliance rather than dependence upon diplomatic scoundrels and double-talkers.
 



In northwestern Germany, stretched along the banks of a muddy river, lies one of the world’s great natural resources and industrial centers – the famous Ruhr district. This area of great coal supplies, combined with massive iron and steel works, has long been Europe’s industrial heart. Thanks to the intense bombing of the last war, its cities are masses of rubble and its great factories are largely twisted wrecks of buildings. But underground lies the coal, still easily attainable, and in the cities of Düsseldorf, Essen, Wuppertal, Remscheid, Duisburg, Dortmund etc. great source of manpower – hundreds of thousands of skilled miners, iron and steel workers – are available. The war halted Ruhr productivity, but did not destroy it. The Ruhr is back at work again, and the chronic struggle for its riches and a share of its products has broken out all over again.
That the Ruhr produces again is easy to prove. Coal volume is soaring and will reach 80 million tons this year. Next year’s production will be almost that of the prewar period. Already, the Ruhr produces its one-fifth proportion of Europe’s total coal; the same as before the war. Steel production is now at 5 million tons a year, still far below the 13 million record of 1937, but climbing steadily If permitted to do so.
The present struggle over the Ruhr is primarily one between United States and French imperialism, although other factors are involved. Russia, for example, would clearly settle the Berlin question in five minutes time flat if it could receive a share of Ruhr production, a word in its management, and veto power over the distribution of its products. In the new Ruhr battle, one of the major concentration points of Stalinist propaganda in France will be the fight against the new, proposed American-British plan for the Ruhr. Here again French Stalinism will find de Gaulle as its tacit ally.
 
The New United States Plan
The Ruhr issue has drifted on for three years and now America proposes to settle it clearly and once for all. Since the United States leans more heavily on a revival of western Germany as part of its whole Marshall Plan strategy, it is natural that it should be most anxious to set the Ruhr going again at full capacity and speed, within limits set by America. Western Germany is conceived of, more and more, as being a powerful economic buffer between America and Russia, particularly under the impress of the sensational economic recovery now going on in that country. Coal and steel are the heart of this recovery, and America wants mounting production. Therefore, the new plan which the French so bitterly oppose.
What is this plan? Until now, the military governments of the occupying powers (with Russia excluded) have held possession of the Ruhr and its resources and operated them with German-appointed officials. An international body was created last year in London, with the United States, England and their German appointees having a voting majority, to apportion the coal, coke and steel produced to the various Marshall Plan nations. This body was the formal management, but the question of ownership was not settled at that time.
The new proposal, in essence, is that the power of this international body is to be liquidated, except insofar as general supervision and overseeing is concerned, and the ownership and management of the Ruhr Is to be placed in the hands of German “trustees” until a formal German government – now in process of creation at Bonn – shall decide what to do. In other words, what appears to be proposed is a return of the Ruhr mines and factories to German control.
This announcement of the British and Americans provoked a violent French reaction, particularly on the part of France’s would-be dictator, General de Gaulle. The spectre of a revived militarist-Hitler Germany is flaunted, and de Gaulle’s interview with the press emphasized his deep conflict with American imperialism so far as French foreign policy is concerned. The French claim their “interests” are being double-crossed; that western Germany is favored in the Marshall Plan as against France; that the Germans are not the ones to settle the ultimate ownership of the Ruhr etc. They demand that the London board control management at least, and not alone distribution in the future. “The International Authority for the Ruhr,” said M. Alphand, French delegate to the new London conference, “should exercise detailed control over the policy of the Ruhr coal, coke and steel industries for an indefinite period after the end of the occupation of Germany.” It is quite clear that French economic and imperialist policies have been badly trampled upon by the United States, and that a source of serious conflict (long foreseen by Moscow) has begun.
 
What It Will Mean
We are not much interested in the French protests and complaints. They fit into the general pattern of imperialist rivalries and conflicts within the so-called Western bloc, and will be solved by various makeshift concessions and the like. France is hardly in a position to back up its complaints with action, and will be forced – after the formalities are over – to accept what has been decided by the others. He who has the economic whip-hand (the United States) cannot be deterred by the pipsqueak complaints of a Vincent Auriol, or the squawks of a de Gaulle. The strategy of the U.S. is to set western Germany on its feet, and that means the Ruhr.
Of real importance Is this: precisely what does the U.S. intend to do with the Ruhr, under their new proposition? Is this great productive area to be used for the reconstruction of Germany, the rebuilding of its cities and industries? Or shall it fit into the plans of American imperialism? The key to that question, of course, is who shall own, manage, control and regulate the products of the Ruhr. Under the American plan, the answer is clear. German trustees will be appointed by the Military Government which shall remain in supervision until an ultimate decision has been made. Who will these “trustees” be? No indication has yet been given, but it will certainly be from among the old, “denazified” group of former magnates, managers and capitalists. Union representatives are not to be includes among the “trustees.” Properties held by Western allies (such as the ex-Stinnes works) are exempted from trusteeship.
The British-begun process of “decentralization” is to be halted. A vague statement against “concentration” has been made, but the steel mills will be reorganized so that they can regain control over coal and iron ore holdings – that is, the familiar American “vertical integration” technique is planned. An American official has stated that, “Under the British operation the former giant combines have been broken up too much ...” The new tendency will be towards restoration of the old monopolist structure within limits set by America.
The meaning of this, of course, is that America is lending a powerful hand toward resurrecting, in a form suitable to it, the old German capitalist class. A new western Germany is now being shaped, by the United States and England, and the image is almost entirely to American liking so far. In this new Germany, America must hove its representatives and supporters who have fundamental social and economic ties with this country. Part of them, so Truman intends, shall be a newly-revived group of Ruhr magnates, managers and capitalists. Certainly not the former gang of mighty monopolists (Stinnes, Krupp et al.). but a new version – a post-war model – of this crew of warmakers and imperialists.
In next week’s Labor Action we shall continue and conclude this discussion of the Ruhr problem, taking up the attitude of European socialists and their proposals.
 



The present strike of France’s 400,000 coal miners not only has created a deep political and social crisis in that chronically crisis-ridden land, but poses again for socialists – and this time perhaps in its clearest form to date – many difficult and delicate questions concerning Stalinism, etc. These problems are neither easy to answer nor simple to meet and we hardly pretend an ability to solve them with total satisfaction to all those interested. Yet, obviously, they cannot be ignored since they return to constantly plague us.
But, first, let us recapitulate the facts of the situation. For three weeks, 400,000 miners in France’s coal industry have been on strike. The Stalinist-led, controlled and dominated CGT (General Confederation of Labor) – and it must be realized that this control is exercized with typical Stalinist “firmness” – launched the strike ostensibly as a militant trade union action to better the miner’s conditions of life. France’s coal miners are not only hounded by the same inflationary wage-price spiral which affects the entire French working class, but they also live under far more miserable conditions than, for example, do the miners of America and England. Wages coverage about $60 per MONTH and the miners’ small towns are pitiful sights.
At the beginning of the strike, the anti-Stalinist CGT Workers Force and the Catholic miners’ unions went along, but soon withdrew their support when other political factors became dominant in the situation. About 60 per cent of the miners belong to the Stalinist-led CGT, about 30 per cent (mostly Italian and Polish immigrant miners) belong to the Catholic unions and a negligible portion to the newly formed Workers Force of Leon Jouhaux.
 
Stalinist Aims
The call of the two non-Stalinist unions to return to work meant little or nothing in practice since the bulk of the miners are in the Stalinist CGT organization and, in any case, the others are hardly likely to attempt strike-breaking action against their fellow workers. Nor are they likely to buck aggressive Stalinist picket squads at the mine heads at the side of the police and troops. Thus the strike is, in effect, general and effective to the tune of three million tons of coal needed by France’s basic industries.
The strike rapidly assumed its true and dominant character – a clear-cut political attack and adventure launched by French Stalinism at the orders of the Moscow ruling clique, with the openly avowed aim of striking a heavy blew at the Marshall Plan and French economic recovery. All this, of course, under the guise of satisfying the obviously legitimate needs and demands of the French miners.
For once the Stalinist leaders have not bothered to attempt to conceal their aims in a mass strike action but have openly announced their object of crippling the Marshall Plan, sabotaging French industry and creating as profound a social crisis as they possibly can, in the interests of Moscow’s program of European conquest. The very manner in which they have run this and similar strikes is clear enough. Simultaneously with the coal strike, they have organized revolving strikes (that is, the type that move swiftly from one area to another) in steel and on the railroads, knowing that such strikes most effectively upset transportation and heavy industries.
They are conducting a political and economic guerrilla warfare against the French state and its ally, American imperialism. There is no effort to mobilize the French proletariat systematically for effective strike action and to gain organized demands. It is rather a fastmoving system of UTILIZING their influence among the workers for harassing actions and demonstrations that will effectively lower French productivity.
Such are clearly the tactics and strategy Moscow has ordered them to pursue and which, most effectively, one must admit, they are carrying out. That this sabotages and undermines the effectiveness of the legitimate French labor movement at the same time is of no concern to them.
 
Do Not Aim At Power Now
Since French Stalinism cannot take political power now, it is being utilized by Stalin for the NEXT best purpose: a guerrilla army in his cold war with America. In an interesting article in the current issue of the Fourth International, E. Germaine advances the speculative thesis that since Stalin and the French Stalinist leadership realize that they cannot take power now independently of the Russian army, they have decided to pursue this adventuristic game of sabotage, even if it expends their human capital, and to pursue the general strategy of permitting General de Gaulle to come to power. Under the expected reactionary and anti-labor regime of the French Bonapartist they will seek to build up a neo-resistance movement in underground form which, when the Russian troops ultimately complete their march through Europe, will then take power in France behind the Stalinist bayonets. While this speculative thesis cannot be proved, the entire actions of the French party seem to bear it out. In any case, it is clear that this is the trend of events. The French government and the French ruling class as a whole are paving the way at this moment for the taking over of power by de Gaulle and his organization. This is the clear trend in French politics.
Under the Stalinist leadership, the French miners cannot win either their political or even minimum economic demands. They are being used by a criminal gang who will lead them straight to the twin disaster of worsened economic conditions in the country and the advent to power of Europe’s outstanding candidate for neo-dictatorship and militarism. This is the essence of Stalinist leadership.
Nothing more reveals the Stalinist intent than their action in withdrawing the mines’ safety and maintenance crews, thus allowing many to become flooded and damaged. This is not the action of a leadership preparing to take social power and run the economy in the interests of the nation – it is the action of professional saboteurs.
 
What Policy for Socialists?
What then must be the attitude of a socialist and revolutionary toward such action? The French government, as to be expected, has responded with troops and organized police action, resulting in much violence against the miners. Their deliberate aim is to smash the strike by force and violence, in the hope that the division of the miners themselves will lead many back to work and a resumption of mining. The leadership of the non-Stalinist unions is tacitly supporting this response and has urged the miners back to work, denouncing the strike as purely political.
The Socialist Party, part of the government, has issued a statement endorsing this strike-breaking activity of the state. The Stalinists have maneuvered the miners into a situation where, unprepared, they must meet the full force of a brutal assault by the state and its various political and labor supporters. The Socialist Party has brought further disgrace on its already unpopular name, and the CGT-Workers Force has probably forever excluded the possibility of gaining any influence among the miners. Clearly no socialist can do anything but condemn such responses.
On the other hand, it is equally impossible to keep silent on the Stalinist leadership and motivation of the strike, or go along with it in the general name of “working class solidarity.” The stupidity of the French Trotskyists reaches downright criminal lengths when the gist and burden of their “criticism” of the Stalinist leadership is that “they don’t go far enough”; “they don’t want to take power,” etc. All this, don’t you see, because the Stalinists are, at bottom, agents of the capitalists and “reformists.” The meaning of this criticism seems to be that the Stalinists should strive to take power NOW, then they would be good revolutionists! This ignorance and misrepresentation of the situation is every bit as repulsive as the statements and activities of the Socialists and supporters of Jouhaux.
What, then, must be the role of French revolutionaries in the coal fields? Basing themselves on the two fundamental conceptions that a socialist belongs organically to the working class (regardless of his lack of influence; even if he has none), and that only the working class has the historic possibility of leading our world out of its current mess, he must give his support to the French miners against the capitalist state and march along with the miners. But his problem is far greater than that since he has a fight on two fronts to wage: against the government and its strike-breaking machine; against the Stalinist leadership and its sabotage machine. The line of the CGT-Workers Force and the Socialist Party can appear in the eyes of the miners only as a united front with the police and the government and anyone who knows a miner knows that when the cops come into sight he’ll fight against them. Such a line is excluded for a socialist.
 
A Struggle on Two Fronts
But this strike and such strikes must and can only lead to defeat. The strike must be ended at the least possible cost to the workers. The role of the socialist can thus be that of attempting to organize the inevitable retreat, of seeking to protect the miners’ union as a union against the government and the Stalinists, of preparing an organized retreat. The Stalinists will go as far as they think it is possible to go and still retain control over the miners.
It must be borne in mind also that Stalinist domination over the miners is not purely one of influence and conviction, for the Stalinists have an organized machine for spreading terror among doubting or opposition workers. It is false to believe that the crowds of workers who fight the police and troops are overwhelming rank-and-file miners – more than anything else they are the aggressive cadres of the local Stalinist cells and organizations.
Socialists must fight within these unions tor democratic controls, tor secret elections in strike ballots and real discussions before strike action. The work for socialists in France is cut out for them – a struggle with the workers on the two fronts of class struggle against the government and political struggle against the Stalinists. Obviously this is an extremely difficult task and can hardly be expected to have quick successes. Yet there seems to us no other possible alternative for one who still wishes to consider himself a socialist, independent of both Stalinism and reactionary capitalism.
The whole meaning of these tactics is to attempt to revive the independent thought, activity and consciousness of the working class as such.
 



May Day of 1948 finds the United States more deeply involved and concerned in the affairs of Europe than ever in its history. The most influential factor in American politics today is the European situation as it affects America. The basic issues in the coming Presidential campaign relate to foreign policy and even internal, “domestic” problems – such as inflation, prices and employment – are more tied up than ever with the intervention of America in Europe. The multi-billioned Marshall Plan is now in operation and its effects, political, social and economic, will bind together, perhaps closer than hitherto, the common destinies of the European and American working class.
What is the situation of the European worker today, three years after the conclusion of World War II? Three years after the conclusion of the First World War, his situation, terrible as it was, was much better than it is today, both in material terms and above all, in terms of his future. Today, the European working class is struggling to surmount economic conditions infinitely more desperate than ever before – inflation, low productivity, disruption of pre-war trade and commerce. Will it succeed in making headway and advancing reasonably towards its pre-war standards? Great sections of the European working class are today hungry, ill-fed, living in ancient buildings or homes half ruined by the war, incapable of long and sustained working effort. What effect will the Marshall Plan, allegedly to stimulate the rebuilding and reconstruction of the war-ruined countries of Western Europe, actually have?
If the Marshall Plan was what it pretends to be – a vast plan for economic and material help to Europe – there is no doubt that an economic upsurge could be expected. There is enough work and rebuilding to be done in Europe to last many decades – new factories, homes, industrialization of agriculture, etc. But this will not happen under the REAL Marshall Plan – that is, the plan of American imperialism for the revival of Western Europe’s heavy and basic industries for the production of war goods and capital goods. Of course this expenditure of billions will have some effect upon Europe’s economy and will provide work and more goods for the workers of Western Europe. But this will all be secondary and subordinate to the primary objectives of the Plan and its operation. It is this knowledge that has made the European labor movement suspicious and doubtful about America’s plan.
 
Stalinist Influence
Politically, as we all know, the European labor movement has suffered a series of disastrous defeats that are far greater than those inflicted upon this same labor movement in the post-war period after 1918. These defeats have come from two sources – the capitalist governments of the Western European nations, and the conquering imperialism of Stalin’s Russia. But in either case, the organizer and inflictor of the defeats has been the Stalinist movement and its political machine. The entire history of post-war Europe has been – and for a long time to come, will be – dominated by the sensational rise of Stalinism which has managed to exploit for its own vicious purposes the desire of Europe’s masses to overturn capitalism.
In country after country – Poland,the Balkans, the Baltics, Czechoslovakia, etc. – we have witnessed the extinction of the traditional free labor and democratic movement, and its replacement by a brutal dictatorship fashioned in the Stalin mold. The pattern has become sickeningly familiar to all of us – misleadership and manipulation of the workers in their legitimate struggle against the capitalists by the would-be Stalinist dictators; the seizure of power by combined fraud, duplicity and trickery by these same organized criminals, and the wiping out of everything vital to the workers – freedom of speech, press, the right of critical opposition, etc.
At the same time, thanks to the desperation of the Stalinists in the struggle with their American rivals,we have seen these same people lead the workers to bitter defeats in those nations of western Europe (France, Belgium, Italy) where the time and conditions do not yet permit a seizure of power by these Stalinists. It is doubtful if a single important or major strike, for example, was won by any segment of the European labor movement last year. These political adventures instituted by the Stalinists, of course, actually helped the reactionary government of these countries to deal heavy blows to the workers. They likewise resulted in serious splits in the ranks of labor as, for example, in France where two labor federations now rival each other.
 
Social-Democrats Crawl
Politically, May Day this year finds the European worker in a seriously confused and divided state of affairs. With the Old World becoming more and more a battlefield between American and Russian imperialism, it would seem to be the duty of European labor leaders to attempt to assert and strengthen their independence of both rival blocs, neither of which offers any future to the worker of Europe. Actually, the labor leadership has withdrawn from any acts of independence and permitted itself to become a part of one or the other bloc.
This holds true for labor’s political as well as trade union leadership. The Social Democrats, for example, have either given up entirely, to become minor and petty functionaries in the Stalinist apparatus of those countries taken over by Russia and Stalinism; or they are entirely at the service of America and their own governments, as is the case with Saragat’s Italian Socialist Party, Blum’s French SP and Bevin’s British Labor Party. There is not one sign of independence out of these gentlemen.
The Stalinist labor leadership, in those countries where it has not yet attained power, merely exists to advance the interests of its party, by any means conceivable, in its struggle for power. It awaits only the day when conditions favor its seizure of the state, its strangulation of all opposition, and its imposition upon the people of dictatorships modeled after Stalin, Tito and Gottwald.
The truth of the matter is – and it must be faced – that this year marks unquestionably an all-time low point in independent working-class struggle and socialist progress in Europe. Politically without leadership of an independent nature, and confused by the permanent struggle between Russia and America, the European worker has fallen into a state partly of apathy, partly of confusion and partly of demoralization. Does this mean that European labor is through, doomed to be pushed about by whatever force is stronger, and that the prospect of a socialist revival in Europe must be dismissed? No, such an answer would be entirely wrong!
 
We Can Assist
Stalinism has not yet conquered Europe and is still far from completing this task it has set for itself. The most important countries of Western Europe – Italy, Germany, France and England – still can develop powerful anti-Stalinist labor movements that will not merely rush into the American camp.
If the working class of these countries can force the MATERIAL aspects of the Marshall Plan to be used in their interest and with the purpose of reviving their living standards, then the workers of these countries will take new hope, will have their courage for struggle revived. And, with the assistance of a new socialist leadership, they can strike out on a fresh road, independent of both America and Stalinism. The creation a short time ago of the Revolutionary and Democratic Front in France – a new movement independent of both the Stalinists and Social-Democrats – is the one bright spot in the entire European political and labor scene. Next May Day may see the spread and organization of such movements in all the countries of, at least, Western Europe!
What is needed more than anything else is a breaking up of the hidebound parties of the working class, the Stalinist and Socialist parties, with the organization of new movements with clean hands, unstained by either Stalinism or Social-Democracy. What is also needed is a successful year of struggle by the American working class, to act as a stimulus and example for the weary but still struggling workers of Europe.
 



Italy votes at the end of this week. Approximately25 million people are expected to cast their ballots in one of the most crucial and decisive elections of modern times. Months of campaigning and propagandizing are drawing to a close in an atmosphere of strife, conflict and widespread belief that the outcome of the election will be driven home perhaps by mass violence and civil war on a wide scale.
The campaign has developed into a test of strength. This test is not merely between the Italian Stalinist movement and the ruling, capitalist class of bourgeois Italy. In a far greater sense, it is a political test between American and Russian imperialism, their powers of propaganda and persuasion and their strength in determining the fate of Europe. This is why all of Europe in particular is watching the elections closely. The ability of America to develop and enforce its Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of Western Europe will be influenced by its capacity to hold the Italian Stalinists in check. Actually, the elections are more crucial for Washington than for Moscow. This is why American intervention, in the form of speeches, letters, threats, declarations, naval maneuvers off Italy’s coast etc. has been on a more open basis than Russian intervention, limited to newsprint shipments for propaganda and secret financing of their Italian Stalinist agents.
 
How the Blocs Shape-Up
How do matters stack up on election eve? The parties of the so-called “left,” organized in the Democratic Popular Front constitute a solid group, entirely under Stalinist leadership. This bloc, headed by the sinister GPU agent Togliatti (a cynical and ruthless Stalinist agent if one ever existed), stretched out to include the pro-Stalinist Nenni Socialist Party and even the left-wing youth of the recently split Saragat Socialist Party which is supporting the Stalinist candidates in the elections. The electoral lists of the Stalinist bloc include some individual bourgeois candidate’s, placed there by the Stalinists who were disappointed by the fact that no bourgeois party adhered to their bloc. This fact has led certain ignorant theoreticians to denounce the Stalinists for “running after capitalists to capitulate to”! The Trotskyists in Italy, who are heavily influenced by“Bordhigist” (ultra-leftist) ideas, are not participating in the elections, while the European Fourth International leadership is supporting the Stalinist electoral bloc! Meanwhile, it is clear that the Stalinists will receive the overwhelming support of the working class and poor peasantry to whom it has promised a quick distribution of land if it comes to power.
An exception to this is the Saragat Socialist Party, now part of the government, and an extremely conservative and right-wing Social Democratic party. It is running candidates and will obtain a measure of support from the more skilled and privileged workers, particularly of northern Italy. This party is committed to full support of the Marshall Plan and a coalition government for Italy. It is reported that many members of the pro-Stalinist SP of Nenni are leaving it in disgust,and going to the Saragat Party. This party may reveal surprising strength in the elections.
In the bourgeois camp there is, of course, primarily the Christian Democratic party which has governed Italy for over two years. It is the Party of Catholicism,the Pope and American imperialism. It is committed entirely to a conservative, pro-American course and its victory is naturally strongly desired by Washington. Unlike the parties of the labor movement, adhered into a single bloc by the Stalinists, the parties of the Right are sharply divided among themselves and could not form any kind of an electoral bloc. The Stalinists are counting heavily upon this division to give them, at least, a plurality in the election results and thus a semi-legal basis to demand the right to be the governing party.
For the Right, there is the Christian Democratic party and the Republican party, representing the so-called liberal forces; then, further to the Right, stand the various nationalist, neo-fascist and monarchist movements (l’Uomo Qualunque, Italian Social Movement, etc.). They will effectively split the rightist vote, but clearly the Christian Democrats and the Stalinists are the two great mass parties squared off against each other. The elections are for candidates for the new parliament that is to be created under the recently constituted Italian Republic. This, the first election, may well turn out to be the last!
 
Who Will Win the Elections?
The Italian Stalinists seek to come to power legally and constitutionally. Above all, they would like to gain 51 per cent of the votes, form a government under the new Constitution – perhaps invite a few Nenni Stalino-Socialists and even some liberals to participate – and, having peacefully gained control of the state apparatus,set about their job of building a totalitarian state in Italy. This was their road in Czechoslovakia. But this cannot be their road in Italy, for the situation is much different. Russian armies never penetrated into Italy to set the stage for an eventual seizure of power. The Italian bourgeoisie controls the army and state apparatus at present and presents far greater capacities for resistance than did that of Czechoslovakia. Finally, the presence of American imperialism is far more direct and potent than was the case elsewhere.
There is no peaceful road to power for Italian Stalinism. Even if the Stalinists should legitimately gain51 per cent of the votes, it is clear that the present Italian government would never admit this publicly but would count the Stalinists out by fraud and miscounting of ballots. To admit that the Stalinists have won the elections (that is, have the right to be the government) would be tantamount to suicide by the Italian bourgeoisie.
But it seems most unlikely that the Stalinists will win a majority of the votes. Present indications of the most objective kind give them between one third and 45 percent (maximum) of the total. This is more than enough (8 to 11 million!) and would indicate their solid base among the masses! The Christian Democrats, while not winning a majority, will probably gain close to this. A plurality is sufficient for them to stay in governmental power, since the Saragat SP and other right-wing parties will give them a majority in the new Parliament. In this sense, the electoral vote will constitute a roll call of the nation’s politics, but will hardly decide the issues in themselves. The struggle will go on. The Saragat SP, particularly if it gains in strength, will probably hold the power balance in the new Parliament.
 
And After the Elections?
And what after the elections? Armed with their vast popular vote which fell short of a majority, what will the Stalinists do? The Christian Democrats, still in power, and now reinforced by operation of the Marshall Plan, will appear to have a durable perspective in the country. Can Stalinism take this lying down? Clearly, this will be a crucial test for Stalinist perspective in Italy and Europe. Will the Stalinists launch civil war, attempt to seize power by extra-legal means, arm the workers who support them? Will they limit themselves to a partial civil war, seizing only key industrial centers in Northern Italy and attempt to hold out there, reinforced by aid from Jugoslavia (that is, Russia)?
Certainly these are possibilities and Stalinist calculations, dealing with the masses as so much capital to be expended for definite goals, will not quail before such adventures provided, that (1) the conviction existed that American imperialism would not fight over this, and (2) such a civil war could be isolated and confined as, for example, that of Greece is. While we do not believe this possibility will materialize, it certainly cannot be excluded. However, there is good reason to believe that civil war is not imminent in Italy at present. Why? Even the Stalinist supporters are unprepared, politically and psychologically, for such a desperate adventure and gamble whose consequences are too involved for anyone to foresee. Furthermore, since American imperialism would have so much at stake (control of the Mediterranean and future of its Marshall Plan), a quick and major intervention could result. This might lead to what Stalin dreads before all else – a premature world war between Moscow and Washington. There are other reasons that make open civil war unlikely.
Far more likely is that the Stalinists will confine themselves, for the present, to a protracted hit-and-run game against the Marshall Plan. This means strikes,open sabotage, a constant stirring up and disturbance of the country. Keep the Italian pots of discontent boiling – this will be the probable Stalinist strategy. They will attempt to prolong the confusion, uneasiness, uncertainty and insecurity for an indefinite period of time.
The great tragedy of Italy, it goes without saying, is that no alternative political party to that of Stalinism, Christian Democracy or the hopelessly conservative Social Democracy of Saragat has been thrown up. The Italian worker, seeing no alternative to the Christian Democrats, goes to the Stalinists. The problem in Italy, now, as before, is to create a new party of the workers – neither Stalinist, nor Social Democratic – but a revolutionary socialist party. Late as it is, it can still be done.
 



“Now Gandhi belongs to the ages.”
These words contained more than the triteness implied by the self-conscious westernized intellectual, Jawaharlal Nehru, as he gazed at the white ashes of his spiritual father. We think instinctively of the famous chapter on The Struggle for the Image of Jesus, contained in Kautsky’s book, Foundations of Christianity. Gandhi, of course, is not comparable to Jesus either in a moral, spiritual or religious sense. He was no founder of a world religious order ushering itself in together with a new world social order. The doctrine of “non-violence” and “passive resistance” associated with Gandhi’s name, together with other aspects of his personal philosophy, are bits and scraps collected from other religious and moral systems and shrewdly put together for the fulfillment of flexible goals.
Yet if Gandhi bears no resemblance to Jesus or any other great religious founder as the creator of a new idea, there is bound to be a marked resemblance in a different sense – a struggle over which movement, in the future, best lays claim to the rounded meaning of the man’s life, his works and activities. Let us recall the words of Kautsky, writing of the period after the death of Jesus:
... a crown of legends began to form about this character, into which pious spirits would weave whatever they wished their model to have spoken or done. But as Jesus thus came to be regarded more and more as a model for the entire sect, the more did each of the numerous contending groups, of which the sect had consisted from the start, attempt to assign to this personality precisely those ideas to which each group was most attached, in order then to be able to invoke this person as an authority. Thus the image of Jesus, as depicted in legends that were at first merely transmitted from mouth to mouth and later set down in writing, became more and more the image of a superhuman personality, the incarnation of all the ideals developed by the sect, but it also necessarily became more and more full of contradictions, the various traits of the image no longer being compatible with each other. [Foundations of Christianity, p.38]
 
Which Gandhi Will Survive?
So now is it also with Gandhi. As a doctrinaire, saint, and religious figure, the Gandhi known as the Mahatma is dwarfed by the Gandhi who was the head of the All-India National Congress and leader of his country’s civil-disobedience movements.
Yet here we do not wish to assay Gandhi’s doctrine or his role as the nationalist leader of India. To begin with, all this is well known and has been familiar for years. The question that interests us is: What place will Gandhi occupy in India’s future struggles? Will the conservatives and industrialists succeed in completely burying his true image beneath the cold and artificial saint they are now attempting to manufacture?
This effort began with the emphasis on the religious rites surrounding the cremation and burial of Gandhi. Every custom and practice of orthodox Hinduism was faithfully carried out as the process of enshrining and sanctifying the Mahatma got under way. All the ritual and mystification associated with holy beings, including the preservation of ashes and bones, the carving of statues, etc., has begun.
The aim of all this is clear: to mummify the image of Gandhi in the interests of “the nation” – that is, the governing group represented by the increasingly reactionary Congress party; and to synthesize from his being a sacred symbol, standing for inner unity of the nation, to which the ruling class can appeal in time of crisis. In China, a similar operation was performed upon Sun Yat-sen, but every indication signifies that the Congress leadership will attempt to go much further with Gandhi.
Then who can justifiably claim the image of Gandhi? Shall we leave him to the Indian bourgeoisie whose spokesman, organizer and tactician he most certainly was? Or to various among the intellectuals who concern themselves solely with the psychology and personality of the man, seeking to relate these to their own doubts and difficulties with the modern world? Gandhi, an anti-modernist and a traditionalist in the most naive and backward sense of the term, has a particular appeal for our intellectuals.
Thus, on the one hand, we find a chronic vulgarizer of Marxism, J.R. Johnson, who writes in The Militant that the death of Gandhi “is an important political event”! To him, the sum and substance of the Gandhi problem is exhausted by calling him an agent of the Indian capitalist class. Or again, on the other hand, we find a series of “appreciations” of Gandhi penned by various intellectuals in the winter 1948 issue of Politics magazine, each of which assumes the man to be “purely” an individual, and a non-political one at that! From Mary McCarthy, who thinks the real horror is “that any man could look into the face of this extraordinary person and deliberately pull a trigger,” to the absurd Paul Goodman who, in a brief piece performs a quickie psychoanalytic job (Gandhi was an “oral sadist”) with attached poem, the same impression is presented. A man with an appealing personality, abstracted from his life and reality, one in whom each one can find the image sought by his confused and bewildered soul. Gandhi’s appeal is truly a broad one, but we cannot accept either the cheapening of the sectarian Johnson or the self-projections of Macdonald and his friends. Both distort the man and his relation to the life of our time.
 
Gandhi and the Masses
Here is not the place to attempt any elaborate estimation. One must see and watch the evolution of India over another decade for that. Will the subcontinent disintegrate into warring communal and semi-national sects, or will it achieve a reunification under a new leadership? Only the answer to this question, at present unanswerable, will permit a final placing of Gandhi’s role as the organizer and leader of India’s national consciousness.
Clearly, his lifetime was not crowned by success. He was the founder of a semi-independent and disunited India, that is, his two great goals of complete independence and a united India failed of achievement – at least under his leadership. In this sense, one may say that he was the last great bourgeois national figure that we shall probably see, with all the properties and limitations that this implies. Likewise, as a personality, it strikes me that all the self-conscious intellectuals who seek to sing his praises have missed the real appeal of the man and thus lost the key to understanding the full measure and qualifications of his popularity throughout the world.
Gandhi was both loved and ridiculed, sympathized with, but laughed at by the masses of people. Why? They knew little about his so-called theology or life doctrines and justifiably ignored them as of no consequence. It was his activities, his actions, which awakened responses everywhere. He opposed imperialism (oppression and foreign domination); he opposed war (violence and killing); he wanted a harmonious society (peace and constructive building). It was his utter simplicity in presenting these ideas and attempting to activate them which made him popular among great masses. Far more than any complex intellectual, he understood the simple things.
Why was he, at the same time, laughed at? Because his methods struck people as woefully inadequate in relation to the focus standing between himself and his objectives, because his simplicity of style and conception appeared grotesque in the world of power, violence and absurd complexity. Convention, authority, government and power – Gandhi, with all the limitations of his tactics, had the capacity for making all these appear ridiculous. And this corresponded to a fundamental feeling, as widespread as it was inarticulate, among the masses of people. What Gandhi referred to as the voice of God guiding him was really his keen instinctual sense for what was disturbing people and his ability to give it expression.
The real Gandhi, the organizer of the civil-disobedience and non-cooperation movements, is a man of the masses, not a spiritual confessor for intellectuals nor a calculating politician. It is this appreciation, we believe, that provides the answer to the problem of the struggle for Gandhi’s image.
Gandhi’s strength derived from his organic ties with the Indian nationalist movement. Without this movement he would have been a quaint and unimportant utopian doctrinaire. But the handful of Hindu landlords and industrialists, now heirs to Gandhi’s Congress Party, do not exhaust this movement. The reactionary politician Sardar Patel, who claims the mantle of Gandhi, has nothing in common with the Gandhi who launched half a dozen mass campaigns, marched to the sea in defiance of the then powerful British Empire and courted death to halt communal violence. Just as Gandhi drew his power out of the nationalist movement, so did this movement obtain everything from the masses poor peasants and city workers.
Thus, the real origin of Gandhi’s role lies in his relation with the vast Indian peasantry and working class. All that was progressive and reactionary, right and wrong, revolutionary and limited, can be discovered by a study of Gandhi links with the people of his nation.
The present leaders of India, including Nehru, would evoke the image of Gandhi to halt the progress of the nation and rest content with its present semi-independent, disunited status. Nehru, who never understood the sources of his master’s strength, has rapidly cut his ties with the masses and a accepts the characteristic intellectual’s vision of Gandhi. But the struggle between the Indian bourgeoisie, now a substantial partner of imperialism, and the people of the country will obviously continue. It is a struggle for the completion of the national revolution which has been halted in its tracks. And the struggle for the true evaluation of Gandhi is a part of this new struggle.
The Indian bourgeoisie must not be permitted to claim without challenge, and sanctify the image of Gandhi. Rather does he belong to the masses of people and the new, revolutionary socialist leadership which it is slowly and painfully attempting to build up. If it is true that Gandhi’s work is incomplete, that full independence, unity and a peaceful social system have yet to be built, then it is also true that only the achievement of socialism can bring this about. The present leaders of India will not only never finish Gandhi’s work but will betray it each day.
In this sense, it is perfectly correct and justified for Indian revolutionary socialists to struggle for the image of Gandhi as his continuators and as the only ones capable of successfully concluding the tasks he first brought to the consciousness of the Indian people.
HENRY JUDD

Footnote
1. Henry Judd was the pseudonym of Stanley Plastrick.
 



New Cycle in Asia
edited with an Introduction and Notes by Harold R. Isaacs
Macmillan Co., New York, 212 pp., $3.00
The end of the war precipitated a series of events in the Far East
and colonial world whose end is far from attained and whose historic
significance is yet undetermined. The end of the Japanese empire,
destroyed in war, occurred simultaneously with and partly helped
along the end of the British, French and Dutch empires, at least in
their familiar form.
This book, ably edited by Harold R. Isaacs, contains the more
important selected documents on major developments in the Far East
from 1943 to 1947. As source material for future studies, these notes
and documents are of great value, particularly since the trend of
modern imperialist diplomacy – in view of the acuteness of
presentday conflicts – has been toward clearer, more open
expressions of opinions and interests.
These documents deal with the defeat of Japan, the entire
evolution of American post-war policy toward China, the struggle
between the two great rivals over Korea, the Philippines, the
development of the final position on India’s partition, the framing
of Burma’s new position with respect to Britain, and the important
documents relating to the colonial wars in Indo-China and Indonesia.
The fact that these documents have been brought together, with
explanatory notes, is an achievement in itself. The larger problem of
an overall analysis of the new colonial systems, and the still more
complex problem of interpreting the new situation through Marxist
revolutionary colonial theory (above all, the adaptation of Trotsky’s
theory of the permanent revolution as applied to the colonial world)
– these problems must now be tackled.
 



Germany: What Now?
by Joachim Joesten
Ziff-Davis, New York 1948, 331 pp., $3.75.
For those who want a good deal of factual information and data
about post-war Germany, this study has a definite value. Written in a
rather dry and academic style, it contains enormous quantities of raw
factual material dealing with the new constitutional setup in the
various zones and states of Germany, a chronicle-like survey of the
various political parties, and a general description of the economic
systems prevailing in the four zones.
Perhaps the most interesting part of the book consists in the
account of the various political parties and their present heads.
Joesten gives us a brief sketch of each leader, with some telling
sidelights on his career and political philosophy, including such men
as Pieck, Schumacher and Kaiser, to mention the most important. In
addition, there is much data on the results of the elections that
have been held up to now.
For those anxious to get a factual picture of Germany as it is
today, battered and split, this book will provide at least a partial
answer. The description of the new setup is exhaustive in its detail.
Yet this reviewer ventures the opinion that the reader will not have
a real picture of the new Germany. He will have touched the surface
and perhaps grasped its form, but the book completely fails to
penetrate below the superficial. It utterly lacks the “feel”
(most important for the understanding) of this land of utter misery.
There is nothing of the hunger and ruin, the spiritual and political
regression, the confusion and fear without end, the sense of
hopelessness and a future without future, that constitutes the real
Germany. The author is a good collector of data, which he digests in
popular and readable form, but not much else.
One of the interesting, if forgotten, documents he has dug up is
Proclamation No. 2 (August 13, 1945) of the Allied
Control Council. This document, signed by Zhukov, Eisenhower,
Montgomery and Koeltz, is now used by the Russians to justify their
seizure of Germanys assets, both industrial and human. It provides
that “... the German authorities will ... provide such labor,
personnel and specialists for use in Germany or elsewhere as the
Allied representatives may direct.”
Writing as a liberal, somewhat sympathetic to the
Social-Democratic viewpoint, the author assumes the continuation of
the occupation more or less in its present form, with the freezing
and stabilization of the present split between Eastern and Western
Germany. This is highly dubious, and undermines the prognostic nature
of the book, as contained in its title.
The limitations of the author’s method, for example, are
illustrated by his section on the Russians’ land reform in their
zone of Germany. He states the facts, but even here he misses the
still more important fact of its bureaucratic fulfillment, together
with the Russian suppression of the spontaneous uprising of the
landless peasantry. And he neglects the problems arising out of this
land reform, as well as the now well-known fact that the Russians
collect substantial portions of the crops for shipment eastward.
Likewise, he sees nothing of the “national problem” (he links
all resistance tendencies to reactionary Prussian chauvinism) and
cannot see the larger and broader problems of Germany. The value of
the book, then, lies mainly in its useful and handy collection of information.
 



The split of Germany into Eastern and Western states is with us. Only the formalities and final construction of divided Germany remains to be organized. Russian Germany, with 25 millions, will confront Anglo-American-French Germany, with 40 millions. Each Germany, if those responsible for this tragic division have their way, will be shaped to conform with the social,political and economic doctrines of the imperialist power in charge. This means conflict and struggle, ultimately ending in armed war as a part of the world struggle between Russia and America. Who doubts that a split Germany will provide one, if not the principle battlefield in such a war?
The failure of the Great Powers’ final effort at London to settle the German question made this split inevitable. The April 8 speech of Gen. Sir Brian Robertson, British Military Governor, in Duesseldorf, announced the intention of the Allies to proceed to the creation of a Western Germany, based upon the existing bi-zonal Economic Administration in Frankfort. The struggle around and about Berlin shortly followed, and the Stalinists running Eastern Germany proclaimed their intention to hold a “plebiscite” on the issue of German “unity.” The two power blocs have been proceeding with great speed in their respective zones to make the split definitive.
 
National Freedom Remains Key Need
The struggle over Berlin is essentially irrelevant to this split, but will continue indefinitely since prestige and “face” are at issue. Regardless of what happens at Berlin – eventual Allied withdrawal, or not – the two Germanies will now be set up. The Allied Economic Control Council is apparently dead and the remaining formal ties between the powers will rapidly be dissolved. The infamous Potsdam Treaty survived a bare 2 years! Western Germany has been brought into the sphere of the Marshall Plan and a common policy for its participation in this plan has been adopted. Before long, after satisfactory compromises and concessions to the avaricious French, a tri-zonal regime instead of the present bi-zonal one will exist, with its headquarters at Frankfort.
The Allies appear intent upon proceeding rapidly now because the industrial and economic recovery of Western Germany (primarily the Ruhr) plays an important part in their plans. A German plan for the use of $2 billions of Marshall Plan money has been presented and is under consideration. German currency reform (devaluation of the worthless mark), new price schedules etc. are all on the agenda for action. Meanwhile, in their zone, the Stalinists plan to proceed to the final nationalization of all industry (that is, what is left after Russian plundering for 3 years) and complete their setting up of a model Stalinist totalitarian dictatorship over the unfortunate part of Germany under their occupation. Such are the facts after three years of imperialist occupation.
Now, what does all this signify. It is perfectly clear, of course, that the joint occupation and its alleged purposes (Nazi purge, democratization, rebuilding the German nation as a peaceful unity, etc.) has all gone up in smoke. Everything is now being dumped, discarded and cast overboard. Germany is a pliant tool, split in twain, in the hands of two great power groups, each of which wishes to use its section for (a) conquest of the other section, and (b) preparation for eventual war. The farce, fraud and deceit of the imperialist occupation is clear to all. The policy of deindustrialization (was this not to be the principle means, according to Potsdam, by which Germany was to be made a “peace-loving nation” like the Allies?) has exploded and we shall see instead a feverish reindustrialization, primarily for war purposes.
Who is responsible? All of them, in equal share and proportion. We cannot follow those liberals and Social-Democrats who try to lay the blame for Germany’s division at the exclusive doors of Stalinist Russia. The Allies participated jointly in the division and carving-up of Germany up to the point where their differences among themselves forced a reversal in policy. The hypocritical cries for “unity” on both sides are as fraudulent now as ever. Stalin wants German “unity” under joint Russian Army-SED control; Truman wants German “unity” under Anglo-American imperialist control, to provide a base for military operations against Russia. Each power, in its own way and through its own crimes, must be blamed for this division which now seems so definitive. Even though tactics and methods must now be divided in accordance with the new situation, the basic political strategy for the German people still remains the winning of their national freedom by an independence struggle waged equally against all the occupants who have brought about this mess. Germany cannot recover split in half and dismembered. Economic recovery alone would require the restoration of commerce and trade, now more disrupted than ever, between Eastern and Western Germany.
The division is an accomplished fact, imposed upon an unwilling and hostile people who are denied every right of expressing themselves. Revolutionary socialists in Germany cannot accept responsibility for it, nor approve it in the slightest degree. They are against this split, and must retain their fundamental belief and stand for fundamental unity. But within Western Germany they must also fight against the kind of rump German state the Allies give every indication of creating. The reactionary, Christian Democratic dominated Frankfort Economic Assembly is not a freely elected, democratic Parliament. It is an Allied hand-picked body. The document drawn up by this body asking for $2 billion Marshall Plan money is entirely the work of right wing Christian Democrats and has been rejected by the Social-Democrats.
The struggle for German unification can well begin in Western Germany, over the issue of this pseudo-Parliament and the demand to make out of it a genuine parliamentary body, democratically elected and with real powers. Likewise, in accepting Marshall Plan aid, the revived German labor movement must attempt to prevent its use exclusively for war and military purposes, rather than a start for the rebuilding of the country’s ruined cities and industries.
Germany has been torn in half, despite and against her will. But this does not end the story. The struggle for the reunification of Germany, independent of any and all forces of occupation, is entirely a part of the struggle against making of Germany the slaughter and battlefield for the war now being actively prepared for by those who have brought about this same split.
 



The division imposed upon the subcontinent of India, into the Dominion of Pakistan and the Dominion of India, has occurred under the most disastrous and tragic circumstances imaginable. If recent experience in the colonial world has again indicated the incapacity of the national bourgeoisie to successfully lead the nation to national independence (Indo-China, Indonesia, etc.), the experience in India has not only underscored this fact again, but also the additional fact that this same bourgeoisie can only lead the nation from one disaster toward the menace of an even greater disaster.
Creations of only a few months, the Dominions of Pakistan and of India are already squared off against each other as though the perspective of an ultimate, full-scale war between them is to be understood, taken for granted and prepared for!
Such a war is not possible today, nor probably for many years to come. Both territories are too chaotic, disorganized and lacking in stability to engage in such madness at the moment. Yet this is clearly the trend, as openly predicted by their respective leaders, including the eminent philosopher of nonviolence, Mahatma Gandhi! But neither one has the army, the administrative or technical cadres, or the machine necessary for war. Yet it is clear that both governments, young and immature as they are, are pointed in that direction, will begin (indeed already have begun) to prepare for this eventuality, and — assuming they remain in power, consolidate and establish themselves — will one day plunge the whole land into its greatest catastrophe, war between Pakistan and India, over continental control.
If we speak of the necessity of an orientation toward reunification of India, it is without any illusions. The terrible damage already inflicted on the cause of a united India makes it impossible to accomplish such a task except over a long period of time and with the utmost difficulty. The division of India today is a fact that must be taken as a new departure point. We must seek to understand why the division took place as it did, the causes of the disastrous manner in which it was carried out, and then pose the question of whether it can be healed, and how.

It is apparent that neither dominion is capable of healing the rupture but, given their troubled and dynamic internal social systems, will clash again and again. If today’s struggles over those princely states which have not yet made their choice between the dominions (Janagadh, Kashmir and Hyderabad) will be settled in one or another way by force of circumstances, we should only view such settlements as temporary in character and in no way harmonizing the antagonism between the two power groups. The same attitude must be maintained toward the important agreements and settlements of serious financial matters reached in December 1947 by the two states. The rulers of Pakistan, in a far inferior economic and industrial position, will not rest with their defeat in the Kashmir adventure; nor have the Hindu capitalist rulers of India become reconciled to their losses in the Pakistan territories.
What were the factors leading to the division of the continent, a division long opposed by the Indian nationalist movement?
We cannot here trace the entire history. Fundamentally, it resulted from the historic incapacity of the Indian bourgeoisie, organized .in its Congress Party, to lead the oppressed nation as a whole in the fight for national independence. Partition was thus the end result of a long period of struggle and negotiation between three forces — British imperialism, the Congress Party and the reactionary Moslem League of the feudalists. Throughout the torturous negotiations of partition’s final phase, lasting two years, imperialism remained the dominant element in the situation, despite the fact that its own internal weaknesses forced it to twist and yield and bend.
 
Why Partition Took Place
The final solution reached, while not the most satisfactory, was nevertheless highly acceptable to imperialism since it signified the continuation, even though in a highly modified form, of Britain’s power over the bulk of India’s economic life.
The direct rule of British imperialism is ending. The job of governing the country has been handed over to the Indian bourgeoisie, with whom the British imperialists have entered into a partnership... Despite a certain improvement in the relative position
of Indian capital, the volume of British capital investment in India has undergone no significant change, while the grip of imperialist capital over the exchange banks, insurance companies and in shipping and key positions in industry continues ... The direct rule of British imperialism, we declare therefore, is being replaced by indirect rule.
This declaration of the Indian Trotskyist party on the eve of the August 15, 1947, day of “independence” is essentially correct.
But more was involved than the creation of this junior partnership of the Hindu capitalist class with imperialism. Unable to force an acceptance of its original “Cripps proposal,” under whose terms a unified India would have emerged with the junior partnership embracing the Moslem League as well as the Congress, imperialism sought a solution that would not only leave India in as weak a condition as possible, but with a chronic, long-lasting communal division that would sap the potential unified strength of the country and assist the British strategy of remaining on and intervening at important moments in the life of the two dominions. Thanks to the Congress and to the Moslem League, equally, this strategy has succeeded.
Finally, it would be blindness itself not to recognize the mass forces and pressures at work that made it possible for the Moslem League to take the adamant stand that it did. The truth is that over a period of years the Moslem masses became increasingly (and justifiably) concerned over their possible future under a Congress regime. Since no reassuring force rose among the Hindu masses to calm their fears, the Moslem League leaders were not only able to create a mass movement out of the communal problem but were also able to present themselves as the sole active mass force present at the conference table. The partition of India did not take place merely as a cold, worked-out deal between the three forces we have mentioned. The atmosphere was ready for the violent and tragic explosion that occurred.
In a previous article in The New International (December 1947), we have attempted to outline the character of the Hindu-Moslem conflict and relate it to the now increasingly familiar world tendency of the regrowth of narrow nationalist and communalist movements within the confines of the more backward territories. Moslem communalism, called into existence first by British imperialism, became a force which could not be brushed aside and which channelized the strength and desires of tens of millions of India’s most backward and downtrodden community. At the conference table of partition it had to be accounted for.
 
Chain Reaction Unleashed
The actual partition took place suddenly, abruptly and brutally. Only the top leadership of Congress, imperialism and the Moslem League knew what was coming. In this sense, even though it may be argued that India’s division was “agreed” to and segments of the nation were consulted, we maintain that it was a reactionary and imposed division, so far as the masses were concerned.
Nehru for the Congress, Jinnah for the Moslem League, and Lord Mountbatten for imperialism were thus the authors of the great disaster which followed, particularly in the province of Punjab. The frustrated impulses of the two peoples, held back by their leadership from a joint struggle against imperialism, ran into communal lines and burst out in a frenzy of communal warfare. Two nations, Hindu and Moslem, were born amid the barbaric death of hundreds of thousands, the forced migration of millions and the destruction of enormous amounts of property.
By November 1947, it was estimated that eight million persons had been switched or displaced in the Punjab and elsewhere. Many others will migrate, at a slower pace, and the tendency will be for both dominions to become strictly one community or the other. This was the greatest mass migration of world history, whipped up by a fantastic outburst of communal hysteria. Over four million Hindus and Sikhs fled Pakistan, and about the same number fled the Indian Dominion. No one has accurately estimated the number of deaths, but it was at least 250,000 people. The Sikh community of approximately five million, residing in the Punjab, had the highest percentage of displacement and losses. One and a half million fled Pakistan, and 600,000 were left without any land or property after the debacle.
If fratricidal communal strife appears outwardly as the explosion of primitive emotions and fanatic passions, a closer examination will indicate this to be untrue. A backward, semi-feudal milieu, with a great mass of illiterate and down-trodden peasants such as India provides, is not even necessary for such outbursts, as the example of Nazi Germany and the Jewish community indicates. What is essential is the perversion of genuine and legitimate social grievances into paths desired by reactionary segments of, the population, on both sides. The clearest example of this is the story of the Punjab, where the major portion of the catastrophe took place.
The province of the Punjab was a distinct section of India, with a large population of Hindus, Moslems and Sikhs, all speaking a common language (Punjabi), and comparatively well unified culturally and historically. The Sikhs, long employed by the British as the nucleus of their armed forces in India, had developed into a privileged military caste, often and justly compared with the Cossacks of the Czar. This community occupied roughly the center of the Punjab. Furthermore,
“... the border regions of both Eastern and Western Punjab were occupied by the land-hungry peasantry. The persistent propaganda of the Moslem League promised the land to the Moslem peasantry who were told that once Pakistan was established, all land would belong to the Moslems.” (M. Naidu, The Militant, October 27, 1947)
Likewise, in the Moslem sections of the Punjab, the landlords and money lenders were mainly Hindus. Class and communal struggles overlapped and were confused.
The document dividing the Punjab was a British-drawn document. It was deliberately conceived to antagonize the Moslems, who constituted 57 per cent of the Punjab, and the four and a half million Sikh community. On either side of the announced border between India and Pakistan four million minority peoples found themselves. On one side was a large Moslem community, in conflict with their Hindu landlords, industrialists and capitalists, bankers and business men, money lenders and merchants. On the other side were masses of Hindu peasants, living under Moslem landlordism. In-between was the rich and powerful community of the bearded Sikhs. And the British were permitted to handle this tense problem and make the final decision!
Suddenly, without warning, the Punjab was split wide open, with the demarcation line between India and Pakistan running down through the rich communal lands of the Sikhs. Reactionary, communalist elements on both sides had been agitating the land-hungry peasants that partition would be the signal for the expropriation of opposing communities and seizure of their lands and property. Once such action had begun it swiftly became the bloody chain reaction familiar to us. Poverty, land-hunger, feudalism, religious fanaticism, narrow communalism, incapable of being held in check by a nonexistent revolutionary leadership, ran rampant. The real criminals in the situation are the same three forces that had signed this partition conceived in secrecy — British imperialism, Hindu capitalism and Moslem feudalism. That landlords, capitalists and feudalists were murdered in the struggle, and their properties destroyed, again illustrates the meaning of Marx’s remark about the continuation of our social order leading to the “common ruin” of all classes.
 
Pakistan Versus India
Thus the division of the sub-continent took place. There now exists Pakistan and India, two tremendous nations busily attempting to consolidate their power and erect firm state foundations. How, from an economic standpoint, do they compare with each other? We give a brief summary of both nations’ outstanding characteristics, without detail.
The Dominion of India is, by far, the more advanced economically and industrially. With a population over four times that of Pakistan, India possesses most of the coal and iron mines, textile and jute mills and steel mills, as well as the major harbors of the sub-continent (Bombay, Madras, Calcutta). India has the bulk of industrial production and skilled labor, particularly since most of the skilled Hindu workers who were living in Pakistan areas have now fled, along with the flight of Hindu capital from that unhappy dominion. India’s main difficulty, economically speaking, is a shortage in food production.
Pakistan is primarily an agricultural area — backward at that — with very little actual industry. Larger than Greater Germany, it has a population of seventy million, of whom about sixty million are Moslems. It is the most backward region, industrially, of the sub-continent. Pakistan has no known iron or coal, and Karachi is its only important harbor. The country’s major asset is its large agricultural production, including 85 per cent of all the world’s jute supply (which must be processed in India!). There is an agricultural surplus of wheat and rice, cotton, wool and tea. There is little capital for development, and the people are largely illiterate — four per cent can read as compared with twelve per cent in India. Its skilled proletariat is small and rudimentary, with most of the population consisting of land-hungry peasants.
The Indian Dominion thus is the center of capitalism, while Pakistan is the home of the strongest semi-feudalism and landlordism. This is the heart of the economic struggle between the dominions, with Hindu capital seeking to rule and exploit the sub-continent as a whole, and Moslem landlordism resisting and demanding its share in such an expansionist program.
Given its obvious weaknesses and disadvantages as against the Indian Dominion, the future of Pakistan as a long-lasting, viable state is doubtful indeed. The desire to find a more stable base is unquestionably one of the reasons why the Pakistan rulers have begun various expansionist adventures, such as the invasion of Kashmir. Writing in New Spark (August 30, 1947), Indra Sen has described some of the internal political problems of Pakistan, all calculated to further upset the struggling young state.
He points out that Pakistan itself is composed of various minorities, divided along national lines — the Pathans, the Punjabis, the Baluchis, the Sindhis and the Bengalis are all separate peoples within the body of the Moslem state. There is a movement among the Pathans (in the northern frontier area) for separation from Pakistan; Baluchistan has affiliated with Pakistan only as an autonomous province with its own administration; there is a trend among the Moslems in Bengal to join forces with the Hindus in their own region and thus (since Bengal is the single most powerful unit of Pakistan) threaten to dominate the whole dominion. The Pakistan Constituent Assembly, in which the Bengalis have a clear majority, is now the center of the struggle among these disintegrating and centrifugal forces within Pakistan itself. These tendencies, however, do not signify an early falling apart of the Pakistan Dominion, which will, on the contrary, be held together precisely as the reactionary pressure of the Indian Dominion grows and tugs at it. This is a familiar story in history.
 







The Key Problem
Now, viewed in its broadest aspects, the partition of the Indian sub-continent — as well as the disintegrative characteristics within each separate dominion briefly described above — is but another example of a world-wide phenomenon peculiar to capitalism in its stage of total degeneration and regression. This outstanding characteristic of our age, denied and ignored by the official Fourth International movement, has presented theoretical and tactical problems which virtually only two political movements, the IKD [German Trotskyists] and the Workers Party, have grappled with, each in its own way and with its own answer. The wartime national movement in Europe, the question of the Stalinist-occupied countries of the East of Europe, Palestine — these are some of the more familiar new headaches plaguing revolutionary socialists. India and Pakistan, mutatis mutandis, fit into the same category of revived, unexpected but nevertheless solvable national problems.
Unfortunately, the Indian Trotskyist movement (Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India), like its sister sections of the Fourth International, has distinguished itself (and continues to do so) only by the multitude of its errors in handling this matter. In our opinion, it has been consistently and thoroughly wrong from the beginning, and is still wrong. Does the BLPI believe it can grow and gain commanding influence without solving this key problem? Apparently yes, because it has never dealt with it in such detail and with such seriousness as to oblige us to conclude it even recognizes its importance. A brief resolution two years ago (now antiquated) and several articles in its press are all we have discovered.
In its December 1946 issue, The New International published an article presenting its point of view on the Pakistan, or the Hindu-Moslem problem, as well as an invitation to the Indian Trotskyists to explain their position. This was never accepted, and the proposal that the BLPI champion the right of the Moslem community to self-determination, if it so wished, was never discussed, rejected, accepted or amended by the BLPI.
Our previous criticisms of the BLPI still stand, in full. Now we must add new ones, and renew our invitation to these comrades to explain their viewpoint, or at least tell us what is wrong with ours. Faced with the accomplished partition, what does the BLPI now say? It condemns the partition (so do we); it calls for unity of Hindu and Moslem masses (so do we); it explains the deceptive nature of Moslem communalism, etc. Its proposal for the healing of the communal division is summed up by its publication, New Spark, in the following slogan: “For a single revolutionary Constituent Assembly for India and Pakistan.” Just as this slogan sums up the BLPI’s political program of today, so does it sum up everything that is wrong with that program. We shall attempt to explain why.
The strength and mass base of the reactionary, communalist Moslem League was long under-estimated by the BLPI. The BLPI was not alone in this error; many others who attempted to analyze the complex politics of India were also wrong, among them this writer. As a result, the BLPI only recognized the strength of this movement at a late stage and never developed a program which, in a positive fashion, could meet it.
The very logic of the class struggle within India, it was felt, would dissolve communalism through the revolutionary effects of national liberation, the emergence of the Indian proletariat as the leader of the nation, etc. But precisely because this “logical” development did not and has not occurred, the acuteness of the Moslem problem grew. From a purely British-created movement of reactionary feudalists and petty bourgeois the League became a mass movement, with a certain independent existence of its own. Doctrinal disputes over whether or not the Moslems constituted a “legitimate” nation became increasingly abstract — i.e., meaningless. The point was, rather, that politically speaking they acted and believed more and more as though they were determined to become a nation!
The slogan of “Hindu-Moslem working class unity,” while it remained applicable to concrete phases and actions of the class struggle, no longer sufficed as a central slogan to meet a developing political crisis. The proposal that revolutionary socialists champion and support the right of the Moslem people to self-determination, to a separate existence, if they so wished (a wish which became increasingly obvious) was rejected by the BLPI, which clung to its old position. Failing to understand that the struggle of nationalities and national minorities for self-realization within India itself is an organic pan of the general, all-nation struggle for national independence from imperialism (to which it can, if properly directed, add its strength as small rivulets feed a river), the BLPI advanced the utterly mechanical notion that only after the complete independence of India can the national problem within the country itself be resolved. That is, the BLPI proposed to put off indefinitely the working-out of a solution to what was rapidly becoming the key political issue! It still proposes this. In practice, the BLPI made a farce out of the concept of the permanent revolution, under which the working class wins and earns the leadership of the nation because it and it alone is able to solve the multitude of unsolved problems, chief among which are national and minority problems. In practice, the BLPI proposes the “pure” proletarian revolution which, after its victory, will settle all questions.
The BLPI’s present slogan of a “single revolutionary Constituent Assembly for India and Pakistan” is merely a new version of its former abstractionist slogan of Hindu-Moslem unity and, like the latter, evades the issue. To advance it today, as the chief slogan, must signify indeed that the BLPI does not even accept the partition as an accomplished fact! To think that a single Constituent Assembly (that is, broad Moslem-Hindu unity) is realizable in the near future is to display a fantastic blindness in the face of what is happening. Or, if the BLPI agrees that such a united assembly is remote, then what business does it have making this its central slogan; rather than (at best) a propagandistic or educational one? This slogan is meaningless not merely because it is unrealizable, but because it makes no contact with a single living political development of today.
A revolutionary party such as the BLPI, with few or no units in Pakistan or among the Moslem masses, must do better than this. Have not the comrades of the BLPI considered the fact that the Hindu bourgeoisie would also favor a “united Constituent Assembly” for all of India? How shall you distinguish yourself from the Hindu chauvinists and nationalists of the ruling class who wish to “unify” the Moslem masses under their rule? By calling your Constituent Assembly “revolutionary”?
Here again the BLPI plays fast and loose with words. “Revolutionary” in what sense? Shall its task be to institute workers’ power and begin the construction of socialism in India? Then you are confusing your “revolutionary Constituent Assembly” with a Congress of Soviets and the proletarian dictatorship, which is really what you mean. The Constituent Assembly, as the highest political expression of the national-democratic revolution, cannot be “revolutionary” in this sense. Lenin and Trotsky, in their old writings against the left-Mensheviks and the Russian S-Rs, often denounced this mixing up and confusing of issues.
 
A Program for Re-Unification
But, besides this matter of theoretical confusion, we wish to stress our principal objection to the slogan — namely, its stubborn blindness before the reality that the two peoples are drawing apart, not closer together as the very issuing of the slogan would falsely imply. The problem is: how to halt this disintegration; how to reverse the process and set the two peoples on the road leading toward one another. No well-meant abstraction will do it.
In bringing our general attitude toward this problem up to date, we offer the following set of propositions, partly a repetition of what has been previously said:

The BLPI shall support and champion the right of self-determination of all national and communal minorities and peoples within the Indian sub-continent. First and foremost, the BLPI shall declare the right of the Moslem people to its own state, to complete separation, if they so wish.
 
The BLPI shall fully support the right of existence, continuation and survival of Pakistan as a separate state. It shall categorically oppose any step or action on the part of the government of India and of the Hindu bourgeoisie to crush Pakistan and bring about “unity” by force and violence or economic pressure. It goes without saying, this implies no political support to the Pakistan regime or to its reactionary feudal-landlord rulers. It does mean that the BLPI supports the right of the people within Pakistan to determine their own future.
 
The BLPI will oppose all efforts on the part of the Indian Dominion to squeeze Pakistan economically, by institution of taxes and duties on Pakistan raw materials; by confiscating Moslem properties in India; by withholding funds from Pakistan, etc. The first steps on the long and hard road toward a democratic re-unification of the sub-continent can only begin in simple, but important, economic and social matters. The BLPI proposes customs unity, free travel between both countries, international trade unions of all workers in the dominions and such other concrete measures as will underscore unification. The BLPI supporters in Pakistan should naturally have a corresponding policy.
 
The BLPI must recognize that, in an educational sense, the only acceptable solution it can put forward for the eventual organization of a re-unified India is that of a federated India, constructed along not only multi-national but also multi-communal lines. This can mean not only a federated state of the Punjab, for example, but also a federated Moslem state of the Punjab, and a federated Hindu state of the Punjab. We do not advocate or wish this, but we certainly cannot exclude such a possible development.

This, then, is our view of the road toward re-unification, in its broad outlines.
 



The issue of American foreign policy will unquestionably be one of the major – possibly the major – issues in the ’48 presidential election campaign. Nothing less than the historic perspective of American imperialism will be debated, and the different parties and candidates will take their stands. Candidate Wallace, in a favored position to raise hot issues, has recognized this and has for a long time pressed: it home. At Milwaukee on December 30, Wallace announced his seven-point “Wallace Plan” for European recovery (the heart of the foreign policy issue), in opposition to the government’s Marshall Plan.
The “Wallace Plan,” like all of Henry’s ideas and proposals, is a compendium of catch-all slogans, demagogy and solid, if alternative, imperialist strategy for America. Just as the entire Wallace movement represents the synthetic coming together of many diverse streams (Mid-west populist traditions; urban middle class and professional trends, liberal and working class anti-war currents – all whipped up into the semblance of a movement by the American Stalinist party), so does the seven-point Wallace foreign policy reflect the same characteristics:
 
Based on Anti-War Sentiment
The basic element of demagogy underlying Wallace’s program – not only foreign, but domestic – is that it appeals to the mass anti-war sentiments of our people, to the widespread and justified fear that the Truman program leads inevitably to war, but makes this appeal on a false, hypocritical and deceptive basis. That is, Wallace tells us his program will halt the trend to war and assure “peace.” Let us briefly see if this is the case, by examining his seven-point program.
Point 7 demands that no money be advanced for the purchase of military or war supplies. This, of course, is the ancient liberal myth that war is caused by “armaments” in overabundance. By now we have learned that total warfare means the marshalling of the entire productive apparatus and that weapons of war are merely the end products of a long process, which, when war approaches, can easily be set into motion.
Points 1 and 4 are directed against the plan to include Western Germany within the Marshall Plan scope. Aside from its relationship to the problem of Wallace’s attitude toward Russia (see below), it is clear that his demand that Germany be excluded, and that the Ruhr be placed under Big Four control, is nothing but an alternative imperialist plan for the domination and sweating of Germany and its people. Wallace, still adhering to the Morgenthau plan for Germany, wants that country to be allowed to rot indefinitely, regardless of its effect upon Europe. Is this a contribution to “peace”?
Points 2, 3 and 5 of the Wallace program contain his proposal to turn over the entire matter to the United Nation’s. This is demagogy at its lowest because it would simply mean the transfer of the entire struggle to another battlefield, that of the United Nations, The same contending powers would be present for, as everyone knows by now, the United Nations is nothing but an alternative and additional battlefield for the American-Russian world struggle.
Where is the peace content in Wallace’s alternative plan to that of Marshall? Does it propose administration of the funds and materials by European labor? Does it question the ability of capitalism, in any form or shape, to actually reconstruct and revive Europe? Does it put the alternative of a socialist reconstruction of Europe? In its theoretical construction, the Wallace Plan is devoid of any interest and would hardly be worth consideration. But this is not its true significance. That lies in the political meaning and practical implications of the proposals.
 
Is Wallace an Appeaser?
The loudest war-minded ideologists in America (Burnham, the editors of Partisan Review, The New Leader, etc.) scream that Wallace is an “appeaser” – he wishes to capitulate to and appease Russia as Chamberlain did and gave way to Hitler. Is this the case? The analogy between Chamberlain and Wallace is shallow and false. Chamberlain, leader of the fast weakening British Empire and a declining Britain, appeased – for a time – out of weakness. He played the imperialist strategy dictated by time and circumstances. What can this have in common with the type of appeasement proposed by Wallace, would-be champion of the mightiest and still-growing imperialism our world has ever seen? Does Wallace “fear” Stalin, as the Umbrella Man feared Hitler? It is absurd.
But yet we are willing to call Wallace an “appeaser” of Russian imperialism, if by that is meant that the essence of his program is to come to terms with Russia, short of war. On what basis? A division of the world between American and Russian imperialism, with America taking the lead in this settlement by making certain definite concessions to Stalin such as, for example, a share in the Ruhr, a share in American capital export, a free hand in the Balkans and Eastern Europe, etc. Wallace, then, represents that section or thought of American imperialism which believes that war between America and Russia is neither necessary nor inevitable; that the two powers can successfully divide up the world and live in “peace”; that Stalin, by concrete concession, can be won to this point of view. Wallace offers an alternative strategy to American imperialism, rather than the strategy of Truman. If we wish to call this “appeasement” – a risky word at best – then we must simultaneously make clear its imperialist roots too, just as clearly as in the case of the war ideologists. This will be a major job of Labor Action during the coming campaign months.
 



Hundreds of thousands of industrial workers in Germany’s Ruhr Valley cities participated last week in mass hunger demonstrations against their starvation rations. In the key industrial cities of Duisburg, Mulheim, Essen and Dinslaken, workers from the coal mines, iron and steel plants walked out in 24-hour demonstrations which threaten to be only the beginnings of mass action on the part of the six million people who live in the Ruhr region.
The basic cause of these actions is the outright shortage of all foods, which has driven the promised ration of 1,550 calories daily far below that mark. At the same time, in Frankfurt, officials warned that the worst is yet to come during the months of February, March and April, before spring sets in. It was predicted that the 40 million Germans living in the American and British zones would not receive a single “gram of fat and little meat,” beginning on February 1. “For the first time since the end of the war we really face famine,” said Dr. Gebhard Seelos, president of the German Bizonal Executive Committee. All reserves and winter stocks have now been exhausted, and the great need is for fats, meat and flour.
The response of the occupation authorities to this menacing situation has been typical. British and American military government spokesmen have simply placed the entire blame upon the Germans, particularly the farming section of the population. The economic chaos and stagnation existing in Germany, which forces the farmer to resort to black market sales and operations in the hope of there receiving some of the things he desperately needs for his farm, is directly the responsibility of the occupying authorities. They have had full charge of German life since May 1945.
At a meeting of leading British and German officials held in Duesseldorf, the occupation spokesman turned down each and every concrete proposal made by the Germans. No additional food is to come from outside beyond that already scheduled for import, woefully inadequate though it is; no additional food, can be purchased with money from export of coal, the production of which is steadily on the rise; the request to rebuild the German whaling fleet is denied; and the extra “incentive pay” money earned by the Ruhr coal miners cannot be used for buying extra food supplies from abroad. The authorities used this meeting as another opportunity to attack the Germans for not, collecting food from the farmers.
*But, simultaneously, all permission is refused by the British and Americans to organize trade union committees for the purpose of getting food from the countryside, or even to give police-authority to German officials for forced requisitioning of grain and hoarded farm products. Instead, it was decided that all other states in the bi-zonal area would be forced to contribute half their fat ration for the next month to Ruhr workers, and also to make up for the meat shortage. Certain sections of the population will receive no butter ration for two weeks and each food producer must contribute one kilogram of bacon.
This criminal policy of taking from the semi-starving to supply the starving is the sum total of what the Allies have to offer Germany. It is doubtful whether workers and the general population in those sections of Germany that are supposed to contribute from their own meagre supplies will respond to these measures. It is clear that the Allies are hoping to scrape through the winter by playing off one section of the German people against another section, and by refusing to tackle the real problem – that is, the problem of reviving Germany as a productive, economic nation. The British and American authorities, in line with their Marshall Plan orientation of setting into operation the coal mines and basic industries of the Ruhr, are seeking to lessen the serious starvation conditions of that area at the expense of all other areas of Western Germany. From their imperialist standpoint, only the Ruhr has any importance because it is a key to the successful operation of the Marshall Plan, above all, in the building of strategic bases against Russia. So far as they are concerned, the rest of Germany, including the French zone where economic life and living conditions are notoriously low, can continue to rot away and lie stagnant.
In the light of these actions, demonstrations and mass actions by the population, while temporarily at a standstill, will tend to flare up again and increase in intensity. The. Allies have once more revealed they have no solution for Germany’s misery, beyond its deepening and perpetuation.
 
The Mystery of “Protocol M”
The events in the Ruhr have uncovered a new, historic document – “Protocol M” – which is bound to take its place among the important documents of our time. Not only is it important in itself, but it is probably a key document in solving the problem of the aims, objects, program and strategy of the world-wide Stalinist movement. Is the document “authentic”? We are in no position, of course, to prove this beyond any doubt, nor are we inclined to accept in good faith the loud assurances of its British discoverers as to its authenticity. But nevertheless, “Protocol M” has the authentic style, ring and smell of Stalinism about it, even though close examination indicates the strong possibility of its having been touched up in several spots to make it more damaging to the German Stalinist movement, and more sensational to the outside world. Although admitting that they uncovered “Protocol M” many months ago, the British failed to release it until the Ruhr demonstrations of last week began, obviously wishing to imply that all this is only a “communist-led” plot, and not the genuine protests of hungry and needy masses of human beings. The Allies respond to Stalinism’s “Operation Ruhr” with “Operation Silence,” but the truth is a bit too evident. The fact that Stalinists, for their own political purposes, actively participate in these demonstrations does not detract one bit from their urgency, realness and correctness.
What is “Protocol M”? Its value lies in its revelations concerning the aims and objects of Stalinist participation in the activities of the German people and working class. This is their program for such events in Germany – to be sure, only in Western Germany, for is not Eastern Germany a people’s paradise, administered by the hirelings of Russia? “Protocol M” consists of instructions to German Stalinists for the disruption of Ruhr industry in accordance with a specific timetable laid down in the document. Let us briefly examine some of its aspects.
This document is a synthesis of old-fashioned radicalism in the style of the pre-Hitler Communist Party (including a quotation from Lenin), and the new pseudo-radicalism created by the Cominform bureau operating out of Belgrade. The Belgrade Bureau, in fact, is named as the coordinator of “the common battle” of world Stalinism. “Protocol M” announces the launching of a winter battle which will be “decisive” in the history of the German working class. “The main objective of the winter battle is to break the attack of the monopoly capitalists (of America), which they are launching through their so-called Marshall Plan.” Everything else in “Protocol M” is subordinate to this central proposition.
There is nothing said about a struggle for Germany’s rewinning of national independence, or of driving out the occupants and reasserting the right of a unified Germany to live free from the heavy hand of foreign troops and occupants. Once more the central strategic aim of Stalinism – defeat and sabotage of the Marshall Plan – is confirmed, and we see how the foreign Stalinist sections are expected to act purely as expendable troops in the service of Stalin, the master, criminal and dictator of the Kremlin. As if to underscore this, the instructions explicitly state that in its propaganda, the Communists should make clear, “The steady and constantly progressing development of the Eastern European economy under the protection of the Soviet Union.”
 
Hinder Arrival of Food
And how shall the struggle against the Marshall Plan be conducted? Here we see again the now familiar pattern followed in France and Italy – that is, the employment of all available weapons of economic sabotage and disruption, with an aim to worsening the already existing economic chaos. The interests of the German workers involved, even in the narrowest physical sense, are disregarded. The transport and metal workers are to be the principle capital expended by the Stalinists. What is their job, in Stalinist eyes? “... to try by all possible means to prevent the smooth running of their supply services.” “It is not essential to destroy food supplies,” continues “Protocol M,” “but merely to hinder their timely arrival. The timely coordination of delays in the arrival of food transports and the organization of wild strikes leading to loss in production is an essential feature of the operation.” And the document continues in this vein, concluding with a timetable which sets March as the period for the launching of mass strikes on as wide a scale as possible.
In the light of this document, then, the German Stalinist movement is branded as nothing less than a criminal organization of political hirelings and gangsters functioning directly as sabotage agents of Russia, with the eventual aim of facilitating the seizure and control of all of Germany, East and West, by Russian imperialism. Correctly employed, this document can be of great value in blasting loose sincere and trusting supporters of Stalinism who still believe this movement functions in the interests of the German and other workers.
At the same time, we must guard against any attempt on the part of the Allies, who have found this document most convenient for their purposes, to shift responsibility for the situation in Western Germany away from its real source and origin in the desperate conditions of the German people, their hunger and despair, and to paint every mass protest and action purely as a Stalinist-inspired event. In the light of this, it is high time that the American labor movement spoke out against the American maladministration of Western Germany, and in favor of full material aid and help to the German people, today, when it is most needed.
 



As had been expected, the international aspects of the Truman address on The State of the Nation have touched off sharp criticisms and conflicts within the ranks of the new session of Congress. This part of his proposals dealt almost exclusively, of course, with the Marshall Plan, or the European Recovery Program, and contained the proposal that Congress should authorize the outlay of almost $7 billion, beginning with April 1 of this year and lasting for 15 months, to start the ERP on its historic way. This “contribution to world peace,” as Truman calls it, is but the “initial amount” essential. The fact that Truman has asked only for a fifteen-month appropriation, while it is a tactical capitulation to the Republicans, is not too important, since the over-all sum remains fixed at between $15 and $18 billions of dollars, for a period lasting until July 1952.
Thus the Marshall Plan, the backbone and highest expression to date of American foreign policy, is now formally cast into the fire and the debate will commence, growing warmer and more revealing as time passes. It has already met a hostile and unfriendly reception not only from the Republican ranks, but also to a surprising degree from Democratic Party ranks. This debate is bound to color and affect in many ways all aspects of American domestic and international development. Marshall, in his appearance before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, attempted to reassert the Administration’s offensive in the issue, by insisting that the plan – embodying administration in its entirety by the State Department – must be either accepted or rejected in toto. But it is clear that the struggle will be long and heated. Taft has predicted that a greatly modified Marshall Plan will not be put into practice until some time after July, not April, of this year. The very fundamentals of the plan will be challenged by lingering isolationist Republican elements, in the first place, and by Wallace supporters, representing Stalinist Russia’s opposition to European aid. Democrats, big business interests and liberal ideologists who take a long-range view of the perspectives of American imperialism will be the most articulate supporters of the Truman proposals.
Sharpest debate will be over attempts to cut down the amount of money involved, with Senator Taft demanding a scaling down to $5 billion maximum. Neither side in this debate will make any effort to link directly the problem of the money involved with issues of prices, inflationary trends, taxation, etc. This statement may appear to be not the case, in view of the fight over taxation, etc., but what we mean is that no one will propose clearly and directly that the money be raised in a specific manner – such as, for example, by a capital levy on industry (which contributed so much to the destruction of Europe), or higher profits taxes. Finally there will be a dispute over the question of what conditions, and precisely how they shall be made, will be attached to the loans; as well as the matter of who shall run and operate the ERP. The Administration, of course, knows it cannot formulate conditions that openly and crudely play havoc with the national independence of the countries involved. This would defeat any possible success that ERP may expect even before it gets going, because it would defeat its political purposes which are, in their own way, of equal importance to the economic aims. The ERP opponents, on the other hand, will attempt, to attach such strings as will grant advantages to privately owned industries and corporations where extensive nationalization has taken place (such as England), and, at the same time, will attempt to strike blows at any possible recovery of those industries and businesses which may offer future competition to American export trade.
 
The Final Plan
Despite the violence and vehemence of the opposition, it is apparent that an ERP will emerge from this session of Congress. It must emerge, because the interests of American imperialism demand this. Modified, cut-down, changed, amended and revised, it will still be a specific plan, formulating America’s position at this phase in its history. Both sides, fundamentally representing only differing wings of American capitalism, have presented their maximum program. Now will begin the bargaining and working out of terms. But Truman and his Administration will win out. Not even the most ignorant and isolationist-minded Republican has dared propose no ERP for Europe!
For American imperialism, now reaching out for economic mastery over the markets of our entire globe, simultaneously with its probing for strategic bases for ultimate war with Russia, must come to the aid of Europe, from its own point of view. It must underwrite and stimulate a limited and closely-guarded economic uplift in Western Europe as the only possible means of halting Stalinist expansion and seizure of power over the entire Continent. The many-billioned payment for this underwriting is necessary because this is the sole weapon American imperialism possesses. A limited period of capitalist stabilization of Western Europe thus becomes a vital part of the imperialist future. ERP, in some form, must be adopted as the means of achieving this.
What brands ERP – no matter what its final form – as imperialist is not so much the inevitable strings and conditions that will be attached to it, but rather this way in which it fits into the historic program of American imperialism, together with the fact that the entire discussion and debate over it (with the exception of the revolutionary press) will be a dispute over what is the best way to advance these interests. Truman-Marshall have their way; Taft-Vandenberg another way and Wallace a third way. A socialist ERP, Which could be adopted quickly and without dispute, would simply concern itself with helping the recovery of the masses of Europe in the quickest and easiest possible manner. Problems of profit, conditions, eventual war, limitation of competitive productivity, etc., wouldn’t enter into the picture.
 



The defeat administered to the French working class has already had a major consequence that will affect the development of French labor for many years. By the deliberate action of its right-wing leaders, who openly played a strike-breaking, role during the recent strikes, the GGT (General Confederation of Labor) has been split wide open and a new trade union center established. The leader of the new center is the notorious Leon Jouhaux, long an organizer of disasters for the French working class. Along with him in this plot to split the ranks of French labor are involved various syndicalists, Socialist Party trade unionists, conservatives and open reactionaries of various types.
It must be recognized, of course, that this split could not have occurred without the basis for it having been laid by the Stalinist leaders of the CGT. The atmosphere of hostility and profound disgust with the Stalinist misadventurist leadership could not be channelized by the socialist and revolutionary wing of the CGT due to the latter’s weakness in size and influence. Instead, much of this has flowed into the reformist path opened up for it by Jouhaux and his associates. The Stalinists led the workers of France to a resounding defeat, but they were concerned first and foremost with accomplishing their pro-Russian political aims in the strike. The ruling class of France is now trying to rub home this defeat and, thanks to the aid provided by its supporters in the new trade union center, has succeeded in splitting the labor movement. Where unity was essential to ward off the aggressive attacks of the government of Schumann, where a common front was vital for the defense of the workers, there is now a deep split. From the point of view of French capitalism, what could have been more desirable?
 
Jouhaux Worked with Stalinists
This split, in itself constituting an adventure since it plays so lightly with the real needs and interests of French labor, was organized by men who until a few weeks ago worked hand in glove with the Stalinists. Since the end of the war, Jouhaux has been joint ruler of the CGT together with the well known Stalinist leader, Frachon. These people never opposed nor organized an anti-Stalinist movement. When Stalinism was riding high and could compromise with these small-minded bureaucrats, they followed humbly along and were silent about Stalinism’s crimes. When Stalinism plunged into its wild adventure and met inevitable defeat, these Stalinist labor Quislings of yesterday hastened to desert and joint the strike-breaking government forces. Instead of remaining within the CGT and combatting the Stalinists openly, organizing a united force to drive the Stalinists out of union leadership, they fled to the comforting embrace of the government, thus adding confusion and dismay to a situation already overburdened with this. The hesitation of Jouhaux to split indicates the doubts of this hardened old bureaucrat about the wisdom of the maneuver and his realization of its adventuristic character. There is plenty of reason to view the future of the new federation with skepticism.
What is the situation of French labor now? Clearly. there is the utmost of confusion and demoralization. The CGT has hitherto claimed six million members. The new federation claims between one and one and a half million members (no doubt exaggerated), but more significant than numbers is the type of unions it claims. Government employees, teachers, printers and other craft trades, railway workers, etc. That is, with the exception of the railway workers, those sections of the working class not belonging to the heavy or basic industries. At the present writing, it appears that the coal miners, iron and steel workers, metal trades, dockers, etc., are remaining with the old CGT. There are, of course, hundreds of thousands of workers who will, for the moment, drop out entirely from trade union membership. But, and here is the important point, when they inevitably return to trade union membership and activity, will they return to the conservative, government-sponsored and strike-breaking unions of Jouhaux, or to that union center still holding the majority of the militant workers of the heavy industries, the center with the class struggle tradition? Unless in the interim there will have been a tremendous shift away from the CGT to the new center, the answer is self-evident.
Today the French workers are split into roughly three categories: Those who stick with the CGT in its hour of defeat, despite the Stalinist leadership; those who, out of conservatism and legitimate disgust and disillusionment, have gone to the new center; and those who, having quit entirely, are watching and waiting to see what will happen. This is the unfortunate fruit of defeat, for which the Stalinists and the splitting reformists, each in their own way, are equally responsible. Nothing is more revealing of the true character of this split than the haste with which it is now trying to merge with the notoriously reactionary Catholic Trade Unions of France, composed of the country’s most backward workers.
 
Which Path Toward Reunification?
Lacking detailed information and facts, it is impossible to comment upon what would be the best course for a revolutionary movement to adopt in these circumstances. We are against the split, and we should oppose any and all efforts to make it worse by splitting unions not yet affected. We should start immediately the long and difficult work, among rank and file workers who always suffer the most from such situations, of educational and propaganda work for reunification of the labor movement. Once before, for a long period, French labor suffered the consequences of a divided labor movement. The breach must be healed as quickly and effectively as possible, and only the masses of workers in BOTH centers can do this.
In this respect, we must fight against both the Stalinist leaders of the CGT, the originators and prime criminals in the split and who, for their own political reasons, will only accept a reunification that keeps them in power; and against the pro-government union bureaucrats who have set up their rival federation on the basis of support to the government and social peace, and who, in turn, will oppose any reunification that would mean democratic unions, EQUALLY independent of pro-Russian Stalinist influence and pro-government “union sacrée” influence; unions, in a word, that pursue a class struggle policy in the interests of French labor. The problem of what to do. in various unions and industries is a difficult problem that only those on the scene and able to judge in which direction the best interests of the workers lie, can decide. It is largely a matter of which federation the masses of workers in the particular union or industry will support. There we must be, to work for the essential reunification.
 




“Neither Washington nor Moscow”
A new political trend that may well prove to have great significance has been born within the past few weeks in France. This new political front, known as the RDR (Rassemblement Démocratique et Révolutionnaire – Revolutionary Democratic Front) has been initiated by a group of leading French intellectuals, writers, former leaders of the resistance movement, left-wing Socialist Party members, etc. Some of the prominent figures who are active in its ranks are Jean-Paul Sartre, famous existentialist doctrinaire, and the well-known writers Camus and David Rousset, author of the excellent concentration camp study, The Other Kingdom.
The RDR is born of the reaction against the threat and menace of Stalinism (it is highly important to note that many prominent French intellectuals, previously deeply infected with Stalinism, are revolting against it) and the corresponding reaction against the hopelessness of Leon Blum and his Socialist Party. Politically and organizationally, it is, we hear, now being reinforced by the adherence of two substantial groups recently resigned from the Socialist Party. These two groups are the Socialist Youth (JS) and the Revolutionary Socialist Action group (ASR), whose leader is the well-known left Socialist, Dechezelles. Both groups have signed the original manifesto, as has the leadership of the Trotskyist minority faction which is opposed to the sectarianism and sterility of the PCI (French Trotskyist party) leadership.
Although it would be premature to predict future developments, it is possible that we are here witnessing the creation of a new, large and broad centrist political movement in France. Such a party, beginning as a broad socialist movement opposed to Stalinism and social democracy, and oriented against the squeezing of France between Russian and American imperialisms, ‘might mark the revival of independent socialist politics in France. Naturally, this party would be politically confused and composed of many diverse elements, ranging through Christian Socialists, pacifists, intellectuals, militant socialists, etc., but its existence would, mark a new stage in French politics in that it would break up the tendency in France to crystallize into hard and fast Stalinist or de Gaullist lines. The RDR has a voice in the daily newspaper, Franc-Tireur (published daily in Paris, with a tremendous circulation among workers), and partial support from the daily paper, Combat – both resistance-movement born publications.
Labor Action will report on this movement further as we receive details from France.
 

Stalinism and the Fourth International
We have previously commented on the startling and widespread trend within the ranks of the Fourth International to capitulate, one way or another, to Stalinism, particularly on the issue of the Stalinist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia. The hypocritical evasion of all issues involved in this question has best been illustrated in The Militant, organ of the Socialist Workers Party. We have already commented on this. The French PCI (Parti Communiste Internationaliste) in its paper La Vérité (The Truth) has engaged in the same evasion. The official magazine of the Fourth International (Quatrième Internationale), in its January 1948 issue, published a few weeks before the events, contains the fantastic prediction, in a report on Czechoslovakia, that the capitalist class of that country has the greatest powers of resistance of any country within the Russian sphere because it has the best and closest ties with the Western imperialisms!
It has remained, however, for the English Revolutionary Communist Party, English section of the Fourth International, to come out with the most unashamed pro-Stalinism of all. The current issue of its paper, Socialist Appeal, contains an article by the party’s leading spokesman, Jock Haston, the sole dubious virtue of which is its honesty and forthrightness in contrast with the American SWP. Hailing the Stalinist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia with the words that an “important working class victory has been achieved in Prague,” this desecrator of every idea Trotsky ever held publishes his piece under the heading of “Capitalists Routed in Czechoslovakia”! True enough – along with every semblance of dempcracy, a free labor movement and political organizations including his own Czech comrades!
How refreshing to turn away from this shameful and revolting capitulation to Stalinism and to read a statement issued by the Irish section of the Fourth International, the Revolutionary Socialist League. It gives Haston and his co-thinkers a fitting answer:
“What, then, should be our attitude to the events in Czechoslovakia? Should we, in the name of ‘going with our class,’ condone the coup d’état and even embellish it as a kind of bureaucratically sponsored workers’ revolution? Or should we not admit that it is not an ‘important victory’ but an important defeat that has been inflicted on the Czech workers, notwithstanding the fact that 100,000 class-conscious Prague workers paraded the streets in defense of the new regime? Trotsky, in 1939, harshly condemned the Kremlins seizure of new territories, the progressive content of which (nationalizations!) was far outweighed in his opinion by the conception of a bureaucratic revolution, organized by the Kremlin, which these seizures would engender among the international workers. However, the basic reason why we are absolutely against a Stalinist state regime anywhere is because the free working class movement is sooner or later crushed out of existence; and the mobilization of the workers for the struggle for proletarian state power is thereby rendered immeasurably more difficult. It is against the political vanguard that Stalinism wreaks the greatest havoc. Without this vanguard, however, the socialist struggle cannot prevail.”
The same tendency toward surrender to Stalinism is seen in country after country. We cite some recent examples. The Greek Trotskyists, in a resolution published, in the January issue of Quatrième Internationale, call for critical support to the Stalinist Markos government of that country and urge the workers to fight in its armies. The Ceylon Trotskyists join in political united fronts with the minute Stalinist party of their country. The Trotskyists of India form a nationwide united front, on a broad scale, with the Stalinists and various Stalinist-front organizations of their country. In Bombay they vote for the Stalinist candidates in municipal elections, rather than for Socialists. The same story is repeated elsewhere, in different forms. One of the unexplained phenomena of the day is why the American SWP did not support Wallace! Perhaps this sign of independence will shortly be corrected.
 




Italy’s Coming Elections
On April 18, within a month, the most crucial election in Italy’s history, and a decisive one in post-war European elections, will take place. It is expected that almost 25 million people out of the nation’s total population of 45 million will Vote. Labor Action will be increasingly concerned with the significance of this election. Meanwhile, we wish to describe primarily the facts and issues already existing.
The basic issue, of course, is largely determined by the world struggle between American and Russian imperialism. In an even sharper sense than last year’s municipal elections in France, which resulted in the startling de Gaullist victory, people will be voting for “the Russian party” (Stalinists), or “the American party” (Christian Democrats). All other parties are expected to be swamped by the two great political blocs now dividing Italy.
In the last general election (1946), the rightist bloc had a total of 1 million more votes than the Stalinist bloc – 10 million as against 9 million combined Stalinist and Socialist Party votes. The Stalinists alone received 4,200,000 votes – a little more than 20 percent of the total.
Much has changed since then. The Stalinists are no longer in the Resistance-born government. The “Cominform” has been created; a series of general strikes and wild adventures has shaken Italy; the Marshall Plan is nearing practical existence; Stalinism is driving full speed ahead for power over Italy; and American imperialism is determined that it shall not lose its strategic hold over the Mediterranean, North Africa and the Near East through a conquest of state power by the Stalinists.
 
Socialist Party Severely Split
Internally, the coalition government has long ceased to exist and an entirely rightist Christian Democratic government (with the exception of Saragat, extreme right-wing Socialist) heads the country. It is entirely dependent upon America and its future is committed to the working out of the Marshall Plan. Ideologically, the Vatican is its base and the Pope its chief election propagandist. It is waging a battle for the survival of the Italian bourgeoisie, landowning class, the Church and every social institution connected with status quo. Its social and political program is entirely reactionary, and its main appeal will be to the traditionally Catholic and conservative women of the country.
Meanwhile, one year ago, a sharp split took place in the Socialist Party between the two wings of Nenni (leading pro-Stalinist of the SP) and Saragat (leading Social Democrat of Italy). The essential cause of this split was the extreme pro-Stalinism of Nenni, who had made out of the party nothing but a subsidiary of the Stalinist machine. The split last year effectively prevented the Socialist Party from developing into a center “third force” similar to the Socialist Party in France, and is perhaps the major difference between the general situation in Italy and France. That section of the SP which followed Nenni is now an electoral bloc with the . Stalinists (known, of course, as the “Popular Front far Peace, Bread, and Work”). It is, completely Stalinized and Nenni, its leader, aspires to the same role of serving Stalinism in power as has been exercised by his fellow Socialists in Poland, Hungary and now Czechoslovakia.
The split-off Socialist Party of Saragat, in the meantime, has had a rapid evolution and has finally undergone a new split in February of this yea-r. Created out of diverse elements who joined together (for widely different reasons) against the Stalinist Nenni, it has failed to develop any cohesion or political unity. Saragat, supported by Matteoti, has become a full-fledged Social Democrat, a member of the Gasperi government and a leading advocate of the Marshall Plan. At its recent convention this party (Socialist Party of Italian Workers – PSLI) split into its Saragat wing and its left wing, made up of the Socialist Youth and others. A formal split took place, and the left wing walked out, to form the “Socialist Movement of Proletarian Unity,” with Socialist Unity as its newspaper. The Saragat Socialist Party, with 50 members of Parliament at present, will run independent candidates in the elections.
 
Youth Group Succumbs to Bloc
What of the new (the third) Socialist Party, created by the Socialist Youth? There is little available information about it, but what we do know (largely based upon accounts published in The Militant) is far from promising or hopeful. It originally split with the pro-Stalinist Nenni on the grounds that the Stalinists were nothing but reformists (at the time they participated in the coalition cabinet), who were holding back the Italian working class. The complete reversal of Stalinist tactics, their pseudo-militancy, etc., has confused the Socialist Youth who do not understand the. real nature of Stalinism. A large measure of responsibility for this failure to understand Stalinism falls upon the shoulders of certain of the Fourth Internationalists in Europe who, yielding more and more to Stalinism, can explain nothing.
Thus we have the absolute tragic news that this newly-founded socialist organization has decided to adhere to the Stalinist electoral “Popular Front for Peace, Bread and Work”! It is reported that they will not run their own candidates, but evidently will vote for the bloc – that is, the Stalinists! Politically, then, they meet with their former enemy Nenni once more! A political cretin named Marcel Rogier writes in the current issue of The Militant that the new party should differentiate itself politically from the Stalinist Front by “an energetic and patient campaign for expulsion from the Front of all individual capitalist elements, whose presence serves as an eternal alibi to the Stalinist leadership for restraining the fighting spirit of the masses.”
The familiar (and sickening) old tale! The Stalinist bloc is 6k, except a couple of capitalists (we wonder who?) in it. The Stalinists must be prevented from – taking power – no, capitulating to these capitalists! They must be “made” to take power! In country after country we see this shameful surrender to Stalinism by political bankrupts who desecrate each idea and conception of Trotsky.
From a revolutionary point of view, the Italian situation offers only dismal prospects. No independent force – independent, that is, of both Russia and America – exists. The parties of the left are under Stalinist domination – all other parties, including the Saragat Socialist Party, gravitate toward De Gasperi’s Christian Democrats – that is, the Pope and American imperialism. Next week we shall discuss the various possible outcomes of the election.
 

Masaryk’s Death
Jan Masaryk, who did more than his share in helping the new Stalinist dictatorship mount to power in Czechoslovakia, allegedly tossed himself out of a window last week. His suicide is more than the personal tragedy of this individual. Although the Stalinists were quite capable of murdering him (or anyone else, for that matter) it seems unlikely in this instance. The adverse publicity throughout the world has been felt by the Gottwald gang, still somewhat shaky from their rapid ascension to power, and, besides, they still had some use for Masaryk as their Foreign Minister.
Masaryk, a family symbol of the Czech democratic republic, took his life because he knew that all he represented, personally, ideologically, politically and socially, had come to a definitive end. The Czech capitalist bourgeoisie, former masters and rulers of the nation, are finished as a class. The social base – private property and ownership of industry – is gone. Dead as a social class, only individual capitalists and capitalist politicians of Masaryk’s type can survive. To survive, they must become part of the new administration – managers of nationalized industries, functionaries of the totalitarian state, hatchet men in the Czech Stalinist party, etc. The old order is gone, replaced by the brutal totalitarian dictatorship of Stalinism; in turn absorbed into the expanding empire of Stalin. Masaryk knew this. Western imperialism was impotent to rescue him. Having no stomach for a new exile, a new opposition, a new struggle, he opened the window and leaped. The new struggle that will arise in Czechoslovakia against the totalitarian state will not come from the old, compromised liberal politicians (Masaryk, Benes, etc.), but from the ranks of those Czech Trotzkyists who, unlike their fellow “Trotzkyists” in America of the Socialist Workers Party, refuse to give Stalinism their critical blessings (as has the SWP for several past weeks), the radical students who marched against the Stalinists, the workers who recognize what this new total state means, the intellectuals who understand that socialism is much more than “nationalized industry,” etc.
N.B. For those who wish to see the depths of political capitulation of the SWP (Cannonites) to Stalinism, we direct attention to the note on page 3 written by Paul G. Stevens in the current (March 15) issue of The Militant. This note is allegedly in reply to our criticsm of The Militant on this issue. No comment is necessary – just read it!
 



FEBRUARY 23 – Moving with the speed and organized ruthlessness of totalitarian movements, the Czechoslovakian Stalinist party is openly seizing total power over the country and its 6,0000,000 people. Openly discarding all pretenses of legal action, within the framework of the Czech constitution, the armed gangs organized by the Stalinist leaders have launched a reign of terror and arrests throughout the land. The aim is to create a majority of Stalinist supporters in the Czech Parliament by the expedient pf liquidating enough opponents to get this “majority.” Then an all-Staiinist government will be proclaimed and put forward as the legitimate government of the nation.
Action committees of the Stalinist machine are arresting hundreds of non-Stalinist political officials, beginning with top ministers of all parties and ending with the smaller officials of local and city administrative bodies. Opposition newspapers and magazines are being silenced by outright seizure, confiscation or the refusal of Stalinist-controlled printers’ unions to publish them. Police and soldiers, all dominated by the Stalinists, and backed up by armed gangs, have occupied the headquarters of all parties, including the Social Democrats.
The Stalinist Minister of the Interior, Nosek, is the directing hand behind this seizure of power. Directing the police forces and supplemented by the party machine of the Stalinists, Nosek has ordered all local officials and political representatives to take their orders from the local Stalinist leadership.
Simultaneously the National Labor Organization, entirely controlled by the Stalinists, has been ordered to take over all factories and businesses having 50 or more workers. The seizure of Czechoslovakia by the Stalinists is proceeding along several lines at the same time – seizure of the state power and its administrative branches; seizure over the country’s entire economic system and strangulation of all opposition political tendencies.
The Stalinists mobilized their forces on all fronts, including a carefully controlled one-hour strike of the labor movement.
 
Brutal Counter-Revolution
Little or no resistance has been offered as yet to the various moves organized by Stalin’s supporters in Czechoslovakia. The various capitalist parties are completely routed, terrorized and incapable of lifting a finger to stop the march of the totalitarians. President Benes will undoubtedly fall into line and accept the; Stalinist government as the “legal power, ” thus actually facilitating its taking over of the nation.
As for the Social Democrats, until now in close political and governmental alliance with the Stalinists, they have signified their readiness to join the Stalinists. The most pro-Stalinist leader of the Social Democrats, Fierlinger, has become head of the party and will fufill his function of giving the Stalinists a majority of the votes in Parliament.
There seems no force capable of halting the Stalinists and preventing them from, setting up their reactionary dictatorship over Czechoslovakia. Stalin has given the order to bring the unhappy land firmly within the area blocked off by the Iron Curtain and to create exactly the same type of regime that exists in Poland, Yugoslavia and other lands of the Stalinist empire.
What is taking place in Czechoslovakia is a brutal counter-revolution that will mean the final destruction of whatever political liberties and democratic rights have remained until now. It can only end with the imposition of a new, bloody GPU-Stalinist dictatorship upon the Czech and Slovak peoples. It will mean the destruction of the country’s labor movement. It has nothing in common with socialism or the winning of workers’ power.
How significant is the fact that when the Stalinist leaders ordered the unions to seize the factories, they commanded them to hold the factories only until the government administrators (that is, the Stalinists) arrived to take charge of affairs. Czechoslovakia will rapidly assume all the characteristics of Stalin’s Russia and other lands where police rule, dictatorship, secret police and political gangsterism reign supreme.
Before the eyes of the world, the Czech and Slovak peoples are being enslaved by force and violence organized on a sinisterly effective scale. Let the labor movement of America and other countries speak out openly in condemnation, without equivocation, of the scene now unfolding in Czechoslovakia. This is reaction and counter-revolution, open and undisguised.
 







A NEW DEPARTMENT
is inaugurated with the accompanying survey of four discussions from the international socialist press. It is planned for alternate issues, barring unusual demands on our space. It will concern itself with reporting and commenting on efforts of socialists in other countries to grapple with the political and theoretical problems of our times – both those with which we agree and those with which we disagree. – Ed.





One of the most interesting new political publications to appear in Europe in the post-war period is La Revue Internationale, a monthly political, cultural and literary magazine edited by a group of leading French intellectuals and Marxists, including some ex-Trotskyists (e.g., Pierre Naville).
The publication is interesting not so much for its intrinsic merit (which is rather varied and uneven) but its steady evolution toward pro-Stalinism, or, at best, Stalinist apologism expressed on a comparatively high ideological plane. We do not want to trace the steady development of this tendency here, but rather to call attention to one particularly significant article which has, like the magazine itself, an interest beyond its own content. La Revue Internationale might be called the first important theoretical journal of the neo-Stalinist trend.
A discussion was organized by the magazine’s editors around James Burnham’s book The Managerial Revolution, which hit Europe last year, arousing much the same superficial interest as it had done in America. In this discussion, however, it turned out that it was the Russian state that was being discussed. The articles soon left the field of lofty, if abstract, theory and dealt with Stalin’s regime in theory and practice.
Charles Bettelheim, well-known economist, took the first timid but definite step in his contribution (No. 16, June 1947) which contended that the Russian bureaucracy is a necessary, progressive characteristic of the first stages of socialist society; that each revolution must experience the same bureaucratic growth since such an organism is needed to regulate privileges and material distribution during the first days of a workers’ state.
More interesting and clearer, both in content and significance, was the article of Giles Martinet, editorial board member of La Revue Internationale, published in July 1947 (No. 17). The article is entitled, From Trotsky to Burnham, and is a bold and open step in justifying the existence, as an historic necessity, of the Russian bureaucracy together with its methods and manners.
In the course of a violent attack on Trotsky and his movement on grounds of revolutionary “utopianism,” the position of Shachtman (Workers Party) is attacked at great length. Martinet cleverly makes use of the numerous contradictions in the Fourth International’s analysis of events (based principally on the “approaching revolution” theories held by the European Trotskyist spokesmen), and openly takes his stand with the Stalinist movement and the Russian bureaucracy. The reply of the Trotskyists (Quatrième Internationale, October 1947) is ineffectual since it is an elaborate defense of this same “approaching revolution” perspective.
 
Burnhamite Speculation
F.A. Ridley, who conducts a column called The Shape of Things to Come for The Socialist Leader (publication of the British Independent Labor Party; formerly known as The New Leader) speculates on the character of Britain’s Labor government after two years in office.
In the November 15, 1947 issue, Ridley theorizes: “Far from being the legatees and last hopes of traditional Capitalism, the Labor Government is effectively digging the grave of that society. It is the authentic forerunner of a new social-democratic, collectivist system. One in which the State controls the economy, and not the economy the State ...” And further, says Ridley, the new ruling class “is the State Machine itself, as expressed and represented by its political directors and bureaucratic agents that becomes the new ruling-class. And this, and not either Capitalism or Socialism is ‘the state of things to come’ in contemporary Britain ... we may accurately term [this]: ‘The Managerial Revolution.’” Burnham pops up here again.
A social revolution is in process in England, says Ridley, but it is not a socialist revolution. What is it then? “...why beat about the bush? Such a governmental regime, even if, as may be, it conserves some fig-leaves of formal political democracy, is, in essence, a totalitarian regime, a ‘servile state,’ as Belloc, a generation ago, called it more bluntly.” Its final stage will be, concludes Ridley, the same as “the final stage of Stalinism.” It sounds suspiciously as if John Dos Passos’ recent article in Life magazine derived its original inspiration from the Ridley thesis.
A notorious tout of generalities, Ridley here lightmindedly deduces sweeping conclusions from the existing tendencies and trends. With less than twenty per cent of British economy nationalized, with a halt in the entire program now apparent, and faced with the fact that the really basic branches of British industry are yet untouched (steel, iron, machine works, etc.), Ridley asks us to accept the Burnhamite theory of the gradual growing-over of state-capitalist Britain into a full-blown Stalinist Britain, without suggesting why this will happen or accounting for any intervening political counter-factors. This is speculation without rhyme or reason and indicates the theoretical poverty of the ILP remnants.
Unfortunately we must simultaneously acknowledge that while the RCP (Revolutionary Communist Party, British Trotskyists) has several times seriously grappled with the problem of the historic significance of the British Labor government, and has fortunately rejected its original viewpoint that this government, like its predecessors, would “do nothing,” its analyses have not been entirely adequate. It has related the program and policy of the Attlee regime to the capitalist needs of a declining Britain, but it has failed to deepen this economic side of its analysis either with an accompanying political analysis or, more important, a related political program for itself. The best that can be said for Ridley is that in his blundering way he realizes that “something new” is with us, and his speculative fancy tries to get at this “something new.”
 
Theory of “State Bonapartism”
The problem of the character of Russian-occupied Eastern Europe is common to revolutionists everywhere. Since one’s general attitude toward Stalinism as a world phenomenon is, in part, determined by a concrete answer to this problem, the universal concern of Marxists with Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia, etc., is understandable. In the November 7, 1947 issue of Toiler’s Front, publication of the Revolutionary Communist Party of India (an organization in general sympathetic to Trotskyism) Sudarshan Chatterji, in an article dealing with the writings of the now-disgraced Professor Varga on the subject of Eastern Europe, attempts to answer this problem.
Varga, as our readers know, was the man who described the Eastern European regimes as “democracy of a new type.” With grim determination, Chatterji reads Varga a lesson in elementary Marxism, but we are not concerned with this aspect of the article. What does Chatterji himself say about the regimes?
Repeating the familiar story of how the Red Army’s approach opened up the path “for a socialist revolution,” he tells us that the Kremlin stepped into the breach “to refurbish the old capitalist apparati with the help of its bayonets.” To solve the economic difficulties of the occupied lands, Stalin organized a “managed revolution” (definitely not to be confused with the “managerial revolution”!). A small landowning peasantry is created by land reforms, and “to weaken the bourgeoisie” (Chatterji’s emphasis) some important industries are nationalized. But this, of course, does not undermine the capitalist foundations of these countries. On the contrary, “it will help capitalism to recover.” The regimes of Eastern Europe are state-capitalist, with the state power resting: in the hands of “the Stalinist generals.” But these generals, since they maneuver between the workers and the bourgeoisie, are Bonapartists; and therefore “the states in Eastern Europe can be called Stalinist Bonapartist States ... a bastard product of Stalinism.” (Chatterji’s emphasis)
This neat little package, all tied up with the ribbons of Marxist “orthodoxy,” carefully evades taking any position on the political nature of the regimes, the problem of their defense or non-defense, etc. The trouble with the whole thing is its entirely static quality, refuted by the events of each day. Stalin conceives of his pattern for the Eastern European states, imposes it upon them, maneuvers back and forth, and everything is clear! But the continuation of the nationalization process in country after country, the obvious growing totalitarianization of each state apparatus, the tying together of the nationalized economy with Russian economy, etc. – all this is a process to which Chatterji is blind. In “explaining” yesterday, he explains nothing because his theory is shattered with each new day. Between Varga’s “New Democracy” and Chatterji’s “State Bonapartism” there is little choice in theoretical clarity.
 
Mixed Theories
Apparently still puzzled and dissatisfied with its explanation of events in Eastern Europe, the French Parti Communiste Intemationaliste (PCI) has begun a re-examination of the problem in its weekly paper, La Verité. Under the standing bead of Facts, Figures, Documents, a series of articles are being published to examine “What is the exact nature of the profound modifications that have taken place and are taking place in the countries that find themselves integrated into the zone of ‘Soviet defense’? Is the Stalinist bureaucracy capable of playing a revolutionary role outside of the USSR? Is the new democracy of Varga a ‘necessary step,’ an ‘original stage’ on the road toward socialism?”
Vital questions, all of these, but we are fearful of the reply that the French majority Trotskyists will give to them if we judge by the first article in this series, The Popular Rumanian Republic.
Denying that Russia’s victory has led to “the extension of soviet economic relations to the countries where the Red Army has penetrated,” the author claims that Russian efforts aim at fulfillment of two demands: reparations, and seizure of industrial enterprises and capital possessed by Nazi Germany in the conquered lands. Russia replaces Germany as banker and industrialist. All this requires “the maintenance of the economy within the capitalist framework.” In Rumania, for example, Russia creates, together with the state, mixed companies (oil, air traffic, banks, etc.). That is, an economic alliance is formed between “the Soviet bureaucracy and the Rumanian bourgeoisie” which exploits the workers, with Russia and the Rumanian capitalists dividing the profits! The author predicts more extensive nationalizations, but only of Anglo-American properties and not touching the country’s key industries.
Here we have another neat and equally worthless package, based upon superficial economic rationalizations, fitted into preconceived patterns which ignore the role of living politics. Example? In the very same article, the author tells us that King Michael of Rumania, just kicked out by the collaborating Stalinists, was “the biggest banker, industrialist and property owner of Rumania!” And who took over the capital represented by Michael? The Rumanian state, of course – the state which is controlled, dominated and run by the Rumania Stalinist party, handmaid of Russia. But La Verité will cling fast to the “Rumanian bourgeoisie” and its mixed companies – mixed like Molotov cocktails!
 



It is the misfortune of Czechoslovakia and its six million people to lie in the shadowy No Man’s land between Western Europe and the region of the Iron Curtain. But if Stalin has his way, the Iron Curtain will shortly hang west of this unfortunate land, and its descent will be unmistakable and final. Regardless of the tempo at which it proceeds, Stalinism has launched a definitive campaign for inclusion of Czechoslovakia within the sphere of Russian imperialism, and it must be recognized that its chances of victory are only too great.
The background of the long-expected crisis is simple. The country has, since the war’s termination, come steadily under the influence and pressure of Russia, even though no occupation troops are now in the land. Czechoslovakia has been an instance on which the major effects of Stalinism have been felt through the medium of the Czech Stalinist party itself, once the stage had been set by the original Russian occupation. In the elections of May 1946, the Stalinists received the largest vote and became the plurality party, with 114 out of 300 seats in Parliament. Together with the Social Democrats (a large part of which is under Stalinist control) they had an absolute majority, but they preferred – until now – -to rule through a National Coalition government of five parties. The Stalinists represented in 1946 slightly under 40 per cent of the popular votes. Their game since then, obviously, has been to sap and undermine the bourgeois parties of the coalition, while simultaneously winning over or paralyzing a majority of the Social Democracy, until they felt they could exercise power in their own name. That moment evidently is at hand.
What is happening in Czechoslovakia is nothing less than a calculated move for the seizure of totalitarian state power by the Stalinists, together with the crushing of all opposition, and the erection of a totalitarian state, entirely within the sphere of Russian influence, parallel to the Stalinist states already created in Poland, the Balkans, etc. This crisis has been deliberately precipitated by the Stalinists. The arrival of Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Valerian A. Zorin as “advisor” tells us much. Stalin has decided to end the coalition farce and pluck the apple. The crisis began over the issue of the police and its control. The Stalinist Minister of Interior had been appointing Stalinists as police chiefs. The non-Stalinist parties, recognizing the beginning of the end for them in these moves, protested and last week resigned. But President Benes, still attempting to hold the coalition together, has refused to accept these resignations and insists that the government continue. The Stalinists, of course, wish the resignations accepted and members of the CP appointed in place of the resigned ministers. They also demand the formation of a so-called Social-Democratic-Communist government. We say “so-called” because the divided Czech Social Democracy is either exclusively under Stalinist domination today, or numb with fright. Behind these parliamentary issues, of course, lies the vital and real question of State-Power – who shall be master in the house?
 
How Stalinism Seizes Power
There are two basic questions that concern socialists in the Czech events – how the Stalinists operate in their march toward power; how can this Stalinist counter-revolution be defeated, and by whom?
The Stalinist road to state power is marked by the use of blackmail, threats, violence and coercion in every, shape and form possible. Kidnapping and jailing of opposition leaders, bribery of Social Democratic leaders with jobs and privileges, police violence against opponents’ meetings – all of this is familiar now as weapons in the Stalinist arsenal. Behind all this hovers the menacing shape of the Russian armed forces, able to invade and overwhelm the nation at will.
But all these are techniques, methods and, as such, are subordinate to factors far more important for socialists to grasp. These weapons alone could never put Stalinism in power in Czechoslovakia or, for that matter, anywhere else. Together with their use, Stalinism must

mobilize the working masses of the country and,
 
offer a political and social program that will actually mobilize the workers. This is what concerns us for it is this that differentiates Stalinism from for example, an openly fascist movement. It is being employed to the hilt in Czechoslovakia.

A general strike of labor is to build up mass support for the demand of Premier “Stalin” Gottwald that a majority Stalinist cabinet be accepted by President Benes. This climaxes mass public meetings called in response to the Stalinist manifesto “to good Czechs and Slovaks to join closely in a firm National Front which would secure support for the government of Klement Gottwald and guarantee enactment of all demands which are in the interest of the republic.” A convention of 8,000 works council delegates from factories dominated by the Stalinists will likewise build up toward the climax while, at the same time, political terror is directed against the Social Democracy to precipitate its internal split and force its “left wing” to join openly with the Stalinists. The game is played on many fronts at the same time. We are dealing with men motivated by power drives, desperate and calculating, determined to see the thing through. A national peasants’ convention has likewise been called, but, in this case, not by the official Peasants’ Congress (which is non-Stalinist in its majority), but by the Stalinist elements who, of course, will claim to represent the entire peasant mass.
 
Pseudo “Dual-Power” Possible
Precisely how Stalinism will manipulate these masses whose movement it has thus artificially created is something that remains to be seen. It depends upon how quickly and in what form the Social Democracy and the other coalition parties capitulate. There is no question that the Stalinists are prepared to go to the end this time, and may even create a pseudo, Stalinist-controlled “dual power” regime, in the form of the Labor and Peasant organizations, to push aside the Benes Parliament and openly rule in its own name. It seems unlikely that matters will go this far since the bourgeois parties, divided and weakened, unable to get any real aid from America and the Western powers upon whom they depend, cannot be expected to offer lasting resistance.
And by what means are these masses being mobilized? Here again we see another unique weapon of great importance, that differentiates the Stalinists from their blood brothers, the fascists. That weapon is the demand for nationalization of industry. Those pitiful thinkers of the official Fourth International who have (and still do!) described such regimes as exist in Czechoslovakia as “state capitalism; an alliance between the Czech capitalists and Stalinists,” had best spend one moment contemplating reality.
All Czech industry is now 75 per cent nationalized, under state operation and control, yet the Stalinists now actively demand that the government nationalize every industry in the foreign and wholesale trades with more than 50 workers – that is, that the 25 per cent balance likewise be nationalized! The Czech bourgeoisie, about to be politically expropriated and soon to find its properties entirely state owned, this bourgeoisie is alleged by some to be the ruling class to which Czech Stalinism has capitulated and with which it has allied itself!
The events in Czechoslovakia, rapidly approaching their final dénouement, demand a more extensive analysis than we can offer here. Profound lessons as to the character and nature of Stalinism must be made. Those American liberals who informed us about the happy marriage of Stalinism with Western Democracy, as symbolized by the Czech National government of Benes, must have the truth shown to them. Those socialists who think of “nationalization” as synonomous with socialism, ignoring its use by the Stalinists as a weapon for creation of their totalitarian state, must again be subjected to the demand that they re-examine their attitude. And those who believe that the bourgeois parties, the liberal parties of Benes arid his type, can halt the march of Stalinism must be made to answer the reality of events.
 
Propositions in an Analysis
As our contribution to an analysis of these events, we offer the following-propositions:

In countries where Stalinism can count upon, directly or indirectly, the imminent support of Russian, imperialism, its total victory is inevitable. By victory we mean the total seizure of the state and its apparatus. The issue in Czechoslovakia today is state power; unlike France of three months back, it is not intertwined with working class economic demands. Stalinism, at present, cannot take power in those countries whose bourgeoisie can count upon the support, in a tangible way, of American imperialism.
 
Stalinism cannot rule together with other parties over any extended period of time. The essence of its totalitarian character lies in the fact that it must have total power; nothing less will do. No matter how meek and subservient the other coalition parties are, Stalinism must destroy them and rule exclusively in its own name.
 
The greatest threat in the nature of Stalinism lies in its capacity (based upon organic need) to mobilize the working masses, in the name of a social program (nationalization) which appears to be revolutionary and progressive.
 
Capitalism, the bourgeoisie, capitalist parties cannot fight Stalinism successfully. Stalinism will defeat its opponents except where American imperialism is the counter factor, in every case because the capitalist parties are politically and socially bankrupt and cannot halt the Stalinist mobilization of the people.
 
A completely re-oriented socialist movement, grasping the true nature of Stalinism in all its implications, is needed to halt Stalinism. The greatest need for such a movement is, above all, in Europe where the threat of Stalinism is strongest.

 



The seizure and rapid consolidation of totalitarian state power by the Czech Stalinists has brought disaster to more than 12 millions of unfortunate Czech and Slovak peoples who must now suffer the consequences of yielding to Stalinism. The reaction of the thousands of Czech students who, defying the Stalinist police armed to the teeth, poured into the streets and demonstrated their hostility to what was occurring, under the slogan of Long Live the Democratic Republic, was the only possible and correct reaction.
Sensitive to the meaning of totalitarian dictatorship, with its crushing of all democratic liberties and rights, and sensing the similarities between the recent Nazi occupation of the country and the rapidly emerging Stalinist dictatorship, the Prague university students acted in the heroic tradition of active struggle for living democracy. Their cause must he championed, and they must be defended against the Stalinists who would arrest their leaders, forbid their demonstrations and purge their university in Nazi style. The tragedy of Czechoslovakia is that great masses of workers and middle class people did not instinctively come to their aid and support.
 
How The Militant Reacted
Outside of Czechoslovakia, more than one political organization and movement has found itself tested by the meaning of these events. While it has not been our custom to conduct polemical discussions against political opponents in this column, the importance of the Czech issue compels us to set that aside for this week at least. We are concerned here with the reaction of The Militant, the newspaper reflecting the political ideas of the Socialist Workers Party (Cannonites) to these happenings. The article by Paul G. Stevens in the current Militant dealing with Czechoslovakia can be described as nothing less than a disaster – a disaster on a truly gigantic scale, involving as it does, elements of fantasy, grotesquery, stupidity and unintentional humor. The author of the article has carefully composed the following account of what happened in Czechoslovakia.

The capitalist members of the coalition government resigned “in protest against alleged moves by Nosek, Stalinist Minister of Interior, to place the country’s police under exclusive CP control.” “Alleged!” Indeed!
 
The Stalinists and Social Democrats together now “... constitute a majority of 151 out of 300 in the Czech parliament and are thus in the position to meet the formal constitutional requirements.” Nowhere is it mentioned that (a) the Social Democrats were deliberately split, that a substantial section opposed support of the Stalinists but that the Stalinists got this needed support by arrests, terror and threats, and (b) to guarantee their parliamentary majority the Stalinists forced parliamentary representatives of other parties to join them by employing the same methods.

But these are minor points compared to the disaster yet to come. Stevens tells us of the underlying causes of the crisis, which go much deeper. The Kremlin must integrate Czechoslovakia into its Eastern European bloc. So far so good – the Kremlin has already done that. But what else was involved in the Stalinist seizure of power? It seems that the Stalinist party has been faced with the danger of losing its popular support among the workers and people because ... “continued exploitation of the workers by Czech capitalism, left intact by the fake ‘nationalizations’, has produced growing unrest and discontent.” That is, the initiative has come from the workers, in a revolutionary mood, who have forced the reluctant Stalinists to swing into action against “Czech capitalism.” Incredible, you say?
 
From Idiocy to Idiocy
This “description” of the Czech workers dragging the reluctant Stalinists behind them is a polemical fantasy on our part? We quote Stevens further. “While the Stalinist leaders are basing themselves on masses action, they are proceeding with a caution that reveals their fear of its revolutionary impetus.” The stunning speed and effectiveness, with which the Stalinist apparatus struck is “caution and fear” to this observer. His vulgar distortion of what occurred is made necessary by his desire to fit the events into the ridiculous theory held by the Socialist Workers Party, and so-called orthodox Trotskyists everywhere’, that what exists in Czechoslovakia, as well as all other countries within the Russian sphere, is a capitalist regime with which the Stalinists are allied and to which they have consistently capitulated. The seizure of state power in this new country, the final nationalization of the 25 per cent of industry and economy hitherto not nationalized, the political destruction of the capitalist parties and their leader, Benes, all of this is, in the eyes of Stevens and the Cannonites, nothing but capitulation on the part of Stalinism to capitalism! Do you think we exaggerate? For our final quotation from The Militant we preserve a sentence that must absolutely be preserved, for history, as a monumental example of stupidity, ignorance and blindness. It is the final sentence, a prediction of Stevens, contained in his article. “But before this point (civil war) is reached, the Stalinists will make every effort to arrive at another compromise with Benes and Czech capitalists.” Before the political disaster represented by Stevens, one can only bow his head with shame and humiliation that so-called “Marxism” and “Trotskyism” have sunk so low.
 
A Vital Issue of Policy
But far more is concerned than the blunders of this spokesman for the SWP. In reality, aside from its distorted picture and false prognosis – all of which are related to the SWP’s general position that the Stalinist movement is a genuine working class movement and Russia is still a workers’ state – the Stevens article conceals gross cowardice and evasion of the real issue. What is his attitude toward events in Czechoslovakia? Everybody who reads Labor Action knows clearly where we stand on this matter.
Labor Action states bluntly that a disaster and tragedy to the working class not only of Czechoslovakia, but of the entire world, has occurred. Labor Action denies that the Stalinist counter-revolution against the Czech people has anything in common with socialism or its liberating principles; that, in fact, it is precisely the opposite because the socialist organization of society is impossible without broad, popular working class democracy. Further, Labor Action states that, consistent with its entire approach to the problem, if there had been civil war in the country, if an important segment of the population made up of workers, students, middle class democrats and liberals, peasants, etc., had resisted the Stalinists and taken up arms to preserve democracy in the country, we would have championed this democratic camp against the Stalinists. In a struggle between a popular democratic camp and the Stalinist totalitarian camp, we would have ardently supported the democratic camp.
But Stevens’ article contains not one word on this, the real issue. By implication, not directly, it supports the Stalinists who, after all, did yield to the workers’ will (if we believe Stevens) and did smash the capitalist politics and complete nationalization of the remaining industries. Why shouldn’t the SWP and Stevens support Gottwald? It would be perfectly in order, from their viewpoint. Will they? We do not know. If they do, it will again emphasize what has become clearer than ever – the politics of Labor Action and the Workers Party is utterly opposed to the politics of The Militant and the Socialist Workers Party. In the meanwhile, we can only insist upon a clear and non-evasive reply to the questions raised by Czechoslovakia. Is what occurred in the interests of the workers’ movement and socialism, or against it? Are you for a democratic struggle against the Gottwald dictatorship, or would you stand with its opponents? These are fair questions that demand answers. Like it or not, the SWP will be obliged to reply.
 



To THE EDITOR:
The difficulty we have with the article of Homer Paxon (The New International, July 1948) is certainly not with its description and analysis of the Marshall Plan as such. Paxon has given us the imperialist essentials of the project and explained its relationship to the development of American capitalism.
What we find lacking is the proper setting of the plan within the context of the world situation as it is today. Just as the relationship between politics (including; foreign policy) and national economy has changed considerably since the time of Marx — above all, in this period of absolute capitalist decay — so has the character of imperialism itself.
The Marshall Plan is not “simply” an imperialist plot, motivated by the economic needs of American capitalism. From the point of view of profits as such, the investment of billions in the outmoded, depleted and unproductive economies of capitalism’s most ancient home is surely the poorest possible choice. A billion invested in backward India would yield more profits in one year than the $17½ billion will in Europe over the next five years. We have already indicated the impossibility of repayment.
The point is that now, in 1948, the fulfillment of capitalism’s economic goals (which have, incidently, changed considerably also) is utterly dependent upon and follows political considerations. It is the political problems besetting American imperialism which drive it to behave in such and such a fashion, within the general, long-range context of its economic needs and development.
Thus, for example, Paxon points out that the ERP Act gives the American president the right to shut off aid at will. This, formally speaking, is certainly the fact. But the reality is far different and American imperialism could no more shut off aid arbitrarily and unilaterally than it could afford to drop its aid program and see Stalinism conquer Europe. The importance of Paxon’s formal consideration is lost if it is not qualified by describing the actual relationship of forces. There are many other remarks of Paxon of the same nature that tend to give a distorted and unbalanced picture.
Furthermore, it must be remembered that even the limited success of the plan in operation will tend to create counter-forces within Western European economy itself. We are not suggesting that these counter-forces will definitely influence the tempo and measures permissible to America.
For example, since the tendency of America is to favor the revival of Western Germany, centering around the Ruhr, as against that of France, it is perfectly clear that at a later stage there must be a counter, self-protective tendency for England, France and possibly Italy to band together within the Marshall Plan bloc and oppose this favoring of Germany.
This is but one of many economic counter-tendencies which will develop and make, it exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, for America to obtain the economic “straightjacket” stranglehold over Europe which Paxon seems to think will and must come. The spirit of “economic determinism” is much too rife in the Paxon analysis, and should have been replaced by more caution and care in dealing with these complexities where innumerable variants exist.
Henry Judd



I
On June 5, 1947, Secretary of State Marshall, in a now famous speech delivered at Harvard University, stated that
Our policy is ... the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and economic conditions in which free institutions can exist ... The program should be a joint one agreed to by a number, if not all, the European nations.
These words have now assumed the flesh and blood form of the European Recovery Program (ERP), better known as the Marshall Plan. This plan, backed by a financial appropriation by act of Congress of over $5 billion, is now in operation in sixteen nations of Western Europe.
Since Marshall’s first speech, within one year’s time, a statement of intent and principle has grown to enormous proportions. In its broadest aspects, and in the sense that the Marshall Plan represents the sum and total of American historic and strategic interests relative to the entire world, one may correctly include within its embrace such matters as the Truman Doctrine, as expressed over the issue of Greece, the program to bolster the Chiang Kai-shek regime of Kuomintang China, the European Reconstruction bill (ERP) adopted by Congress in April 1948 – in a word, all that enters into the framing and shaping of American imperialist policy.
In the more popular and truer sense, however, the Marshall Plan has come to mean that aspect of the whole program directed toward the reconstruction and stabilization of Western Europe and directly embodied in the above-mentioned ERP act itself. This popular narrowing down of the Marshall Plan, which makes the western half of the Old World the center of all efforts, has a definite validity since it is perfectly clear that the destiny of the plan, its failure or success, as well as its future evolution, depends upon what happens in the sixteen recipient nations of Western Europe, which are still the key arenas for the settling of world rivalries.
The question, for example, of whether or not American imperialism will be able to develop a similar program for the penetration of India and Asia (an Asiatic Marshall Plan) depends largely on what happens in Europe; in fact, one of the major considerations in Asiatic politics today is the fact that American capitalism cannot, at the moment, provide capital to such countries as India, Burma, Ceylon, Indo-China, etc., and thus strengthen the semi-independent regimes of these countries and further drive out British financial holdings. The drive and direction of the Marshall Plan then can conveniently be limited for our purposes to its program for Western Europe. One year’s steady but complex evolution was required to begin actual operation of ERP. Issues of political principle had first to be settled, beginning with the general conference of June-July 1947, held in Paris and attended by all European powers including Russia. At this conference, the exclusion of Russia from the scope of the plan was carried out, and Russian imperialism declared its holy war of opposition to American intervention in European political and economic life.
As is well known, all American efforts since this fatal moment of division have been bent toward setting the program into operation with the same energy that Russian imperialism has directed toward preventing its launching and development. We shall see later why this became the storm center of the American-Russian “cold war” for Europe.
 
Basis of the Marshall Plan
Then a series of congressional committees, prepared reports and recommendations for consideration, while Stalinist Russia hastily concluded treaties and alliances binding the occupied lands of Eastern Europe still closer, economically and politically, to the Kremlin. As various skimpy and emergency appropriations were hastily adopted for interim aid (to prevent a total collapse during the winter of 1947–48), the sixteen nations, participating in still another Paris session, accepted six basic principles laid down by Secretary Clayton of the United States:

Immediate action for financial and currency stabilization.
 
Guarantee of each nation’s production schedules.
 
Agreement to reduce trade barriers.
 
Budgetary allowances for capital needs that would have to be financed through the World Bank.
 
A system of organization for administering and checking the plan when it came into operation.
 
Recognition of common objectives and responsibilities.

Once these principles had been agreed to, the formulators of the plan were able to proceed with concrete legislation and enabling action. We shall not review the long, protracted course of the bill through Congress, except to point out that its vital need was shown by the fact that all political wings of the American bourgeoisie, while differing on details, finally united behind it on principle.
While Truman’s proposal for a five-year bill, financed at $17 billion to begin with, was not adopted, the measure finally approved is equivalent to what he had proposed for the first year in his own bill. In summary form it is as follows:

The sum of $5.3 billion is provided for, to be expended over the first twelve-month period, with a contemplated total outlay of $17 billion within five years.
 
Of the first year’s expenditures, $3.8 billion will go for direct relief commodities (food, fuel, fertilizer) and the balance of $1.5 billion for machinery, equipment and raw materials. This relation between relief commodities and capital goods is to change each year, as the plan succeeds, and ultimately farm equipment, raw materials and machinery are to form the bulk of shipments.
 
An elaborate administration is created, with a single, president-appointed authority at its top, empowered to make grants or loans. Elaborated treaties and agreements will, with each specific country, decide whether economic aid will be in the form of grants that will never be repaid, or loans and their conditions; as well as the quantity, type and nature of the aid. These treaties are being worked out, subject to approval by the American Senate and the respective parliamentary bodies of the sixteen governments. Statements of intent to abide by all stipulations of the ERP Act have already been signed.
 
The four main items to be shipped during 1948 are: coal, steel, grains and machinery.
 

Over-All Objective
What is the intent of this program, in terms of its own designers? We may summarize it as follows, from Truman’s original Marshall Plan message to Congress delivered on December 19, 1947:
First, the program is designed to make genuine recovery possible within a definite period of time ... Second, ... the funds and goods which we furnish will be used most effectively for European recovery. Third, the program is designed to minimize the financial cost to the United States, but at the same time to avoid imposing on the European countries crushing financial burdens ...
Other objectives were listed, but these are the significant ones. Naturally, these aims are contained within the ERP as a whole, whose over-all objective is never mentioned or even implied in the legislation itself. This objective has often been stated in The New International and other Marxist publications – the stabilization and revival of European economy so that it may act as both a social and military bulwark against Russian expansionism, but a reconstruction so limited as not to offer serious rivalry to the organic need of American capitalism for mastery of the world market.
The numerous conditions and significant qualifications contained in the Marshall Plan and the ERP Act have been listed and described in sufficient detail by Homer Paxon in his article dealing with this subject (New International, July 1948), and need not be repeated. In fact, one of our serious disagreements with Comrade Paxon is over the undue and one-sided emphasis he places on these qualifications which, as we shall try to show, set desired but unrealizable goals for American imperialism.
What concerns us primarily, now that the bare facts of the ERP have been stated, is the question of its workability, the effects it may produce, and its possible social consequences. As Comrade Paxon pointed out in his article, the concrete imperialist details of the Marshall Plan itself will not be known until the sixteen specific treaties have been negotiated, ratified, signed and published.
 
Complexity of Relationships
The complex economic forces involved flow not in one direction (between America and the Europe it seeks to dominate) but in many. We must examine the relationship between: (a) America’s economy and that of Europe; (b) the relationship between European economy and that of the world; (c) the relationship between the economies of Eastern and Western Europe – East-West trade relations; and finally (d) what effects any Marshall Plan recovery, no matter how small, will have upon all this.
It is this complexity of relationships which is far more important than the conditions and “strings” of the ERP Act itself, the vast physical destruction of Europe by the war, and the reactionary terms of the treaties which American imperialism will try to impose upon the sixteen nations of Western Europe.
But even before taking up this question we must first briefly pose yet another problem: What is the nature of the economic difficulties of Europe? From what and out of what must Europe recover? What, precisely, is wrong with European economy?
Only if we understand this can we deal with the real question of what results the Marshall Plan will have, if any, and whether the prospect for European reconstruction has any reality.
 
II
As posed in the original Truman report to Congress, the problem of Europe is essentially one of a maladjustment and malfunctioning of the established European economy.
This is alleged to be principally the result of the war and contingent factors. “The end of the fighting in Europe left that continent physically devastated and its economy temporarily paralyzed.” Natural catastrophes enhanced the problems: “... difficulties were greatly increased during the present year, chiefly by a bitter winter followed by floods and droughts, which cut Western Europe’s grain crop to the lowest figure in generations and hampered production of many other products.”
The malfunctioning of European economy, according to the report, consisted essentially in the following :
... these elements of international trade were so badly disrupted by the war that the people of Western Europe have been unable to produce in their own countries, or to purchase elsewhere, the goods essential to their livelihood. Shortages of raw materials, productive capacity, and exportable commodities have set up vicious circles of increasing scarcities and lowered standards of living.
The Marshall Plan is to solve all this. How? The same report gives the reply:
... [by] breaking through these vicious circles by increasing production to a point where exports and services can pay for the imports they must have to live. The basic problem in making Europe self-supporting is to increase European production.
This is the fundamental thesis of Marshall Plan doctrine. The question is: Does it correspond to reality?
The above explanations – the very way of posing the problem – is superficial and false. The familiar phenomena of inflation, devaluation of currencies, monetary controls, etc., are but symptoms of more serious difficulties.
 
Decline in Production
Who would maintain, for example, that the recent action of the Allied authorities in wiping out in one brutal blow vast masses of worthless inflated marks in Western Germany will have nothing but a momentary effect unless this step is accompanied by a tremendous spurt in productivity and a resumption of the flow of normal goods to the consumer’s market? The malady of European economy is organic and deep-going; it lies in the development of European capitalism itself. The war must be considered as a part of this development, or else it loses all meaning. The war, as a French economist has pointed out, “did not overturn ‘economic mechanisms,’ but only exacerbated them.” (Jacques Charriere, La Revue Internationale, page 82, October 1947.)
The examination and tracing back of symptoms, however, is useful in leading us to. the disease itself. The disruption and malfunctioning of European economy assumes many sympomatic fprms and appears in all fields: currency, trade, commerce, shipping, levels of productivity, etc. It is idle to point out that the physical resources of the Continent still largely remain. Which fact is more significant, for example, in understanding the problem of Germany today? – the fact that beneath the ruined cities and alongside the rubbled factories, that nation’s resources in coal, iron ore, technical skill, etc., remain substantially intact (quite capable of plunging into a planned and ordered reconstruction of the ruins); or the fact that a truncated Germany, politically split and ideologically demoralized beyond belief, will never succeed in lifting itself up higher than its knees so long as the present political situation remains?
And Germany is but the sharpest image of the whole of Europe. The same lesions and diseases that affect Germany are present elsewhere, although to a lesser degree. Let us examine some of these factors.
Buried in the confusion between symptoms and organic causes of the crisis, the president’s original report does suggest the principal factor – the decline in production – but nowhere does it develop or explain this. Charriere has summarized this as follows: “Europe has seen the volume of its production diminish.” He summarizes four contributing factors to this decline, brought about by World War II. In an article entitled The Economic Disintegration of Europe and Its Decadence (La Revue Internationale, December 1945), Charles Bettelheim has analyzed in fine detail the pre-war decline of the productive forces. Charriere’s summary is as follows:

destruction and using up of means of production by military operations, or acts of military occupation;
 
exhaustion of stocks, liquidation of means of international payment, wearing out of machines without their replacement;
 
restrictions on international exchange and therefore on production In neutral countries; and
 
the destruction or paralysis of the productive apparatus in conquered countries, and principally in Germany. To this we must add the concentration on production of means of destruction in the pre-war and war period – that is, for almost ten years!
  

Structural Crisis of Capitalism
But these factors only contributed to and hastened the process of decline. European economy had long since ceased its expansion and had begun to turn inward upon itself, devouring its stored-up capital. The percentage of European production (excluding Russia) in total world industrial production declined as follows:



1913 – 46.6 per cent of world production
 1928 – 40.8 per cent of world production
 1938 – 39.5 per cent of world production



The fall of European commerce was from 66.5 per cent of total world commerce in 1900 to about 62 per cent on the eve of the war. The same decline can be shown for European banking, export of capital, etc., in relation to the balance of the world. The role of the “special” factors brought about by the war has been to so accentuate these declines that one can only speak now of a fundamental structura1 crisis of European capitalism.
To all of this may be added the following generalizations and observations about the actual nature of European capitalism today. Much could be said to detail these observations, but there is neither space nor time:

A worn-out, aged technology, unrationalizcd and antique (in contrast to America), in the principal European countries.
 
National markets too narrow and bound to permit industrial expansion (particularly in the case of France, whose trustified system deliberately narrows down consumers’ purchasing power).
 
A very low man-hour rate of productivity.
 
A feeble agricultural productivity (largely due to the backwardness of methods employed and the social structure of land-holding).
 
A limited supply of raw materials.
 
A social structure and stratification in each European country which hampers invention, improvement and expansion.
 
A high cost of productivity which tends to eat into prior accumulations of surplus capital which are thus used solely for continuation of production, rather than renewal and expansion.
 
Crushing public war debts.
 
The further depressing effect upon production that American competition exerts.
  

America Comes Out on Top
These are the facts which lead Charriere to the apt and fully justified conclusion that all this runs counter to the possibility of “... a new extension of the productive forces of the European countries on the basis of their existing economic structures ...” (Ibid., page 87.) To further round out the picture we return again to the Truman report:
... the peoples of Western Europe depend for their support upon international trade. It has been possible for some 270 million people, occupying this relatively small area, to enjoy a good standard of living only by manufacturing imported raw materials and exporting the finished products to the rest of the world. They must also import foodstuffs in large volume, for there is not enough farm land in Western Europe to support its population even with intensive cultivation and with favorable weather. They cannot produce adequate amounts of cotton, oil and other raw materials. Unless these deficiencies are met by imports, the production centers of Europe can function only at low efficiency, if at all.
From this description of what General Marshall has referred to as the “organic dislocation” of European economy (although, to him, it has been caused by the war exclusively), we must briefly examine the structure and nature of American economy as it stands isolated in the same world of which Europe forms one part. As is well known, to an even greater extent than Europe’s productive capacity has fallen, that of America has leaped forward. This is, of course, at the center of Europe’s difficulties.
This dual growth of American productive forces (absolute, in terms of its past capacities; relative, in terms of its supremacy over Europe and its percentage of world production) has made of American capitalism the undisputed head of the capitalist world. The productive index of the United States rose from 100 in 1939 to 218 in 1943. During the war and immediate post-war period, the destruction of capital and means of production created an insatiable market which resolved the production-consumption problem and encouraged this unprecedented expansion. America contributed 50 per cent of total world industrial production before the war. This went up to as high as 65 per cent during and after! Two specific examples will further illustrate this:



Steel –


America produced 32 per cent of world supply in 1938
America produced 70 per cent of world supply in 1945




Iron Ore –


America produced 37 per cent of world supply in 1938
America produced 71 per cent of world supply in 1945
 



Interrelation of Europe and US
The direct effect, of course, of this huge volume of production is shown in the export statistics of the United States. We cite but one example of this: In 1944, the value of American exports was 4½ times that of its exports in 1939! This export rate has held fairly steady since 1944 and its decisive nature is suggested by a modest statement in a government report quoted by Charriere:
“It is only through the re-establishment of an increased level of production and commercial exchange throughout the entire world that the United States can guarantee over the coming years a lifting of exports permitting the highest possible production and the full use of labor power.”
To this decisive theme we must, naturally, return later and in greater detail.
Our brief survey of European economy and American economy in their mutual isolation has indicated the contrary tendencies of both. Of still greater importance is the interrelationship, both traditional apd present, of these two great productive areas.
Here, too, we shall see that a most striking change has occurred, causing its share of malfunctioning and “dislocation” to drive Europe to its present disintegration. Again, we can only describe this relationship in its broadest outlines. The Truman report gives us an indication of the character of this relationship:
In the past, the flow of raw materials and manufactured products between Western Europe, Latin America, Canada and the United States has integrated these ureas in a great trading system. In the same manner, Far Eastern exports to the United States have helped pay for the goods shipped from Europe to the Far East. Europe is thus an essential part of a world trading network. The failure to revive fully this vast trading system ... would result in economic deterioration throughout the world. The United States, in common with other nations, would suffer. [Emphasis mine – H.J.]
Because of its food and raw-material lacks, the foreign trade of Europe has always been proportionately greater than that of the United States. In 1938, the sixteen Marshall Plan nations (including Western Germany) imported 50 per cent of the world’s total imports, as contrasted with 8 per cent for America (The Nation, January 3, 1948). The cost of these imports was paid for by industrial exports to the world, including a highly significant exchange of industrial products for food and materials between Western and Eastern Europe. Services such as shipping, banking and income from capital investments abroad furnished the balance for payments of imports not covered by export trade. That is to say, the nations of Western Europe had huge colonial empires to exploit in Africa, the Near East, Latin America and, above all, Asia. This entire relationship, as is well known, between capitalist Western Europe and the colonial world was destroyed during World War II.
 
One Great Debtor Area
Here, obviously, is one of the key factors behind the unbalancing of pre-war economic relationships. The British, French, Dutch, Belgian and Spanish colonial empires, in one or another fashion, have gone up in smoke as significant trading and commercial enterprises for Western Europe. Together with this, the financial position of Europe has been reversed. Whereas England, at least, had remained a creditor nation after the First World War, even this asset has now been lost, although England still has large amounts of capital invested abroad and not yet liquidated. In the words of Sternberg,
“... today Europe is one great debtor area and no longer able, as in the past, to pay for imports with interest from foreign investments.”
In the estimates of the Marshall Plan as originally outlined, the five-year deficit of the sixteen nations in trade with the entire Western Hemisphere is figured at between $20 and $22 billion – or approximately $4 to $4.4 billion each year. A chart in the New York Times (April 11, 1948) shows that whereas in 1938 there was a rough balance in European export and import life, in 1947 a total export trade of $6.1 billion left a deficit of $7.5 billion when deducted from the total import sum of $13.6 billion! No more graphic representation of the European disaster is possible.
But this deficit must be examined more concretely since it involves primarily the United States. Despite the undoubted increase in productivity, Europe’s deficit in 1947 (estimated at $7.5 billion above) represented a jump of $1.7 billion from the deficit of 1946, and this deficit increase was exclusively to the United States! That is to say, while production and trade were increasing, it was all in the wrong direction, from the viewpoint of Europe.
Imports increase more rapidly than exports, and 90 per cent of Europe’s current deficit flows from its unbalance of trade with the United States. A breakdown of the $7.5 billion deficit in 1947 indicates this:



$2.7 billion of deficit due to decline in profits from investments abroad, services, etc.
  1.2 billion of deficit due to decline, in volume of trade: i.e., lower exports, higher imports.
  3.6 billion of deficit due to price increases in imported goods, primarily from America.

$7.5 billions – total trade deficit.
 



Import-Export-Import
The principal way in which this deficit manifests itself is the notorious shortage of dollars for payments. If, as has been estimated, the United States (at its present productivity and rate of employment) produces annually a surplus of goods estimated between $10 and $14 billion which cannot be consumed by the internal national market and must therefore be exported, it is clear that the wherewithal to purchase this must exist in the world market. American imperialism spent $16 billion in loans and advances in the interim period between the end of lend-lease and the start of the Marshall Plan. Yet the paucity of dollars for payment is as acute as ever!
The reason is, of course, that dollar pump-priming can never substitute for genuine exchange and trade, and if Europe can neither export nor find a willing American market if it could export, then the drainage of dollars is interminable and endless. This, as Charriere has explained, sets up an import-export relationship which is the exact opposite of the normal.
That is, the former basis of European economy in; relation to the world was a process of export-import-export. The mechanism today has become one of import-export-import “under which Europe must first import in order to live and reindustrialize itself before thinking of exporting, in payment, a part of its production.” (Ibid., page 90.)
An illustration of this is French trade in 1947. In that year, imports exceeded exports by 210 per cent, and 85 per cent of this deficit was to the United States.
A more striking example was the astounding speed with which the $4½ billion loan to England became exhausted and left England in essentially the same position as before the loan. As late as March 1948 England’s monthly trade balance was running against her at an average of $200 million monthly, despite the steady mounting of exports and productivity itself. Why? Because the volume of imports, far from decreasing as had been hoped for, leaped up to greater heights than ever, particularly in food, tobacco, oil, raw materials.
We have already cited the statement from the president’s report that it is precisely the intent of the Marshall Plan to break down this vicious cycle and thus induce the harmonious rhythm of international trade and commerce to re-enter the world of European economy, accompanied by a return of prosperity and economic revival. While our description up to this point has dealt by inference with the possibility of such a development, it is necessary to put the question directly and attempt an answer.
Can American capitalism, with its Marshall Plan and its billions, achieve its stated goal? If not, why not? If not, what will it achieve?
 
III
The problem of success or failure of the plan is in itself a complicated matter since it exists on various levels. One can consider it in terms of the stated and alleged purposes (as expressed in the introduction to the ERP Act, for example); or in terms of the economic reports of the sixteen participants (submitted in September 1947); or in terms of the actual trends of American imperialism and its objectives. According to its formulators, the plan will revive and reconstruct European economy, set in motion a new flow of international trade and undermine the basis for Stalinist expansionism which results from stagnation, etc.
These general objectives have been formulated more specifically by the Committee for European Economic Cooperation, the co-ordinating body of the Marshall Plan nations. They have set them down as follows:

Increase of coal production to 584 million tons yearly (30 million tons above the 1938 level).
 
Restoration of pre-war grain production.
 
A 66 per cent expansion in pre-war electrical output.
 
Development of pre-war oil-refining capacity to two and a half times its former volume.
 
Expand inland transportation by 25 per cent.
 
Rehabilitate and rebuild the merchant fleets.
 
Supply from Europe itself the capital goods needed for this expansion.

These targets, endorsed by the United States, are to be achieved by the end of 1951, within four years. This applies to Europe’s expanded productive effort. Simultaneously, of course, it is proposed to re-establish normal trade relations with America (signifying an increase of American imports from the above expanded production, together with a large decline in exports from America) and to revive Europe’s trade with the rest of the world – above all, that trade which formerly existed between the eastern and western halves of the Continent.
From its side, the American government states its concrete objectives as follows: a strong productive effort by each of the sixteen European nations; creation of internal financial stability within each country; maximum cooperation between the CEEC countries; and a solution of the trading deficit problem through the medium of increased European exports to America and elsewhere.
The Conference of the Sixteen has countered these generalities with its own set of generalities. Pointing out in its report that America accumulates a valueless credit balance due to the movement of goods and services in only one direction, the conference aims to restore the following conditions: adequate trade with overseas countries; renewal of revenues from merchant-marine activities and foreign investments; revival of commerce within Europe itself among the sixteen nations, with Germany and with the eastern sphere of Europe; the return of the fundamental exchange of Europe – that is, raw materials, food, fertilizers, etc., for machinery and manufactured goods.
 
The Goal: Back to 1938!
But enough of these wishful generalities and alleged objectives. The question is: What reality do they have?
It is clear from our report up to this point that we consider the Marshall Plan impossible of achievement so far as its stated goals, both in America and Europe, are concerned. We shall state in detail why, but first let us point out what has often been concealed within the mass of figures and percentages generally used to shroud the plan – that is, the relatively limited nature of the entire proposal, even if we assume the validity and attainability of its stated goals.
England’s Bevin stated this most clearly when he admitted, in Parliament, that complete success of the plan would only signify the restoration of the 1938 standards of living. And in Germany, still the key to Europe’s economic health, productivity by the end of 1951 – with full success – will still remain far below its 1938 level! In the other countries, 1938 production standards are the maximum goal, despite population increases, revival of agricultural production, imports, etc.
Thus the most optimistic prognosis is for a revival of that same economy, productivity and distribution which existed one year before the very war came which contributed so much to creating today’s problems. Such a goal is surely not only modest but, psychologically, self-defeating if it is supposed to arouse popular enthusiasm and interest.
 
Why the Plan Can’t Succeed
Yet, given the conditions of the plan and assuming the continuation of the present social structure in both America and Western Europe, the stated goals cannot be achieved or, even if some are achieved, the effect desired will not come about. We summarize our reasons for this statement:
(1) It is and will remain impossible for Europe to pay for the loans and grants it receives from America. Even the foreseen deficit of over $2 billion at the end of 1951 cannot be paid for. The only possible way for Europe to repay – a tremendous spurt in its export trade to America or the turning over to Europe by America of its Latin American markets and a snaring of its world markets – this way is forever closed to Europe by the very nature of American production, which more and more excludes the products of Europe while simultaneously reaching out to remove Europe from those very markets still remaining to it.
If European productivity should revive to the extent hoped for, to whom shall its excess products be sent? With whom shall it exchange its products for needed materials once American aid (on the ground that the crisis is past) has halted? These and a dozen other questions return us once more to the original nature of the crisis – its functional and structural character that makes it a part of the world crisis of capitalism itself.
(2) The nature of American production, with its huge volume of capital goods, semi-finished and finished products, is precisely the same as that which it seeks to revive in Europe through its aid program. It is impossible to seriously envisage an extensive exchange – on a normal market basis – between Western Europe and the United States. The very revival of European economy will only underline this difficulty which is so structural in character, that only the closest and most careful type of planning could resolve it: that type of planning which could come about only through a division of labor and productivity that would be international in scope, with the element of competition excluded.
(3) American economic aid is both insufficient and uncertain in nature. “My great fear,” said Administrator Hoffman to a Senate committee on April 21, “is that even with the most careful planning and the most rigorous supervision of expenditures, this amount may prove insufficient to accomplish the degree of recovery we seek.” The facts regarding the European Committee’s proposal for $22 billion for five years which was, in turn, reduced to $17½ billion by Truman and then cut down to a one-year appropriation by Congress, are too well known to need repetition. What will happen in the second year is still more uncertain and depends upon political events. Further, a continuation of the price trend eats into the appropriation itself.
(4) The Marshall Plan assumes the lowering of prices and the end of European inflation. But both these developments can come only with a fundamental success of the plan itself, and this is excluded. There is no sign in Europe today either of an end to the inflationary process or a lowering of prices. This could be shown, to one or another degree, country by country. There is little reason to expect much in this direction beyond a halt to the price rise (at current level), and a checking of inflation.
 
East-West Trade
(5) The weight of unknown and uncertain factors – largely political – is ignored. Yet we know how completely determining they can be. Strike movements in the Marshall Plan countries, political events such as the struggle of Tito with Stalin, and the resistance of the presidents of. the German Laender (states) to working the program for a Western German government tend to unbalance all economic aspects of the program. Finally, the factor of open Russian-Stalinist sabotage efforts (see below) can hardly be expected to add to the chances for even limited successes.
To this must be added a final and perhaps decisive proof of the impossibility for the Marshall Plan to work out in practice. This involves a question we have largely neglected in this study until this point, but which merits a separate and distinct section. That is the question of trade relations between Eastern and Western Europe, its trends and possible developments. Western Europe, always an area with a deficit in food, has long been helped by Eastern Europe (Poland, Hungary, Rumania, etc.), an area normally provided with a food surplus. In addition, the East has huge resources of timber, minerals, petroleum and by-products of its peasant economy.
The split of Germany into East and West which has so largely guaranteed that nation’s stagnation and inability to rise above its war ruins is but one aspect of the deeper split between Eastern and Western Europe. What this has meant in economic terms can be illustrated by a few figures.
In 1947, trade and commerce between East and West amounted to only 56 per cent of its pre-war rate. In 1948, up to this moment, the situation has definitely worsened and the rate for the year will be still lower because of the well-known deterioration in political relations. A contrast of pre-war and current trade emphasizes this point:

Total trade in 1938 – $7 billion. Total trade in 1948 – $4 billion.
Percentage of Western Europe’s world trade that came from Eastern Europe: 1938 – 10%, 1947 – 4%.
Percentage of Western Europe’s world trade that went to Eastern Europe: 1938 – 10%, 1947 – 6%.

It should not be imagined that, despite this decline, intra-European trade is without importance, particularly for the Stalinist-occupied lands which, in 1947, sent 40 per cent of their exports to Western Europe, and which supplied that area with some grain, much coal, potash and timber. Yet the trend is toward further decline and only a sharp reversal in the political atmosphere will change this. The importance of this in relation to the Marshall Plan is that all estimates, both European and American, assume the revival rather than further decay of this traditional intra-European trade!
The dollar deficit of Western Europe contributes largely to this trade decline since, as the New York Times (May 22) comments,
“... the decline in the exchange in goods among the European countries will turn out to be much greater than expected as the result of the jamming up of payment mechanisms established under bilateral payment agreements.”
Further, this decline will add to the dollar deficit because
“Now the prospect is that even more purchases will be made in the Western Hemisphere, not because of the physical impossibility of supplying the items in Europe but because the countries cannot get dollars and cannot solve the intra-European payments problems.”
 
No Revival Ahead
Here again we see the functional nature of the European economic crisis. Could the situation be helped? Clearly yes, by a revival of investment in Eastern Europe which would increase the production of exportable commodities now being purchased with deficit dollars.
... on the strictly economic View there is no question that a dollar invested in Poland or Czechoslovakia would do fur more to improve the over-all European position than a dollar invested anywhere in ERP Europe.
So reports the New York Times. The already famous examples of Polish coal illustrates the point:
... Polish economic officials were seriously troubled [!] by the prospective glut of coal if output continues to expand at present rates. Already Polish coal is being sold with difficulty in Northern and Western Europe ...
At the same time, France is importing huge supplies of coal from America, unable to take Polish coal because it cannot pay for it with so-called hard currency.
Thus East and West are mutual victims of both Russian and American policy. American imperialism not only refused aid and capital investment to the countries of Eastern Europe, but would not permit even the establishment of a dollar supply pool in Western Europe to facilitate intra-European trade! For its part, Stalinist Russia pushes industrialization at a forced tempo in the occupied lands, both to increase the amount of capital goods it may plunder from these lands and also to increase their internal consumption of raw materials formerly exported, thus lowering intra-European trade from yet another direction.
The economic basis of the current struggle between Tito and Stalin has one of its roots in this policy, which the Yugoslav dictator feels strong enough to resist. While American and Russian imperialism have entirely different characteristics, their effects upon the two occupied or controlled blocs of Europe are not dissimilar. Both are sick and malfunctioning. The East cannot send food and materials to the West while the West cannot send to the East the machinery and equipment needed to extract and move this material and food.
As New York Times European financial expert M.L. Hoffman points out:
Eastern Europe is as far as Western Europe from being able to lift itself by its own bootstraps. Only if Russia could offer vast quantities of capital goods and industrial materials for food could a permanent solution to Eastern Europe’s problems be found wholly within the Russian orbit. [February 8, 1948.]
We conclude, then, that a Europe split into two such economically divergent camps excludes in and of itself any possibility for a substantial and full revival of the Continent as a whole, let alone only the western section.
 
IV
“The USSR will put all effort into seeing that the Marshall Plan is not realized.” – Zhdanov, September 1947
If the history of our world, in political terms, since the end of World War II is the story of the struggle between Russia and America and the slow hardening of these differences into incompatible social, economic and ideologic walls, then we may also say that the struggle over the Marshall Plan has been and will remain the most concrete expression of this antagonism. The remarks of Zhdanov, contained in the same speech that ordered the revival of the international Stalinist movement in the form of the Cominform, have been the basis of Russian policy for the past period.
The opposition of Russia and its Stalinist parties everywhere, as well as the methods pursued, is well known. The aggressive side of this struggle against America is conducted on the plane of sabotage, terror, political action and the diverting of social struggles in Western Europe and elsewhere into desired channels. We limit ourselves here to a few words on the economic aspect of this opposition.
 
Russian Drive for Industrialization
As already mentioned, the ruling group of the Kremlin – primarily concerned with its national all-Russian interests – desires the speediest possible industrialization of those territories it influences or controls to one or another degree. This pressure for feverish industrialization has, as we see in the case of Yugoslavia, a disastrous effect on the relatively backward and undeveloped countries of the Russian bloc, and can readily have such serious consequences on the efforts of the local Stalinist bureaucratic-collectivist rulers that they, much in the manner of a national bourgeoisie of a truly colonial country, will risk taking the path of opposition to the Russian “motherland.”
The basis of this Russian drive for forced industrialization is not merely to take the occupied lands out of the orbit of traditional European trade und economy, but also to satisfy the endless Russian need for machinery and capital goods of all types. Any examination of the economic facts of the Russian bloc (insofar as they are known) and the published trade treaties between the Kremlin and its various satellites can only lead to the conclusion that the people of the occupied lands benefit in no way, as a mass, from their enforced membership in this bloc. On the contrary, their recovery is hindered, their conditions worsened, and living standards lowered.
This we can see up to the present moment, despite the oft-heard rationalization of many intellectuals and semi-Stalinists, that (in spite of everything) the Russian method will justify itself by raising the level of productivity. The actual relationships of the bloc give no basis for this belief.
This relationship – a subject for further and independent examination – clearly creates its own difficulties. While differing in both nature and detail from the difficulties imposed upon Western Europe by American imperialism, it has this in common with the latter: the slowing-up of normal economic recovery; the discouragement of all national initiative; the wholesale robbery of the products of this laborious productivity and, most important of all, the steady strangulation of the vital economic interdependence of the two halves of the European continent.
Both sectors of Europe thus have the same general misfortune of having fallen victim to a superior and exploitive foreign power. In this sense, the movement for a reunification of Europe, independent of both external powers, must be the central strategic aim of any political tendency on the Continent which wishes to play a progressive role.
 
Limited Recovery
In summary, then, what is the indicated evolution of the Marshall Plan, in terms of political realities rather than expressed goals or formal declarations? Charriere (page 94, loc. cit.) motivates the American aid program in the following terms:
“... the aid and loan policy of American capitalism to the European countries can have no other fundamental principle than political goals, to the extent that this imperialist power considers its political security is placed in danger through the existence of too miserable populations ...”
A “controlled lifting of their living standard” is the attempted answer of America, and this is the essence of the Marshall Plan. Within the framework set by American capitalism – a framework that arises out of its own development and needs – the Marshall Plan constitutes a limited recovery effort.
This limited effort will succeed only to a still more limited extent, for reasons we have already indicated. There will be a partial economic revival in Europe, productive in nature, but its scope will be hardly extensive enough to make any fundamental change in the situation, and surely insufficient to be, in and of itself, a decisive answer to the problem of Stalinist expansionism. It will be far too limited, tenuous and shaky for that. At best, it will provide a breathing spell within which the possibility for new ideologic currents to develop exists. But nothing more will be settled.
From the point of view of America, Charriere is quite correct in stating that
“The fundamental problem of the existence of a surplus of production is not resolved by the extension of a monopolist imperialism. These difficulties will be carried along step by step until the conquest of almost the totality of means of production and markets. This imperialism will then find itself, on a world scale, confronted with the same problems that it cannot solve on its own territory, but at this stage the safety valve of exports financed by loans will no longer exist.”
 



There cannot, of course, be any final or authoritative answer to this question, even from those like Stalin, Marshall, Bevin, et al. who supposedly are in a position to know. To even consider the possibility that they may know is to assume that they are actually the movers and operators of historic events, rather than moved and manipulated by factors beyond their control.
It must be recognized that any discussion on the problem of war today is based upon the assumption that the two great world powers inevitably must and will reach a showdown point where hot war becomes unavoidable and the dreaded conflict of atomic power and long-range bombing planes will be upon us. Unpleasant as it may be, this universal assumption has a healthy element in it. There is probably less illusion on the general subject of war, its nature and purpose, than ever before. False hopes and pacifist doctrine in general (except in the sphere of exclusively individual acts such as those of the COs) play little part.
The problem of the struggle against war does not lie along these lines, but rather in overcoming the existing mass apathy and the pervasive feeling of hopelessness before the inevitable. Only with respect to that part which holds that war between capitalist America and Stalinist Russia is inevitable dare we go along with this attitude.
But is the inevitable almost upon us? Does all the noise and fury at the United Nations Paris assembly signify what Trotsky once referred to as the warning flashes of heat lightning before the storm itself? Will the struggle over Berlin go down in history as the first battle of World War III as the Spanish Civil War introduced the Second World War? Will there actually be war within the next two, three or six-month period?
 
Conflict Still in Diplomatic Stage
Secretary of State Marshall, a bit of an authority on this subject, made a highly significant remark last week at the UN sessions when presenting the American case against Russia at the Security Council. Years back, he said, such an incident as that of Berlin would have meant war long ago. Perhaps the general was expressing his surprise and amazement that, this time, war hasn’t come. In any case, his remark is absolutely correct. Far more trivial incidents have served as the starting point for grandiose wars between rivals in past years. But Berlin, where great powers struggle bitterly and viciously for mastery of a central and strategic city of unparalleled importance containing millions of people, where the differences are so sharp that the impasse reached seems unbreakable – surely an “incident” on a gigantic scale when compared to such trivialities as Archduke Ferdinand’s assassination or Hitler’s seizure of Danzig – all this has not yet led to war and, in our opinion, will not lead to war.
Why is this the case? To begin with, since socialists do not accept the belief that war begins in an accidental manner, but rather that a complex and involved evolution and preparation along economic, political and social lines must first have occurred, it is clear that this process is still, fortunately, far from complete. That road which leads to the point where rival powers no longer are able to compromise, in any form or manner, their differences, but must fight it out to the end, is now being traversed by both Russian and American imperialism. But the end point is not yet within sight.
There are many signs that indicate this. The speeches of Vishinsky are not pre-war speeches in the sense, for example, that those of Hitler in 1938–39 were. The main efforts of American foreign policy are still diplomatic rather than inflammatory in character. The concrete military acts of both nations are of the preparedness stage, rather than the active war-preparations type. Even in the Berlin struggle over all these months the Russians have yet to actually interfere (shoot down) a single American plane.
It is also clear that preparations for World War III must be, because of the expected nature of the war, infinitely more careful and complete than those of previous wars. Three years’ time has hardly been sufficient. Linked with this is the acknowledged dread of the belligerent rulers themselves that the war itself may well be so destructive in character as to weaken, possibly even nullify, the material and social basis upon which their rule over society rests. Naturally, this hesitation will hardly be decisive, once the end point is reached; the war rulers of both America and Russia will unhesitatingly launch the disaster once they believe they can win out, and are prepared for victory.
 
Popular Reaction Is Obstacle
Finally, and perhaps most important of all from the socialist point of view, is the general recognition of those who hold responsibility that there is no mass, popular political and ideological preparation for the war as yet. Greatest difficulty of all would be mobilization of the European peoples for such a war. Only complete irresponsibles, such as Churchill is today, dare sing the aggressive marching tunes; those who hold power and know the reality of mass sentiment must spend their efforts in preliminary efforts to fix responsibility on the other.
Stalin and his fellow criminals in the Kremlin not excepted, there is great fear and indecision today in all leading political circles about bearing responsibility for a future war. This factor cannot be ignored, and acts as a definite deterring factor. Put in other words, the rulers themselves tremble before the spectacle of war since they know not what it will bring, above all with regard to perpetuation of their power.
Can we then safely assume that nothing can happen, that today’s headlines are empty sound and fury? Since we know that the road of preparedness is now being actively built and reinforced by all possible means, obviously not. It is a question of time and timing. There even exists, in our opinion, the possibility of an unexpected and premature launching of the war within the immediate future.
It could happen in one of two ways:

The Russian regime, partly through the obstinate blundering of its obtuse leadership and partly through the pressure of the alleged aggressive wing of its leadership (whose supposed leader was the late Zhdanov) may push its way into war by simply refusing to halt or negotiate.
 
The minority “Zhdanov wing” of American imperialism, made up of our air chiefs, assorted militarists and aggressive imperialists, may succeed with its concept of a “preventive war” and push ahead in the manner proposed by Churchill.

But both possibilities, presented by minority circles within the general ruling class of both nations, have neither the benefit of popular support, widespread acceptance nor adequate preparation. It is very unlikely that either will prevail.
Thus we conclude that the war is still some period away. But each passing day brings the inevitable that much closer, and each day in which the opponents of the war do not score some success in their work is a lost and wasted day. In essence, the struggle against war is the struggle for awakening the dormant consciousness of people and bringing them to an understanding that they can actually do something about this problem.
 






We begin herewith a series of articles by Comrade Henry Judd which will discuss various aspects of the situation in Europe, notably in France and Germany. Comrade Judd recently returned from a stay of several months in Europe. Insofar as possible these articles will appear in successive issues of Labor Action in this column.



*
The danger of unwarranted generalities and baseless assumptions make it difficult to write on the broad subject of Europe, particularly after only a brief trip to parts of western Europe. The flood of American tourists was so great this year that it is clear that innumerable and varied opinions about the Old Continent must now be circulating far and wide in the United States. All the more reason why one must be careful and cautious in stating his observations, based partly upon comparison with previous years and partly upon discussion with various socialist and political people.
To begin with, the physical and economic upbuilding within the last year is obvious everywhere in Western Europe. There is productivity and activity on a large scale such as has not been seen since the end of the war. In writing further accounts of France and Germany in particular we shall give more details of this. But traveling throughout Europe today has none of the difficulties compared with previous post-war years. From the rebuilt dock and harbor works in the bombed ports, from the smooth and efficient running railroad systems in England and France (with improvements even in Germany!), from the general rebuilding and reconstruction work (bridges, roads, homes, buildings, etc.) there is an undeniable picture of a Western Europe which has, at least, gotten off of its back and struggled up to its knees.
To outward appearances, this same process of recovery has taken place for the average European worker and citizen who looks far better physically and so far as his dress is concerned, than he did last year, or certainly the year after the war. Closer investigation reveals that in continental Europe (including Germany) he is eating much better than before, and has been able to buy some clothes (even those who live most modestly and poorly). With the exception of Italy, there is no unemployment in Western Europe. Thus, together with the mass of importations under the Marshall Plan which are now flowing into Western Europe, there is a genuine supply of available commodities. Naturally, available at a price. In the stores of European cities (to a surprising extent in Western Germany also) practically every possible product is available – all types of canned foods, radios, automobiles, cigarettes, American vacuum cleaners, etc. Unlike last year, these things can actually be bought – not merely looked at. Clothing is likewise available and largely unrationed, with the exception of England.
 
But the Economies Are Unbalanced
These random facts indicate that, given its natural resources and labor power, and together with the undoubted stimulus provided by the sheer volume of Marshall Plan goods and materials, general European economic and productive has advanced to a surprising state in view of the deeply deteriorated political and social situation. And that; it seems to us, is the only real observation that one can make about Europe as a whole now. Economically and productively it has advanced tremendously; politically and ideologically it has sunk much deeper into the hole dug for it by the Russian-American conflict. The split of Europe into east and west exerts overwhelming influence in all phases of life, and the area of European political and social independence has correspondingly narrowed.
Even our remarks on economic recovery must be qualified and measured. To begin with, we are describing facts in comparison with previous conditions. Living, eating, housing and clothing standards are still far below that of American averages, although pre-war standards are now definitely being approached. And the basic economic difficulty of all is that of the apparently incurable divorce between the price of things and workers’ wages as well as middle-class salaries. With respect to this fundamental problem of purchasing power, the general European situation has definitely worsened and there seems to be no immediate halt in sight for the familiar spiral. In France, workers’ wages are now 10 times that of 1938, but prices of food and other necessities are 17 times higher! Even in Germany, where the new D-Mark had an actual purchasing value after the brutal devaluation, the same tendency toward runaway prices is observable.
 
State of Socialist Movement
With the exception of Germany – where the struggle for the saving of Berlin, together with the definite economic revival now going on as a result of Marshall Plan expenditures have brought about a marked change in the former political atmosphere and morale of the people – with this sole exception it is clear that socialist and independent class politics is at the lowest moment of its history. The re are many reasons for this, above all the failure of the Western European masses to develop independent political forces.
While it is true that Stalinism is in serious decline in all countries where normal means (such as elections) can be used to judge and test their strength, it is also true that revolutionary socialist politics is likewise weaker than ever. The so-called Trotskyist Fourth International has disappeared and can be found nowhere except by those possessing the infinite patience needed to track them down to their latest address. With the exception of the RDR (Democratic: Revolutionary Regroupment) In France, there is no new or important political tendency of the left, and there is added confusion and a striving for new understanding among most left intellectuals and supporters. This, of course, is largely due to the marked turning away from Stalinism and is a welcome event.
The official Fourth Internationalist program is entirely without attraction to these people who, unfortunately, largely flounder about. Again, with the exception of Berlin and Germany, the spirit of apathy and “disgust with politics!” is widespread among proletarian ranks. Even the ranks of the Italian CP have cooled considerably toward their party after its fiasco of the General Strike. Simultaneously, there is a definite strengthening of the neo-reactionary forces; those who offer a “bold solution” and “leadership.” Most notorious of all events, of course, is the revival and new forward spurt of General de Gaulle’s movement in France. There is little doubt that the reactionary political tendencies in Western Europe – if we isolate Europe from the general world situation – have the upper hand at the moment, thanks to solid American backing and support, as well as the apathy of the masses.
In future articles we hope to give more material describing some of these generalizations, perhaps indicating the possible tendencies within the more important countries of Western Europe.
 



Perhaps no people are more surprised than the Germans themselves over the fact that the ruins and divided segments of their nation have become the scene of the greatest pre-war political and social struggle ever known. In general, the effect of this struggle has been – for the first time – to lift them out of the depths of apathy and disinterest that so characterized the mass German population in previous years. In this respect, it is correct to say that an amazing transformation has occurred within Western Germany since the beginning of this year. To those acquainted with the country immediately after the war, and even so recently as last year, this transformation in the social, moral and psychological atmosphere has been a revelation, testifying again to the ability of any people to pull itself together and tenaciously resume historic life despite all obstacles.
Naturally, a decided bettering of conditions of living has been the principal factor behind this change. The influx of food and raw materials into Western Germany under the terms of the Marshall Plan, together with the currency reform measures, provided the elementary stimulus which, together with the revival of small German industries and the leap forward in Ruhr coal and steel production, set off a distinctly noticeable economic revival. The economic face of Western Germany is entirely different from that of last year. People are working and, in general, look better fed and better clothed. They possess far more physical and mental activity than last year. The currency measures, brutal and discriminatory against those whose living depended upon savings rather than earnings and income, and carried through in a manner calculated to arouse fear and panic among the population, did – despite all this – achieve certain results. It struck a heavy blow at the mass black market, liquidated a worthless paper currency and replaced it with money having real value, and stimulated the production, marketing and sale of commodities. One can actually buy things now in German stores – an unprecedented happening! The familiar “Zigarette-Shokolade” economy of post-war Germany is definitely over.
This must not be taken to mean that there has been a wholesale revival of Germany’s former economic life or even that there has been a recovery comparable to that of, for example, France. We simply mean that whereas Germany was flat on its back and out cold one year ago, it is now up on its knees and conscious of its surroundings. Everything indicates that this economic revival will continue, within definite limits set by the trend of American aid and the political situation in the “cold war.”
The economic and social problems of Western Germany are entirely different from that of a year ago. Today, the problems approach those of the “normal” European countries – that is, high prices, the wage-price spiral, the shortage of money, foreign commerce, etc. The Neue Volkszeitung, in a report from a typical German industrial city, estimates the real problem of the German working class in cost of living terms. A worker, head of a family of three, receives a weekly income of about 45 marks (approximately $13 a week). Deduction of five marks for taxes and social insurance leave him with 40 marks per week. But a cost of living budget – on a very modest scale indeed, including food, light and other necessities – runs to 45 marks a week! This is the heart of the new economic and social problem of the German working class.
 
Organized Political Life
Simultaneously with this economic revival there has come an increase in organized political life and trade union activity. There is no question but that the German labor movement, if we speak of it in the broadest sense of the word, exists once more. Just as the most dire prophesies about mass starvation, epidemics and disease catastrophes failed – fortunately – to materialize (the problem of tuberculosis is, however, a very serious one), so in the realm of political and social life the tendency toward the pauperization, atomization and “lumpenization” of the German proletariat has likewise been halted. Those political circumstances which forced American imperialism to pour aid and dollars into Western Germany, while reversing its notorious Morgenthau program for the complete destruction of German economy, have proved a godsend to the German proletariat which has known how to take advantage of this situation.
Able to work once more, receiving a wage with which, in any case, he can buy something that has value, seeing about him growing signs of rebuilding and renewed economic activity, the German worker can take a renewed interest in the events of life and feels himself once more a member of a social class within society. This does not mean that a high level of political and socialist thought and action exist; again, it simply means that the most necessary and elementary progress has been made.
It is impossible to overestimate the effect that the struggle over Berlin has had upon the German consciousness. Masses of people in the western zones, ill-fed and undernourished as they are, willingly have contributed portions of their rations to the Berlin airlift. The political blundering of the Russians in their handling of this situation has so antagonized the population not merely of Berlin (this is well known from the demonstrations and other actions conducted by the people of that city), but of all of Germany so that it can be stated that German Stalinism has lost heavily and would show up very badly in elections. The association between the German Stalinist movement and their Moscow masters is clearly fixed in the minds of all. Stalinism has declined considerably, even among the Ruhr workers. Berlin has become a focus of German nationalism, hope In the future and desire to resist the progress of Stalinist totalitarianism.
Does this signify a burst of enthusiasm for the Allies in general, or the American occupation in particular? Nothing could be further from the truth. We have no space here to discuss the long story of disillusionment with American “democracy,” even among those liberal layers of the population who were most prepared to pin their faith on the Americans. We can merely report that there is widespread understanding of why the Americans hold tight to Berlin, together with the belief that since they – along with the other conquerors of Germany – are equally responsible for this fantastic situation, their supplying of the Berlin population is a necessary action, and not a “favor” or act of generosity. In the same sense, American material aid is accepted for what it is. To those Americans who boast about it, the curt reply is given that what the Americans have removed from Germany (in the form of patents and machinery), together with money extracted as occupation costs, plus the volume of German trade and commerce taken over by American firms – all this more than accounts for the value of Marshall Plan aid.
 
Orientation of German People
There are no illusions about the nature or aims of the Allied occupation and American activities. At the same time, there is absolutely no popular movement or demand for the ousting of the Allied or American troops of occupation since it is felt that only the Russians, together with their totalitarian SED Party, could fill in the vacuum that would be produced. There is no belief at the moment that a German state, arising out of an independent development of the people as a whole, could step into the situation and successfully halt the march of Stalinism. In this sense, the continued occupation is tolerated as a necessary, if unwanted and hated, condition.
But this attitude does not mean that a political and ideological orientation toward creation of an independent Germany does not exist. It does, in different ways, within different layers of the population and above all, within the different political parties. The conception, held by some revolutionary socialists in America and elsewhere, that a mighty national resistance and revolutionary movement can arise which will cast out the occupants (Russians and Allies alike) and set up a fully independent German state – this conception is unknown in Germany, even among the most left of the left. It is the naive transformation of French conditions under the German occupation, with its Resistance, to an entirely different situation.
The general orientation it more along the following lines: It is believed that the Berlin situation, and the general split between East and West, will remain, deepening into a total impasse. Within the context of this impasse, the hope exists within German bourgeois circles as well as the Social Democratic Party, that the Russians and Allies will be obliged to withdraw, not only from Berlin, but from all of Germany. Part of the withdrawal will consist in leaving behind, in their respective zones, comparatively stable GERMAN regimes; one oriented toward the East and under an SED police dictatorship; the other oriented toward the West, aided by America and supplied by American arms.
The Social Democratic leadership hopes to play a leading role within this formally independent (in reality, satellite) Western German state. The German bourgeoisie, naturally, hopes that this development, together with a continuation of the economic revival, will make it possible for Germany to push itself a little bit into the world market. Both believe that the very existence of such a state would be a powerful force in attracting support from Stalinist-terrorized Eastern Germany.
While nobody can foretell how these orientations will work out in practice, it is surely the most likely variant and, in the sense that such a state would furnish the best possible opportunities for the development of a revolutionary trend within the German Social-Democracy (non-existent now), the more desirable one. In any case, German political activity and discussion in the future will revolve around precisely such problems.
 



If economic and living conditions seem rather normal to the bulk of that great mass of American tourists who visited France this summer, it is largely because their failure to establish any relations with the French people leads them to judge conditions purely on the basis of how they, the Americans, fare. And, considering that for one measly dollar he receives 320 francs (400 or more on the black market), he can live under fairly luxurious conditions for about $25 a week, equivalent to spending $50 or $60 a week on himself in a city like New York. This leads, of course, to the most absurd conclusions on his part. Since, furthermore, he sees that the stores of Paris and Prance are filled with all possible types of commodities his ultimate conclusion is that recovery and revival have been fulfilled in the country. Nothing could be more mistaken, since France, more than any country in Europe today, is the victim of the wage-price relationship which expresses itself in the constant gap between earnings and living costs.
While industrial productivity and economic life in general have had an amazing recovery in France over the past year, this recovery has failed to reflect itself in a corresponding lifting of general living conditions and standards. A few facts will bear this out. Since 1938 average wages have increased TEN times. But the official cost of living index has gone up SEVENTEEN times over the same period! If food prices are marked on a base equivalent to 100 in 1938, the level in July 1948 was 1559 and in August 1948, it was 1716! Considering that the French family (worker and middle class) spends 50 to 60 per cent of its weekly budget for food alone – according to the French National Bureau of Statistics – the inescapable conclusion is that practically everything the French person earns through his work goes into his food budget.
Other standard items such as rent and typical household expenses take up the rest of his earnings and explain why the Frenchman today simply has no money in his pocket. The masses of people are poorer than ever before in French history! The 15 per cent general wage increase, together with last month’s 3,000 franc “prime,” has just been wiped out by price increases in coal, gas, electricity and railway fare.
 
Stabilization by No Means Reached
Under these circumstances, the new wave of disorganized and chaotic strikes, led primarily by the coal miners in the North and steel workers of the Lorraine area, cannot simply be explained by Stalinist machinations against the Marshall Plan program for France. In view of the fact that the mass of industrial and factory workers in France are still under the domination of the Stalinist CGT leadership (the CGT-Force Ouvrière of Jouhaux has remained stationary), the familiar and now obvious Stalinist program of economic sabotage plays its part. But without this ever-present prodding force of inflation and a franc whose purchasing value sinks rapidly toward zero, it is clear that the Stalinists would be unable to find such fertile ground for their operations. Politically, Stalinism has declined considerably and even among its militants there is a general apathy regarding political issues.
The most puzzling question in France today is why the sharp lifting in economic productivity failed to translate itself into a healthy and wholesale bettering of general social conditions? This is far from an academic question, since it means that those who held out the perspective that economic and social revival (due to natural forces within France itself as well as the huge sum of Marshall Plan aid) would inevitably result in a strengthening of the “middle-of-the-road” coalition government parties (Socialists, Radical Socialists and MRP), symbolizing a period of capitalist revival and stabilization – those who believed this have been wrong, at least until this point.
The possibility of such a “stabilization” developing now seems remote indeed. The explanation for this situation is not easy to find and involves a whole searching of French economy itself, with its chronic malfunctioning and unbalance, that we cannot go into at this point. Yet, this is the explanation behind the complex, often incomprehensible and fantastic picture of French politics today. Above all, it accounts for the revival, belligerence and aggressive activity of the de Gaullist movement which now drives for power.
The parties of parliamentary democracy have declined considerably since the groundwork for their growth – prosperity and stabilization – is not present. The Blum Socialist Party, above all, is probably now in the most pitiful condition of its history. The present National Assembly, elected on the perspective of a hoped-for stability, hardly reflects the nation’s opinions and has thus become an easy target for de Gaulle’s attacks. Since the Stalinists have still been unable to surmount the all-important obstacle in their path – that is, their political inability in the given situation to launch an actual political struggle for power – they too have declined considerably. Their meetings are uninspired and,their ranks are dull and listless. However, they are still organizationally the party of the French working class.
 
Gaullists Capitalize on Disillusion
Since this disillusion with time-honored parliamentary techniques is widespread, it is natural that the de Gaullists should capitalize most of all. Their proposals for a “solution,” a strong government that leads and acts, etc. – characteristic of Bonapartist-militaristic movements – have growing support. Its demand for a dissolution of the present National Assembly and general elections has much support. While it might not win an outright majority in such elections, it would certainly be the plurality party (perhaps 45 per cent of the votes) and might thus fulfill its desire to take political power peacefully.
The fact of the matter is that the division of France into the two camps of Stalinism and de Gaullism is sharper today than ever. This does not mean that France faces the prospect of civil war since, to begin with, parliamentary method – now represented by the crazy-quilt government of Premier Queuille – has not yet exhausted its last efforts and, more important, international factors tend to dampen the drifting toward civil war.
What of other political movements and tendencies within France? The once-promising Trotskyist Party (PCI) has, to all intents and purposes, vanished from this world after undergoing one final and humiliating split. Like the European Trotskyist movement in general it is unknown and not worth a moment’s attention. On the other hand, the movement known as the RDR retains its first promise and hopes. Its program calls for renewed activity along organizational and political lines and it will certainly intervene increasingly in the political and social life of France.
 



Six months have passed since Pearl Harbor and America’s formal entrance into the great war. During that time Labor Action has constantly described and exposed the policy of the official labor leaders who, in the name of “national unity” and “everything for the war,” have steadily given up labor’s gains.
The boss press commemorates six months after Pearl Harbor by summarizing America’s war efforts during that period. But, for a working class newspaper, it is far more fitting to summarize the net results of six months of labor’s appeasement to Roosevelt and his capitalist masters. The sum total is a gloomy picture and should underscore what Labor Action has repeatedly claimed: A continuation of this appeasement policy will be a disaster to American labor and the union movement.
But first let us bear in mind how President Roosevelt works. He is not the bloody and ruthless totalitarian dictator, smashing his opponent at one round-house blow; he does not rule with the rubber truncheon and the steel fist. No. This skilled spokesman for American capitalism achieves his aims at a slower pace – an inch at a time, if need be – but he gets there just the same. He strips his opponents of their weapons, disarms them politically, persuades them to say “yes,” and ends up by framing their signatures on the dotted line.
Here is what this “unconditional surrender” of labor’s rights has meant to the labor movement so far. How much further this will go in the next six months depends on the trade unionists. If it is up to the official bureaucrats and the Stalinists, it will go up to the hilt, an “all-out” unconditional surrender!

Labor’s right to strike has been abandoned. This was the first, and most fatal, surrender on the part of the unions. This sell-out by the officials was sealed in the AFL-CIO strike “truce” immediately after Pearl Harbor.
 
Labor has been hogtied to the War Labor Board. Instead of relying upon its own strength, initiative and action, the unions run to the boss-government-run WLB. Here they get either (a) a run-around; (b) a sell-out decision; or (c) a postponement until hell freezes over.
 
Labor has been victimized by priorities unemployment. The failure of the innumerable Washington boards to correctly plan conversion to war production hits labor first and hardest, since it means indefinite unemployment for the affected industries. Forty thousand in the New York garment area is the latest priorities sore spot announced.
 
Arbitration decisions granting the closed shop are halted. Labor is denied, by the WLB and the arbitration committees, the finest and most satisfactory fruit of its union struggles: the closed shop. The hypnotized bureaucrats nod agreement, like so many puppets.
 
The work alleviation program is virtually halted. Senator Byrd’s reactionary “curtailment of expenditures” program has been adopted by about 90 per cent, in practice. The CCC is gone; WPA remains only as a vague memory kept alive by a few thousand who still remain on the rolls; the NYA program is either gone, or transferred to training youth for war industries. But there are still 4,500,000 unemployed!
 
The tax program makes labor pay for the bosses’ war. Income taxes are raised on the lower brackets; the base is reduced to an incredible low ($700 per year); federal excise taxation, etc., has effected everything that labor purchases.
 
Labor unity was smashed by government-boss interference. The effort to join the CIO and the AFL met the determined opposition of President Roosevelt, who was again aided by the lickspittle union officials. A chance to advance the union cause was scotched.
 
Drives to organize unorganized workers have halted. With the exception of the Lewis District 50 drive to organize dairy farmers, not a single major union drive is under way today. But there are still millions of unorganized workers in aircraft, textile, machine, etc. Instead of organizing them, the officials stand pat and continue to draw their salaries for keeping the status quo.
 
Double time for overtime on Sundays and holidays is gone. Even the Lord said a man deserves to rest on the seventh day (if not, he deserves double time pay!). But the bureaucrats – to prove how generous they are – decided otherwise. So the AFL-CIO gave this up, too!
 
The longer work week is universal. Forty hours is a distant memory for millions of workers (and there are still 4,500,000 unemployed). Fifty-five, 60, 66 hours are familiar now. It’s work, eat and sleep in order to work, eat and sleep again.
 
No more wage increases, except ... Roosevelt, by his direct interference in the shipyard and aircraft negotiations, has said that his “stabilization of wages” program means wage freezing, for the duration. As for the “exceptions,” the Missouri sharecroppers can’t get even 30 cents an hour, without a bitter struggle. Will the steel workers give up their demand for $1.00 more a day?
 
The strikebreaking “work or fight” threat is out in the open. Every time a worker demands something, or threatens independent action, he is met by the Hitlerite threat: work as we say, or get drafted.
 
Every effort is being made to destroy the shop steward system. The Stalinists, hand in glove with Donald Nelson, lead this sabotage of the unions with their “joint management-workers Councils.” But the shop stewards represent one of labor’s remaining molar teeth, and cannot be abandoned.
 
The end of installment buying hits labor. This step in the curtailment of labor’s ability to purchase accompanies the drive against living standards. Clearly, the end of installment purchasing affects the great mass of small income Americans only.
 
Skilled labor is “frozen” (chained) to its job. This measure, the latest and most reactionary of Roosevelt’s “inching along” schemes, may destroy American labor’s right to move about independently and thus raise its standards by initiative. It is the most fascist-like step yet taken!

* * *
It doesn’t add up to a pleasant sight, does it? Not when all this is done in the name of “the war for democratic survival.” It smacks all too familiarly of what has happened to the labor movement in Germany and France, which likewise “appeased” the ruling classes.
 



The Duke of Windsor and his “The-Woman-I-Love” were paying a visit to Washington last week. The Duke was relaxing from his strenuous administrative tasks of governing the 65,000 people who inhabit the island group of the Bahamas, off the coast of Florida.
But suddenly – after enjoying an excellent lunch with President Roosevelt – the Duke decided to fly back to his “island kingdom” in the Caribbeans. Wally’s visit – we are so relieved to report – was not disturbed. She is said to be resting comfortably at the Maryland home of her uncle, General Henry Warfield – having a new “hair and face-do,” while a drove of specialists check up on her health.
What caused His Dukeship’s hurried and undignified departure?
According to a heavily censored dispatch from Nassau, capital of the Bahamas and a winter tourist spot for wealthy Americans, “an outbreak of rioting ... which assumed the proportions of a labor revolt,” lay behind the Duke’s unexpected trip. The rioting, according to the same dispatch, “led to pillaging and other acts of violence in which at least two laborers were killed and many wounded.”
By whom it is not said, but that is easy to surmise.
A later dispatch, however, says that “British garrison troops” did the job. “The demonstrators,” says the New York Times dispatch, “were joined by a rabble (he means the people) and swept Bay Street, smashing show windows and looting stores catering to the tourist trade of liquors, expensive English fabrics and rare French perfumes.”
Curfew was declared from 8:00 at night until 6:00 the next morning. Nassau was under police and military control.
What was the so-called rioting and disorder all about?
The matter is comparatively simple if we understand a few facts about what is going on in these islands.
Most of the labor among the 65,000 people is Negro labor, and the Negroes far outnumber the whites, who are the officials, rulers and administrators.
This Negro population lives under conditions, notorious and typical of the British Empire throughout the world. Suffice it to say that the standard wage is two shillings a day (40 cents).
 
“Highest Prevailing Wages”
Under the treaty with Britain, by which the United States obtained an air base in Nassau, it was provided that the United States should pay the highest (!) prevailing wage when employing labor to build air fields, etc. Labor leaders in the islands were informed that wages were fixed by agreement between the British and American governments. But this “fixing” could not answer the fact, that increased living costs, made it vital for the Negro laborers to obtain more than the “highest” (40 cents) prevailing wage.
When they were told that the treaty between, the white imperialists said “wages were fixed,” they responded with the only action “that gets the workers anything. Thousands of workers employed on the American military projects struck and marched into the city of Nassau, demanding higher wages. They got British bullets, Duke and Duchess style!
The responsibility for this criminal murder of unarmed workers rests jointly with the British and American authorities. It was they who jointly connived in order to “freeze” wages at incredible lows and perpetuate the virtual slave-labor system that exists in this British colony. What has happened since the Duke flew back is a deep and dark secret, for not a word has come out since. The Duke made a “soothing syrup” speech, but its effect has not been reported.
This is why the Duke’s vacation was spoiled and why Wally is all alone on the sumptuous estate of her uncle, in the equally sumptuous suburb of Timonium.
As for Labor Action – well, we advise the Duke to abdicate before he puts his foot in it again. Our greetings and wishes for victory go to the Negro workers of Nassau in their more than justified strike for the fight to live!
 



The people who inhabit the island kingdom of Great Britain, now at war for three years, draw rapidly toward the greatest internal revolutionary crisis in their long history. This crisis, reflecting the internal difficulties of English capitalism, has been brought to a head by the historic decline and break-up of the world British Empire. Because of its sharpness, the current crisis is hardly comparable to previous political crises in England’s history.
This is fundamental, organic. It affects the motherland, the organizing center of the empire, which is itself, in turn, dependent upon its colonies. Among the more important factors accounting for the acuteness of the crisis are the following:

The catastrophic defeats suffered by the empire, which have driven it out of the European continent, expelled it completely from the Far East and now threaten the mid-Eastern imperial heart, India.
 
The further development toward autonomy and assumption of greater independence on the part of the dominions, or their turning toward American imperialism (a process vastly speeded up since the war in the Pacific began).
 
The political and economic inroads made by American imperialism into the empire itself.
 
The inability of the British ruling class to strike a bargain with the bourgeoisie or any section of the bourgeoisie in its colonies.
 
The bankruptcy and inability for leadership displayed by the metropolitan ruling class of England itself (a bankruptcy which, comparable to that of the English colonial ruling class itself, has a specific importance of its own).
 
And lastly, the restlessness, uneasiness and discomfort of the English working class vis-à-vis the bankruptcy of its leadership (both bourgeois and proletarian); a growing feeling that continuation of the present situation can only bring disaster upon its head.

It is necessary to elaborate further on the causes and details behind the approaching crisis. The accumulated effect cannot but be profound, nor will it fail to shake metropolitan England from head to foot, placing the English proletariat in the most difficult position of its career.
Britain’s military reversals are known to all. Without Russia’s war front, first of all and the steadily increasing military strength of America, the English war effort would be far more disastrous. As it is, the entire Pacific-Asiatic war action is in American hands, with England restricted to performing limited tasks: bombing the Continent, guarding the Middle East, patrolling sections of the Atlantic lanes, etc. That is, the British military machine occupies a secondary place in the Allied camp and the subordinate nature of this place will become clearer with each passing day as American imperialism assumes, in theory and practice, the direction of the war.
 
How the Empire Is Disrupted
But these defeats have a far more serious economic than military effect. They destroy the material basis upon which England rests. The fields for capital investment in Asia, Africa, etc., are wiped out; the sources of raw materials (rubber, tin, metals, etc.) fall into enemy hands; the profits and riches of trade, commerce, exploitation of slave colonial plantation labor flow into the vaults of the rivals; the rentiers and coupon clippers of the English ruling class and middle class lose their holdings, dividends and interest in the scorched ruins of Malaya, Burma, Hong Kong, etc. (they must fall back on banking reserves, or, worse yet, seek honest employment!). The entire structure of England – an industrial center with octopus tentacles sucking the resources of its imperialist empire – begins to grow weak and staggers as the sources of its plunder-nourishment trickle away.
Of the so-called “white dominions,” Australia and New Zealand have drawn away most rapidly from the motherland in recent months. Canada’s position, of course, has remained stationary since it is already completely dependent upon the United States, with whom its economy is linked; while South Africa’s internal situation grows more precarious with the possibility of a Nazi-fascist Boer Party revolt aiming at a coup d’état if Hitler wins on the Russian front.
The situation of Australia is clearest of all. Militarily, its existence depends upon American support and American control of supply routes; politically its population has turned against the British and its public opinion advocates either independence or federation with America after the war. With American lend-lease aid, troops and naval protection, it is understood in British circles that Australia’s post-war status will be well within the American imperialist orbit. As for the island dominion of New Zealand, with its minute population, its position with respect to America is revealed in the recently adopted war budget for 1942. Over 10 per cent of the budget ($40,000,000) is financed directly by lend-lease aid! New Zealand’s rulers have already indicated their willingness to fit their pastoral economy to the needs of America by repaying lend-lease loans with exports of their food, shoes, hemp, timber and labor for American military projects on the islands. The four dominions appear to be lost, even in a “spiritual” sense, to the motherland.
As for American inroads into the British Empire, this matter was described in great detail in the September and October 1941 issues of The New International. Since that time a very heavy black veil has been drawn over the entire problem, particularly with respect to such concrete matters as liquidation of British holdings in America and South America, taking over of supply routes, bankruptcy of British export companies, extent of lend-lease aid to Britain directly, etc. It is therefore only possible to point out various tendencies and directions, without the advantages of concrete figures or statistics. Certain factors are obvious, as, for example, the fact that the military directive center has shifted to the United States with Washington as the center. In addition, the lend-lease program has continued to mount steadily, with Britain rolling up a huge debt bill to American imperialism. In recent months, with a growing shortage of raw material, a system of international “priorities” has been put into effect. Under this system, America receives first choice of available materials and then, provided its needs are satisfied, balances are sent to England or its colonies. This is an elaboration of the program by which England’s industrial machine is subordinated to that of the United States.
 
Britain’s Bourgeoisie Is Bankrupt
The recently adopted lend-lease post-war treaty is ominous for British capitalism. Lend-lease articles not lost or destroyed in the process of war are to be returned to the United States. This will hit Britain hardest in shipping. “In the case of shipping it will leave Britain in a very embarrassed position.” (London Economist) The already existing shipping shortage will become even more serious as Britain struggles to regain its economic position as against America. Furthermore, the balance owing from the lend-lease indebtedness is to be repaid in empire goods and values. It is already acknowledged in London circles that, for the accomplishment of this task, America will demand the end of “imperial preference” and the establishment of free trade in the British Empire, or its remnants. The destruction of the existing anti-American trade barriers and the establishment of an imperial free trade system would about complete the economic undermining of the empire, and insure the victory of rival American capital.
Fourth of the factors contributing to England’s crisis has been the inability of the Tory imperialists who head the empire to make an effective agent out of a single one of the colonial bourgeoisies. So intense, so greedy and so short-sighted has been the historic exploitation of the colonial empire by the metropolitan imperialists that the development of a native bourgeois class, sufficiently strong and with enough at stake to make it join hands with Britain against impending aggression, has been prevented. This is what lies behind the failure of the Cripps mission to India. The bourgeoisie of Britain’s empire is either neutral to the fate of the master class (Malaya, India) – preferring to take its chances with Axis imperialism – or it is openly pro-Axis (Burma).
The bankruptcy and lack of leadership displayed by the ruling class of Great Britain is apparent to everyone. We come now to internal causes of this crisis, which requires some elaboration and detail.
“We must break loose from the stupefying magic of Churchill’s oratory ... Whenever we suffer a reverse and whenever news is bad we are treated to a superb example of the mastery of the English language. The nation is being drugged by high-sounding phrases.” (Robert Wallis, Secretary, London Trades Council.)
Raymond Daniel of the New York Times has described the current dissatisfaction in British bourgeois and middle class circles with Churchill and his National Government in such terms as “official muddling,” “procrastination,” “hesitation,” etc. Churchill, says this trained observer, is threatened first and most of all by “bad management” at home.
Naturally, the crisis of the English ruling class has far more profound roots than inefficiency and bungling. It lies in the crisis of capitalism itself and the exhaustion of the empire. But this exhaustion expresses itself in many varying forms. In England, the inability to win serious military victories and then to “make them stick”; the inability to organize a war economy and war production and the inability to formulate a concrete political program around which the bourgeoisie itself and its staunchest middle class backers can rally – all these illustrate and underscore the bankruptcy of the rulers who remain in power solely (a) through the support of the Labor Party and trade union leadership and (b) through the failure of the English proletariat to push them out of power.
What could be more revealing of the true mentality and state of affairs than the fact that after three years of warfare the National Government has yet to say what its war aims are, what it is fighting for, what it intends to do with a reconquered Europe? Can a patriotic Englishman give any other answer than “pious platitudes and glittering generalities” to the simple, specific question: “What is England fighting for?” The England capitalist class and Churchill, its Tory spokesman, have no political or social program for the war, for the post-war period, or even to facilitate the winning of the war. The 464–10–1 vote of confidence recently obtained by Churchill in the House of Commons was, in reality, not a vote of confidence, but a “vote of no confidence,” that is, in the ability of the other parties (Liberal, Labor and Conservative) to offer anything else but Churchill and his John Bull-muddles-through program. The two cabinet reshufflings (with the balance of forces turning up the same in the end – a strong Conservative majority) deceived no one, not even when his nibs. Sir Stafford Cripps was added. The addition of a few Liberals in unimportant posts and the dropping of the most fanatic Conservative-Tories has not advanced the English bourgeoisie a step further toward what, for it, is a dire necessity: the formulation of a political program beyond that of preserving the empire.
 
The Inefficiency of the Ruling Class
The disorganization and mismanagement of British war industry is a notorious scandal in England. Outbursts in Parliament speak of the “silent sabotage” by the mine operators. For example, a labor conference in Lancashire-Cheshire speaks about the chaos and inefficiency in the coal fields where “coal production was being deliberately hindered by the employers to maintain profits and keep pits sound for after the war.” Coal owners prefer “to work seams where coal was hardest to get, the productive seams being left for peacetime working.”
As the Socialist Appeal of England states:
“The real root of the trouble is the stranglehold of monopoly ownership over industry, inefficient management and domination of the state machinery by big business ... To take only a very minor item: the pooling of technical knowledge – even such a person as Sir Walter Citrine had to complain that such is the lust of these people for profit that not even the pooling of their technical knowledge has taken place after nearly three years of war. In almost all big factories, extensive alterations are being undertaken and additional structures being built at the expense of a tremendous amount of labor and raw material simply in order to secure new factories at government expense” (April 1942).
Endless time lost through absenteeism due to over-long hours of labor; idle labor due to mishandling of the supply of labor; increase in industrial accidents; all-around inefficiency and inability to plan raw material needs; disorganization within the factories – these are the leading characteristics of English capitalism’s failure to evolve an effective war industry.
And finally, we have mentioned as the basic cause of the crisis the restlessness, uneasiness and revolutionary stirring of the English working class, now that it is confronted with the shameful bankruptcy of the old order. Many reasons lie behind this sharpening of the political and class lines in England. Some we have already indicated: the lack of confidence in the political and military leadership of the National Government; the indecisiveness of the bourgeoisie even within its own ranks and the cowardly capitulation of the trade union and Labor Party leadership to the demands of the English ruling class.
But the workers have been stirred to their depths by other and more pressing problems – primarily the collapse in their standards of livelihood; the disparity and contrast between their war burdens and hardships and those of the ruling class and their doubts and gnawing fears about the post-war England (shall we pass through this terror in vain? What will be our lot in the post-victory period?).
When Hugh Dalton, Churchill’s Labor Minister of Economic Warfare, stated recently that “one more year and then the standard of living will be down to a strict war-economy level,” he struck a chill in the heart of every English worker. To understand this it is necessary to give a brief description of the immense collapse in the level of life that has already occurred. Then we shall contrast this with the effect of the war upon the imperialist ruling class. This will give us the answer to 95 per cent of the problem!
 
How the Masses Fare
Here are the facts with respect to living conditions in a great imperialist nation whose population has had thirteen colonial slaves laboring for each member of it for two centuries. As the New York Times of March 1 expressed it, the problem of England for the first year of war was “blackouts and boredom”; for the second year “bombs and fear” and for the third year “food and the Black Market.”
Wholesale prices, which stood at 96.6 in 1939 – before the war – had risen to 158.8 by March of 1942. This 64 per cent rise had the following effect upon retail (that is, consumers’) prices: Standing at 70.3 in September 1939 (the outbreak of the war) they had risen to 108.5 by February 1942, an increase of 55 per cent! In a word, not only has there been a terrific rise in the cost of living; not only has the burden been shifted completely to the consumer but the avowed program of the National Government to stabilize prices is clearly a total failure. The most that can be said for Churchill’s efforts is that it slowed up the rate of the rise, but had little effect upon the rise itself.
Here are a few prices in England today. Textile and clothing prices have doubled since the war (clothing rations listed below). Cigarettes, 40 cents a pack; lettuce, 20 cents a head; cauliflower, 32 cents; a good steak, or a good meal, $4.00; as for commodity shortages and rationing, there is no more white flour for bread (a standardized “national loaf” has just been instituted); the weekly meat ration amounts to 25 cents; (horse meat shops are now opening throughout England); a quarter pound per week is the sugar ration; four ounces of soap per person each week; milk is obtainable only for children; three eggs per month are allotted; fish, game and poultry are sold only on certain days of the week; no fresh fruits are at all available.
In addition, coal supplies for heating were restricted as the London winter drew to a close, presaging a severe 1942–43 winter; fuel and electric light are soon to be rationed (and also hot water). The present gas ration expires in July and probably will not be renewed (most private cars are out, anyway); even bicycles are becoming rare! The latest 10 per cent cut in newsprint consumption brought the weekly use of newsprint to a low of 4,350 tons per week as compared with 23,000 tons in the pre-war period. The fifth war budget just adopted (amounting to $21,000,000,000, or two-thirds of England’s annual national income) doubled the so-called “luxury sales tax” on such things as tobacco, drinks, entertainment of all varieties, etc. This sales tax now amounts to 662/3 per cent on objects taxed.
Here is what the clothing ration (60 units) permits a man to purchase during the course of one year:



1 suit


 


26 units




1 coat


18 units




1 pair shoes


  7 units




1 suit underwear


  8 units




1 pair socks


  1 unit




Total


60 units



For women, the allotment is similarly shrunken.
With a continuation of merchant shipping shortages and losses (the New York Times estimates that Britain has lost 40 per cent of her pre-war tonnage – March 1, 1942); and with the growing militarization of the island in preparation for invasion of the Continent, it is clear that the situation can only grow tighter and more restrictive.
Nothing has caused greater indignation among the workers than two major factors which incontestably prove the class character of England’s war and give the lie to the myth of a wartime “socialized” England, in which all classes alike share the burden of the war. These two factors are (1) the Black Market and (2) the question of the excess profits tax
 
The Black Market and Profits
The Black Market in England has become a gigantic war racket by means of which the rich manage to retain fairly well their pre-war standard of luxury. It is estimated now that the Black Market has a yearly cash turnover amounting to $600,000,000 – and this business is definitely on the up-and-up! All sorts of foods, clothing, textiles, gasoline, cigarettes, whiskey, cooking fats, etc., are handled on the Black Market. Naturally, the prices are prohibitive to the working class (cigarettes, 50 cents a pack; a bottle of Scotch, $7.00, are a couple examples). One of the cleverest (and these British aristocrats are clever) means devised to evade the stringencies of rationing is hotel life. A member of the English bourgeoisie, with money, can live almost in accord with his customary standards by moving to a hotel “for the duration.” The hotels have become a beehive of Black Market and illicit sales activities. In addition, the characteristic pleasures of the British ruling class, dog racing, horse racing, fox hunting, boxing, etc., have been restricted and curtailed, but not liquidated. All in all, the Tory set thrive infinitely better when it comes to eating, housing conditions, entertainment and special privileges.
“Profits,” we are informed, “have practically vanished in England.” Dorothy Thompson and her “White Cliffs of Dover” crew have sung us the song of Britain’s all-out war production, for use only.
All of this is so much cynical lying. Every week the British New Leader – as does Labor Action in the United States – publishes long lists of English monopolist concerns (Imperial Chemicals, Ltd., Vickers-Armstrong, etc.) with reports of their annual profits, dividend payments, etc. The New Leader has proved that, so far as the combines are concerned, their gross profits have steadily increased since the war.
More important is the myth of the 100 per cent excess profits tax. According to this law, all profits above a given amount are taxed 100 per cent, that is, taken by the government. But the English Socialist Appeal, publication of the English Fourth Internationalists, has neatly exposed this fraud:

This law does not affect “normal,” “below excess” profits. As pointed out above, these continue to flow in for the big companies.
 
Excess profit consists of all profits above the following three methods of computation (that is, the company has three choices or ways of picking out what is most favorable to it):

(a) Average profit for the years 1935, 1936 and 1937;
(b) average profit for the years 1936 and 1937, or
(c) profit for the year 1935, or 1936.

It is noteworthy that the (c) method gives two years (1935 and 1936) when English industry had pulled out of the decline and had a good record for profits!

The government is to pay back 20 per cent of the total excess profits collected when the war is over. That is, a one-fifth rebate!
 
The companies are permitted to set aside 20 per cent of their gross profits in the name of “depreciation.” This contributes to reducing the “excess profits.”
 
“Excess profits” are likewise reduced by putting relatives on the payrolls; voting enormous salary increases to presidents and firm executives; running entertainments and establishing “general expense” accounts; building unnecessary plants or making unnecessary expansions, etc. Our British cousins are no less shrewd than the American business man when it comes to the question of tax evasions and profiteering on war contracts.

The effect of having this imperialist inequality and capitalist robbery practiced upon them for three years of war has made the English proletariat increasingly skeptical about the “New England” that will exist when the bloody struggle is concluded. Probably more than any other people the English have insisted upon discussing the problem of what will be in the future. Questions of post-war unemployment, wage and hour conditions, housing reconstruction, indemnification of the soldiers who fought, have constantly agitated their minds. Naturally, the National Government has never attempted to provide any specific answer but has, instead, relied upon the Labor Party bosses and the trade union functionaries to smooth the rough edges of the workers’ doubts with honeyed promises. “Never shall we return to pre-war England, with its class and caste rule,” guarantee the lieutenants of the Churchill government. They will find this is more true than their hypocritical expectations.
Acting as a brake on the workers’ restlessness, the official labor representatives have completely merged and compromised themselves with the Tory-Conservative government. Among the masses of workers, particularly among the rank and file Labor Party men, this surrender and appeasement of Churchill has not gone unnoticed. Bevin, Attlee, Greenwood, Morrison and the other mediocrities of the labor movement are well aware of this, but can propose nothing. This profound distrust of labor’s rôle in the National Government is a contributing factor to the dissatisfaction among the English working class.
*
English political and social life at the moment is marked by comparative quiet and peace. The professional journalists in England attribute this to the character of the English people, and their “determination to see it through,” despite “family” differences. But they are simply fooled by the temporary quiet that precedes every revolutionary crisis, when the opposing class forces (and groups within the classes) probe out one another’s positions and deliberately strive to formulate programs of action and combat. It is a quiet before the storm.
Yet even within this relative calm there have been many signs and symptoms, all of which point to a turbulent future. The crisis in the National Government, with the ousting of Lord Beaverbrook and the hocus-pocus cabinet re-shuffling, has been England’s most significant political event since the war. In addition, the large popular vote received in three by-elections by the British Independent Labor Party candidates and the popularity of the ILP’s “Socialist Britain Now” campaign; the resounding defeats administered by voters to two government Churchill-endorsed candidates on April 30; the releasing of the Welsh coal miners who were imprisoned for strike action; the nationwide proletarian indignation when the trade union bureaucrats accepted the shameful decision of the National Arbitration Tribunal granting the munition workers a weekly wage increase of five shillings ($1.00); the resignations of various Labor Party leaders from the parliamentary bloc; the insistence of others upon more freedom of criticism and less dictation of Labor Party policy by the National Government – all of these are facts indicating the growing tempo. It is not generally known in America, but the English proletariat has not abandoned strike action despite the strike-breaking “labor-management committees” the Stalinists have vainly tried to impose upon the unions. In 1940 there were 850 strikes involving 284,000 workers; in 1941 this had increased to 1,162 (30 per cent rise) involving 334,800 workers. The 1942 record shows no signs of any abatement and will probably surpass the 1942 statistics.
 
Basis for a Workers’ Victory
It remains to be seen how England will take the Russian success. But one has a feeling now – to me it is a very painful one – that England will take anything; that overcautious and somewhat sordid counsels will always prevail. On the Continent, certainly, her ancient “prestige” is gone. But I must say that even the decline of England seems to me a tremendous and, even, almost an inspiring spectacle, and if the British Empire is once more to shrink up into that plethoric little island, the process will be the greatest drama in history. (Henry James, 1877)
Like every great ruling power and imperial class whose sun is setting, the English bourgeoisie suffers from an amazing blindness and lack of perspective. Assuming its eternal existence, it lives upon the glories and achievements of its past. In its outermost reaches (the distant colonies of Asia and Africa), it first reveals the startling degree of its decrepitude and impotence. This phenomenon, well described by Gibbons in his study of the Roman decline, has taken place with a particular sharpness and brazenness in the colonial Empire of Great Britain, the rapidity and facility of whose loss (Malaya, Burma, etc.) only underscored the extent of the imperialist decay and filth. No world empire ever felt the grave’s chill in so short a space. Every political ideology in the world today recognizes this extinction. The question is: what shall replace it?
Naturally, England’s crisis has special features of its own. Writing from America, without access to much valuable material and without the needed first-hand acquaintance with the situation, it is difficult to probe into these special characteristics. Some are obvious and have already been mentioned – the political impotence of the ruling class. This ideologic castration (best exemplified by the windy Churchill) has led to another special feature: the complete dependence of the state upon the English proletariat. Other factors helped this along: the tremendous industrialization of the islands, plus the fact that the working class is the overwhelming and decisive section of the population – but it is mainly due to the bankruptcy of the ruling strata that the proletariat is in the featured position of “running the country”; actually keeping it going, despite the sabotage of the bourgeoisie.
For rarely has a proletariat been so powerful and so essential in the economy of a capitalist nation as that of England! It runs all the war industry and transportation; its agricultural laborers keep the small agricultural industry alive; it mans the divisions and forces of the war; it constitutes the bulk of the ARP forces; it suffers under the bombing raids; it puts out the fires; it takes the volunteer posts, etc. Its specific weight in the life of England is more than decisive, it is crushing. All the more criminal and treacherous then, are those Labor Party and trade union fakers who bind this mighty class to a comparatively insignificant group of dodo Tories and imperialist bankrupts. These “labor lieutenants of capital” are truly responsible for keeping capital in power!
An additional factor in England’s crisis is the absence of a fascist movement with either a mass-appeal program, or a base in the middle class. The fact that there is no fascist organization worthy of the name at the moment is decidedly an advantage in favor of the English workers, provided they utilize it. Regardless of the reasons for it, it is enough that there is neither a fascist party nor tradition favoring one, nor does a favorable field seem to be developing for its birth. The existence and continued practice of democratic liberties during England’s war period (not due, as the petty bourgeois intellectuals inform us, to the generosity and “superior culture” of the English ruling gentry but to the power of the working class) is another indication of the special importance, alertness and combativity of the English proletariat. The rulers dare not yet impose fascism upon the masses, let alone the fact that they as yet have no homogeneous, seriously organized fascist group to which to turn. But they will not hesitate for a moment to take that path.
*
The Impending Class Crisis
A section of the monopolist British bourgeoisie is actively engaged in formulating its plans to meet the internal crisis. The beaverlike energies of the supremely reactionary Lord Beaverbrook, lately ousted from the war cabinet, are bent in this direction and already bear close resemblance to the sinister plottings of the ex-Kaiser’s officerdom against the Weimar Republic. (Secret meetings with high army officials, sensational speeches putting out “sensational” ideas, gathering together of the anti-Churchill, anti-Labor cliques, etc.)
It is possible that the plotting of the bourgeoisie, and even the discontent of the workers, may momentarily be safely channelized by American imperialism along the lines of the establishment of a “second front.” The pouring in of American troops, offensive war weapons and supplies (transforming the islands into the European invasion base) can slow up the development of the crisis, but the reactionary imperialists will continue to lay their plans for the inevitable assault on labor. If their dictatorial and militarist plans are not needed for today, then tomorrow will do. For, it is around the objective of establishing a military dictatorship over England that the bourgeoisie will seek to rally its confused and hesitant groups. Fascist-minded politicians, army and naval chiefs, banker-monopolists, etc., these are the individuals who will attempt to destroy the English labor movement as a preliminary to its inevitable post-war economic struggle with American imperialism.
Sir William Beveridge, a banker’s economist of repute, has tentatively outlined the “program” for such a combined military-political movement, whose leading aspirant today is Beaverbrook.

Give up party government and Parliament;
 
Abolish the profit system for the duration of the war and run industry on totalitarian production lines;
 
Do away with autonomous trade unions.

Here is a typical military-fascist program, meant to appeal to the imperialist vanguard of the British bourgeoisie.
 
Forces of the Left
In this situation there are only two working class political organizations in Great Britain – the Independent Labor Party and the Workers International League (Fourth International) – that have shown any grasp of matters. Unfortunately, neither group (although the ILP has grown considerably in numbers and influence) has the necessary revolutionary socialist clarity, without which there can be no revolutionary success.
The ILP – the original “grandfather” of confused, centrist political organizations – has shown little sign of learning from the great and tragic lessons imposed by history upon the Spanish POUM and the French PSOP. Its composition is as heterogeneous as ever; its domination by the Parliamentary group (Maxton, McGovern, etc.) in combination with the Fenner Brockway group continues; its multitude of conflicting tendencies (including English patriots, pacifists and conscientious objectors) has failed to jell into a majority revolutionary tendency.
The English Trotskyists (WIL) are correct when they criticize the “Socialist Britain Now” campaign for the opportunist and reformist manner in which it is conducted (that is, aiming primarily to increase the electoral vote of the ILP). The WIL, for its part, doubly misguided by its blind “orthodoxy” and adherence to the policies of the Cannon group in America, has centered its program around the slogans of “Arms to Russia,” and “Military Training Under Trade Union Control.” It has failed to work out a program specifically applicable to the crisis in England itself and has allowed its political sectarianism to throw it considerably off the track. This alone can account for its failure to grow during a very favorable period. A program of mutual revolutionary collaboration and clarification between the Workers International League and the left wing of the ILP is needed if another favorable revolutionary situation is not to be tossed into the laps of reaction.
 



Let us give the man his due! Vice-President Henry A. Wallace is the first of the United Nations leaders and spokesmen to give a specific and concrete statement of what his war aims are.
After we have won the war, said Wallace in a recent speech, we intend to see to it that every man and child throughout the world has “a pair of shoes” and “a pint of milk per day,” Here, at last, after three years of waiting, after endless speeches filled with pious hopes and empty phrases, here, at last, is something we can sink our teeth into!
“A pint of milk and a pair of shoes!” In a world where destruction reigns supreme, where the greatest efforts of the powers that be are directed solely toward the ruination of the means of livelihood and production, this demand is nothing to sneeze at. The tens of millions of white and black sharecroppers in the South have neither; nor do the people of Europe’s ruined territories, nor the great masses of the Orient. If by this aim Wallace means the social advancement of the masses everywhere, the raising of universal living standards, the achievement of social security and economic liberation – then that is the revolutionary program of Labor Action.
But shall we take these phrases seriously?
Whose words are they; from whose mouth? Is this not the same man who – as Secretary of Agriculture – advanced his program of “a pair of shoes and a pint of milk,” during the days of bitter crisis after 1929, by originating the program of plowing under cotton, burning wheat, slaughtering hogs and pigs, curtailing all farm and dairy production? Of course it is! It is the same Triple-A Wallace, now ambitiously maneuvering for the 1944 presidential race. It is the same man who, in the name of American capitalism, said we could pave our way back to prosperity by destroying the means of life.
Furthermore, how can we take seriously this “war aim” when it is put forward in the name of the very opposite: capitalism, a system of class exploitation and production for profit. Wallace tells us that we must first win the war (that is, achieve the destruction and prostration of our enemies’ economic system in Asia and Europe) and then we shall have abundance. Abundance under what social order? Abundance without freeing Asia from Western imperialism; and America and Europe from the stranglehold of capitalism? Abundance through militarism, and war, and bombardments for years on end? We cannot take this seriously.
 
What Are Our War Aims?
In the past few weeks the official spokesmen in America have come forward in lengthy speeches and editorials stating their “war aims.” They seek to answer the perpetual question that arises in the mind of all working people: What are we fighting for?
Wallace has made at least three speeches (including this latest), all of them on the same theme of “the people’s war,” “the common man’s war.” He has emerged as the left wing spokesman of the New Deal democrats – the “radical” Vice-President.
Roosevelt, our President, has likewise raised his voice in an effort to allay these incessant demands of the people to know what the shooting is all about. In a letter to our soldiers abroad he wrote:
“You are not only fighting for your country and your peoples – you are, in the larger sense, delegates of freedom.”
The New York Times, commenting upon the Russo-American lend-lease agreement, says:
“It is to establish freedom, security and economic prosperity upon this earth that we plan to increase our lease-lend shipments to Russia, and that the United States and Britain have committed themselves to a second front.”
Even the Atlantic Charter has been revived, after lying dormant for many months!
Why this sudden and furious interest in “war aims” and the post-war world? “When the Greeks come bearing gifts, let us beware!” When the imperialists and the war-makers, when the “economic planners” and the men who cure poverty by plowing under, when the phony politicians and the “liberal” New Dealers come to us with grandiose promises and enchanted pictures of the future – then, too, let us be on our guard.
 
Preparation for the Slaughter
They have something up their sleeves? This slew of statements, describing our “war aims” and our “victory objectives” have something more behind them than to allay the people’s fear and nervousness regarding WHY the war is being fought.
These speeches and statements seek primarily to prepare the mind of the American people, to lay the ideological groundwork for the greatest military and economic suffering that our country has ever undergone. They seek to make us believe that the enormous sacrifices in lives that a second front in Europe will mean; plus losses in the Asiatic wars; plus a still greater curtailment of living standards and goods in America – they seek to bamboozle us into believing that all this is worth while. Nay, that we should be only too willing and ready to make the sacrifices of life and material wealth, because we shall reap rich rewards.
This is what lies behind the hypocritical statements of the American Vice-President and his colleagues in deception. The American ruling class, bursting at the seams with war-like energy as it embarks to wage war at every front scattered throughout the world, wants to pull the wool over the eyes of the working class with its chatter about “a pint of milk and a pair of shoes.”
But bitter hardship will teach all of us that flying fortresses and machine guns do not yield milk or make shoes. Only those who have a program for ending the war in the name of the people, for constructing a new world order based upon the working class – only they can guarantee the peace and prosperity that will give “a pint of milk and a pair of shoes” to all of us.
 



Dear Editor:
The other night, while listening to the radio, I heard an official government propaganda program which has become very popular. It is known as Report to the Nation. This particular patriotic session dealt with the use of air power, and the part I listened to gave a story about America supporting China in the war; how America would never let the Chinese people down, etc.
At the end of the program the announcer informed us that the script was written by one Harold R. Isaacs, a name that had a familiar ring to it.
Could this be the same Harold R. Isaacs who wrote a book on China called The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution and who, according to the introduction by Trotsky, “approaches the revolution as a revolutionist? ...” The author of this book, which describes China’s effort to free itself of western imperialism, claims to be an “orthodox” Trotskyist and has many a scathing remark to make about American imperialism’s dirty work in China. He keeps mentioning such facts as “British and American gunboats promptly opened up a bombardment of the city (Nanking) ... (page 164); “The leading role played by the Americans in the bombardment of Nanking on March 24 ...” (page 194); “American, British, Italian, French and Japanese gunboats open fire repeatedly ...” (page 425); “American, British, Italian and German planes made Chinese skies horrible for the defenseless peasants ...” (page 425), etc., etc.
Of course, all this took place some time ago – maybe Anglo-American imperiaiism has changed now!
If this is the same Isaacs, we wonder what the “living fighters of the Chinese Revolution,” to whom his book is dedicated, would think of the author’s base desertion to the imperialist cause.
Henry Judd
 



Only One Storm
by Granville Hicks
The MacMillan Co., New York. $2.75
Lem Parsons leaned back heavily against the wall of Ed’s bargain grocery and aimed an over-chewed cud of Prince Albert at the wood stove.
“Say, any of you fellas heard who drove into town last night?”
Ben Ward, busy sorting out the morning mail, vaguely shook his head. The other men sitting and standing around the stove didn’t bother to answer. They kept their eyes on Ben to see if any mail was coming for them. Jim Oaks got his Sears catalogue.
Lem’s cud fell short, but Ed Tabor scraped it under the stove with his foot. Lem’s suspenders were on too tight and he scratched himself vigorously. He was waiting to be asked who came to town, but nobody spoke up. They were all watching Ben with the mail.
“By cripes,” said Lem, “ain’t none o’ you fellas care about what’s goin’ on in your own town?”
Still there was no response, so Lem thought he might as well let on to what he knew.
“Oh, heck, I’ll tell you anyway. Granville’s come back home.”
Canby Marsh, who’d been adding a few blocks of cut-up wood onto the stove, turned half around to look at Lem.
“You mean that son of old man Hicks that had the farm out over Sap Suckertown way?”
“That’s him, all right. Went off to college long time ago, I reckon. Some summer folks said he’d got to be one of them an-archist writers.”
Old Jesse Turk, sitting with his back up against the stove, almost stirred in his seat when he spoke to Canby. He’d known old man Hicks long ago and was suspicious.
“What’s he want up here?”
“Gosh a’mighty, I dunno.”
Old Jesse got more fidgety and suspicious than before. When he turned to Lem he twisted his chair around with him.
“Consarned city slicker! Bet he wants to run against me next election for town moderator.”
Lem was busy stocking up for another try at that hot wood stove. He liked to hear the sizzle when his chaw hit the hot iron. He let one go before answering old Jesse Turk.
“Gosh, you reckon so?”
* * *
This book is a novel. It was written by the ex-literary editor of The New Masses and an ex-leading Communist Party intellectual. But don’t let that frighten you. Nobody is excommunicated, nobody is damned, nobody is sent to political Hades.
It’s about a town in New England which, according to Mr. Hicks, is “... decadent, narrow, suspicious, uncharitable, immoral and stupid” (page 137). But don’t let that frighten you either, because, according to Mr. Hicks, it’s also “... humorous, shrewd, honest, generous” (page 137).
In case you don’t think there is much excitement going on in this novel, don’t blame Mr. Hicks. Because, as the hero answers when his wife complains about all the cemeteries in the town, “Well, it was hard to get around in the old days, and then Pendleton’s (that’s the town, folks) been growing smaller for a long time. The dead are bound to take up a lot of space in a town like this.” (You said it, Granville.)
Is this a good novel? Simple candor compels me to say that it stinks. Frankly, I haven’t been so bored since the last time I heard Lord Halifax extolling the virtues of the British Empire.
Its characters are all colorless and stereotyped; its prose is as drab, monotonous and inhibited as a Daily Worker patriotic editorial; its situations are as unembarassing as a Sunday School picnic (as a matter of fact, you’d probably take the picnic!).
There are two sets of protagonists in the novel, and Hicks “protagonizes” them for all he’s worth. One group, the Stalinists & Co., symbolize “evil.” (Party member Stalinists are really evil; the simps are merely potential victims of evil.) The other group, the New Englanders, represent ... “good.” Of course, Hicks has read too many realistic novels (in his sinful youth) so his farmers are not really pure angels. They indulge (not in the pages of his novel, it goes without saying) in a little country carnal pleasure, adultery, sodomy, etc. Granville delicately (and how he can be delicate!) implies this. But at heart they are the real Americans, the salted earth of our nation.
Well, folks, this goes on for 427 pages.
I put a question for all of you to answer. It’s a tough one. Personally, I couldn’t figure it out.
Would the world (humanity in general) have been better off if Mr. Hicks had remained as Party Pontiff in charge of “executions” for The New Masses?
Or are we better off since he became a novelist?
That one’s pretty ticklish, eh?
 



Industry in Southeast Asia
by Jack Shepherd
Published by the Institute of Pacific Relations, 133 pp.
This pamphlet study, published as one of the International Research Series brochures concerned with the problems of the Pacific areas, is a catalogue of industry in Southeast Asia. The author describes in detail the industries (handicraft and modern) of French Indo-China, Netherlands Indies, the Philippine Islands and other smaller territories such as Taiwan (Formosa), Thailand, Burma, etc.
As Shepherd admits in his introduction, “... the Western colonial powers (were) primarily concerned with drawing off the tropical products and industrial raw materials in which Southeast Asia abounds, it is not surprising that this region should have remained predominantly agricultural in character, even in an industrial age.” Whatever industry that did develop was extremely lop-sided and distorted in character and was based solely upon the imperialist interests of the ruling powers. Thus, large-scale plantations (rubber, tea, etc.); mining and smelting operations connected with extractive industries (rubber, tin ore, oil, etc.) were about the only industrial advances made in this part of the world.
The pamphlet is useful for those who need to be convinced that the imperialists were little concerned about industrializing and advancing the productive capacities of their colonies by introducing modern, heavy industry, but deeply concerned about the unmitigated exploitation of those sections of colonial economy that would line their pockets most rapidly. Of course, Mr. Shepherd is not concerned with these political questions, but nevertheless his facts and catalogues prove incontestably that the colonial areas conquered by Japan were completely unequipped to wage modern warfare in their own defense.
 



The war between Russia and Germany is a year old this week. It has been, and will continue to be, the most massive and deadliest part of the world-wide struggle.
Over a front of 2,000 miles from Murmansk to Sevastopol, the youth and working class of Soviet Russia and fascist Germany are engaged in the futile and tragic destruction of one another. With the exception of the Chinese war, the Russian front of the imperialist war has been the field of one of history’s greatest slaughters. Never before have so many (three and a half to five million) soldiers died in such a brief span of time (one year)! Never have such human and material forces locked in such devastating battle; never before has such a great military deadlock occurred.
Germany, the nation whose proletariat always felt closest and most sympathetic to the revolutionary workers of Russia, has failed to break the Red Army and the Russian nation. Russia, whose working class always expected and looked primarily to the socialist workers of Germany to break the capitalist encirclement, has succeeded only in holding on grimly, fighting for, dear life. But the workers of both nations (Russian and German alike) have been completely estranged from one another, as though the bonds of former years never existed. The war has found no internationalist echo in the ranks of the people; it has had no political reverberations among the masses. It is a war between German fascist imperialism (with the duped German workers as fodder) and the Russian totalitarian rulers (with the Russian people as foils).
America, from the beginning of this struggle, has taken a leading role – if not militarily, then politically and economically – in the Russo-German phase of the World War.
 
Attitude of the American Rulers
The attitude of the American ruling class, as expressed in the deeds of Roosevelt, can be summarized as follows: They brilliantly illustrate typical methods used by American imperialism for the gaining of its ends.

Roosevelt, immediately recognizing the value of the Red Army’s struggles in so far as weakening his main enemy – Hitler – was concerned, placed America unhesitatingly by the side of Soviet Russia.
 
Roosevelt, recognizing that this job he had allotted to Russia in weakening German might, was determined to keep the Red Armies in the field, fighting with American lend-lease aid. Even at the risk of weakening other fronts, Roosevelt insisted upon supplying the Russo-German front.
 
Roosevelt, realizing the political significance of relations with Russia, has tried (with success) to draw Russia and its ruling authorities into ever closer political ties and dependency upon the United States.

All this has occurred during the past year. Lend-lease aid has gone in large quantities; American air forces are in the Crimea; Stalin has signed various economic and political agreements binding him to the Atlantic Charter, post-war political and economic planning, etc.
But the relationship is not so simple as all this. That it is not merely a matter of aiding our friend and ally, Russia, in the common struggle has been proved by the recent visit of Molotov – a visit which, seen in retrospect today, proved to be singularly unprofitable – for Molotov!
Molotov wanted a firm agreement for the opening up of a second front this year – he got an ambiguous statement instead. Every event since indicates there will be no second front for a long time.
 
Molotov’s Trip a Sorry Failure
Molotov wanted a firm alliance, or treaty-similar to that he had just obtained from England. All he got was an extension of the former lend-lease agreement. In a concrete sense, his trip must be chalked up as a rather sorry failure.
Now, why? Is it not to Roosevelt’s interest to do everything possible to draw our country closer to Russia; to prove the sincerity of his pro-Russian position?
The answer can only be that Roosevelt’s relations with Stalin and the Soviet Union are determined by Roosevelt’s imperialist designs. It has always been the classic method of American imperialism to allow its enemies to mutually destroy, weaken and undermine one another and then step in – to dictate the terms. Russia is no exception to this law. Roosevelt is quite pleased to see the mutual destruction of Germany and Russia by one another; while his own war machine grows stronger and mightier. He does not want his hands bound by any twenty-year treaty or any formal alliances. Yes, he will support Russia with all he has – so long as Russia fights the main enemy, Germany. But this support is motivated by other interests than love of the Soviet Union.
Our relations with Russia during the next year (or for the duration of the war) will run along the same pattern. American imperialism is quite content to see the Russian people clear the path to Berlin by continuing its resistance to Hitler’s legions. In this case also, Roosevelt is far more sagacious than the isolationists and the narrow-visioned American capitalists who shudder at “relations” with “Red” Russia.
Under capitalism, relations with your neighbors are based upon expediency and self-interest. The policy that prevails is: does this suit the interests of our ruling class and its imperial objectives? If it does, then we are “allies” and “fellow-democrats.”
 



“Events happening from day to clay and the experience which the people of India are passing through confirm the opinion, of congressmen that British rule in India must end immediately, not merely because foreign domination at its best is evil in itself and a continuing injury to a subject people ...
“The freedom of India is thus necessary not only in the interests of India but also for the safety of the world, for ending Nazism and fascism, militarism and other forms of imperialism ...”
With these words the Indian National Congress, headed by Gandhi, has once again confirmed the overwhelming belief of that nation’s 400,000,000 people. “We demand immediate and unconditional independence from British imperialist rule.” This is their belief.
Almost three months have passed since the Cripps mission to India failed and His Majesty’s loyal servant was unceremoniously booted out of the country. During that period the Japanese have conquered Burma and are now slowly preparing the way for a full assault upon India from their occupied positions.
During that period the people of India by their steadfast opposition to the British, by their refusal to lift a finger to help the imperialist troops who occupy their nation, have more than confirmed everything that Labor Action has previously written on this matter. Only complete independence will move them into action or self-defense. While their conservative leaders (Gandhi, Nehru & Co.) have kept up a constant game of negotiation – trying to make an agreement with the British masters – the workers and peasants have refused to participate in this treachery. Instead, they forced, the expulsion from the Congress of C.R. Rajagopalichariar, the most openly pro-British of all the conservative Congress leaders!
Now the Working Committee of the Congress has adopted a resolution stating that unless the British grant them independence the National Congress will be forced to launch a nation-wide “civil disobedience” movement against the imperialists. The resolution is full of numerous loopholes and open doors that will permit the resumption of negotiations between England and Gandhi, if the former are willing, but it nevertheless shows how determined and resolute are the people who want to fight NOW for their independence.
The British have already indicated that they will not resume negotiations and that they are set to use force and violence against any national movement when and if it begins. In this they merely prove – once more – the hypocritical nature of their democratic pretenses.
The question of India is still before the world. It will never be settled until imperialist rule of that great country has been wiped put. If the people of India finally start a mass movement for their independence it will be a more than welcome day for the socialist and working class movement.
 



Last week in this column we described how Roosevelt is laying his plans for an American army of world conquest with an eventual enrollment of eight to ten million men. We described how a gradual adaptation to the “Prussian” school of militarization of the entire nation, by age and class groups, is occurring.
Side by side with this militarization, our entire economic and social structure begins to take on a more totalitarian air and appearance. Aware that the war can only be won by “guns – not butter,” Roosevelt deliberately has taken the road of organizing the highly centralized, all-powerful state, whose leaders and administrators will have full command over every individual, every resource, every instrument of production.
 
Production for War
The expanding needs of the military forces cause the diversion of American economic and capital energies into production for war purposes primarily. The Army demands more food, more tents and equipment, more steel and metal for its mechanized forces; the Navy demands more battle craft and supply ships, it takes over the peacetime Merchant Marine; the Air Force demands more training schools, more planes, more material for its newer experimental craft.
The results are, of course, apparent to all of us. They can be measured in terms of shortages of goods (silk, clothing, typewriters, kitchen utensils, etc.). The decline in consumer good is the first and earliest stage of the militarization of American economy. The second stage – already begun – is the rationing of these same consumer goods. So far, this extends only to a few commodities like gas, rubber and typewriters. Sugar is the only food affected to date. But everyone understands that this is but the start – with at least fifteen other commodities to go on rations within the next few weeks, and undoubtedly dozens and dozens to follow within the year – as war conversion proceeds.
A familiar process, is it not? Familiar to the students of totalitarian war economies. Furthermore, it should not be assumed that the civilian populations will remain untouched by this great capitalist tendency toward regimentation and militarization.
To begin with, the proportion of American workers engaged in the DIRECT war producing industries (airplane factories, munition plants, steel mills, machine shops, tank assembly lines, etc.) has grown up, million by million. Next year, it is estimated, 23 to 25 million workers will be working in the war factories – the greatest concentration of its kind in the world! These workers are, in reality, just as much in the American Army as are the millions who now wear the uniforms of our country.
Says Paul V. McNutt, chairman of the War Manpower Commission, in the current issue of the American Magazine: “The only Americans who aren’t earmarked for the fighting forces, shipyards, munitions factories or farms, are the very old, the very young and those who haven’t any talent or energy that can be used.” In other words, the military state will utilize everyone it can lay its hands on for the carrying out of its military and social objectives.
 
Binding Labor to the Machine
Having mobilized its industrial manpower, American capitalism will then dictate its role and destiny. Some part will go” into the armed forces; another section will stick only to the task of producing for these armed forces. According to McNutt, deferment ratings on war workers and priority ratings on war industries for employment purposes have been worked out. The employment services of the various states (a federal institution which, like all other federal institutions is becoming more powerful and dominant in its authority) will determine the order of men to be drafted. Those exempt are the skilled workers (diemakers, first-class machinists, toolmakers, set-up men, etc.) who cannot be replaced. Those with less chance of exemption are the less skilled and experienced (carpenters, ship metal workers, lathe hands and second-class machinists). While those with little skill (assemblers and operators) will be taken first. But the bulk of American industrial power will find itself either in the fighting or productive branch of the war machine.
A hardening process will take place, side by side with the mobilization we have mentioned above. Here the role of the employment services will become more rigid and bureaucratic. Says McNutt: “The time may come when all employment in war industries will be supervised by the employment service and men will change jobs only when permitted.” That is, American labor will become bound to the machine, the shop and the farm on which it toils.
The ultimate characteristics of the military, bureaucratic imperialist state should be plain to all. After all, the world is filled with innumerable examples. From the trends we have described in these two articles, they can be summarized as follows:

An enormous body of manhood under arms, comprising perhaps as much as 10 per cent of the population (13,000,000) – assuming the same percentage relation as in Germany.
 
A staggering fall in the amount of consumer goods, with a resulting decline in the traditional standard of living that America has known. The ultimate rationing of practically every basic and needed commodity.
 
The binding of American labor to the war factories, accompanied by an effort to strip the trade unions of virtually all independent and class functions they have heretofore exercised.
 
The imposition of a bureaucratic regime, emanating from the federal center at Washington, which will dictate by agency decree all matters affecting social and economic life (price control, quality and quantity of goods, ability to move and. change living quarters, etc.).

The capitalist press constantly harps on the fact that the American people are not yet fully aware of the meaning of the war. By their complaint they do not mean what Labor Action means, but there is some truth in the statement, “The war and its continuation mean the hardening of central authority and the vast growth and expansion of all tendencies leading to a totalitarian regime.”
 



Introducing Australia
by C. Hartley Grattan
The John Day Company, New York, vxi–331 pages
C. Hartley Grattan is one of those journalists whose mentality is obsessed by such matters as “scholarly research,” “constitutions and federalism,” “states’ rights,” etc. He is a legalist and a formalist in the worst sense of the word. Although he has one good book to his credit, dealing with America’s entry into the last war, his other works are marked by a stodgy approach and superficiality.
His book on Australia is particularly bad in this respect. It is little more than a collection of abstract facts about this almost unknown territory. If one wishes to learn the low-down about Australia – its size and population, climate, its various industries, Australian slang, culture, etc – then this book performs a very useful purpose. But if you are seeking something that lies a little deeper – say, for instance what is the basis for Australian labor reformism and opportunism, what is the social character of Australian economy, etc. – then it must be stated that such a book is not yet written.
For, on these matters, Grattan is a complete blank. In one sentence (to the effect that Australia is the country where a miner can become a cabinet minister) Zinoviev, in his essay, The Social Roots of Opportunism, had more to say than all of Grattan’s 300-odd pages. There is no effort to explain the specific features of Australia:

The backwardness and distorted character of its economy, which is a pastoral one;
The ability of the Australian Labor Party to achieve a successful (until recently) reformist growth;
The effects of the supremely chauvinistic policy of racial exclusion and tariff protection;
The real reasons for the minute Australian population;
The relation between British capital and Australian industry;
The “seizure” of Australia by America, etc.

Above all, Grattan avoids any discussion on the “White Dominion” policy and the special backwardness of the Australian labor movement insofar as socialist and revolutionary ideology are concerned. But how can one even begin to understand Australia’s present crisis without answering these questions? Of what use is it to know the bare “facts” when the Australian people are fighting for survival against Japanese invasion? Must one not know the fact that the Australian reformist Labor Party is politically bankrupt and that it is precisely the policy of its leadership in collaboration with the rulers which has prevented the economic and material growth of this vast continent and brought it to its present precarious position?
The best part of this book is, in our opinion, a bit of Australian verse which we take the liberty of quoting. A working class as tough as all that can yet learn Marxism and get rid of its capitalists!



“A REAL AUSTRA-BLOODY-LAISE”
By C.J. Dennis
Fellers of Australier,
Blokes an’ coves an’ coots,
Shift yer bloody caracases,
Move yer bloody boots.
Gird yer bloody loins up,
Get yer bloody gun,
An’ watch the bugger run.
Fellers of Australier,
Cobbers, chaps an’ mates,
Hear the bloody enermy
Kickin’ at the gates!
Blow the bloody bugle,
Upper-cut and out the cow
To kingdom bloody come!



 



The Company She Keeps
by Mary McCarthy
Simon & Schuster, Inc., New York, i–ix, 304 pp.
Hollywood motion pictures solemnly assure us in their introductory footnotes that “all the characters portrayed are fictitious ...” Usually this guarantee is pure redundancy, since they rarely bear any resemblance to reality, anyway.
The trouble with Mary McCarthy (who apparently identifies herself with the heroine of the book, Miss Sargent) is that she is the Eternal Sophomore, the Never-Grow-Up, the Universal Debunker. Miss Sargent, who prides herself in “not believing in anything” (including the peculiar brand of “Trotskyism” which she vehemently upholds at one period), reminds us of those young college sophomores discussing the problem of “petitio principii” (begging the question) in their elementary classes on formal logic. Like these students who cannot grasp the scientific ideas of hypotheses and projection and therefore insist that all science argues in a circle (begs the question), Miss Sargent believes that everything (including believing) is circulatory and must fall back upon itself. This, of course, results in an advanced form of neurotic cynicism – of which our author has more than her just share. An intellectual snob of an extreme type, Miss Sargent is a most unpleasant character to contemplate. Her fetish of sneering and jeering at everything extends even to the poor psychoanalyst who attempts to aid her. Her intellectually sadistic pleasure of foreseeing and shutting off every remark of every individual she ever associated with certainly did not make her company much of a delight!
One reviewer remarked on the method by which this “novel” unfolds. He compared it to the process by which an onion is peeled off, layer after layer, with each layer revealing a different facet of the heroine. The analogy is good, provided the reader realizes that (unlike with Gypsy Rose Lee) nothing remains or is revealed after all the layers are peeled off. Nothing, that is, except the nebulous Miss Sargent – half proud, half regretful of the fact that she never had a real experience – emotional, sexual or political – in her entire life. As the portrait of an American petty bourgeois intellectual Oblomov, The Company She Keeps is a success, if you care for this sort morbid, self-objective sort of writing. As a novel, it is misnamed, since it bears greater resemblance to an elaborate case history study by some clever, literary psychoanalyst.
The “political” aspects of the book – although containing a devastating portrait of “The Yale Intellectual” – are filled with an ignorance that become appalling. We do not mean so much the description of Shachtman as “a dark little lawyer,” but rather the constantly implied insult that “Trotskyism” and Marxism have something to do with the absurd and neurotic creatures whose company Miss Sargent found interesting, at any rate, until she progressed to her next “layer in life” by marrying a wealthy professional.
This is an abuse of literary license and elementary honesty worthy of those frauds who pillory an opponent by distortion and caricature. Mary McCarthy knows nothing of politics and should recognize this. If she persists in utilizing her undoubted talents in creating artificial, unhealthy and synthetic literary products like this book, that is her affair. Hollywood, reported to be short on subject matter and script, may be interested. But literature and art are not consonant with caricature and debunking. The moment Mary McCarthy catches up with the realization that her energies are wasted she will cease to write and will probably rationalize this bankruptcy by turning upon her own work.
 



Last week America commemorated the fifth year of China’s resistance to the invasion of that country by Japanese militarism. The United China Relief Association opened a drive for the collection of many millions to be sent to China for war relief purposes.
“Six rickshaws, banked with flowers donated by florists ... were drawn beneath the flags of the United Nations yesterday in Rockefeller Plaza ... The rickshaws were then distributed to points throughout the city,” reports the New York Times. They have forgotten that a rickshaw – a carriage pulled by a MAN, a Chinese coolie – far from being a symbol of a “Free” China, has always been a symbol of an imperialist-dominated China, whose people are forced to pull and haul for the ruling foreigner, the white and yellow imperialist.
When the rulers of America celebrate the fifth anniversary of China’s resistance to the Japanese invaders it is with an entirely different meaning than will be given that event by China’s 450,000,000 people. Among the Chinese MASSES there is an indestructible impulse toward independence. It is for such independence that they fought so valiantly until Chiang completely subverted their struggle to the interests and dominion of Allied imperialism. And if the end of their fight today is not independence, it is not because the masses do not desire it, but rather because China’s fight is in the hands of imperialist powers. So that what was once decidedly progressive has ceased to be.
Wendell L. Willkie – whose election ambitions make him the most hypocritical and insincere politician in America today – heads the list of prominent Americans who heap praise upon the Chinese people. Aware of Asia’s huge marketing potentialities and immense wealth, they are disturbed by Roosevelt’s concentration on defeating Hitler in Europe and the Middle East. They would have America pay far more attention to China, particularly in view of the fact that China is now virtually cut off from all oversea supply routes and that the Japanese campaign to isolate its capital, Chungking, is perilously close to succeeding.
But Roosevelt, primarily concerned with Germany – his enemy No. 1 – pays little heed. Result: China celebrated its fifth anniversary with an outcry of terror and a warning of approaching defeat and collapse. One by one, beginning with Chiang Kai-shek and his invaluable wife, Mme. Chiang, and ranging down through the entire collection of generals and ambassadors, there came a plea for planes, munitions, machinery, troops, etc. But, so far as can be determined, the cry for help has gone unanswered by Washington, and China stands close to being ousted from the war before the sixth year rolls around.
 
A History of Imperialist Policy
This behavior of Roosevelt and the leading American imperialists toward China gives us the key toward a realistic analysis of American relations with that country. Like everything else in this capitalist-imperialist world, our relations are determined first and last by economic and political motives, based upon capitalism. The “natural” bonds between us and China – so often cited by the clique of Willkie supporters – is rather an imperialist love for the resources of China and a strong yen for the right to exploit, its 450,000,000. (THEY do not mean the genuine natural bonds which unite Chinese and American workers.) For our entire history of dealings with the Chinese consists of one reactionary crime on top of the other.
Today, when we seek to use China’s masses and China’s soldiers in the imperialist war (the use of Chinese troops to retain Burma for the British Empire is an excellent example of what we have in mind), we are merely completing a 50-year-old period of participation in the game of who can swindle China “mostest and firstest.”

American imperialism – side by side with Japanese, German, English and French – aided the suppression of the “Boxer Rebellion” in the 1900’s, when China first began to be divided up among the Western powers.
 
Side by side with other imperialist powers we deprived the Chinese people of their independence, brought slums, factories, exploitation to China, subjected the nation to white rule.
 
When the Chinese workers and peasants struck out for their independence in the great 1925–27 period, American gunboats, destroyers, airplanes and troops fought them on the Yangtze and Pearl rivers.
 
When Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the conservative Chinese ruling class, turned on the revolutionary workers at Shanghai and Hankow during the 1927 period, we threw our full support to him and aided his criminal assaults upon the revolutionary centers.
 
When Japanese imperialism invaded China five years ago we rejected a policy of boycott (it was to appease Japan in those days) and continued to sell oil, scrap metals, munitions to these militarists who were shooting down “our friends” on a dozen Chinese fronts. “Business was business” then.

After Pearl Harbor things changed. We stopped sending munitions to Japan, and we found Chinese troops were mighty handy for use in Malaya, Burma and a few other points. They could serve well in the imperialist struggle with Japan – so Roosevelt became still more friendly to China. But the Chinese people have learned to be suspicious of such friendships.
The relation between Washington and China is based upon imperialism and its perpetuation; the relations that should (and will) exist between the American people and the Chinese workers and poor peasants will be based upon common understanding and concord in the mutual struggle against all imperialists and forms of imperialism. The American workers should stand for China’s COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE from both Washington and London as well as Tokio.
 



It is now approaching eight months since America became directly involved in the Second World War. In that period, as everyone recognizes, the American war machine has not achieved notable success.
In the Far Pacific – despite defeats at Midway and in the Coral Sea – the Japanese Navy and its military adjuncts sail the seas of China and the Indian Ocean more or less at will, exploiting, organizing and building their brutal imperialist empire in the territories they have conquered. For the moment at least, they are unchallenged.
In the European and Asiatic battlefields, the Axis Powers retain an unchallenged initiative and offensive. American production and supplies have just begun to reach many of these fronts. Talk of the Second Front remains – TALK. In the interim, the basic and most important front of all – the Russian front – appears in great danger as the German Wehrmacht drives into the Middle East and Caucasus. At best, America is holding tight (Egypt, Alaska); at worst, America is retreating and withdrawing (Russia, Asia). It is important to note that the really important war fronts are scenes of defeat rather than stalemate or victory.
To top it all there is the incredible Senator May, who recently informed us that the war would be over (won) this year, or next at the very latest! This fantasy came from a responsible and recognized spokesman of the American capitalist-imperialist class, whose war this is!
 
Strategy or Continued Muddling?
In the welter of confusion and defeat, in the maze of contradictions and conflicting decrees that emanate from the war leaders at Washington, is it possible to make out any organized pattern, any system and strategy by which American imperialism hopes to gain its goal of world mastery? Or is it all, as many believe, a hodge-podge of hopeless improvising, without order? Is the American ruling class staggering along from defeat to defeat in its war program? Do the messing up of the shipbuilding program, the rubber and gas conservation schemes, the inability to organize the skilled labor supply so that one industrial area does not have a tremendous shortage, while a nearby area has 400,000 (New York City) unemployed? Do all these factors indicate that American capitalism will be unable to develop a unified, world-wide strategy to meet the war’s requirements?
The same questions and doubts are raised by examining the war machine itself – the lack of coordination and unification in the various commands; the absurd situation where air forces (separately representing the Army the Navy and the Marines!) participate in battles as independent entities. Certainly the record to date does not speak very well for the future. American imperialism is engaged SOLELY in the military task of holding on; retaining a grip on the Asiatic and African continents.
 
Eyeing Hitler’s Methods
But it is our business to point out that an increasing section of America’s rulers are turning a more acute and interested eye toward the methods employed by Hitler. These gentlemen, representing the monopolists and the finance imperialists, recognize that in Germany the imperialists and expansionists of that nation have found an organization and institution that DOES have a strategy of world conquest, that HAS succeeded (the methods do not matter to these people) in diverting and centralizing the entire energies of 80,000,000 people toward but one goal – the waging and winning of expansionist, imperialist warfare.
For these men recognize that under capitalism war must be waged with a centralization and a total concentration that is still lacking in capitalist America. Among the American rulers there are many capitalists, industrialists and merchants who are actively struggling against this inevitable militarization of the war economy. Fearful of being wiped out in the process (as were large sections of the German capitalist class when the Nazis were put into power), they resist with might and main. The “isolationist” wing of the ruling class is still strong, still regretting the war, still anxious for a peace and a turning toward South America rather than Europe and Africa.
Individual capitalists in the various consumers’ goods industries (radio, household articles, etc.) hesitate to convert their industries, use every possible method to obtain raw materials for their “business as usual,” and, in general, are ready to sacrifice every last capitalist but themselves.
In a word, there is no organization or party or movement powerful enough to knock together the heads of the American rulers, order them to commit suicide if necessary for the benefit of capitalism as a whole – rather than a section of it – and proceed with a Nazi ruthlessness toward definite imperialist goals.
It is precisely for this reason and to overcome this fatal handicap that the most imperialist-minded section of the rulers have taken the road toward the imposition of a military dictatorship upon America. In their press (the publications of the Henry R. Luce group – Life, Time and Fortune – are the best illustrations) a constant campaign against democratic liberties and institutions (Congress, campaigning, etc.) and, of course, most particularly against the labor movement, are carried on without cease.
Centralization, authority, no mixing up of the commands – these are the war cries of the leading imperialists of our country. The small industrialists and business men must be sacrificed to the big corporations; labor as an independent class with its own institutions must yield to the “greater need” – the winning of the imperialist war. This is their program and they will not hesitate to ape and emulate more and more the dictatorial methods of the nazified states. Hence their current admiration for Stalinist Russia, an admiration based not upon any love for the “socialist experiment,” but respect for the centralized war economy, and the straight-jacketed labor movement of Russia.
 



The House of Representatives has voted the largest military appropriation in our country’s history. The sum is forty-three billion dollars! This one bill represents a billion dollars more than was spent in the entire period of the last war. It means that a total of 220 billion dollars has been spent since June 1940. Roosevelt is playing for the highest stakes of any power engaged in the World War and he who plays that way must have the most to back him up!
Militarily, American imperialism makes no bones about what it is aiming at: It wants the world’s largest and best equipped army; it wants a two-ocean navy that will completely outweigh and absorb the remnants of the British navy (after wiping out its only other rival, the Japanese fleet); it wants the greatest air force in the world, a fleet of bombers and flying fortresses capable of destroying any opponent.
American imperialism banks primarily on its great industrial machine, its power to produce all the weapons and materials we have described. With its terrific weight and its ability to deal out more death and destruction than any of its opponents, American imperialism hopes to overwhelm and subject Europe, Asia and South America to its rule.
In line with this policy, Congress has just adopted a bill containing a four-point draft policy, as well as provisions for dependents of men. The inadequacy of the provisions has been dealt with in Labor Action. Here we are interested in the policy by which the order of drafting is determined.
 
Draft by Age Groups
In the militarized nations of Europe, the dictators have a simple method of drafting their cannon fodder. Upon reaching a certain age, men are automatically forced to undergo military training. After completing their service, they are placed in reserve and are called up according to their year group. (The class of 1912, for example, is made up of all trained youth born in that year, etc.) On the whole, all youth in Europe above the age of 18 are now in the armies of their respective imperialist masters.
Roosevelt – although urged to do so by innumerable military men – did not utilize exactly, this method when he set out to militarize America’s youth. In classic Rooseveltian fashion, however, he is getting the same results – inch by inch and step by step! That is, we are adopting in piecemeal fashion the system of militarization we formerly condemned by calling it “Prusssianism.”
The greatest step yet taken in this direction is undoubtedly the registration and classification of the 18 and 19 year old youth, this week. In addition to completing the registration of all American man power from 18 to 60, this particular registration is beyond doubt preparation for the wholesale drafting of these 2,500,000 18-19 year old boys. Says the United States News: “It seems very probable that draft age will be lowered to-18 before 1943 ... Elections will be over. War will have changed Congress’ attitude. There’ll be less resistance to tapping ranks of 2,500,000 18 and 19-year-olds.” Undoubtedly, this modification of the draft act will be followed by some bill fixing automatic induction and training requirements for those who reach the age of 18 in the future. And there we have our “Prussianism,” by date of birth!
In fact, the newly registered group will be listed in the order of their birth rather than by draft lottery, as in ALL previous registrations!
 
Satisfying Needs of the War Machine
Furthermore, the new automatic and rigid categories setting the order of drafting are filled with the same “Prussianism” as are the edicts of Hitler and Mussolini. The all-powerful military state becomes supreme, commandeering men automatically to satisfy the needs of the bottomless war machine.
First come those who are single, without dependents.
Second come those who have dependents that are neither wives nor children.
Third come men married prior to Pearl Harbor.
Fourth come men with wives and children dependent upon them.
This order applies to those already registered; behind them stand the great untapped sources of the 18 and 19 year olds – that is, those who will openly be organized into class and age groups, in the European fashion.
As the imperialist horizon of America broadens, so does the mechanical nature of the war machine harden. A system is worked out; everyone’s place is fixed in advance – practically before he is born! Accompanying this steeling of the war machine we find an increase in the estimates of army size: approximately 4,000,000 today; 6,000,000 in 1943; 10,000,000 in two years; 12,000,000 in three years. Such is the price of imperialism!
 



“Food will be a mighty weapon and a powerful persuader in that crucial interval between war and peace when the future of the world will be decided.” (New York Timeseditorial, November 28)
Herbert Hoover, former President and World War I food administrator, has written recently, “agriculture must be envisioned as a munitions industry and treated as such.” In this statement he echoes the now familiar slogan, of the Roosevelt New Dealers and government administrators; “Food will win the war and write the peace.” How innocent and sweet-sounding are all these statements, editorial remarks and slogans issued by our leading spokesmen, as they spur on the American farmers to greater productive efforts.
Governor Herbert Lehman, leading figure in the Democratic Party and a member of the “Sixty-Family” Lehman Brothers – that filial organization of big shot financiers, investment brokers, bankers and finance-monopoly capitalists – has just been appointed by FDR to take charge of the “rehabilitation of Europe and other war-devastated areas”; to supply the starving and war-weary masses of the world with food, supplies, money to set their industries and economic life in order again, etc.
 
Food as a Military Weapon
Food, and everything that it implies – the ability to keep going, to live – is obviously a tremendous weapon in the hands of those who possess it. Europe is starving right now; it is not necessary to wait until the war is over to find hundreds of thousands of men, women and children who are starving, in addition to the tens of millions who are undernourished and hungry. In the economic chaos that will grip Europe with the downfall of the Hitler regime, the upsurge of national and revolutionary movements, the devastating invasion of the continent by the “democratic” forces, the starving condition of Europe will be intensified. Yes, food, the RIGHT to eat, will become (already has become) a dominant POLITICAL question!
This is what the New York Times means when it describes food as a “powerful persuader.” Do you want to eat? To go on living? Then you had better know which side your bread is buttered on! Are you with us? Then here’s a slice of bread, with a vitamin pill thrown in. Are you against us? Then eat cake!
Administrator Lehman, too, understands the use of food as a “persuader” and a weapon in the imperialist war. That is why he spoke, in his first statement upon acceptance of his new post, about American troops probably remaining in the countries they occupy (to keep law and order and hand out food to the deserving) for at least a year after the war is over and won. That is why he, too, emphasized the vast importance and significance of the whole question of post-war supplying and rehabilitation.
 
Food to Nourish Reaction
Although it is clear that the role of food and rehabilitation in World War II will be far more important than it was in the last war, America has already had one experience in which food was utilized to help bolster up reactionary and imperialist causes. Last time it was supervised by Herbert Hoover; this time it will be Herbert Lehman, with more authority and more important missions to perform. Hoover used American food to back up every reactionary clique and counter-revolutionary regime that attempted to seize power in the Central European and Balkan states during the revolutionary upheavals of Europe after the 1917 Russian Revolution.
The individuals are changed, but their goals are the same. Yes, America’s rulers will hand out food and supplies to those who give it full support and are willing to set up reactionary European governments – the de Gaulles, the Prince Ottos of Hapsburg, the Count Sforzas of Italy, the Darlans of France, the Queen Wilhelminas of Holland, the Mikhailovitches of imperialist Yugoslavia, etc. They will get food to stabilize their rule and provide a support for their reactionary governments, the better to do the bidding of Anglo-American imperialism. They will get food as a part of the deal between FDR and the reactionary monarchists, royalists, semi-fascists and diverse reactionaries who constitute, the so-called “governments-in-exile.”
But suppose the oppressed nationalities, the workers and peasants of the European Countries, refuse to accept FDR’s Gauleiters? Suppose, as we strongly suspect and hope, they ignore the de Gaulles and King Peters and establish THEIR OWN workers’, socialist, democratic rule, ousting the capitalists responsible for the war? Will they get food and reconstruction supplies IN THAT CASE? Or will they meet with the same hatred and opposition that the Russian people did in 1917 when they overthrew the Czar and established their workers’ and peasants’ government?
If it is up to FDR, Lehman and their fellow imperialists, the answer is obvious. Food only to those who support us; no food to revolutionary workers or revolutionary movements. The criteria? Capitalism and its private property!
 
Food as a Workers’ Weapon
FDR uses food, as an imperialist weapon; socialists use it as a revolutionary, working class weapon in the struggle for peace and an end to the war. This is why American workers must prepare to fight for the right of ALL European workers, poor people and peasants, to be fed, without any political strings attached. A workers’ government in America would have as one of its major objectives the helping of ALL its brothers in Europe; starving victims of a capitalist war they never wanted in the first place.
 



The Latin American conference of 21 nations organized by the United States to help in the war effort of the “United Nations” was concluded this week with American dollar diplomats gaining notable victories.
Held at Rio de Janeiro under the hospitable auspices of Julio Vargas, the Brazilian dictator, most of the conference concerned itself with the question of winning Argentine support to a resolution breaking of all diplomatic relations with the Axis powers. Secret conferences, deals and bribery, maneuvers and “diplomacy” finally succeeded in getting Argentina to sign a compromise proposal which permits each of the 21 countries to decide for itself to break off with the Axis. Seventeen have already done so and others are following in line behind the United States – the dominant power in Western Hemisphere affairs. Sumner Welles would have preferred not to compromise with Argentina, but the final result is a satisfactory victory for “Yankee imperialism.”
But the real success or failure of the conference remains to be seen. Only the coming months and years of war will show whether the United States has succeeded in its real objective: to organize a closed hemisphere economy – based on a uniform currency, the American dollar – and with America as top dog in the entire set-up. Dozens of resolutions were adopted, dealing mainly with economic and military matters. Most of them were drawn up by the United States or its closest satellites, the tiny powers of Central America (Panama, Nicaragua, etc.). Now efforts will be made to put them into practice.
If they are put into practice with success it means:

That America will have complete economic, control over the Latin American countries;
 
That America will have eliminated all its rivals (the Axis powers and England) as competitors for the trade, commerce and raw materials of the South American nations.

The entire Pan-American Conference was a game of give-and-take; of promises and agreements between the mighty imperialist Neighbor of the North and the dependent nations of the South. In exchange for the severance of economic, trade and political relations with the Axis nations, the United States has promised to make up for the loss of trade these nations formerly had with Europe and Asia.
Specifically, the United States has promised to lower trade and tariff barriers on those goods produced by South America which are duplicated and compete in the United States. Argentine beef is a notable example. Will American capitalist producers agree to this concession without a fight? We doubt it very much.
The United States has also promised to supply the Latin American nations with various priorities material on a quota basis – materials such as completed machinery which are badly needed by these countries. Likewise, since these countries have only tiny merchant marines, Uncle Sam has promised to aid them in their transportation and shipping problems.
And what are American capitalists, bankers and exporters to get in exchange for all this?

Full access to the rubber of Brazil; the tin of Bolivia; the copper and nitrates of Chile; the farm products and meats of Argentina. The right to develop (that is, own and finance) whatever industries are needed to help American war production requirements. For this purpose international corporations (cartels) are to be organized under American directions.

This means that the capitalist-imperialist class of the United States will firmly establish itself as the main power behind the economic life of these nations.
 
Trade and commerce with the neighbors of the South will be greatly facilitated by various methods. Woe to the English businessmen who are still doing business in Latin America! Their day has come. The Southern nations are to lower their tariff barriers so that American products can come in more easily, every encouragement is to be given to the American seeking a market for investment; all transport and shipping facilities are to be pooled, under American guidance; questions of banking and foreign exchange are to be simplified (primarily by making the American dollar the standard of currency); an international fund to stabilize the various currencies of the Pan American nations is to be established, etc.
 
All matters of naval, military and aerial warfare are to be handled from Washington, under American guidance.
 

Victory for Imperialism
All of this represents an undoubted victory for American imperialist interests and designs. The men of Wall Street and Washington have served notice to the entire world (including Great Britain) that they intend to subject South and Central America more than ever before to the doubtful benefits of American control.
But many barriers and stumbling blocks still lie ahead before this final aim can be achieved.
Can America make good its promise to purchase all South American surplus products; to keep these countries economically alive; to protect them from Axis intervention?
What will the people of Latin America – never known, for their friendship to American imperialism – have to say about all of this?
What will happen to the various Latin American dictators (Vargas of Brazil, Batista of Cuba, etc.) during the war? Suppose their people become tired of their dictatorial rule and attempt to upset them? Will Roosevelt intervene on the side of the dictators to thwart the democratic will of the South American peoples?
These are a few of the questions not answered at the conferences.
 



“So far as we Irish are concerned, the landing of Americans in Northern Ireland is the same thing as the landing of the Germans in Norway. We consider the landings an aggression against the Irish nation.” (Patrick Maxewell, Nationalist member of the Ulster Parliament)
*
When Hitler’s troops sneaked past the defenses of Norway and planted themselves in that country against the will of its people, the world protested this criminal act, “I did it for your own good, to protect, you from the English,” proclaimed the Fuehrer. How everyone laughed and ridiculed this lie! And correctly so.
When Hitler’s partner, Il Duce, sneaked up on Albania one dark night and occupied that country, he told the world: “I am the friend of Albania. I did it to save the country from the democracies.” And again every honest man laughed up his sleeve and called Hitler’s stooge a liar. And correctly so.
When the Japanese Mikado five years ago hurled his troops against defenseless China, he said: “I am doing this because I love you and want to save you from the white devils who are ruining your country.” Every worker knew that he too lied in his throat; that the only result of Japanese attacks upon China has been to lay waste that country – just as the attacks upon Norway, Albania, etc., have had the same result.
And even if we were to use the most high powered microscope, it would be well nigh impossible to discern any essential difference between these actions and the occupation last week of Northern Ireland by an American AEF. The fact that it was done by those who preach that this is a war for “democracy” only makes matters worse. It was aggression against the national independence of the Irish people. Why do we say this?
Because the Irish government was not consulted in the matter, and knew nothing about it – as Roosevelt has admitted – until the troops had begun to land. How do such actions differ from Hitler landing in Norway and then announcing – Boys, here I am!
Because it violates one of the principles laid down in the Atlantic Charter of Roosevelt and Churchill according to which every nation – small or big – has the right of self-determination and control over its own destiny. The government of Eire didn’t ask for the troops!
Roosevelt has already expressed his attitude toward the affair. When informed of the angry protest of President de Valera of Ireland, he wisecracked: “Live and Learn!” But, this remark holds true for those who have a chance now to observe “democracy” in practice, including the Irish people. And Churchill informed Parliament that the American troops would do Ireland “a lot of good.”
 
The Basic Issue
But some people will say: After all, the troops have landed in Northern Ireland, not in Ireland proper – and they came with the approval of the Ulster government, which is a part of Great Britain. Prime Minister Andrews – head of the Ulster government and leader of the majority Unionist Party of. Ulster – announces that he stands by the Constitution and that he welcomes the troops, who come in the cause of the United Nations.
This immediately raises the main, the real point at issue: The question of the division of Ireland which took place in 1920. By decision of the British Parliament in that year (and without consultation of the Irish people) Ireland was divided into two parts: The Irish Free State (Eire) consisting of five sixths of Ireland and 70 per cent of the population, and Ulster, 30 per cent of the population and one sixth of the country.
This division was engineered deliberately by the British to keep the people of Ireland divided. It followed no geographical, linguistic or economic lines. It was an artificial division from start to finish and a method of keeping a pistol pointed at the head of a united Irish nation.
The 1918 election showed 80 per cent of the people for a United Irish Republic; this was reaffirmed in the 1921 election and would undoubtedly be doubly reaffirmed if an election was held today. In Ulster itself (consisting of six counties) a majority of the people want unification with the Irish Free State. Ulster is run in a dictatorial manner by the Unionist Party with the help of British soldiers and bayonets. By every democratic, historic and economic right Ulster belongs with Eire and would be part of a United Irish Republic if it were not for British imperialism and militarism.
 
Andrews’ Excuse
When Prime Minister Andrews speaks of the Constitution he does not speak of any democratic law voted upon by the Irish people, but rather of a foreign Constitution forced down their throats by the British Parliament. His approval of the American troops is similar to Quisling’s approval of Nazi action in Norway. Both violate elementary democratic rights.
What are the troops doing there? What will they be used for?
They are there to put pressure on the de Valera government in Ireland.
The only effect these troops can have is to hasten the process by which Eire is being dragged into the war, against its will. Eire is caught in a trap in this World War between
two imperialists war camps. Like every small and comparatively weak country it is squeezed and pulled apart by the rivals who threaten at any moment to make it a bloody battlefield. Democratic rights, national sovereignty, free consultation, unity of peoples – all this goes by the board when the great imperialist powers are seeking to strike destructive blows at one another.
If it should ever become necessary for him, Roosevelt is capable of ordering – in conjunction with his ally, Churchill – an invasion of the Irish Free State. This is as possible as it is for Hitler to make a surprise attack upon Ireland and thus try to sneak into England via the back door.
Although it must be pointed out that the de Valera government has not established a reputation for democratic practices (for example, right now it is attempting to put through a bill in the Irish Dail which would give it military and martial law powers), nevertheless American workers and supporters of genuine democratic rights cannot but back up its protest. If the famous Irish Republican Army (IRA) ever makes the criminal mistake of allowing itself to be utilized by the German imperialists, then it is betraying Ireland’s interests as much as those who say: let the Americans and British in. The real interest of the Irish workers and the Irish people lie with neither war camp, but in the unification of all of Ireland under workers’ rule and unity with the people of all oppressed or threatened lands everywhere.
 



As part of its announced policy to give material and financial aid to those countries fighting on the Allied side, President, Roosevelt last week granted a $500,000,000 loan to the Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek.
Simultaneously, Great Britain announced that she was giving $200,000,000 to China as her contribution.
According to official statements, the object of these loans is to help China “in the successful prosecution of the war” by stabilizing her currency. The grand total of $700,000,000 – and there have been previous loans of around $200,000,000 before this – is supposed to strengthen China internally and make her a more powerful ally in the camp of the United Nations! War materials now being shipped to China over the Burma Road now find, according to Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau, their “financial counterpart.”
But is this the real purpose of these enormous loans? Seven hundred million dollars is a lot of money to “stabilize the currency” of China!
First of all, we want to remind Labor Action readers that these great capitalist “democracies” of England and the United States which today seek to rush to China’s aid were not so very long ago engaged in the highly profitable business of supplying munitions to China’s deadly enemy: Japan. Everyone knows that Japan could never have continued her five years’ war against China without the aid of the United Nations.
 
A Suspicious Fact
This fact should be enough to make us suspicious about the motives that lie behind this new-found friendship for China.
Arthur Krock, New York Times Washington correspondent, really let the cat out of the bag when he disclosed that an American member of the Committee that negotiated the loan (which has already been approved, by Congress) had proposed that Chinese soldiers should be paid directly by the United States government! This, idea was not accepted because of the protest of the Chinese negotiators. It would have been a little TOO raw!
But this proposal reveals clearly enough the status of China in the bloc of the United Nations. “Free” China – that section of the country not occupied by the Japanese – beoomes a part of the United Nations war machine; directed by and supervised by the high command of the allies. The soldiers of China who, until yesterday were fighting for the freedom of their country against Japan, are now being used by the Allies in Burma, in Singapore and other localities for the safeguarding of the British Empire.
The $700,000,000 loan is, in reality, a huge bribe to the bankers, financiers, landlords, etc., who surround Chiang Kai-shek in Chungking and who run his government. If the scandalous racketeering and grafting that goes on over the Burma Road is kept up with respect to these loans, then we can rest assured that an all-too-large proportion of the money will find its way into the pockets of the Chinese capitalists and damn little will go toward helping the people of China.
 



In two months the troops of the Japanese Empire drove their way through the “impassable swamps” and “tiger-infested jungles” of Malaya. In two days these same troops tore to bits the mighty defenses of “impregnable Singapore Island” and swarmed all over the Gibraltar of the Far East. It couldn’t happen, but it did!
Gone are the airfields, the naval guns (all pointing the wrong way!), the $400,000,000 naval base – never used except for ONE week – and built by 20 years of labor. Japan now controls the South China seas and the water exits and inlets into the Indian Ocean. Japan now runs the rubber plantations, the rice fields and the tin mines that formerly belonged to the British. Japan now is immeasurably strengthened to strike deeper into the Dutch East Indies and at Burma and India. Every military authority admits the harshness of the blow; government spokesmen talk about “the worst is yet to come.”
Churchill faces the crisis of his career – smooth – voiced words will not satisfy the critics.
Everyone asks: Why did it happen? From all sides the answers come; British bungling, stupidity, shortsightedness; inefficiency. Failure to apply “scorched earth” is cited; failure to organize a proper air defense is pointed to.
All this is true. British militarism – run by an aristocratic caste – was never notorious for brains!
But it’s all superficial and secondary. There is a reason a thousand times more important in explaining the Singapore fiasco.
Malaya and Singapore fell because the people, the 12,000,000 Malayans, Chinese and Indians – didn’t give a damn which side won.
Labor Action has published, articles explaining the attitude of these colonial peoples – explaining how, after 100 years of British exploitation in the mines and on the plantations – they felt neither side had anything to offer them in the way of democracy, independence or improved living standards, When the war began they fled to the hills and stayed there.
Nor did the British make the slightest effort to win over the people, even when the going became toughest. They wouldn’t arm them; they wouldn’t even build air raid shelters for them (those were for whites only!)
Cecil Brown said on the radio; “At Panang the British military authorities ordered the evacuation without consulting the government. They refused to evacuate anyone except Europeans. All Chinese, Malayans and Indians were left to their fate. That was the beginning of considerable difficulties with the natives in Malaya.” (You bet! That was the beginning of the end for the British, too!)
All of this this is a deliberate policy of the British.
It proves the imperialist character of the war they are conducting. Yes, they want to win – and keep their precious colonies at the same time. Sure, they want to lick the Japs – and bold on to their colonial possessions and money bags at the same time. Yes, they want the Japs out of Malaya – and themselves back in possession of the mines and plantations so they can take up again where they left off.
They want to win the war for their Empire – but not for the people and democratic freedom. So the result is that the colonial people whom they’ve exploited for centuries won’t lift a finger to help them on such terms.
Why should a Malayan, an Indian, or a Burmese lay down his life for his master who tells him in advance that he’ll get neither freedom nor independence for it. Churchill already has informed the Empire people, that “the Atlantic Charter doesn’t hold for them.” And that’s why Singapore fell so easily to the Japanese who had only to lick the relatively small handful of white defenders.
Lord Moyne, Colonial Secretary of the Empire, in a message delivered to the people of Malaya said: “In spite of grievous reverses we shall break the enemy’s power and restore to you your freedom of life.”
What colossal gall and impudence! How can the British “restore” what the people, NEVER HAD? Exploitation and slave labor they had plenty; freedom, and independence, they had plenty of nothing. The people of Malaya will interpret this statement – and correctly so – to mean that the British want to restore their slave rule. Hardly likely to induce them to resist the Japanese.
 
Fate of Colonial Peoples Involved
If all this was simply a matter of the handful of British plantation owners; merchants, capitalists and “whiskey and soda” club snobs, we would not get greatly worked up over it.
But a lot more is at stake than the useless existence of the British imperialists.
We are greatly concerned with what happens to the tens and hundreds of millions of people (workers and farmers) of these colonial countries.
The victory of Japanese imperialism represents a great catastrophe to them. Japanese rule is as brutal and savage (witness China) as any that ever existed. The Japanese militarists, after all, had much opportunity to learn from watching the British in action. They will keep the colonials down with a hand every bit as iron-fisted and murderous as that of the English and Dutch. The colonials, far from being aided or “liberated” by Japanese victories, are crushed down more mercilessly than ever.
So they have an interest in defending themselves.
 
How Can They Defend Themselves?
These people have something to lose; something more than the moneybags and property, which is about all the English lose. They have at stake that future which they have always dreamed of and worked for: a future in which ALL imperialists will have been vanquished and in which they will have gained freedom and self-government. So they want to defend themselves. They want to keep the Japanese or Germans out of their land. But the British offer them nothing but continuation of the sarne old imperialist racket. They can’t turn to their rulers. But they can turn to themselves!
They can defend their country in the manner urged by the revolutionary socialists who live and work among them: Defend their country by their own independent initiative and action! Defend themselves by organizing their own People’s Army and demanding the arming of the population (a.mass arming, not giving pistols to a few thousand Chinese boys, as the British did in Singapore). Defend themselves by running out the British – or any other imperialist who attacks them. Defend themselves by bringing out the flag of national liberation and independence; by organizing their own government of the native people, by the native people and for the native people; by organizing their own workers’ and peasants’ government.
 



A group of American newspaper reporters have reached the Portuguese city of Lisbon, where they will be exchanged for Axis internees in the United States. All of these men were prisoners in Germany and Italy from the date of America’s entrance into the Second World. War.
In the comparative freedom of London these men have sent a series of dispatches describing conditions of wartime life in the Axis nations. Even if we allow for a certain patriotic exaggeration, it is clear that their descriptions represent a good deal of the truth.
In great detail they describe the enormous shortages of goods, the intense and ever-growing rationing of all normally used commodities, the growth of Black Market racketeering to wholesale proportions; the discontent of the workers with the unfair distribution of war burdens upon them, etc.
The military machines of Germany and Italy are both obviously on the down-grade. Not only is this due to the enormous losses of on the Russian front (particularly for Germany), but to shortages of war materials – oil, coal, magnesium, copper, tin, rubber, material for uniforms, etc. As Reynolds Packard, one of the correspondents, points out, Hitler maintains his economic stranglehold on Italy by supplying 1,000,000 tons of coal to her each month.
They are careful to emphasize, however, that the German war machine is still a formidable force with 12,000,000 men in the fighting services: 7,600,000 in the Army, 1,500,000 in the Air Force and Navy, and 3,000,000 in the Labor Corps. Joseph W. Grigg states that Germany still has 35,000 planes, but the monthly output has dropped to between 1,100 and 2,500.
Although reserve supplies of food and basic raw materials still manage to hold out, the descriptions of life in the fascist countries (and particularly in the occupied territories) indicate that livings standards are rapidly approaching an all-time low for Europe. There is very little tobacco, nightly blackouts are longer to save electricity, restaurants close at 10 p.m., two eggs a month are allotted in Germany (an egg is 28 cents in Italy!), all fairs and expositions in Germany are cancelled, metal coins are withdrawn from circulations, seats in the Berlin and Breslau trolley cars were removed to permit more overcrowding, etc., etc.
 
Problem of Foreign Workers
It is worth noting that the problem of foreign workers dragooned into Germany from Belgium, Holland, France, etc., by all the sly tricks of the German Gestapo has become a major concern of the Nazis. Every method is used to keep the foreign workers apart from the German workers. Nazi decrees forbid association, talking, inviting one another to their homes, etc. The idea is put out that the foreign workers are a defeated people, inferior to the German workers. But, as Labor Action, in the column of Europe in Revolt has reported on numerous occasions, this effort to keep them apart does not work.
Italy appears to be worst off, with the greatest shortages and the lowest military and civilian morale. People are completely indifferent to the war and get no satisfaction out of even the Japanese victories. Mussolini’s prestige is lower than ever in his history. Living standards in Italy are apparently almost as bad as those in the occupied territory of Poland, France, Belgium and the Balkans. As Herbert L. Matthews puts it: “It would be a great mistake to believe that the Italians are any less brave than other races. The point is that they simply will not fight unless their heart is in it.” Clearly, there is no war enthusiasm inside the Axis nations.
Europe, in its third year of bloody struggle, is approaching the break-down point. The standards of living have reached just about the lowest point possible without a general collapse along the economic front; the production of war equipment and war products has reached its highest possible peak; there are many signs that the methods of circulation and distribution (especially the German railroads) have begun to disintegrate. It is obvious that another war winter in Europe can only mean mass starvation, epidemics and a chaos such as was never known even in the last war. This seems to be the general meaning of the numerous details described by the released correspondents.
This is the state of affairs to which Europe and its people have come as a result of capitalism and its imperialist war. Only the revolt of the people, headed by the workers of Europe, can lift the nations of Europe out of their collapse and misery and put an end to the war. The present deterioration cannot continue.
 



A copy of the British New Leader containing a report on the annual Easter conference of the British independent Labor Party has just reached Labor Action. Approximately 100 delegates, reported to be one of the largest delegations in recent ILP history, attended the conference at Morecambe, England.
There appears to have been no serious or important change in the ILP leadership or position as described in the May Day issue of Labor Action. John McGovern, parliamentary spokesman for the ILP, remains chairman of the party, with John McNair as general secretary. The national committee is practically the same as before.
The most important debate occurred on the so-called “basic resolution” put forward by the party leadership. The resolution, stating the ILP’s opposition to the imperialist war and embodying the program of the Socialist Britain Now campaign was adopted after long discussion.
Amendments for a negotiated peace were defeated, as well as various amendments of a “Trotskyist-Cannonite” character. The latter amendments urged “the sending of arms to Soviet Russia under workers’ control” and “workers’ control of the armed forces.” Both got approximately 15 out of the 100 votes, showing a substantial minority. The amendment relating to shipment of arms to Russia was vehemently opposed as leading to the establishment of a second imperialist war front. The Trotskyist group limited itself apparently to advocacy of these two two special “Cannon” additions to revolutionary socialist principles!
The most important addition to the resolution was that which declared, in essence, that:

Socialism can come only through the action of the workers themselves.
 
We must fight to force the trade union leaders, the Labor Party bureaucrats and the Stalinists to break their reactionary alliance with the national government of Churchill.
 
We advocate nationalization of industry and workers’ control of production.
 
We must strengthen and build the independent shop stewards movement.

In the discussion of the resolution about the Soviet Union, all offered amendments were defeated and the resolution itself was adopted 72 to 26. The main point of the resolution was that the ILP’s position of defense of the Soviet Union can best be advanced by fighting for a socialist Britain. There is no real analysis or attack on the Stalin regime, nor the Soviet state in the resolution.
The orthodox Trotskyist amendment – similar to the ideas of The Militant – was defeated by 72 to 29 votes.
This resolution is undoubtedly the most superficial and evasive of all those adopted at the conference.
Other resolutions adopted included one of solidarity with the socialists of India and a demand for immediate independence fpr that country; along with a statement of greetings to English pacifists.
In summary: The most important step forward was the elaboration of the Socialist Britain Now campaign with some concrete details. Politically, the ILP made no advance toward clarification and its leadership remains in the hands of the same group of Parliamentarians and centrist Brockways.
 



Meeting in the city of Allahabad last week, the conservative executive committee of the Indian National Congress adopted the pacifist resolution put forward by Mahatma Gandhi which declared that, while opposing an invasion of India by Japan, “Such resistance can only take the form of non-violent non-cooperation, as the British government prevented organization of national defenses by the people In any other way.”
The British authorities who rule the country are also joining (in their own way) with the supporters of Gandhi and Nehru in making it easy for the Japanese to conquer the country. Anxious to prevent a defense of India by the people themselves, they have ordered the provincial governments which have been organizing home guards for defense to arm them with “wooden batons”! The conservative nationalists and the British imperialists sabotage a revolutionary defense of India for different reasons but the results can only be the same – the tragedy of a Japanese victory over the Indian people.
Gandhi is correct when he accuses Britain of preventing the organization of a people’s defense, but that makes it only more necessary for the nationalists to take charge of their own defense. However, Gandhi and his capitalist supporters among the Indians are unwilling to go so far and take such responsibility. Having failed to come to terms with Cripps in the recent negotiations, they have now probably decided to passively accept conquest of India by Japanese imperialism. Since British imperialism has nothing to offer them, since it refused to make any concessions to them, the native capitalist class that stands behind Gandhi now feels that it can perhaps strike a better bargain with the Japanese. Therefore, it proposes “non-resistance.” What could be more helpful to Japan in its march of conquest?
With the rout of the British and Chinese forces in Burma the Japanese are in an extremely favorable position to advance on India by two routes – overland from Burma into the hostile, anti-British native states on the border and into the equally anti-British province of Bengal; by sea against Ceylon and Calcutta from bases in the Andaman Islands and Burma. The fact is that the invasion of India has all but begun and can actually start at any hour! India Needs Leadership
But India’s hour of crisis finds the great population of that country still without leadership. The imperialists of Britain, now reinforced by the United States, have withdrawn the Cripps plan and are sitting tight, preparing to “defend” their colony by the same methods they employed in Malaya, Burma, East Indies, etc. That is, a purely military struggle, without the support of the peopee, with a small handful of white troops doing the fighting amid an unfriendly, neutral or hostile population. What chance has India to ward off the Japanese under such circumstances?
The Indian Nationalist leadership, dominated by conservatives or open reactionaries of the Indian capitalist class, has likewise failed to rally the people. The Congress leadership today is divided into three mutually warring groups.
First, the Gandhi group (majority). They – with an eye to the future – propose to remain on friendly terms with the Japanese. They are “non-resistant” to Japanese imperialist attack. They will not scorch their private property for Britain; they will fight to see it preserved and continued – if necessary, even under Japanese rule.
Second, the Rajagopalichariar group (minority). This group, coming from the key seaport of Madras, wishes to accept the Cripps proposals and openly support British rule and the British war effort. It urges a complete surrender on the part of the Congress Party to Great Britain and is the most conservative of the leading conservative groups.
And finally, the most shameful and pitiful group of all, that of Nehru. Standing in between the above mentioned leaders, Nehru has nothing to offer but tears (his own tears!) He neither wishes Gandhi’s capitulation to Japan, nor Rajagopalichariar’s capitulation to England. But, as his many and confusing statements to the press testify, he has no independent program to offer the people. With invasion imminent, it is hardly likely that Nehru can continue his balancing act.
This Congress “leadership” that we have described is today completely Impotent and reactionary. It has failed to issue a single directive to the people; it has ignored the 385 million Indians at the most crucial moment. Although the time for independent class action on the part of the people themselves grows shorter with each day; although the difficulties of organizing a Peoples Militia of workers and poor people in defense of the country increase, nevertheless, the socialists and revolutionists of India are still hard at work advancing their program of action: Defense of India against Japan by the people, independently of British imperialism.
 



“British capitalism cannot fight Nazism. All it can do is wage an old-fashioned imperialist war – and wage it inefficiently at that.” (Walter Padly, in the British New Leader)
*
It is as clear as daylight that England is rapidly approaching a crisis in its history.
No country can undergo a series of disastrous military and political defeats, year after year, without experiencing the most serious internal reactions. This is happening in England today. The fact that things are – at the moment – rather quiet should not fool us for a moment. It is a typical “quiet before the storm.”
To summarize what has happened to England in almost three years of warfare is a simple matter.

The unwieldy but mighty British Empire, ruling 550 millions of people and providing the economic and political basis upon which England itself has rested for centuries, is experiencing its dying agonies. A goodly section of it is already gone (either by direct conquest into Japanese-Axis hands; or by economic conquest into American hands). The rest of the empire (India, Ceylon and Africa) are faced with imminent invasion. Britannia no longer rules the waves; the “sun that never sets” now casts but a few dim shadows, These are FACTS, not opinions.
 
The ruling class of Great Britain (headed by Churchill) has proved itself an utter military and political failure. The latest (and probably most disastrous) of its defeats was the abysmal failure of the Cripps mission to India. England’s capitalist class not only cannot organize the nation’s war industries for all-out war efforts; not only cannot make a revolutionary-political appeal to the peoples of Europe and Germany (to whom it offers, for instance, the “Free French” monarchist, de Gaulle!); it cannot even arrive at a temporary settlement or agreement with the most conservative nationalists of India (Nehru and Gandhi). Truly, such a leadership cannot be expected to offer a program to England’s people now. This is precisely why Churchill speaks so rarely (and why his eloquence becomes even more vague and vaporous with each new speech). The great “Man of the Hour” is fumbling in the dark, seeking any wand (Cripps!) upon which to lean his tired, heavy weight.
 

People Anxious for Great Changes
Yet, as Harold Laski wrote on January 19 in the Reynolds News: “I doubt whether there has been a time in our history since the Chartist movement when the mind of the masses was either prepared or so anxious for great changes as now.”
This is the essence of Britain’s approaching crisis: the revolutionary mood of the people as contrasted with the bankruptcy of their ruling class. This is why England’s crisis is a class crisis; a political crisis in which the workers are pitted against the boss, capitalist class.
In the midst of this situation there are only two left-wing labor organizations that present a serious political program of action to the British working class. The traditional party of the. workers, the British Labor Party, is deeply involved in the crisis itself since it has become completely tied up (by way of the Bevinses, Attlees and Morrisons) with the Churchill government. The conservative leaders of British labor have placed their fate completely in the hands of the tottering politicians and bankrupts of England.
The two organizations we refer to are (1) the Workers International League (Fourth International) and (2) the Independent Labor Party.
Unfortunately, the WIL – if its newspaper, Socialist Appeal, and its publications are any evidence – does not appear to have very much influence or support among the more politically advanced British workers. While its political program is undoubtedly more correct than that of the ILP, it seems to suffer from a mechanical sectarianism and political “orthodoxy” that are reflected in the abstract slogans and its lifeless repetition, “to the letter” of the policies advocated by The Militant in America, its major political effort is directed toward readmittance to the British Labor Party, from which it was expelled shortly after the war began.
More important from the standpoint of immediate developments in England is the British Independent Labor Party (publisher of the New Leader), many extracts from whose press and publications we have occasionally printed in Labor Action.
 
ILP Has Grown Considerably
There is no doubt whatsoever that the ILP has grown considerably in size and influence since the war began. This is proved by the character of its paper, the New Leader, by reports on the activities of the ILP and its members, by the publicity and notice it is given in the capitalist press of Great Britain. The ILP plays a fairly important role today in the life of England.
What is this party like? What does it do? What does it stand for? Since the ILP will be heard from increasingly as England’s crisis grows, it is important to learn all we can about this organization. The ILP is a growing organization which has gained most of its support because of its opposition to the war and its program for a “Socialist Britain Now.” It participates actively in the British labor movement and has many prominent trade unionists as members; it is the principal organizing force behind Britain’s shop steward movement, a movement which is now in violent clash with the boss-collaboration, labor-management committees of the English Stalinists; it has an active group of spokesmen in the British Parliament and takes part regularly in local and national elections.
As a sign of its political strength we can cite two recent elections, one in Scotland, the other in Wales. In the Edinburgh contest, the ILP candidate got 1,950 (29 per cent) of the votes. In the Wales election, where Fenner Brockway, editor of the New Leader, opposed the “Colonel Blimp” candidnte of Churchill’s cabinet. Sir Griggs, the ILP candidate got 3,300 votes (26 per cent of the total). This later election was of national significance and had the British Tories greatly disturbed.
 
ILP Stands for the Third Camp
Many of the political ideas and proposals of the ILP (as contained in their publications) are of a genuinely revolutionary character. The party has consistently denounced the war as an imperialist fraud and berated the Labor Party for its support to the war. It stands for the “Third Camp” of workers’ action against the two war camps. It has carried on excellent exposes of boss profiteering, black market scandals, imperialist dirty work in the colonies, etc. Its immediate program of action is based upon the unfair and uneven burden of the war which rests upon the English workers. The party has likewise agitated for freedom to all the British colonies and – particularly in the Parliamentary speeches of McGovern – has yanked hard at the Tory-imperialist tail of Winston Churchill.
At the moment, the ILP has launched a campaign known as the “Socialist Britain Now” campaign. This has received wide publicity and is apparently being conducted with some success, since it answers the needs of the hour. There are five principal slogans in the campaign:




Equality of War Burdens, by taxation, price control, etc.
Workers’ Control of Industry.
Liberation of the Colonies of the British Empire.
Aid to Soviet Russia.
A Socialist Peace Offensive by a British socialist government.




Likewise, the ILP campaigns militantly against growing reactionary tendencies in the country. As its resolution presented at the party’s annual Easter convention (reports of which are not yet available here) states:
“As this war develops, the economic and political structure of Britain approximates steadily toward a dictatorship. Military and industrial conscription, the prohibition of strikes, the tying down of workers to their jobs, etc. ...”
There is no doubt that the ILP is receiving its response because it has formulated answers to many of the questions being asked by Britain’s workers.
We cannot but approve and welcome every militant step forward on the part of Britain’s working class, particularly in view of the severe situation that is coming. To cover up their bankruptcy there are indications that the British rulers will attempt to institute in full some sort of a brutal, military dictatorship. Is the ILP fully prepared to meet this, can it lead Britain’s workers to success?
 
Some Doubts and Criticisms
Here, while fully recognizing all the excellent and progressive work done by this party, we must frankly voice our doubts and criticisms. We do not agree with the ILP on many things – obviously, for example, its position of defense of the Soviet Union. Likewise, its inability to clearly formulate what it means by its “Peace Campaign,” as contrasted with the “Appeasement – come to terms with Hitler” campaign of a group of British rulers and capitalists.
The ILP is confused and contradictory on many important political points. This reflects the confused character of its membership, many of whom are religious pacifists, reformists and reformers, conscientious objectors, etc. For the ILP is not a really unified, homogeneous revolutionary Party. It ranges all the way from the conservative Parliamentarians (led by the erratic James Maxton) to revolutionary socialist militants, with experienced jugglers and political tight-rope walkers like Fenner Brockway balancing the odd assortments together. Clearly, such a party is in process of evolution and will itself experience many internal crises and difficulties. Various resolutions offered by local branches to the Easter Conference showed this. They ranged all the way from open pro-war resolutions, to resolutions urging preparations for a Workers Red Army in England!
Labor Action, as in the past, will continue to report the development and activities of the ILP with all the interest and attention it deserves. The coming year in England will determine whether the ILP can measure up to the great revolutionary needs or whether it will befall the same fate as the Spanish POUM and the French PSOP (both similar political organizations). These parties failed to win political clarity and, as a consequence, perished in the political crisis that struck them. The ILP still has the time and possibility of learning those lessons.
 



The first task of the moment is a sober statement as to precisely what has occurred in the War of the Pacific and in the imperialist camps themselves since the violent eruption of Japanese military-imperialism on December 7, 1941.
But even before that let us remind the reader of two important facts – namely, that the United Nations powers (then known as the ABCD countries) had calculatingly brought the Japanese infection to a head by their attempted policy of economic boycott, encirclement, and strangulation, and secondly, that Japanese imperialism had been marching toward brutal conflict with its main rivals since the 1931 Manchurian invasion. The war today is the inevitable inter-imperialist dash for Pacific hegemony and Asiatic colonial possessions.
Five months have resulted in sensational and unforeseen results; five months have underscored major revolutionary insights with respect to the character of the war; five months have forced the “Colonial Question” to the forefront with an acuity it has never before possessed.
(1) Japan has smashed to pieces, for the time being, the economic chain that had been forged around her. “A few weeks after her first stabs at us in the Pacific she was already within sight of self-sufficiency in the essential resources and raw materials of war.” (Edgar Snow in the Saturday Evening Post) The United Nations and particularly the United States find themselves in precisely the position they had wished to place their opponent. Japan’s food crop (rice) has been secured; adequate sources of chrome, wood pulp, hemp, coal, iron, rubber, tin, zinc, lead, etc., are in her grasp; the oil for her war machine is (assuming the ability to hold Java, Borneo and Sumatra) available in great quantity. We shall later deal with the highly important question of Japan’s ability to exploit her conquests. The essential point is that the blockade is decisively broken.
(2) The underestimation of Japanese strength along economic and military lines (an error which revolutionary Marxists themselves committed) has been overshadowed only by the gross overestimation of the power of the old imperialist empires. The effect of this double jolt largely accounts for the “low morale” of the United Nations and the emergence of independent Asiatic nationalism.
(3) Three Old World empires, hoary with tradition and fat with the accumulated blood and sweat of their colonial slave populations, have been either shattered entirely or severely jolted. France has lost its vital Asiatic possession (Indo-China); Dutch imperialism has lost not only its empire, but even the “Motherland” to the Axis powers; the monumental British Empire rocks ever more shakily on its decrepit knees.
 
The Allied Military Disaster
The full extent of the Allied military disaster can be realized by pointing to the following: In January 1941, The New International outlined the immediate program of imperialist conquest as planned by the Japanese high command: (a) Final occupation of Shanghai – achieved. (b) Occupation of Hong Kong and ousting of Britain from the Pearl River valley – achieved. (c) Seizure of French Indo-China – achieved. (d) Singapore-Malaya conquest – achieved. (e) The Dutch East Indies – achieved. In addition, the Philippine Islands or the most important islands of this archipelago are in Japanese hands.
Furthermore, Thailand (Siam) has been brought within the Japanese “Co-Asiatic Prosperity Sphere”; the important parts of Burma lie occupied; the supply road to China has been cut; a host of lesser strategic islands of the Pacific and South China groups have been occupied (Wake, Solomon, Andaman, etc.); New Guinea partially occupied; telling blows dealt Allied naval and military forces. Australia and India are threatened with invasion. Clearly, the Oriental wing of the Axis has gained far more out of its five months old war than its partners have gained in 30 months!
(4) Most important of all, the complete political and social bankruptcy of the United Nations has been laid bare not merely to their own peoples at home but, above all, to the scores of millions of colonial people. Anglo-American-Dutch imperialism proved incapable of rallying to its banner a single section or segment of the colonial masses. Conducting an imperialist war, the Allies sought to win (or hold their ground) only and solely on a military and imperialist basis. The Atlantic Charter, already proved to be a hypocritical fraud in the Atlantic territories of the world, was not even extended in the form of a “Pacific Charter.” Indeed, the very suggestion of such a formal gesture provoked the utmost resistance!
 
A Bankrupt Policy
Furthermore, the “democratic” imperialists persist in assuring us well in advance that their future policy will be as bankrupt and impotent as their past. The objective of the proposed offensive against Japan, we are informed, is to re-establish the status quo. That is the sole “perspective” offered the world – a return to the past, a continuation of the old system.
(5) And lastly, the Pacific War has brought the “Colonial Question” sharply to the fore. One of the prime distinctions between the First and Second World Wars is the concrete posing of this problem in the present war. Only now has the colonial world itself been directly dragged into the struggle between the camps. Now the war stands at the gates of the world’s greatest colony, the sub-continent of India (untouched in the last war) with its 385 millions. In its dying stage, world capitalism struggles for the wealth and resources of the colonies in a direct and immediate sense, thus further testifying to its inner crisis and desperation.
So much for the results and problems uncovered by five months of Pacific warfare. Naturally, the military disasters of the United Nations have occupied the role of primary importance. For this reason it is necessary to ask the question, Why the defeats? The answer to this question is probably the reply to a corollary question: Can the United Nations reconquer the lost territories?
A variety of reasons, all of them with a varying element of truth, but all distinguished by the same superficially, have been given. But the “democratic” bourgeoisie must shun the basic and real truth because it cannot reveal its lack of a social and political program for the Pacific. So, the explanations vary from “British stupidity” to “Singapore mentality” to “Japanese treachery” to “lack of airpower” to “failure of co-ordinated action” to “weakness of reserves,” etc., etc.
Unfortunately, these are not explanations, they are descriptions. Each “explanation” leaves the question unanswered and only raises the additional question, “Why the Singapore mentality,” “Why the failure of co-ordinated action,” etc. All are equally pitched on the military plane, all ignore the rôle of the colonial masses in the territories involved, all assume only the existence of numerically insignificant white-imperialist troops (backed by small units of privileged native forces) and pose the entire problem around the military effectiveness or ineffectiveness of these foreign divisions.
 
The One-Trip Specialists
If we had only had thirty more flying fortresses over Java, wails the newspaper PM. A few hundred more tanks in the Malayan jungles would have done the trick, complain the bourgeois journalists. Edgar Snow, a man who knows the Far East more thoroughly than a thousand Zugsmiths, Randaus and other one-trip specialists, riddles this absurd concept.
“Even if we could mass superior naval and air power on all Japan’s far-flung frontiers, would it be enough to overcome an enemy winning his battles on the land? Against us the Japanese had five to six million men trained and ready for mobilization. The indications are that they must have activized, if not already deployed in battle areas, some 3,000,000 .... Where are we going to find 3,000,000, or even 1,000,000, Occidental troops to keep Japan away from our last-ditch bases in the Orient – from which we must later launch a counter-offensive?”
Snow hints at the heart of the question. Whenever faced by superior military forces (and Japanese imperialism has every advantage in this respect over the “democratic” imperialisms), the United Nations are doomed to defeat unless they succeed in mobilizing (in action, in military action) the only force in the Pacific that can give them military superiority – the colonial peoples. It is this failure, this total and utter failure, that alone suffices to explain the past four months. For today we must recognize a decisive lesson of the Pacific War: namely, the inner bankruptcy of the Tory-imperialist ruling class of the British, Dutch and American powers has reached such a stage of political and moral decadence that it has attained an independent and specific weight of its own. In particular, the decline of the British Empire is no longer an abstraction – it is written in the surrender at Hong Kong; the fiasco at Singapore; the crisis in Australia; the stalemate in India.
The “democratic” bourgeoisie has recognized, after four months, that it is impossible to ignore completely the political and social problems of the Far Eastern War. To do so would only mean to deepen and extend the series of unbroken defeats. Therefore, realizing the critical nature of the situation, the United Nations, headed by the United States, have come forward with various “solutions” and “proposals” aimed at arousing the support and enthusiasm of the colonial masses. These propositions, constituting an effort to come to terms with the native bourgeoisies of the respective colonies, seek to create the illusion of a genuine transfer of power to the people, without arousing or stimulating their independent action. This is the objective of the Cripps, the Chiang Kai-sheks, the Johnsons, etc. All such plans, however, are either doomed in advance or – at best – will be acceptable to small and indecisive segments of the population. None offer the only acceptable proposal: liberation and self-determination now; an ending of imperialist exploitation today.
 
Ineffectiveness of Allied Propaganda
The deterioration of United Nations prestige and of “white” influence in the Asiatic world has gone much further than the “democratic” leaders will admit. It is only necessary to cite the recent experience to prove this point. Let us take three examples, Malaya, Java and Burma, as evidence: (1) In Malaya the colonial population of Chinese, Tamil Indians and Malayans were oblivious to Allied propaganda and its appeals. All authorities admit they maintained a cool neutrality (even the pro-Kuomintang Chinese) and lifted not a finger to help defender or invader. (2) In Java the attitude of the 45,000,000 Javanese appears to have been openly hostile to the “doughty Dutch,” without becoming overtly pro-Japanese. Refusal to obey orders, open contempt for the imperialist authorities, envelopment of the United Nations troops in an atmosphere of ill-concealed hostility, etc. Such are the meager reports of the fleeing Dutch. (3) In Burma it must be recognized that anti-British feeling among the Burmese reached the stage of positive action, particularly among the masses of Rangoon and in the Irawaddy district, where the 1931 peasant insurrection was so cruelly crushed. A section of the Burmese people – deceived by demagogic Japanese propaganda; thirsting for revenge on their ancient tormentors, the white imperialists; and under the influence of the historically backward Burmese nationalists – have openly sided with the invaders. The Japanese succeeded in organizing independent Burmese forces to fight by their side against the British, Indians and Chinese. Thus, the only action to date of the colonial masses, or a section thereof, has been favorable to Japanese imperialism! This undeniable fact should be of the deepest significance. It is the net product and result of “democratic” imperialist rule in Asia.
We are thus forced to draw our first important conclusion. Given the present disposition and relation of military forces (that is, the admitted superiority of the Japanese in this field), and given the historic inability of the United Nations to rally the colonial peoples to their side through a freedom-arousing political and social program of liberation, the United Nations can only enjoy an unbroken series of defeats. Only the achievement of military equality can halt the Japanese advance; only military superiority could bring about the offensive.
 
What Is Japan’s Real Strength?
The fruits of capitalism, instead of falling down through society, were concentrated in the Mitsui, the Mitsubishi and the other great family interests that controlled about half of the nation’s industry and trade. (Fortune, February 1942)
We have mentioned above the serious underestimation of Japanese strength of which all analysts have been guilty. Upon what was this error based? What is the real strength and capabilities of Japanese imperialism? And, above all, can Dai Nippon, the Empire of Japan, establish its imperial rule in place of the empires it is tumbling into the dust? Is the estimation of Japanese capitalism given at the Founding Conference of the Fourth International correct – namely:
“Insular Japan, in the era of the twilight of capitalism, proceeding from a weak economic base, is debarred historically from achieving the imperial destiny of which her ruling classes dream. Underlying the imposing facade of Japanese imperialism are fatal organic weaknesses which have already been aggravated by the military conquest of Manchuria. The resources of Japanese capitalism have been proved inadequate for the task of empire building”?
Bearing in mind that the Japanese ruling class has succeeded in concealing the true state of affairs in Japan perhaps more successfully than any other ruling class of the world, let us try to accurately re-state the nature of Japanese imperialism.
Japan is an advanced, capitalist-imperialist nation – the last to emerge on the world scene. Because of the failure of its capitalism to come to power as the result of a bourgeois-democratic revolution that would sweep away the decisive elements of Asiatic feudalism, the economy and state regime of Japan is overlapping and combined. That is, its decisive industry is modern, monopoly-finance capital (the “Two Families”), with an enormous remnant of primitive and backward handicraft, home and village industry. Its agrarian population, upon which rests the preponderant burden of the wars conducted by the generals, is not feudal, but rather a smallholding, pauperized peasantry. The Japanese political superstructure is a unique and confused one, reflecting not only the combined character of its rotten base, but also the various cliques and groups that struggle within its shadows for supremacy: the finance capitalists, the military and naval castes organized into the secret societies, the fascist (in the European sense) elements, the bourgeois democrats, etc. The superstructure is extremely unstable and its contending elements (primarily the finance capitalist-imperialists against the generals-officers caste – the Samurai) can only succeed in a momentary unification around a program of external wars of colonial conquest. [1] The periodic violent outbreaks reveal these deep-going inter-ruling class fights.
 
Organic Weakness of Japanese Economy
The organic weaknesses inherent in Japanese capitalism have made its life span particularly violent and explosive; have driven it to a continuous series of wars since the first Sino-Japanese war in the 1890s; have driven it far along the road of economic autarchy and political totalitarianism. These weaknesses and contradictions are primarily four in nature: (a) Necessity of seeking all vital raw materials beyond its natural frontiers (Japan, up to 1941, had to import 80 per cent of the twenty-five strategic raw materials listed by Fortune as necessary for modern war; one-half its copper, zinc, tin and scrap iron had to be imported; one-fourth its pig iron; one-third its aluminum; three-fourths of its iron ore; 90 per cent of its lead and all its mercury and nickel). (b) A weak economic base at home, lacking heavy industries (iron and steel, chemicals, etc.). (c) A dependency on its export trade abroad out of which to accumulate profits to purchase the needed raw materials. (d) An inability to accumulate surplus capital with which to develop and exploit foreign conquests and for foreign investment.
In order for Japan to survive at all it was necessary to take certain measures, both industrial and political, to overcome the weight of these initial handicaps. It is our ignoring of the important industrial changes that largely accounts for the underestimation of Japan’s power. These changes have been proceeding roughly since the last war:

A shift from agriculture and light, consumers’ goods industry to heavy industry (iron and steel, munitions and ship building). Unfortunately, no figures are available on Japanese industry since 1937, so that it is only possible to report this trend. But, for example, Japan entered the war with a merchant marine of five to six million tons (the NYK Line alone had over one million tons of shipping) and a modern, fast, oil-burning fleet of freighters. It is apparently capable of producing one million tons annually at the Yokohama and Kobe shipyards for replacements of shipping losses. Japan manufactures about 400 to 600 planes a month. As an indication of the conversion to a war economy, Fortune cites the fact that the annual total of producers’ goods (machinery, metals and chemicals) increased two and a half times between 1930 and 1939; while production of consumers’ goods (textiles, gasoline for private use, etc.) fell correspondingly.
 
By a system of rationing of fuel, food (rice), textiles, leather, etc. Japan has reduced living standards to its barest essentials, for many years. Concurrent with this, stock piles of vital raw materials have been carefully built up (with the blessing and assistance of American, Dutch and English business men!) over a 10-year period. Groves formerly given over to the silk mulberry tree have been converted into grain fields while scores of thousands of workers in the Osaka textile and cotton mills have been shifted to various phases of war production. In the totalitarianization of its economy, Japan had a long start over its rivals!
 

Japan’s Secret Societies
Politically, the drive and impulsion needed by an imperialist class anxious to expand at all costs has been given by the secret societies and military castes that now fully dominate the life of the country. These groups and cliques – shot through and through by narrow ambitions and intrigues; seeking to preserve the independent position and traditional privileges of the ancient feudal institutions from which they have descended – these Samurai societies of “God-Sent Troops,” “The Black Dragon,” “The Young Officers,” “The Blood Brotherhood League,” etc., nevertheless have a contemporary and positive role to play. They are not merely feudal hangovers!
That rôle can be accurately described as equivalent to that of the Nazi Party in Germany – comparable not in methods, but in objectives. These societies as a whole constitute a Japanese fascist ersatz; an Oriental-Asiatic version of European fascism. They seek to dominate and direct the life of the country (its social life and the education of its youth) along the proper totalitarian lines; they seek to compromise (by whatever means necessary – peacefully or violently) the disputes and conflicts within the ruling class for the general advantages of expansionism; they seek to give Japanese imperialism a consistent, clear and historic program, a plan of conquest; they operate as a “centralized state within the Japanese state.” Just as Japanese capital is highly concentrated, so state power and control is highly concentrated in their ruthless hands. The pitiful effort of former Premier Konoye to institute a fascist state apparatus more closely resembling that of Italy and Germany (Shintesei) had to be abandoned precisely because the needs that such a “new structure” might serve are already being carried out. A large share of initial Japanese success is due to the success of these reactionary groups in canalizing and concentrating the nation’s energies behind their sinister schemes.
So much for the reasons behind Japan’s ability to momentarily overcome its fatal inner weaknesses. But what of its future? Will this hold true then? In a word, can Japan achieve its dreamed-of Asiatic Empire; its Co-Prosperity Sphere; its unification of Asia under one roof?
 
The Newly-Acquired Resources
Our answer is a categoric No, but not for the reasons that are most commonly advanced, namely, overwhelming military and naval defeat by the United Nations. It is not our task to engage in military prophecies concerning the war between Japan and the United Nations. But the question of Japan’s possibilities must be carefully considered. To begin with, it would appear to superficial observation that Japan has already gained more than the material prerequisites for the upbuilding of a great empire. In the conquered lands there rests 90 per cent of the world’s natural rubber supply and 75 per cent of its tin; an oversupply of rice and tin; copper, iron, manganese, timber and rope in the Philippine Islands; zinc, oil and lead in Burma; nickel mines in the Celebes; gold, aluminum, iron, quinine and more oil in Java, etc. Says a New York Post writer (March 11): “Fabulous quantities of other items such as coal, wool, hides and skins, chemicals and hemp are produced in the conquered lands.” All of Japan’s raw material requirements are apparently well taken care of.
But obviously the matter is not so simple. In the first place, Japan faces an inevitable counter-attack which will seek to recapture these regions. Here the Japanese have a political weapon in their hands – or, more accurately, the imperialist policy of the United Nations has placed it there. Namely, the dread and fear of the colonial populations against a return of the old, despised Dutch, French and British white rulers. Let no one think for a moment that demagogic Japanese imperialist policy will not seek to frustrate military counter-attack by gaining the support of a substantial section of the population. It will play on every open and hidden fear of the masses against their former masters; it will make every necessary temporary concession to the colonial bourgeoisie; it will utilize every demagogy to secure a base in the population. Already, we can see this process in Malaya, where the Japanese are reported as attempting to establish the Malayan minority as the favored race over and against the Chinese and Tamils. It is clear that the road back cannot possible be as rapidly and easily traversed by the United Nations as the road forward was traveled by the Japanese forces. The Allies, by their past reputation and their failure to propose colonial liberation in case of victory, have played into the hands of their opponents. The Japanese attack, based on the lying slogan of “Asia for the Asiatics,” will be replaced by the slogan of “Asia must remain with the Asiatics” in an effort to fend off the counter-attack.
 
Can Japan Erect an Empire?
But even if Japanese militarism should succeed in beating off the counter-attack of its rivals, we would still reply No to the question; Can Japan erect an empire to replace the old, defeated empires?

All of Japan’s needs will not have been satisfied. Such manufactured goods as machine tools, special steels, industrial and explosive chemicals, automotive and aircraft parts, iron and steel semi-finished products, completed machinery, ball bearings, transportation equipment, etc. (all needed either to prosecute the war and/or necessary for the exploitation of the conquered territories) are still not available to the victors. They do not exist in the conquered territories, which are raw material producing areas. Only in the great Nagpur-Chota plateau of India (producing one and a half million tons of finished steel and two million tons of pig iron) can Japan reach a section of the colonial world that has a substantial iron and steel output from its hearths.
 
The conflicts and disputes within the Japanese ruling circles, momentarily submerged by the early victories, will and are emerging with renewed force. The military castes (anxious to continue the expansion, their appetites growing with the eatingl) will clash with the finance-capitalists and the merchants (anxious to settle down and exploit with profit the huge territories already gained). Even within the ranks of the military circles there are already disputes between those who would continue the advance and those who would go over to “consolidation and building up the defenses.”
 
The most important and basic reason militating against the imperialist success of Japan lies in the character of its colonial exploitation. Japanese imperialism bears a far closer resemblance to the early merchant and industrial imperialism of England and Holland (both of which sought to achieve a primitive accumulation of capital at the expense of the colonies in order to industrialize at home), than it does to modern finance-capital imperialism.

This fact, proven most significantly by the great failures in Korea and Manchuria (see The New International, January 1941), flows from the already mentioned inner weakness of the Japanese system and especially its inability to accumulate surplus capital for development. Japanese methods in action more closely resemble those of the 18th century East India Company. “Theft, bribery, confiscation, taxation – every conceivable method of squeezing money and goods out of the inhabitants ...” Or, “the mock majesty of a bloody scepter and a little traffic of a merchant’s counting-house, wielding a truncheon with one hand and picking a pocket with the other.” These descriptions of the East India Company’s activities in India hold equally true for the methods of the Japanese set-up economic units that have operated in China and Manchuria and now prepare for further action in the newly-occupied areas. Open plunder and robbery, stripping the land of its surplus stocks and goods – these are the primitive techniques of the Japanese merchants, exporters and bankers.
 
Difficulties of Conquest
It is precisely this which explains its inability to establish a fairly stable system of imperialist rule over its colonial dominions either in China or Manchuria. The Japanese system of naked robbery only breeds economic and social chaos; destroys the existing native industry (as has already happened in China); plunges the exploited land eventually into a misery even unknown to the Oriental world and produces an atmosphere of hatred against the invaders (particularly among the despoiled peasantry) that must have its revenge. To put the matter more simply, Japanese imperialism experiences great difficulties in taking advantage of and utilizing its material and territorial conquests. It cannot develop them properly and thus can only lower the already dreadful living standards of the colonial peoples.
Furthermore, whatever is gained through the system of outright plunder, goes to the never-ending needs of the Japanese war machine. In the manner of every other ruling class today, the Japanese imperialists warn the people of a “long war,” a “war that has just begun.” To the masses, this means no alleviation of their present restrictions and shortages, despite the great successes; a continuation of the rationing system into the indefinite future. What avails the conquests if they cannot be exploited for the benefit of the Japanese masses? The people of Japan will learn that the adventures of imperialism benefit solely the ruling classes and the reactionary officers’ castes. Ten years of wars in China and Manchuria brought only lowered standards; the promises of the new conquests hold out no hopes for a halt to this tendency.
This brings us to our second major conclusion. In the period of permanent capitalist-imperialist crisis and decline, and given its inherent contradictions, Japanese imperialism cannot successfully erect an empire. Its historic role is purely negative (to undermine the old empires); purely reactionary (to plunder and depress more deeply the colonial world). In destroying the state-exploitive apparatus of the old imperialisms, Japanese imperialism (unable to evolve its own state apparatus) unwittingly calls into being great social forces among the colonial workers and peasantry that will ultimately defeat the objectives of all imperialisms.
 
The Role of the Colonial Masses
The burdens of both (Japanese) workers and peasants are being increased unbearably by the war. More than 30,000,000 Chinese in Manchuria await the opportunity to liberate themselves from the Japanese yoke. Another 21,000,000 Koreans and 5,000,000 Formosans strive for their independence from Japan. All these factors constitute the Achilles’ heel of Japanese imperialism and foredoom it to destruction. Such military victories as the Japanese army is able to win ... have only an episodic importance. The first serious reverses ... will become the starting point of social and political explosions in Japan and in the territories of Manchuria, Korea, Formosa, etc. (Thesis of the Fourth International)
But the colonial masses will not permit the departure of the old tyranny merely in order to welcome it back again, in a new guise. They will not permit this any more than they will welcome back the old regimes.
Fascist imperialism may attempt to make its peace with the colonial bourgeoisie by setting it up as its “Quisling” administrative and political agency; “democratic” imperialism may attempt to bargain with the same colonial bourgeoisie and dangle an ephemeral “dominion status” before its eyes, but only real power can move the Asiatic masses. This is why the interminable negotiations and maneuvers of the Chiang Kai-Sheks, Crippses, Boses, Nehrus, etc., although significant phenomena, are symptomatic of the cross-conflicts between the imperialist powers and the weak, historically inept native bourgeois classes of Asia. One real, independent step on the part of the colonial people would wipe out with a blow the present stage of “negotiations.” But such a step, unfortunately, has yet to come.
It is around this question of independent colonial action directed against all imperialism that we can discern well in advance the rôle that all the powers will play in the Pacific War. Its objective, to paraphrase Colonel Knox, is restoration of the status quo ante, with proper American supervision over the recaptured colonial areas.
But American imperialism will not hesitate to conduct, if need be, a directly counter-revolutionary war against the Asiatic peoples themselves. That is to say, American imperialism has, with respect to the colonial masses, the same unholy fear of a nationalist uprising against imperialism that Japan or any other imperialist power has. It is only necessary to recall such incidents as the Chinese Boxer Rebellion, the Indian soldiers’ mutiny in Singapore in 1915, the Javanese revolution of 1926 – in which events white imperialist troops fought against the colonials, side by side with the Japanese – to remind the reader of the basic fact that all imperialisms alike will temporarily bury their differences in order to crush the greater menace, the evil all fear alike: the independent colonial revolution of the people themselves. American imperialism fought the Boxers; American imperialism fought the Chinese nationalists in the 1925–27 upsurge. It is this knowledge that made the people of India as cool and skeptical toward the visit of the American Commission to its country as it was toward the visit of Cripps.
The colonial peoples represent one of the great potential source of independent “Third Camp” action against imperialist war and for the establishment of a socialist peace. Whether this action begins by the elementary movements of the people preparing to defend themselves against encroachments by an Axis power or a “democratic” imperialist power; or whether it starts with the organization of a guerrilla struggle and peasant risings against the dominant power; or whether it is a political upsurge that raises the colonial masses high in their demand for a Constituent Assembly, democratically elected and representatives of the people – it is necessary for international socialists to support these tentative but powerful beginnings of a socialist Asia.
For – and here we draw our final conclusion – the perspective offered by either of the struggling imperialist camps is equally bankrupt. One side, politically and socially bankrupt, speaks and acts only in terms of the past; the other side, politically, economically and socially bankrupt, speaks and acts only in terms of the imposition of a new, more intense imperialist terror. Resurgent Asiatic nationalism, the march of the Asiatic colonial peoples toward national liberation and socialist revolution, has the only bright future.

Footnote
1. The cult of the Emperor as God is, of course, the symbolic method by which the contending factions unite, for benefit of the public gaze. This cult is less than 100 years old!
 



It is well known that the Stalinists (Communist Party) do not support the fight of India’s 389,000,000 people for national independence from England; not so well known are the lengths of treachery and strike breaking to which the Indian Communist Party has gone in its efforts to break up, sabotage and confuse the movement.
In the principal cities of the country (Bombay, Cawnpore, Ahmedabad, etc.) where the textile and steel workers went on strike against the British, the Communist Party leaders did their best to force the workers back into the plants “to produce for the United Nations against the Axis.”
A typical illustration of what happened, worth describing in detail, is contained in the Daily Worker of October 30. When the struggle began, the Congress leaders went to the Stalinists in the city of Delhi, where some of the major demonstrations occurred. They asked the local representatives of Joseph Stalin for help in organizing the movement. The Stalinists “tell them our way out of this mess (!), but they (the Congress /leaders) are still not quite prepared to give up the Gandhite ‘struggle’ against the British and follow our plan of unity among all factions of the Indian people to defeat the Axis.”
So the Stalinists, since the people aren’t quite ready to surrender, show them how to do it!
On August 9, a demonstration of 50,000 students and workers of the city is organized. The Stalinist student leader who addressed the crowd (urging them to drop the fight) is arrested by the unappreciative British police. “... He was the one student leader, who could have got the students to keep cool and patriotic at the same time,” moan the Stalinists. What ungrateful wretches these British police are!
Then the violent, semi-revolutionary struggles began between the British and the people of Delhi; struggles in which many were killed and hundreds wounded by police fire. The counter-revolutionary Stalinists write: “The leadership of the movement slipped quickly from Congress to non-Congress hands, such as the ‘Forward Blocists’ (a Trotskyite-fifth column combination).” The workers and radical students who, pushing aside the Stalinists and the conservative Congress leaders, led the people in militant demonstration against imperialism are fifth columnists! The Stalinists say so, so it must be so. All credit must go to the militant leaders who came up from the ranks of the people and refused to subordinate India’s fight for freedom to the imperialist aims of England, or the requirements of Stalin.
And finally, when the students struck and refused to attend the schools and colleges, the Stalinists developed this strike-breaking line: “Therefore, keep the peace. Keep organized, fight your way back into the schools. Instead of continuing the strike, strive, to get the colleges reopened, and that will be victory.”
Has there ever been such scabbery and treachery – even from the Stalinists?
 



NEW YORK CITY, Nov. 24 – At the time of this writing, for the third time within three weeks, The Militant, a weekly labor and socialist newspaper, has been banned from the mails by the postal authorities in New York City and Washington.
The most astounding and reactionary aspect of this blow against the democratic rights of American labor and American labor publications has been the absolute refusal and failure on the part of the officials to give an explanation for their actions! Apparently, under the terms of the military dictatorship which the postal authorities seem to have set up for themselves, they can just ban a paper from the mails AND THEN REFUSE TO GIVE AN EXPLANATION.
Under ordinary circumstances The Militant, is delivered to the main post office in New York City, from which center it is shipped out to various parts of the country, under second-class mailing rights.
Now, it appears, the paper cannot be mailed out unless permission and approval are first obtained from the WASHINGTON postal authorities, involving a delay of several days, even if the permission is granted.
The Washington officials had disapproved of four issues of The Militant prior to the banning from the mails of the last three issues, but these four issues had already been distributed throughout the country. Thereupon, the authorities gave their order that prior approval was necessary.
The editor of The Militant, George Breitman, only learned of the delay and ban placed on the paper when complaints and telegrams began to pour into his office. The authorities did not even consider it necessary to notify him! Such high-handed behavior is almost without precedent, even from the notoriously reactionary postal authorities.
 
Why the Ban?
An examination of the last three issues of The Militant can offer no serious reason or explanation for this move. There are no “military secrets” revealed, or any other news that could fall into a similar category.
Could it be that the ban was placed on The Militant for its references to examples of Jim Crowism in the American Army; its illustrations of how the capitalist class of America is making huge war profits; its criticism of the recently adopted tax program that places the burden of the war effort on labor?
We are of the opinion that The Militant is under attack for exactly these reasons. If this is true – and there is still no statement from the Washington officialdom responsible for this disgraceful action – then it means that a labor paper representing a certain political point of view can be banned at any time that its opinion doesn’t FULLY coincide with that of Roosevelt and the American ruling class. Could there be a greater illustration of totalitarian action, of an anti-democratic blow against the American labor movement?
 
Defend the Militant!
These steps against The Militant are a blow against every American labor-paper including Labor Action. The right of political criticism, the right of a free labor press, the rights of labor organizations themselves are deeply involved. Everyone understands that this action is but the beginning! The next blow of the post office reactionaries may well be directed against Labor Action which has also, as everyone knows, taken its stand for labor and against the capitalist war.
Then, if these totalitarians are not halted in their tracks right now, there will be additional measures taken against labor publications, not excluding the trade union papers of the AFL and the CIO. Defense of labor’s rights to enjoy a free press demands complete solidarity and support to The Militant in its fight to have the ban withdrawn at once and the three issues that have been held up released without any delay.
As The Militant has stated in a press release issued this week (a release which was completely ignored by the boss press), we must “preserve the right of all labor papers for a free press unhampered by reactionary bureaucrats!”
Labor Action stands solidly with The Militant and demands that the Washington authorities restore its full mailing rights. HANDS OFF THE LABOR PRESS! FOR A FREE PRESS IN AMERICA!
 



American forces have taken over huge portions of North Africa and are well on their way to seizure of the remaining area (Tunisia). From the standpoint of the American war leaders the whole campaign is indeed a great military success, for:

Hitler has been forced to extend himself to even greater areas and to take over a territory whose population is intensely hostile to him (Vichy France). Many hundreds – of miles of coastline, huge cities and centers must now be policed and controlled by the overtaxed and heavily drained German army.
 
Springboard positions of immense value for landing in Europe and deluging helpless Italy with a shower of bombs have been gained. Thus, the United Nations forces are in a much better position for their REAL offensive of the war: the open invasion of the European continent and the march on Berlin.
 
The supply route to Egypt, the Near East and India may well be shortened if the aim of regaining control of the Mediterranean Sea is achieved. Furthermore, the Italian and German hopes of African Empire will be destroyed forever.

These and other military and strategic victories have been described in detail in all the capitalist newspapers. But here we are interested in the POLITICAL aspects of the new American front in North Africa.
 
A Victory for Political Reaction
In the short space of less than two weeks, Roosevelt and his supporters have revealed to the world the sort of post-war Europe they favor. It is a Europe based upon reaction, militarism and foreign occupation; a Europe in which “law and order” will be preserved and revolution distinctly frowned upon and crushed.

The whole policy of keeping up relations with Vichy, instead of breaking and making an effort to go directly to the French workers and people, was a deceitful, “clever” game – as Secretary of State Hull now brags. In the words of Dorothy Thompson, we played a “Kurusu mission” with Vichy! Dirty politics, horse-trading, open bribery (one correspondent spoke about the “well greased” French officers), raw deals, etc. – this was American “democratic” diplomacy, according to the very words of the diplomats.
 
When the invasion began, “the British radio and General de Gaulle’s headquarters broadcast frequent warnings to the French population to refrain from premature uprisings ...” (New York Times) That is, the Anglo-American forces dreaded (almost as much as Hitler) a rising of the French masses against the forces of occupation and tyranny that sit upon them!

Is not that strange? We are supposed to believe that the Americans and English are coming into France ONLY in order to help the people get rid of Hitler, to aid them in their revolution. Is that the way to encourage the French to obtain their freedom? It shows, once more, how accurate is the Labor Action accusation directed against both Churchill and Roosevelt that these gentlemen only want uprisings in France and the other occupied countries when they (the military forces of America and England) are ready to land and to take over. That is, they want the European revolts against Hitler to serve only in a military, auxiliary capacity; to aid them in their imperialist reconquest of Europe from Hitler.

Look at whom the Americans have negotiated with and are helping to set up in a new “French” regime in North Africa. Collaborator, pro-Nazi Darlan; reactionary General Giraud – and now the open French fascist, Pierre Flandin, has arrived on the scene! America wants a “free” France, under the reactionary tutelage of hated French imperialists, reactionaries, open fascists and monarchists.
 
And what did Roosevelt say was his object in seizing the Vichy colonies? In addition to inflicting a blow upon the Axis, he said twice that he wishes to see the French Empire restored.

We may be very skeptical about the sincerity of his wishes, since we understand that American imperialism is likewise interested in grabbing off a few valuable colonies in this war, but even if we accept him at his word: such an objective is reactionary through and through! The French Colonial empire is and was viciously imperialistic, exploiting and oppressing tens of millions of Algerians, Moroccans, Negroes, etc.
 
Liberation – Or Imperialist Deal?
What happens to the Atlantic Charter, under whose auspices we are supposedly fighting? If the American soldiers come as a force of liberation, does that not mean that they must liberate the millions of Berbers, Moors, Arabs, Negroes who reside in these colonies? In what sense is restoration of these areas to French reactionaries and imperialists a progressive, democratic step? Isn’t it rather an imperialist deal between French and American capitalists?
If America was occupying North Africa for revolutionary, liberating purposes, it would restore those areas to the colonial peoples who live there! It would say, in effect, to the Arabs and the Moors: “We have helped you win freedom. Now govern and rule yourselves as you see it. That’s what the Atlantic Charter says.” Instead, it negotiates with Darlan, Giraud and Flandin to set up, in another form, the old colonial, dictatorial regime of French imperialism – this time resting upon American bayonets.
Labor Action says: Turn over these colonies to the people and their parties. In Algeria, a powerful nationalist and socialist organization known as “Etoile du Nord” (The Northern Star) once existed. It stood for an independent, workers’ and peasants’ Algeria. This is what we have in mind.
 



The elections and their results have already been forgotten, particularly in the excitement caused by the American attack and occupation of Vichy’s North African colonial possessions. But it is still worth our while to see if we can discover any meaning behind the tremendous Republican Party gains and its sweeping national gains in the Senate, the House of Representatives and various state governorships.
 
Huge Decline in Total Vote
Although no figures have yet been issued as to the total number of people who voted throughout the entire country, it is clear that there was a great decline in the vote.
In the 1936 presidential campaign, 45,000,000 people voted. In the 1940 presidential campaign (FDR vs. Willkie) a grand total of 50,000,000, the largest ever, cast their ballots. Preliminary reports indicate that a mere thirty to thirty-five million voted this year. That is, there was not only a decline of about 33 per cent in the number of voters, compared with 1940, but there was evea a decline of about 20 per cent, compared with those who voted in 1938, the last non-presidential national election year.
Considering that there are at least 60,000,000 people in the United States who are over 21 years of age and eligible to vote, we see that about half voted. What clearer indication is there of the general lack of interest and apathy in the elections just concluded? This apathy is of extreme interest.
Of course, many of the New Dealers and their apologists advance various reasons for the small vote. All of them, no doubt, had something to do with it.

The general decline that traditionally takes place in an off year, non-presidential election. (But, to remind the reader, there was a 20 per cent drop below 1938!)
 
The fact that millions of eligible voters were in the Army camps and Navy training centers, with almost 1,000,000 abroad.
 
The fact that many workers were working too long, or could not get off from their war production jobs, or were not eligible to vote since they had recently moved to some war center and therefore could not legally qualify.
 

Workers Least Interested
But all this could not fully account for the lack of interest in the elections. Although no figures are yet available which will reveal the drop in voting of various groups of the population (workers, middle class, etc.) it is a safe bet that by far the GREATEST decline took place in the working class vote.
Workers were least of all interested because no candidates raised any social or economic issues; all harped alike on their support of the war; none fought against labor regimentation, freezing of wages, unequal war burden, profiteering or ANY of the issues that concern American workers and arouse their interest. In this respect, it was the dullest, most backward and reactionary election held in America for many long years. It was a purely machine politics fight between Tweedledee Democrat and Tweedledum Republican. There was not the slightest serious difference between the contending parties and their various colorless and uninspiring candidates. And the workers consequently expressed their indifference by ignoring the polls.
 
Republican Sweep Pro-War Tendency?
A ludicrous and stupid effort is being made to explain the Republican gains in Congress, etc., as evidence of a critical attitude toward FDR’s conduct of the war and as a mandate for a more aggressive and vigorous offensive military policy. The entire press, Republican and Democratic alike, join hands in this absurd interpretation. To consider the large vote for the conservative, Tory-led, die-hard and antiquated Republican Party a pro-war and aggressive vote is to read into the results something that just isn’t there. The vote was neither pro-war nor anti-war, except insofar as abstentions indicated lack of interest.
PM – the New York daily newspaper for men of liberal opinions and disposition – has, as usual, the most snobbish and stupid interpretation of the whole matter. Quoting Roy Howard’s New York World-Telegram, which explained that the people were voting against the New Deal Administrations because they want more war effort (conversion of industry, rigid control of gasoline and rubber, manpower stabilization, unified command, etc.) PM complains that it wasn’t the New Deal and FDR who were responsible for the slow and soft war effort, but the “reactionary or isolationist Republicans.” The people didn’t understand this and they voted for the “outs” and against the “ins.” “That’s all oversimplified, of course,” adds PM. It certainly is, especially if you try to sneak in a pro-war interpretation, no matter how.
 
A Conservative, Middle Class Vote
Democratic Senator Prentiss Brown – the FDR man who pushed through the Senate the price-fixing legislation – and who was badly defeated in Michigan by Republican Ferguson of Detroit, understood the vote better than most. He blamed his defeat, in a statement, on “resentment aroused by the imposition of wartime restrictions on the daily life of the people.” That is, the vote was a middle class reaction to the annoyances, inconveniences and blows against traditional American living standards brought about by the imperialist war.
It was a vote against rationing of gas and sugar, against increased income taxes, against the disappearance of traditional American products (radios, cars, vacuum cleaners, refrigerators, etc.) from the consumer market. It was a vote of farmers displeased by their loss of farm labor into the army; of salesmen thrown out of work by the conversion ot industry; of all the small merchants, middlemen, real estate operators, petty business executives, etc, affected by the various decrees and rules handed down by the Washington war bureaucracy.
Only in New York State, where 400,000 workers, despite the treacherous conduct of their leaders (as described in last week’s Labor Action) voted for the American Labor Party ticket, is it possible to find any sign of a working class vote – unfortunately cast for a party that is a labor party in name only, and not at all in action. It nevertheless indicates that New York labor is ready tor a genuine labor party.
 



The first anniversary of Pearl Harbor draws near and we are about to be showered with a deluge of propaganda reminding us of the treacherous attack made upon the Hawaiian naval base and the fact that an unwilling American government was, as a result, forced into the World War. This is a good time to discuss a term very often used in Labor Action; the term IMPERIALISM. Often we are asked by new readers of our paper, “You keep saying that this is an imperialist war; that every country (including America) is in it for imperialist purposes. Just what do you mean by that, EXACTLY?”
 
Imperialism Is Modern Capitalism
Broadly speaking, imperialism means the aggressive attack, conquest, domination and control of a weak country by a stronger one. It means a policy by which one country is converted into the COLONY of another and deprived of its independence and freedom.
In the modern world, today, where capitalism in one form or another exists in every important country, imperialism has several easily recognizable characteristics:

The industry and economic life of the colony is all grabbed off by the foreign ruler, the capitalists of the foreign nation send their idle capital for investment in the colony and subject its working population to semi-slave conditions. (Hitler does this in Poland and France; Japan does it in the newly-conquered nations it has grabbed; England has done if for 150 years in India, for example.)
 
The conquered country is occupied and policed by the soldiers and agents of the conqueror (Hitler in France and Norway; Churchill in India, for example).
 
The conquered country – the colony – is robbed and drained of its food, its wealth and riches (as Hitler did to Poland; as Japan has done to Manchuria; as France has done to North Africa, for example).
 
The subject country is not only deprived of its national freedom, but it is denied all forms of democratic liberties (free speech, unions, the right to vote, etc.) and any effort to get these rights is met with violence and gunfire.

These are some of the universal and easily observed characteristics of imperialism, clear for all to see and most openly practiced by the fascist Axis powers. Can we say that the same characteristics and tendencies can be seen in America’s first year of war action? In the first place, America entered the war last year already an imperialist power, with a colonial empire all its own. True, it was nowhere the size of the British Empire, but it was substantial. It included such outright colonies, run directly by Americans, as Puerto Rica, the Philippines, Hawaiian Islands, various territories in big Chinese cities like Shanghai, Tientsin, etc. Still more important was the political and economic hold that American imperialists had over various countries such as Cuba, the Central American republics, huge parts of South America, etc., not to mention the power gained from huge capital investments in Canada, China, Europe, etc.
Imperialism in the War Itself
But these tendencies, these expressions of imperialism, have increased and extended themselves many times since the first days of Pearl Harbor. The evidences are many:

American authority, control and domination over the South American countries has gone ahead full steam. The economic life of these countries falls nearly, now, into America’s war machine. Their raw materials go to the war industries; American commodities and war equipment go back. Rival economic competitors (German and Japanese) have been brushed aside or are on the way out (England). American exporters run their trade.
 
American troops are on every continent (except Europe proper) in ever-growing numbers. North Africa is but the latest. The presence of American troops means, in effect, control and military domination. This is obvious with the former French North African colonies! It is also true for the Solomons, New Guinea, the Caribbean islands, Iceland, etc. And such effective control will grow as more American troops are poured into India, Australia, etc. These occupied territories are policed and regulated by American imperialism.
 
In North Africa it has been shown most clearly that American, rulers too will continue to deny democratic rights and liberties to the people, just like the previous French rulers did. Not one sign exists to show that these colonies will be turned back to their rightful rulers, the people who inhabit them.
 
American capitalist economic control – lend-lease credits; open capital investments; control over trade and tariff regulations, etc. – has grown tremendously over such nations as Cqnada, New Zealand and Australia (the British Dominions). It has already been made clear that the rulers of America will take whatever metals and ores the North African colonies formerly produced for French and then German imperialism. As the troops march in and take over, the economic functionaries and rulers follow close behind, striving to fit the economy of the occupied territories into the American war effort. Sometimes the conquest is bloodless, as in Latin America. But the result is the same.

This is what we means by the imperialist character of the war; a charge Labor Action cannot but repeat as the first anniversary of Pearl Harbor draws near.
 



Propaganda is supposed to be a weapon to aid the military and economic forces of a country at war. America has organized a vast machine broadcasting and speaking to the Axis world. What does it have to say?
 
The “Little Flower” Speaks to Rome
This week we learned that Mayor LaGuardia, the battling dynamo of New York, has been broadcasting to the Italian people. In between the cuss words (“swachime,” “sfunjas,” etc.) the Mayor has a few things to say to these people. For instance, he tells them that the decrepit, armchair and stupid King of Italy is all right and should be put back into power over Il Duce! Then – and this is guaranteed to make the Italian people leap with jittery joy – he brags about the fact, that soon American bombers will be roaring over the great Italian cities, blasting them to bits, and finally, American soldiers and troops will enter the country! All this, undoubtedly, will win millions of Italian supporters!
The reports of the Little Flowers speeches verify what was printed in the American New Leader (an arch-patriotic paper which claims a slight allegiance to socialism) some weeks back. According to these reports, the Italian people were being regaled with insulting broadcasts, delivered in poor Italian by men who threatened and abused them. So much for propaganda to Italy.
 
And Germany?
No material has been published about what FDR and his fellow war leaders, are saying to Germany. This is curious indeed. Isn’t it rather important for the American people to know what FDR is saying to the German workers and Germany? After all, they are being called upon to die in the imperialist war. They ought to have some idea of what sort of government Roosevelt-Churchill propose to set up in Germany after the war is over. But nothing is said.
Still, we have every reason, to strongly suspect that the broadcasts to Germany take on the same tone that the infamous broadcasts of the Englishman, Lord Vansittart, do. They undoubtedly threaten the division and virtual extinction of the German people; the imposition of an even more severe and brutal Versailles Treaty and the occupation of that country by the armed troops of the United Nations.
America’s propagandists (for reasons we’ll take up below) have the idea that the way to “propagandize” (that is, influence) the enemy’s ranks and break down their morale is by threatening them with calamity and doom if they don’t join you, immediately. As to WHY they should join you, not a word!
 
And That Addressed to the Japanese
But most incredible and most reactionary of all has been the Japanese-addressed propaganda, Labor Action has in its possession a public duplicate of a small booklet that was dropped from the bombers that raided Tokyo and the other Japanese cities many months ago.
This booklet (very attractively and colorfully printed) consists of pictorial and graphic comparisons of American resources with Japanese resources. On page one, the huge size of America is compared with the minute size of the Japanese island empire; manpower resources, railway mileage, gold wealth, farm production, coal capacity, the number of telephones, timber reserves, fish (the Japanese are given the edge on this), oil wells, automobiles, iron and steel production, electricity, shipping, etc., are all compared, Naturally, in every instance except that of fish, America is vastly superior to Japan.
The Japanese worker is ground down by a brutal, fascist and totalitarian war regime that subjects him to iron discipline. The Japanese war-mongers and imperialists, however, tell him that all this is necessary because Japan is so poor, has so little “living space” and the other nations that surround it are so rich by comparison. The Mikado says that the Japanese people are fighting for their lives against mighty rivals who have everything, while we, the Japanese, have nothing.
Now, this lying and demagogic propaganda of the Japanese capitalists and imperialists is verified and substantiated by the Americans! What more could the Japanese militarist ask for? He can now go to his people and say in effect: “See! What I told you is true! We have nothing; they have everything. Roosevelt himself says so. That’s why we are JUSTIFIED in our war of conquest. Why should they (the white men) have so much and we nothing?” Nothing could have done more to solidify the Japanese people and drive them closer into the hands of their own reactionary and fascist government than this type of propaganda.
 
Why This Propaganda?
The same message, in varying degrees, goes to all the peoples of the Axis countries. Why? Is it because of stupidity on the part of those in charge in Washington? Is it because the Axis propagandists are so much “smarter” than ours?
No. It is because this propaganda is a logical consequence and embodiment of the TYPE OF WAR that America is conducting – a war of conquest, a war of occupation – in a word, a war of imperialism.
American imperialism cannot appeal to the Axis people on REVOLUTIONARY grounds since this is not its war aim. It can only threaten and boast and brag and then abuse the down-trodden people of the fascist regimes. This is not merely “bad” propaganda; it is reactionary, imperialist propaganda, revealing in its nakedness the meaning and purpose of this war for plunder and colonial spoils.
 



The British government has delivered a “take it or leave it” ultimatum to the people of India.
Through the medium of its agent, Sir Stafford Cripps, the British have made it clear that if the proposed plan “were to be rejected by the leaders of Indian opinion, there will be neither the time nor the opportunity to reconsider this matter till after the war.”
At the moment, the various political groups of India are considering the proposition of Cripps. The leading body of the Indian National Congress Party – made up entirely of conservative nationalists – is clearly split and divided on the question of acceptance or rejection. The remarks of Gandhi have indicated his opposition to accepting this phoney proposal of British imperialism!
As for the plan itself, it is a typical British fraud from start to finish. Indeed, if it were ever put into effect it would prove the most reactionary scheme imaginable for further dividing India.

Cripps offers absolutely nothing now. Everything is for after the war. In the meanwhile, Britain is to continue its political, economic; and military domination of the country. It is to have full charge of defense. Not one iota of democracy is to be extended to India’s 385 million people NOW! In this respect, the Cripps plan does not differ from a dozen and one other offers made by British imperialism for the sake of maintaining its rule.
 
The post-war proposal for dominion status makes no provision for a genuine rule of India by the people. That could be accomplished only if the British ownership of the nation’s resources, industry, commerce, etc., were to be liquidated. All that is proposed is a scheme by which the Indian politicians exercize political administration of the country, while the British remain in real power, through their economic stranglehold.

The offer permitting provinces to secede opens the door for further dismemberment of India and for a division along communal (Hindu and Moslem) lines. Such a proposal can only add more fuel to Hindu-Moslem antagonisms – something very much desired by the British. It is just as reactionary as if someone were to propose that America be divided between Protestants and Catholics.
 
Most shameful proposal of all is the method by which India is supposed to frame a new constitution. A constitutional assembly chosen by proportional representation by the members of all the provincial legislatures is provided for.

Such an assembly is loaded in favor of the British from the very beginning. They call it; their supporters dominate it; they write the new constitution. For the provincial legislatures are elected by a very restricted vote to begin with. Less than 5 per cent of the population can vote. As a result, since the workers and poor peasants are deprived of the vote, the legislatures in the provinces are made up of the most conservative congressmen, plus open British supporters.

Also the Indian states will be represented at this assembly by men APPOINTED by the, princes themselves. Since the British created the princes, this is equivalent to a DIRECT representative of British imperialism in the assembly.

And such an assembly is supposed to draft a constitution for a Free India! The only assembly that could do that would be a constitutional assembly of the people themselves, called through their own action and elected directly on the basis of universal suffrage.
To sum up, the Cripps scheme is a continuation of the same old run-around; seeking only to drag the unwilling people of India into the imperialist war. Even if the Congress leaders should accept it, it will obviously fail to arouse any enthusiasm or support among the population as a whole.
But it is difficult to see even how the most conservative leaders could accept such a proposition. Gandhi has referred to it as a “post-dated check,” one that cannot be cashed until some indefinite date in the future.
On the basis of experience and according to customary British trickery in the past, it could better be described as a RUBBER CHECK, issued by a Tory ruling class whose credit has less and less value each day.
Even Nehru (who is reported as being ready to accept) recognizes this and understands what the masses would say if Congress says yes.
“Suppose we did come to an agreement with Britain, short of independence. Various political groups would immediately say that the Congress was selling out. We can only resist the Japanese through the creation of a nation-wide feeling that India is already free.”
Exactly, and only complete independence now will create that feeling. The Cripps mission to India has failed. He brought nothing but a promise of “blood, sweat and tears for the preservation of the British Empire.”
 



By their refusal to accept any compromise or false agreement, the people of India have forced their leaders to put an end to the useless and treacherous negotiations that had been proceeding for three weeks with Sir Stafford Cripps, Churchill’s agent.
In the words of the Indian National Congress reply rejecting the British offer, the people of India have declared that, “The essential condition was freedom of India, for only the realization of present freedom could light the flame which would illuminate millions of hearts and move them to action.”
In a word, India demands its full right: complete and unconditional independence; the ousting of British rule in all forms; the creation of its own government. Nothing less than this will satisfy India’s 400,000,000 workers and peasants!
Mr. Cripps’ mission to India has failed! The people have spoken and have booted the unwelcome agent of Tory-imperialist Churchill out of their country. Their answer to the slimy scheme offered them with the aim of continuing the unwanted British rule was that
“The people of India have as a whole clearly demanded full independence and Congress has repeatedly declared that no other status except that of independence for the whole of India could be agreed to or could meet the essential requirements of the present situation ... the accompanying provisions and restrictions (in the British proposal) are such that real freedom may well become an illusion.’’
So now Sir Stafford Cripps – the vegetarian “Indian-giver” – has withdrawn (!) his proposal of “dominion status” for India after the war and is to return to London to report his dismal flop. His scheme for perpetuating India’s slavery proved to be another of current British “successful”, withdrawals and retreats.
 
The Hour of Great Crisis
But the failure of Cripps’ mission by no means has solved the problem of India.
On the contrary, it must be understood that the greatest crisis and the most crucial hour in the history of that nation now approaches. For the military dictators and imperialists of Japan stand poised, with great naval, air and military forces, at the very door of India.
Heralding an all-out effort to conquer India and replace British mastery with that of its own, Japan is undoubtedly shifting the bulk of its forces for an invasion of Ceylon and India. The danger to India is not remote; it is hammering at the door.
The reply of the already reeling and badly battered British to this threat is to deny the people the only thing that would arouse them to a fighting pitch – namely, complete freedom, with the desire to defend their own country, a country that really belongs to them. What could be more helpful to the imperialist ambitions of Hirohito?
Besides, it is clear that the British are in no position to offer adequate military resistance. Their navy has already suffered disastrous blows with the sinking of two heavy cruisers and one aircraft carrier; their naval base at Trincomalee is badly damaged; their air strength is vastly inferior to that of the Japanese.
To depend upon Britain to defend India can only bring the same unfortunate results that occurred in Malaya, in Hong Kong, in Burma, in Java, etc. – that is, Japanese victory.
If India is to be successfully defended it can be done ONLY by the people of India, the 400,000,000 themselves. They must take the defense of their country into their own hands, they must remove the stranglehold of British imperialism, they must organize their own organizations of people’s defense.
The time for such action grows very short, indeed. Once the invasion has begun on a large scale it Will be more difficult, if not impossible, for the workers and peasants to take the proper steps.
Yet it is here that we can see most fully the bankruptcy and treachery of their own leaders.
Gandhi, the conservative leader, has nothing to say to the people except to “offer non-violent resistance.” But such religious and moral “advice” will avail nothing. It can only facilitate the military task of the Japanese. It is a confession of impotence, a surrender in advance to the enemy.
Nehru, the friend of Cripps and the leader who undoubtedly came closest to signing a sell-out agreement with the British, announces that he “will not hinder the British military effort.” Instead of calling upon the people to act in their own behalf, to rise up in their own defense, every word and gesture of Nehru implies that India’s defense should be left to the British. This, in spite of all that has happened! It is no wonder that the American war press speaks with such favor about Nehru, Who, unlike the other nationalists, is not really against the British.
Yet it is not too late for India to both free itself from British rule and prepare its independent defenses against the Japanese. The working class revolutionists of that country are hard at work among the people, urging them to act immediately and to take the only possible steps that can lead toward success.
The slogan of the hour is: An Armed Militia of the People, made up of millions of workers and peasants fighting for freedom against Britain and Japan. No dependence upon British “defense”; no confidence in the conservative leaders; but independent revolutionary action on the part of the great masses. The fate of India within the next few weeks depends entirely upon what the people do.
 



“I am a child of the House of Commons. I was brought up to believe in democracy; trust the people ... I have been in full harmony with the tides which have flowed on both sides of the Atlantic against privileges and monopoly and I have steered confidently toward the Gettysburg ideal of government of the people, by the people, for the people.” (Winston Churchill to the American Congress)
Seldom has human history recorded so many misstatements in so few words uttered by one man!
Winston Churchill – head of the British Conservative (Tory) Party; Winston Churchill – Prime Minister of the greatest imperialist power on the face of the earth, the British Empire; Winston Churchill – imperial leader of the English capitalist class which rules over 500 million colonial peoples in Asia and Africa; Winston Churchill – man of the “old school” ties, offspring of Anglo-American aristocracy, descendant of the Duke of Marlborough – this is a more accurate portrait.
Since Churchill’s arrival in Washington two weeks ago the American press, radio and propaganda institutions have outdone themselves in the Churchill build-up. Franklin Delano Roosevelt has temporarily receded into the background before the more dramatic and colorful leader of the British Empire. As a cynic remarked, “Churchill did everything but take out his first papers!”
 
Knight Of St. George?
Churchill is portrayed to us as the fighting symbol of world democracy, as the resolute representative of the British people, as the embodiment of “good” against “evil,” as the hope for a shining future, as a modern Knight of St. George come to slay, in mouth-filling Victorian oratory, the Nazi dragon.
But Labor Action finds it necessary to remind its readers that Churchill is here for other reasons – more sinister reasons – than campaign and warlike oratory.
Churchill is here to plot with Roosevelt the future course of the imperialist war in which both nations, England and America, are now engaged. Behind the talk of “world-wide strategy,” “unified command,” “plans for taking the offensive,” “divisions of supplies and resources” lie many sacrifices and heart aches planned for the people of America and England alike:

The representatives of “democratic” imperialism are planning where, when and how to set millions of American boys on the transports going to the battle fields of Africa, of Asia and Europe. In a word, they are dealing with and, in their own way, settling the fate of countless numbers of American youth, British soldiery and Allied forces.
 
They are seeking to iron out various differences that arise from British and American commercial and economic rivalry. All is not brotherly love between the “Allies” when the question of who gets what arises. But Churchill, as is proven by the fact that HE – not FDR – undertakes the hazardous journey, is yielding to America, as he must. He has told Roosevelt straightforwardly that henceforth America must bear the burden of the war in terms of manpower, supplies and resources.
 

Churchill – The Man
And what about Winston Churchill, the man? Labor Action, after examining his references, his character witnesses, his experience, etc., finds him well qualified to play the role of militarist, imperialist, war-monger, racial jingo, Tory, colonial slave-holder, opponent of labor unions, arch-conservative.
Ex-Friend of Hitler: “I have always said that if Great Britain were defeated in war I hoped we would find a Hitler to lead us back to our rightful position among nations.” (Winston Churchill in a speech, November 11, 1938.)
Ex-Friend of Mussolini: “If I had been an Italian I should have been wholeheartedly with you (the fascists) from start to finish in your triumphant struggle against the bestial appetites and passions of Leninism.” (Winston Churchill in a speech, January 21, 1927.)
Head of the British Tory Party: This is what he wrote about that party back in 1908 when he was a Liberal:
“A party of great vested interests banded together in a formidable confederation ... the tyranny of a well-oiled party machine, sentiment by the bucketful, patriotism and imperialism by the imperial pint ... dear food for the millions, cheap labor for the millionaires. That is the policy which the Tory Party offers you.”
 
Militarist, and War-Monger
Militarist and War-Monger: First Lord of the Admiralty during the last World War. Organized and planned the disastrous Gallipoli campaign against the Turks. Organized and planned the British intervention expeditions against the Russian Revolution at Archangel. Participated actively in England’s war of conquest against the Boers in South Africa. Led British troops on the northwest frontier of India against rebellious tribesmen where he specialized in burning villages and pillaging the homes of defenseless natives.
Tory and Colonial Slave Master: Churchill has an unenviable reputation in the colonies and particularly in India. He has consistently opposed every extension of democracy to the colonial peoples forced to live under British rule.
 



The largest battle in the Pacific area of the World War is now shaping up – the all-important struggle for Singapore.
On the one side the Japanese, having removed Hong Kong from their path, are concentrating tremendous forces in an effort to take this citadel of their “democratic” rivals.
On the other side, the Allied powers are desperately striving to strengthen the defenses of this key point – the kingpin in their Far Eastern strategy. The British are pouring in reserve forces and supplies from Australia, New Zealand and India; the Dutch are attempting to send reinforcements from the nearby East Indies; the Chinese are attempting to relieve the pressure of the Japanese attack by sending troops into Burma for a flank attack; the United States is likewise taking measures to prevent the fall of the “City of the Lion.”
Why is Singapore so important from the standpoint of the rival imperialist powers now struggling for its mastery?

Malaya – the peninsula at whose tip Singapore is located – is rich in rubber and tin. These are raw materials highly coveted by both imperialist war camps.
 
Singapore is a great military and naval strategic location, commanding the entrance to the Indian Ocean and the gateway to the East Indies. Whoever controls Singapore controls the straits of Malacca, leading directly to Burma, Ceylon and India.
 
Capture of Singapore would mean the certain fall of the Dutch East Indies into the hands of the Japanese. The islands of Java, Sumatra, Borneo, etc., would fall into the hands of the Japanese who would then obtain much needed supplies of oil, rubber, copra, quinine, tea. Loss of Malaya and the East Indies to the Empire of Japan would vastly strengthen that country and correspondingly weaken the Allied powers enormously.
 
The Allied powers have commercial, trade and capital interests in these territories valued at several billions of dollars. It would all go up in smoke if the Japanese should win.
 

A Desperate and Bitter Struggle
It is clear that a desperate and bitter struggle will be put up by both sides for the territory of Malaya. This struggle constitutes about the clearest example yet of what Labor Action means when it says the war in the Pacific is an imperialist war – for wealth, for trade, for markets, for colonies, and for raw materials of all kinds. Hundreds of thousands of men from America, England, India, Australia, Japan, China, etc., will be asked to sacrifice their lives so that the imperialist masters of the Great Powers can possess more territory to loot.
So far, the Japanese forces – descending on Singapore from their bases in Thailand and Indo-China – have made amazingly rapid and easy advances. They have overrun more than half of the country, including some of its most valuable rubber plantation areas. They appear to have gained mastery over the external sea approaches and the air. Air military authorities concede that Singapore is in grave danger of falling into Japanese hands although, of course, fierce battles still remain to be fought before the fate of this rich prize is decided.
At the same time, the so-called American military specialists and commentators are filling the press and radio waves with innumerable mis-statements and misconceptions about the entire struggle for Singapore. Ignoring the important POLITICAL factors involved in the battle – that is, the existence and opinions of the 16,000,000 native people of Malaya – they talk as though it were solely a MILITARY problem; a matter of guns, tanks and planes.
For the imperialists, this is quite natural since, they have no interest in the fate or opinions of the native colonial population of these countries. They seek only to retain them in colonial servitude, in the case of the British; or to take the place of the old masters, as in the case of the Japanese. But neither side cares one bit about the colonial people who are the decisive element in the war.
Who are these colonials? They are about 95 per cent of the population, to begin with. They are divided almost evenly between Chinese who came originally from South China; Tamils and Indians, who migrated from Ceylon and India; the original native Malayans. They are the workers and peasants, the shop keepers and merchants of the, country. They are the dock laborers in the ports and piers; they are the miners and factory workers in the tin mines and smelting factories; they are the rubber workers on the plantations; they are the peddlars and food merchants.
They are the ones who unload the ships, who bring down the rubber on flatboats from the plantations, who tap the trees, who mine the tin, who run all the services of the cities and villages, who are made to wait hand and foot on the white colonial masters and mistresses. They are the nine out of ten; the ones who say: “This is a war between two sets or robber bandits who want the right to exploit me – a plague on both your houses!”
Why have the Japanese been able to advance so rapidly? Because they have come through rubber and tin country, where the population has suffered 100 years of British imperialism and will therefore not lift a finger to help the British. The British, lacking forces and supplies, have no alternative but to retreat. They cannot mobilize the native population on their side “in the name of democracy” – any more than the Japanese can mobilize the natives on their side “in the name of liberation.”
Both are liars, and the Chinese, Malayans and Indians know it – so they run off into the hills or hide in their homes until the fighting is over. To them, there is no choice – either side is equally bad and not worth fighting for. And this is a thousand times more important in the battle for Singapore than “unified commands,” airplanes, tanks, etc. If the British rulers could mobilize the natives – to the number of 16,000,000 – on their side, the Japanese would vainly batter their heads against the stone wall of guerilla warfare, mass opposition and fighting in which each native village and city would be a citadel.
But imperialist rule in Malaya – as everywhere else – is based on exploitation. This means forbidding of unions, forbidding of any democratic liberties, no factory legislation, pitifully low wages, indefinite hours of work, coolie living standards, etc. It means rule of the people by a foreign power, in the best Hitler manner.
 
Freedom and Independence
For the British to win over the native people they must give them freedom and independence – the right of self-determination and self-rule. They must do away, with everything, they have done for the last 100 years.
There is as little possibility of this happening as there is of Hitler becoming a democrat or the Japanese withdrawing from China. So the great masses of Malaya will remain neutral in the war, cursing BOTH sides for bringing the horror of war to their country.
But the people of Malaya – the nine out of ten – are interested neither in Japanese victories, nor explanations about “democratic” defeats. They are interested now and in the future in a way of winning their freedom from ALL imperialisms – white or yellow – and in bettering their unfortunate lot. The fact that the leaders of the Malayan Communist Party (Stalinists) have openly offered themselves to the British imperialists will not deter these people from still insisting that their genuine interests lie not with either of the warring capitalist camps, but with the struggle of the colonial people for freedom and the right of self-determination.
 



Last week, in Rio de Janeiro, the capital of Brazil, the diplomatic representatives of the United States and 20 Latin American nations gathered in conference.
Curiously enough – while supposedly meeting to cooperate in a war for “democracy” – the gathering took place in the Palace of Tiradentes where the FORMER Brazilian Chamber of Deputies used to meet. FORMER Chamber of Deputies, because Julio Vargas, military dictator of Brazil and the gentleman who twice re-wrote the Constitution of his own country to suit his totalitarian tastes, no longer permits the Chamber to exist, let alone meet!
The purposes of the conference, which is dominated by the United States, are clear. They have been repeatedly stated in cajoling, threatening or matter-of-fact terms by its leading representative, Sumner Welles. They are as follows:
(1) The complete breaking off of all relations (economic, political, financial and commercial) between the Latin American countries and the Axis powers. Sumner Welles in his opening speech demanded the ending of all neutrality and “non-belligerency.” The American objective is to weld a solid front behind the “democratic” nations in the war.
(2) The lending and leasing of South American naval bases and airfields for use by the United States forces. In addition, the pooling of all sorts of military aid in the interests of America’s war. The Latin American countries are militarily very weak. It is doubtful if the 20 of them combined ha e 1,000 military airplanes! But whatever it is they have, Uncle Sam wants it for his own purposes.
(3) The lining up of South America on the economic front. This means that the superior American capitalism wants the countries of the south to turn over all their raw materials and resources for use by America. Latin America has lost all its markets in Europe and Asia since the war began. It is completely dependent upon the mercies of the United States for its economic existence. And Roosevelt wants the nitrates of Chile; the manganese of Brazil; the tin, tungsten, zinc, bismuth, aluminum ore, beef, copper, oil etc. of the other countries to flow into the war machine of American imperialism.
 
Under the U.S. Thumb
Furthermore, he wants the “Good Neighbor” republics to break all economic ties not only with the Axis competitors (Japan, Germany and Italy), but also – although not as drastically – with England. American business wants total, domination of the economic life of these countries. On the same day that Welles spoke at Rio it was announced in Washington that Latin America was being placed on rations for various materials (steel, soda, chlorine, rare metals, copper, etc.) that it so badly needs. This rationing system will further place, the Latin American nations under the U.S. thumb.
(4) America likewise wants Latin America organized in a political set-up that will help its prosecution of the war. One of the points of the agenda is the creation of an Inter-America defense committee sitting in Washington to regulate shipping, supplies and foreign policy of the member nations. All of this, naturally, is to be done in the name of “Good Will and Solidarity.” The fact that the leaders of the South American nations are mostly petty thieves and military dictators – modeled after Vargas of Brazil and Batista of Cuba – has little to do with it.
But there are plenty of rough spots and points of conflict in this conference. The United States, the Central American nations, the Caribbean island nations are already formally at war with the Axis. But three nations (Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela) have only broken off relations while eight (including the most powerful nations of Argentina, Brazil and Chile) are still completely neutral.
Argentina, particularly, is on the spot and is fighting to retain her position of “non-belligerency.” Undoubtedly, the Argentina capitalist ruling class is fearful of reprisals from the Axis powers, and is somewhat skeptical about the friendly advances of the big imperialist brother from up North. It is this effort to get Argentina to break with the Axis that constitutes the main fighting point at the conferences. Welles is attempting to win the point at various private conferences and with numerous promises.
In addition, there is a long standing boundary dispute between Ecuador and Peru that must be settled if any air of harmony and solidarity is to emerge from the gathering.
Most important of all, the Latin Americans are asking themselves a few questions: Does America guarantee to .protect us from air and naval attack? How? Will America buy up all our surplus products? At what price? Will America be able to supply us with the machinery and material needed to keep our economy going? In a word, what price American domination?
 



As the Second World War approaches new heights of fury and destruction, the ruling powers of all the embattled nations strive with renewed vigor to arouse the national passions of all peoples. Ranging from the more primitive and vile techniques (“the yellow peril,” “the white devils,” etc.) to the more refined and subtle arguments of the professional intellectuals, this campaign of world chauvinism takes on fresh life as each new stage in the military and tactical plans of the rival powers approaches.
Defense of internationalism, the socialist internationalism of the workers and colonial peoples in all lands, has become one of the paramount tasks of the socialist movement. This defense of internationalism, proclaiming the brotherhood of all oppressed masses, is not based upon the airy idealism of the Christian pacifist nor the “good-will internationalism” of the Rotarian business man. No, its base is far more substantial, far more vital and pressing.
Socialist internationalism, as distinguished from schemes of imperialism, or utopias of political federation, flows from the material demands and the material resources of world society. The Second World War, the most insane and futile catastrophe imaginable, has confirmed the theoretical and abstract principles of Marxist internationalism. Namely, that our society and our economic life is international in character; that our outmoded social order, denying the existence of a world economy, is responsible for these unparalleled convulsions; that the continuation of nationalist imperialism means the destruction of the earth’s productive capacities; that human culture, in every phase and aspect, is literally faced with extinction. Every prophetic statement of the socialist teachers, warning all peoples against the continuation of capitalism, has come true – or threatens to come true – with an alarming force and acuity.
But it is the practical, the real, the current meaning of internationalism with which we are concerned in this article. How does it touch on the war of today? How can it bring a halt to the futile slaughter? Out of the distorted energies and the mobilizations for mass murder, can revolutionary socialism bring the necessary transformation?
 
How the “Democrats” Fight Hitler
The entire problem can be seen most clearly in the problem of Germany. When the imperialist bourgeoisie of the United Nations touches the German question (How can Hitler and Germany be defeated? What is to be done with Germany after the victory?) then its inner bankruptcy becomes apparent. When the intellectual and political satellites of the United Nations approach the German question they too display how, in every field, bourgeois thought and science is a mockery to human progress.
A dozen and one solutions, all of them predicated on the ultimate defeat of Nazi imperialism, have been proposed.
Germany is to be the guinea pig for experimentation in the working out of the “democratic” new world order. Most of these proposals deal with Germany post victoria – after the defeat; others, possessing the virtue of realism, claim to solve the two questions: winning the victory and imposing the peace.
What are these solutions to the German question? In brief, they may be divided into three major classifications:

Those proposed by the democratic imperialist leaders (Churchill, Roosevelt, etc.);
 
Those proposed by the professional intellectuals and literati (Thomas Mann, P.E.N. Association, Dorothy Thompson, etc.); and
 
Those proposed by the Soviet Union and the Stalinist parties.

Let us consider each plan individually – bearing in mind that the proposed objective of each is to overwhelm the heart and core of Axis imperialism, institute a stable European order and assure peace in perpetuity.
(a) Churchill-Roosevelt: The “democratic” spokesmen have been notoriously silent on the entire question. Generally, they reply with the fatuous remark that “we must win the war.” As though one had accused them of trying to lose the war!
Some of these gentlemen (for example, Lord Woolsey) have proposed the physical extermination of the German people; some have proposed their gradual extinction by sterilization and the erection of a gigantic cordon sanitaire about the German state; some have proposed the mass arrest and forced enslavement of the population. These are the more vulgar, the more outrightly criminal “proposals” of Anglo-American imperialism, the cynical outpourings of diseased, Nazified minds.
The more authoritative statesmen of the bourgeoisie – Roosevelt and Churchill – have made it clear that they propose to inflict a decisive military defeat upon Germany and then ... they shall see. On December 23, 1941, Churchill said in reply to a direct question: “Don’t let us bank on that (an internal German revolution). We have got to bank on an external knockout.” This, at any rate, is clear enough.
After a few early attempts the Allies abandoned all efforts to direct any serious propaganda, that is, ideas with life to them!, at the German people. The New York Post announces that “plans for a German translation of The Aldrich Family to be used as a shortwave propaganda series to impress the Nazis with the contrast between family life here and in Germany have finally been abandoned.” We may question the effect of Henry Aldrich upon the German people, but the abandonment of even such an effort symbolizes the “grand strategy” of Churchill-Roosevelt: defeat of Germany along purely military lines.
 
Idea Men and the Stalinists
(b) The intellectuals and journalists: Beyond voicing criticisms in a distinctly minor key (“the people are not sacrificing enough; they do not realize the seriousness (!) of the war,” etc.) the literati have contributed nothing that oversteps the bounds laid down by imperialist warfare and strategy.
Walter Duranty, all too typical of the type, has advanced the most rounded solution to the German question yet proposed. According to Duranty, a super-Versailles is to be straight-jacketed on the German nation after the imposition of the “democratic” conquest. The former Austro-Hungarian Empire is to be re-established and Germany proper – returning to the pre-Bismarckian epoch – is to be carved up into segmented states and provinces. With a paucity of democratic imagination but an excess of reactionary imperialist zeal, Mr. Duranty violates every democratic liberty, every nationalist desire and every “Atlantic Charter” pretense under which the war is being fought. The Hitlerian “new order” has many a counterpart in the contemplated democratic “new order” for Europe.
Or take the case of Thomas Mann, the great intellectual leader of the “democratic” camp; the man put forward to signify the cosmopolitan, the spiritual and ennobling virtues of the Allied cause as opposed to the barbaric neo-Paganism of the Axis. In an address broadcast directly to the German people in December of last year, Thomas Mann used the occasion for pinning the “war guilt” upon the German masses as a whole. Ignoring the entire course of Hitler’s successful struggle for power, Mann accused the German people of being responsible for the crimes of their “leaders.” (It is proper to recall at this point, however, that Thomas Mann was not distinguished by the struggle against Hitler before he attained power. Mann’s break with the brown-shirted murderer came after he consolidated his rule.) The people and the régime are one. The Germans can be saved “to gain freedom and peace” only by breaking with their leaders and casting themselves at the feet of the “democracies.” Crying out that “an ever-growing gigantic hatred engulfs you,” Mann ends his declaration by informing the German people that they will thank him (sic) for his advice.
Thus Mann asks for the confidence of the German workers by accusing them and by threatening them with monstrous retribution! You are guilty of the war, you are responsible for Hitler, you must join us – or else! With bitter contempt the German people will turn aside from this “friend,” this man who speaks to them in the name of Goethe and German philosophy!
And thus, two sample representatives of the democratic philosophers of the new democratic world federation!
(c) Soviet Russia and the Stalinists: The Soviet regime is at least as vitally concerned as any other power with undermining the strength of Hitlerism, gaining the victory and organizing the post-war Europe. This concern is proved by the fact that the Stalinist authorities and spokesmen have, probably more than any other ruling group, discussed the question, put forward propositions and attempted to propagandize them. With what success? But first let us see what they say, what they propose.
Stalinist propaganda aimed at Germany departs from the type we have described above.

Emanating from what is supposedly the “Workers’ State,” it must bear some social stamp. It must at least pose the problem of what shall a post-war Germany be.
 
Alone of all the powers, Soviet Russia has an organization of Germans, German workers and functionaries, within Germany itself. Regardless of its size and composition, it is a fact that the German Communist Party is the only “inside Germany” group of some size in the Allied war camp.
 

Absence of Revolutionary Propaganda
What do they say? Despite the skepticism of its allies-in-arms, in ten months of warfare the Stalinists have not uttered a word with which the most die-hard Tory imperialist could disagree. Their propaganda has been strictly bound by the policies of “democratic” imperialism. Socialist, internationalist or revolutionary slogans, expressions or even implications of the same, cannot be discovered in speeches of leading Russian figures, proclamations of the government, appeals to the German soldiers or manifestos of the German Communist Party.
We must strive for “a truly democratic Constitution” reads an appeal of 158 captured German soldiers to their fellow-soldiers. (World News and Views, November 22, 1941.) We stand for “a truly popular Germany,” “a nation governed by honest, diligent people” (!), “a people’s Germany,” etc.
How do the Stalinists attempt to sap German morale? By contrast. “You workers are fighting against a socialist workers regime.” But too many Germans have seen the realities of Stalinist Russia. Or threats: “... woe to our people if it links up its destiny with Hitler and if we Germans do not ourselves establish order in Germany but leave it to other nations.” (Ibid., November 29, 1941.) And, most monstrous of all, by warnings of sinister retribution: “... defeat would mean Germany dismembered and payment for war losses caused to Europe and the USSR by Hitler.” This is the propaganda of the most violent Allied imperialist war lords: the carving apart of Germany and the game of reparations all over again.
And the German soldiers? Pravda complains of their refusal to desert, their reluctance to surrender even when trapped. The leaflets addressed to them by the Red Army, ignoring the revolutionary Leninist appeal of fraternization and soldiers’ solidarity, seeks only to humble and humiliate the German soldier. When you wish to surrender, says a typical leaflet, shout “long live Moscow, Down with Hitler.” And Pravda complains of a lack of response!
So we see that Stalinist propaganda, despite its faintly “social” stamp, falls under the same general heading as does the rest of the imperialist proposals we have described. Nor, considering the integral and subordinate nature of Russia’s position in the “democratic” war camp, is this unexpected. The deceptive coloration of Soviet proposals wears away the instant concrete problems are raised. Beneath the veneer appear the worst schemes of Allied imperialism: occupation of Germany at the bayonet point; disruption and breaking up of German economy and unification; the burden of reparations and war costs; the erection of an Allied-controlled German military dictatorship.
All that we have outlined has the following characteristics in common:

The German nation, its people and the leaders of its Nazi regime alike, are responsible for the war and all its phases. Correspondingly, the people and regimes of the Allied powers, including Russia, are “innocent.” All alike ignore the class and imperialist roots of the war.
 
Victory of the Allies must come primarily, if not entirely, through decisive military blows. Political appeals are subordinate to military action. “Let the guns speak.”
 
Germany as a whole is to bear the burden of war expenses.
 
The German state after the victory is to be a puppet state, imprisoned by the new cordon sanitaire that the new super-Versailles Treaty will establish.
 

German Masses Are Alienated
The failure of this type of “appeal” has been all too evident. Naturally the extremist elements of the “Hate the Hun” school of thought have pointed to this abysmal failure as proof of their teachings about the inherent war lust of the German nation. These racialists (of the “democratic” camp) say, in effect: “You see. They will not listen to reason. They must be exterminated!”
Furthermore, nothing could be more skillfully calculated to bind together the German masses than the combined effect of this propaganda. Hitler makes no effort to conceal it from the German people. The perverted Goebbels quotes it at length in his cynical articles. The net effect is: The German masses tend to be bound together (workers and middle class in particular) behind the German state out of fear of reprisals; out of a revived national consciousness stimulated by the Allies; out of the ever-present fear of the new Versailles; out of the dread of an Allied military occupation.
Shrewd Nazi propagandists and journalists play dark and gloomy variations on the theme “Germany cannot lose this war, or else ...!” Obsessed by the consequences of Allied victory, their thoughts paralyzed by the melancholy remembrances of the previous occupation and its accompanying chaos, their vision distorted by the dismal forebodings of a new Allied “revanche” there is little cause to wonder at the passive acquiescence of the German masses to the brutal dictatorship. Such are the fruits of the nationalist and imperialist chauvinism preached by the Allies! Effective? Yes, in prolonging the war, in stiffening German resistance, in providing the Nazi regime with a backbone of fear and despair.
An insubstantial backbone, it may be said. Perhaps, but let us not neglect the example of Soviet Russia, whose people – despite their hatred of the Stalinist regime – offered an amazing and mighty resistance to the invader out of fear of the consequences of his success It is not unlikely that the actual assault of the Allies upon Germany proper would meet a similar opposition, with similar results.
To summarize, then, the net results of nationalism:

It indefinitely prolongs the war – in terms of duration and cost (both human and productive costs);
 
It arouses and exaggerates the most primitive racial and nationalist conceptions, thus adding to the total destructive horrors of the war;
 
It blocks the formulation of a workable (that is, a revolutionary) peace program that will appeal to the tired masses;
 
It deliberately obscures the character of the war (its origins and objectives) and prevents any appeal to the people based on social and political rights or desires.
 

Internationalism Alone Can Win
It is precisely here that socialist internationalism comes in, unequivocally and diametrically opposed to every concept we have described above. Its fundamental premise is too well known to need repetition: the workers, the people of all lands and nations have nothing in common with the class interests of their respective ruling classes, but have everything in common with one another. The proof, the vindication of this statement? Look about, there it exists in overabundant form.
True internationalism proceeds not with the objective of military victory or military defeat; true internationalism serves not one aim of any ruling class. Socialist internationalism seeks to thrust aside the mists of chauvinism and racialism and find its way into the minds of workers, of soldiers and of the colonial slaves. To the program of “blood, sweat and tears” offered by the world bourgeoisie it counterposes the socialist program of “world solidarity, peace and socialist reconstruction.”
Contrast its appeal to the people of Germany with the appeal of the Churchills, Manns and Piecks. Internationalism, striding over the barriers of trenches, jungles, seas and poisoned nationalist propaganda, would strike deep to reach the innermost desires of the German masses. Basing itself on the people’s hatred for Hitler and his fellow dictators, arming itself with their widespread hatred of the war it would guarantee to the German workers their rightful place in the socialist Europe of tomorrow; a place unrestricted by military occupation of foreign troops and unhampered by an unbearable reparations burden. It would urge the masses of Germany to rise in revolt against Hitler, in conjunction with the revolt of all peoples against their oppressors. Its message, though varying from country to country in details, is essentially the same everywhere. Socialist internationalism can prevent the catastrophic conclusion that the imperialists of the world have in store for us.
 



“India, the largest, the longest dominated and exploited of British conquests, the richest field of investment, the source of incalculable plunder and profit, the base of Asiatic expansion, the inexhaustible reservoir of material and human resources for British wars, the focus of alt British strategic aims, the pivot of the empire and bulwark of British world domination ...”
* * *
This statement, taken from an analysis of the problem of India written by the Indian Section of the Fourth International, sums up the importance of that vast country for Great Britain and its finance-imperialist rulers. What would the empire on which the sun is now rapidly setting, be without India? An empty, lifeless shell; a small, highly industrialized group of islands; the white cliffs of Dover surrounded by the bleak seas of the North Atlantic.
Now the hordes of Japanese militarism and imperialism stand at the frontier of India. The Japanese Navy – having admittedly wiped out in a single action the entire Asiatic fleet of the “United Nations” – rules the monsoon-swept waters of the Indian Ocean. Premier Tojo, spokesman for the feudal-military-capitalist rulers of the Japanese Empire, boldly informs the people of India that “their turn is next.”
What is the situation in India, from the standpoint of that nation’s defense?

Britain has deliberately, sabotaged the expansion and building of Indian industry because it did not want it to compete with British manufactures. Result – India manufactures ONLY small arms and light munitions; no airplanes, tanks, autos, trucks, anti-aircraft guns, etc.
 
All of India’s fortified defenses face (like the famous naval guns of Singapore!) in the wrong direction. The seacoasts on the East and West are defenseless and unfortified. All the forts are in the North, facing. Afghanistan and Soviet Russia.
 
There is no Indian Navy – only a few minesweepers, patrol boats and ferries.
 
The Indian Army (restricted rigidly to Moslem and Sikh soldiers in pursuance of typical British divide-and-rule policy) numbers a mere million; has little or no training in modern forms of warfare and, most important of all, is dominated by reactionary and narrow-minded British officers. It is primarily an army of paid soldiers, organized to do Britain’s work. It is NOT a mass army of the Indian people.
 
Britain has refused to give a single real concession to the people of India, designed to rally their support. How Emperor Hirohito must have rejoiced when he learned of Churchill’s refusal of nationalist demands for freedom and proposal, instead, “Dominion Status” years after the war!
 
Britain has raised a storm of indignation over India by its criminal massacre of 10 Madras textile workers who had gone on strike. Churchill, by this act, sealed in blood his declaration to the effect that India shall not go free, so long as British imperialism lives and breathes.
 

The Real “Fifth Column”
Given these circumstances, the probability of a successful military defense of India from Axis attack appears remote indeed. The British – the REAL “fifth column” in India – have, by their actions, cleared the way for an easy march of the Axis troops from Calcutta to Bombay. Certainly the numerous fiascos of the United Nations in the defense of their other ill-gotten colonial possessions in Asia would hardly stand up as encouragement for what will happen in India.
In our opinion, if the defense of India is conducted on a purely military basis, without the aid of the 385 million people (and this is what British policy means) then the Japanese-German, forces will conquer India with comparative ease – unless the Allies are able to reinforce India with tremendous reserves.
But such a victory over India by Japan and its Axis partners would constitute a DISASTER for the people of the country. The Axis imperialists march not as “liberators” of the colonial slaves, but as imperialists who desire to make themselves the new masters of the present British rule.
How can this disaster be prevented, even at this terribly late hour? Will the people of India have to pay with their lives and their blood for the two centuries of criminal British action? What is necessary is to find a way of shaking off the hand of British rule, and at the same time rallying the people of India in their own defense. The people of India must defend themselves through their own independent action and initiative against the power that rules them today and against the approaching Japanese bandits.
 
Fourth International’s Program
This is the message being broadcast throughout India today by the revolutionary nationalists and socialists of the Fourth International, Going beyond generalizations, they offer to the people a program of action and policy in defense of their interests.

No political support to their present rulers, the British; no political support to their would-be rulers, the Japanese.
 
We, the people, the workers and peasants of India, must arm ourselves by any means for our own defense. We must organize an army based not upon the British-dominated “Indian Army,” but our own People’s Militia of defense.
 
Reject any attempt on the part of “our” native capitalists and politicians or British agents (like Gandhi, Nehru or Chiang Kai-shek) to line India up behind the United Nations in exchange for fake promises.
 
We must organize our mass committees of defense; councils of workers, poor farmers and soldiers who will conduct the defense of the country. To rally the great peasantry of India behind us we must urge them to take the land denied them by British landlords and rich rajahs kept in power by British bayonets. We must wipe out, by our action, the debts and burdens of these peasants. In the cities the Indian workers must seek control of the factories and run them for the country’s defense, not for British profits.
 
We must struggle for a Constituent Assembly of the People, based upon universal suffrage – an Assembly whose first act should be to draft and proclaim the People’s Declaration of Independence from British and all foreign rule.
 
We must organize our own self-government, based upon the broad and democratic organizations of the workers and poor people; a Workers and Peasants Government.

This is the program urged upon the people by the revolutionists of India. It demands that they take their fate in their own hands, instead of leaving it in the bloody and blundering hands of their present rulers, Does this mean they advocate revolution? Absolutely, for only a social revolution will give India something worth fighting for. The people as a whole will gain national liberation and independence; the peasantry will gain the land they hunger for; the workers will have won freedom from capitalist exploitation.
 



“Sir T.B. Sapru, liberal leader, received today a reply at New Delhi to his message to Prime Minister Winston Churchill, urging major governmental changes in India.
“Mr. Churchill replied that Britain had already complied with one of Sir Taj’s requests by offering India representation in the Imperial War Cabinet, The pressure of public business, he added, prevented him from providing Sir Taj with a more complete reply at this time.” (New York Times, February 21)
* * *
The British Empire, tottering from continuous defeats, was forced last week by the exigencies of the military situation to consider some sort of “concession” to India.
Britain has met defeat after defeat. It has been driven out of Europe and its Middle East position is threatened. In the Far East Japan has dealt some mighty blows. Hong Kong, Singapore, Burma, the East Indies ... British prestige among the subjugated colonial peoples would sell for a nickel a ton right now!
Naturally, plenty remains of the empire. Built up after 300 year of toil by the “blood, sweat and tears” of its 500,000,000 oppressed people, the British Empire cannot vanish overnight.
What remains still untouched by actual battle is India, described by Churchill as “the brightest jewel in the crown of the empire.” If this were to fall it would mean the virtual finish of the empire. For Britain’s world might was built on the wealth, resources and labor concentrated in India.
But even India – this “brightest jewel” – is dangerously threatened. A vast two-pronged Axis pincers threatens to meet in India. Already one prong, the Japanese drive in Burma, is drawing closer every day. India has become one of the focal points of the war.
Even the dim-witted, decadent, old school tie Tories have begun dimly to grasp the fact that if India is to be held its people must be won over to active support of the British fight. They begin to understand that the lowly natives whom they have so long oppressed, so long enslaved, have now become a key factor in their imperialist war.
(A sad thought for the British imperialist, is it not, that his war should depend so much on the attitude and actions of a nation ... of “beggars”!)
So the British Tories have dug into their hearts – and offered India two seats on the Imperial War Cabinet and the Pacific War Council.
The Indian people cry out for bread, for land, for national independence. Instead they are offered ... an opportunity to have some Indian politicians sit on the council deciding the conduct of the very imperialist war of which they are a victim!
But this offer got absolutely no rise out of the Indian people or the leaders of the nationalist movement. Even Chiang Kai-shek, agent of the Allied powers, who is trying to sell the imperialist war to India, publicly proclaimed that it was not enough. In a radio address he proposed that the British make “a substantial and generous offer” to the people of India. What that offer should be he forgot to mention.
And then there came the statement of Churchill – which is quoted at the beginning of this article:
“The pressure of public business prevents me from providing Sir Taj with a more complete reply.”
Don’t bother me, says Churchill. “The pressure of business.” I’m in conference, says Churchill. I can’t be annoyed by the complaints of 385 million people. I got other things to think about.
We think the Emperor Nero must have been around with his fiddle when Churchill made this reply. We’ll bet he was tuning up to play the Swan Song.
And who was this Sir Taj that Churchill gave the brush-off to? A radical, red-hot nationalist?
No. He is the leader of the most conservative section of India – the civil servants, the British appointees, the timid Milquetoast “liberals” of India. He is an opponent of the National Congress, of Gandhi and of Nehru.
Was he demanding India’s freedom and liberation? No, for Sir Taj ardently supports both the War and British rule in India. He merely wants the war to be run more effectively and British rule to be “liberalized” (a few more higher jobs for his fellow civil servants).
If HE got such a brush-off, you can imagine what Churchill would say to the demands of India’s people. Their demand is not for a couple of seats on this committee or that council. Their demand is for nothing less than complete freedom from British rule – political and economic – and the turning over of the entire country to the people themselves, to be administered in their own name and by themselves.
Yes, the British government may be forced to make some sort of “concession” to India in order to try to gain support for its war. We don’t know, as this article is written, what form that concession will take; one thing we do know: whatever the glib talk of the British imperialists, they will never voluntarily surrender their “jewel,” they will never voluntarily give India its complete and unconditional freedom. And the people of India will be satisfied with nothing less. That is why any “concession” made solves nothing.
“Pressure of public business” may keep Churchill’s mouth shut tight when it comes to India’s liberation, but the boom of cannon and the approach of airplanes must arouse the masses of India to action – action to expel from their country those imperialists who rule it today, the British, and those who want to rule it tomorrow, the Japanese.
The Indian masses must defend themselves from attack! The Indian masses must drive out the imperialists – all of them! That is the road to independence and freedom!
 



When General Chiang Kai-shek visited India recently for the purpose of swinging that country over to the side of the United Nations in the war, he spent much time with Nehru – leader of the Indian Nationalist Congress and right-hand man of Gandhi. Those who speak of India’s future always do so with the idea that Nehru will be at its head.
What sort of a man is this Nehru? Can we really expect him to stand at the head of a free and independent India?
His record and his character, far from leading to such a happy conclusion, point rather to his becoming a spokesman and leader for a modified British rule in India.
Nehru is known among his friends and the people of India as “The High Priest of Confusion.”
He has earned this uncomplimentary title by his actions over a long period of years – actions which we can summarize as follows:

He has always been the adjutant and stooge of the conservative Gandhi in the Nationalist movement. Whenever the Nationalist radical wing threatened to get out of line Nehru was “there to patch up affairs.”
 
Nehru has always – at moments of crisis – supported the right wing of the Congress, as opposed to the left wing. At every opportunity he has made it clear that the slow, easy-going methods of the conservative leaders are more suitable to his tastes.
 
His claims of being a socialist are really something to laugh at. His “socialism” is no more radical than that of Sir Stafford Cripps or Bevin – both of whom sit in the English war cabinet along with Churchill, leader of England’s Tory Party. Nehru has no idea what constitutes the theory and practice of revolutionary socialism.
 
Nehru has constantly worked for an agreement with the British during the course of the war. When Gandhi said “Our objective should not he to embarrass the opponent in his hour of need,” Nehru nodded his agreement and approval to this cowardly policy.

Nehru has – along with the reactionary Congress leadership – aided in the stifling of every desire on the part of India’s 385 million people to take their fate into their own hands and gain their freedom by their own action against the British or any other foreign power that attempts to rule them.
Nehru sees himself NOT at the head of a free and unified India, but at the head of a national government that will rule and administer India supposedly in the name of the people, but actually in the interests of British imperialism because its REAL power, its ECONOMIC power, will remain unbroken under such a set-up.
Nehru – son of a wealthy, high caste and aristocratic family – does not represent the great working class and peasant masses of his country. He is far closer to the native Indian capitalists, landlords and bankers who wish to rule in conjunction with the white British capitalists, landlords and bankers. This “High Priest of Confusion” proves his real character now – in India’s hour of crisis – when, instead of issuing a ringing call to the people to rise in their own defense, he indulges in secret and suspicious negotiations and conversations with Chiang Kai-shek and other British agents and, representatives. Nehru will not lead a free and independent India.
 



Whenever the problem of India and the incessant demand of its 385,000,000 people for freedom arises, the Hindu-Moslem question is immediately brought in.
It is the most powerful and most often used argument against granting India its independence. It is most frequently employed by British imperialist officials and their apologists in America.
The argument runs as follows:
“We (the English) have India’s best interests at heart. We would like to see the country free, and standing on its own feet. But we don’t DARE to free India because of the Hindu and Moslem antagonism. Why, if we were to leave India, the country would fall into chaos and civil war; every Hindu would try to murder every Moslem, while every Moslem would try to slit every Hindu’s throat. Therefore, we, the English, must – in the name of common humanity – remain to prevent the outbreak of a Hindu-Moslem struggle. The fact that we continue to drain the country of its wealth and exploit its manpower (and, incidentally, now ask the Indians to prepare to scorch the earth of their country as the Japanese advance) is simply a coincidence. We are really remaining in India to prevent civil war between Hindu and Moslem.”
Thus speaks every spokesman and every newspaper of the United Nations.
A tissue of lies from start to finish! It is not true that the Hindu people and the Moslem people hate one another; that they are prepared to slaughter one another; that, therefore, the British must remain to prevent such a catastrophe. And we shall prove this.
What is the difference between a Moslem and a Hindu? Is it a racial difference, a color difference, a language difference?
Absolutely not! The difference between a Hindu and a Moslem is simply and solely a religious difference; a difference in religious beliefs, customs and practices. It is the same sort of difference as exists, let us say, between Catholics and Protestants, or Baptists and Lutherans in the United States. The Moslems (about one-third of the population) are not a separate and distinct race of people – as, for example, are the Negro people in America – they are a different religious community!
 
Live and Work Together
Hindus and Moslems live together, side by side in communities; Hindu peasants and Moslem peasants work side by side; Hindu workers and Moslem workers are in the same factories. If anyone were to suggest that America should be divided between Catholics and Protestants and that these religious communities hate one another we would say either that the man is crazy, or a Ku Klux Klanner. This holds even more true for India. Hindus and Moslems speak the same language, depending on their geographic territory (it is more British propaganda to say that 200 or 300 languages are spoken in India – there are six basic languages spoken in the country); they face exactly the same political and economic problems (namely, to improve their conditions and to obtain the land stolen from them by the English rulers); they ALL live under the same primitive and poverty-stricken conditions.
Furthermore, there has been such an enormous racial intermixing during India’s thousands of years of history that there is no such thing as a racial group in India, Hindus and Moslems look alike, act alike and follow the same general traditions and customs; they differ only on religious questions.
But what about the Indian Nationalist Congress? Isn’t that a Hindu organization? And doesn’t the Moslem League represent the Moslem people? The answer to these questions is NO.
The Congress is not a Hindu nor a religious organization of any kind. It is a POLITICAL organization standing on a POLITICAL program. It participates in political actions and elections. It has no religious program or customs and includes in its ranks members of every religious community in India (Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs, Christians, Parsees, etc.) So do the Democratic Party, and the Republican Party in the United States, but that doesn’t make them religious groups.
 
Why More Hindus
Naturally there are more Hindus than any other group in the Congress because Hindus are two-thirds of the population. But they are there because they are NATIONALISTS and fight for their country’s freedom, not because they are Hindus. There are also many Moslems in the organization. The president of the Congress (Azad) is a Moslem; the leader of the Congress Socialist Party (Meherally) is a Moslem. In the Northwest Frontier Province, which is 90 per cent Moslem, the Congress got 90 per cent of the votes at the last election! In a word, it is a political question, not a religious question. Hindus arid Moslems alike are united around the problem of attaining national independence.
But what about the Moslem League and its spokesman, Jinnah, the wealthy Bombay lawyer who claims to speak in the name of the entire Moslem community and who threatens to precipitate civil war if the British withdraw from India?

The Moslem League is an organization of religious fanatics and English-bribed landlords and middle-class lawyers and intellectuals. Its prime function is precisely what it is doing now – creating confusion and providing an excellent “excuse” for the British to continue their unwanted and too-long occupation of India, The Moslem League has no mass support among the Moslem poor peasants and workers, whom it deliberately tries to stir up against their Hindu brothers in exactly the same manner as American bosses try to create antagonism between white and black workers in America.
 
The Moslem League has never dared participate in political action or elections because that would reveal instantly its lack of support. And, most significant of all, the Moslem League does not stand for a free and independent India. (How convenient for the British!)
 

Some Additional Facts
Here are some additional FACTS (not British propaganda) on the Hindu-Moslem question.

Hindus and Moslems live scattered all over the country, from North to South. To divide them geographically and territorially would be as impossible as to divide America territorially between Catholics and Protestants.
 
The first Moslem state in India was established in 1206. That is, the Moslems came to India over 700 years ago! Their racial and cultural mixing with the original inhabitants has been going on now for more than seven centuries.
 
Ninety per cent of all communal conflicts (Hindu-Moslem riots) take the form of an economic clash between peasants, money-lenders and landlords of different faiths. Thus, what is at bottom an economic and class struggle is described as a “religious” or Hindu-Moslem riot The other 10 per cent are deliberately provoked by the English dictators in their traditional divide-and-rule policy (similar to Arabs versus Jews in Palestine).
 
The cause of antagonism between middle-class Moslem intellectuals and Hindus is the limited number of Jobs (civil-service and government posts) available to educated Indians. The British seek to foster and deepen every petty quarrel between a Moslem and Hindu in exactly the same manner as a boss seeks to set workers of different faiths against one another in the shop.
 
The Moslem aristocracy of the Moslem League spends 75 per cent of its propaganda in attacking the nationalist objectives and the agrarian radicalism of the Congress Party.

Hindu and Moslem workers and peasants have shown over and over again, in practice, that they recognize their REAL enemy – foreign imperialist rule. In every action involving the question of their freedom they are as one,
In Cawnpore, for example, it is reported, “the Moslem workers have joined the union and have defied all efforts to separate them from their Hindu comrades. Some time ago the communalists of the Moslem League tried to make a split in the union by bringing out a Moslem League green flag, but the workers pointed to their red flag and said that the blood which had dyed it red was not communal or religious.” (Schiff, The Present, Conditions of India, page 174)
This is THEIR answer to the Hindu-Moslem question.
 



“As we write we are told that the Cabinet has failed to arrive at the agreed solution. The Cabinet need not worry. The matter is out of their hands. No half measures have any value now. The Indian revolution is on. There is only one possible chance to make up a little of the lost time …
“Nehru must be asked to become Prime Minister and Minister of Defense with full powers and with a provisional All-Indian Legislative Assembly to act as the representative organ of the state.
“Make no mistake. This is not opportunity knocking at our door – it is history battering it down.” (The Tribune, weekly magazine of Sir Stafford Cripps)
Rangoon, port of entry for the Burma Road, has fallen. The Japanese forces are now conquering the remainder of the former British crown colony of Burma. Their forces are gathering in the Indian Ocean in preparation for a land, air and sea attack on Ceylon and the shores of the Indian coast. Submarines have already been reported off of Bombay.
And it is announced in London that the British Cabinet is not yet prepared to make a statement on the question of India and the war. The debate which was supposed to take place in the House of Commons this week is reported postponed indefinitely.
It is clear what is wrong. A bitter struggle is on between various groups in the British Tory ruling class. This struggle is not over the the question of “Freedom for India” versus continued enslavement, but over the question: How little can we give? Churchill against Cripps; Tory against so-called “Liberal.” it is clear that the British Cabinet is being torn to pieces and may fall as a result of the “Indian Question.”
The press is filled with rumors about India and “concessions” to it. “Dominion Status Immediately”; “Dominion Status After the War is Over”; “Indianization of the Viceroy’s Executive Council”; “provisional Government,” etc. These are some of the rumored propositions. Meanwhile, reflecting the mortal crisis of the British Tories, NOTHING HAPPENS!
But the 385 million people of India still continue to speak. They speak the same language as always. They will accept nothing less than a complete transfer of power into their own hands, with full and unhampered independence accompanying this transfer.
So powerful is this feeling among the people of India that even the nationalist leader Nehru is compelled to reject IN ADVANCE the various half-hearted “concessions” and reforms put forward by Cripps and British liberals. Says Nehru:
“The Indian problem can be approached only on a basis of Indian freedom. Nothing else will make a vital difference or move our millions to effective action. Until they realize that they have achieved freedom and are fighting to defend and preserve it, all else is unimportant, talk of reforms and minor changes and what will happen after the war will be mere quibbling.”
Exactly. This is why the only real settling of the “Indian Question” remains in the hands of the workers and peasants. What the Churchill-Cripps Cabinet does is not decisive; what the people of India do is.
 



In the August issue of the Fourth International, the editor, Felix Morrow, had the bald statement that there is a deep gulf between his organization and the Workers Party on the question of India. At the time, we ignored this statement as a typical Morrow “polemical exaggeration” and stupidity, typical of the sort of thing that has earned that gentleman his notoriety. We beg to acknowledge our error; Morrow was correct! There is a gulf between our position on India and his. For, as we shall prove in this article, his position and that of the Cannon group represents a whitewashing and support of the Indian colonial bourgeoisie, in a manner clearly reminiscent of the Stalinist collaboration with the Chinese Kuomintang (1925–27).
The Cannonite theoreticians, even on questions of elementary fact, do not know what they are talking about (except when they plagiarize unashamedly from the work of others). To give a few illustrations:

The Fourth International completely underestimates the numerical strength and importance of the Indian proletariat, particularly its growth since the war. It bases itself upon old, now-antiquated statistics;
 
on the Hindu-Moslem question a virtual silence is maintained, except for some hackneyed quotations from ancient sources; apparently, either they know nothing about the matter, or they think it plays no role in the Indian events. Either cause is based upon ignorance;
 
the Congress Socialist Party is spoken of as a leading force among revolutionary circles in India today, an important factor in the militancy of the revolutionary proletariat. But any acquaintance with the decline and disintegration of this petty-bourgeois party (especially since the war, when the Stalinists and the Gandhi-ists tore it to bits) makes such a statement ludicrous. This party, if it still exists, is an empty shell of its former bloated self, incapable of any rôle! Its best elements have long since joined with the Bolshevik-Leninists of India;
 
the peasant organization mentioned in the various articles – the All-India Kisan Sabha (Peasants’ Union) – is not what, by implication, the unacquainted reader is led to believe it is. The Sabha, limited to the provinces of Bihar and Orissa, is an organization of small tenant and landowning peasants. It is not a union of agricultural laborers or poor peasants who are forced to work for others at least part of the year. If the editor had taken the trouble to read the thesis of the Indian Bolshevik-Leninists with care, he would have noted how these comrades, while recognizing the importance and militancy of the Sabha, emphasize the fundamental task – the need for the independent organization of the farm laborers and poor peasantry;
 
the entire issue ignores the history of the Congress during the past three years (that is, since the war began), fails to link up today’s events with this history and thus gives a breathless, excited character to its newly-discovered “revolutionary crisis in India.” Or, perhaps, this ignoring of the Congress’ rôle during the past three years is more closely related to our main point – the whitewashing and opportunist glorification of the Indian colonial bourgeoisie.
 

Position of Indian Bolshevik-Leninists
With what solicitude the Fourth International writes of the Congress! That notorious red-baiter and right-winger, Abdul Kalam Azad, is delicately referred to as “Maulana Azad, the Moslem scholar and president of the Congress”! How the Congress is painted up, in a stupid and shameless manner! “A hundred times it has been established that the Congress has infinitely more following among the Untouchables than the British agents who parade as their leaders ...” Certainly Dr. Ambedkar is a British agent with no following among the Untouchables, but anyone acquainted with the Congress today knows that it, too, has no base among this most depressed section of India’s people because of its long betrayal of their interests. “But great masses ... arose under the formal leadership of the Congress.” “But at the given moment the people of India are fighting under the banner of the Congress.”
Contrast this approach to the Congress, the party of the Indian colonial bourgeoisie – with the scientific analysis rendered by the Indian Bolshevik-Leninists.
Since 1934 Gandhi and the leaders of the National Congress have had as their chief aim that of preventing the renewal of a mass struggle against imperialism ... (The New International, April 1942)
Or,
The main instrument whereby the Indian bourgeoisie seeks to maintain control over the national movement is the Indian National Congress, the classic party of the Indian capitalist class, seeking as it does the support of the petty bourgeois and if possible of the workers, for their own aims (Ibid.)
Or,
... the direction of its policy remains exclusively in the hands of the bourgeoisie, as also the control of the party organization, as was dramatically proved at Tripuri and after. The Indian National Congress in its social composition, its organization and above all in its political leadership, can be compared to the Kuomintang, which led the Chinese revolution of 1925-27 to its betrayal and defeat.
The characterization of the Indian National Congress as a multi-class party, as the “National United Front” or as “a platform rather than a party” is a flagrant deception calculated to hand over to the bourgeois in advance the leadership of the coming struggle, and so make its betrayal and defeat a foregone conclusion. (Ibid.)
Then I am correct, Felix Morrow will say. You do not support the Indian nationalist movement because it is led by the Congress. Ignoring for the moment the question of who is leading the present movement, our answer is that this is a false and lying accusation. The question is not one of support or non-support to the movement. The Workers Party stands unequivocably behind the nationalist masses in their struggle with imperialism. The basic difference between us and Morrow is over our attitude toward the Congress bourgeois leadership and its r6le in the Indian revolution. Our attitude can be no better expressed than in the words of the Indian revolutionists we have quoted. But, it goes without saying, in so far as the Congress conducts a struggle (more accurately, is forced on the road of struggle by the people) we give our critical support to such actions.
Morrow, forgetting Trotsky’s major point in the introduction to his book. The Permanent Revolution, that the essence of revolutionary strategy and tactics lies in grasping the specific features and peculiarities that are brought about by the law of uneven development, tries to place India and China in precisely the same category. Herein lies the major mistake in his analysis. The question of why we support India’s struggle and why we refuse to support China’s is answered in the article of Comrade Shachtman appearing in this issue. What we are concerned with here is pointing out the differences between the Indian and Chinese bourgeoisies. How can one compare the two? One holds state power (“Free China”); the other is lodged in jail! One is a class with some strength, maturity, political and social experience; the other is historically feeble and inept, incapable even of taking power. One organized and led nationalist armies in bloody wars against imperialism, gaining its semi-colonial status on the battlefield; the other proposes a philosophy of non-violence and remains more than ever in a colonial status. Of course, in a general sense, they are similar: both are victimized by world imperialism.
Why do we insist upon these specific distinctions between the Congress (party of the Indian bourgeoisie), and the Kuomintang (party of the Chinese bourgeoisie)? Because it proves that the Congress cannot even play the rôle in India that the Kuomintang did in China! Fifteen years of capitalist crisis have passed since 1927, the Indian bourgeoisie has not become any stronger or more powerful in that time. On the contrary. We ask Morrow, since he assigns such an important rôle to the Congress Party (not the proletarian revolution, to be sure, but a good sized chunk of the bourgeois revolution, at any rate): what exactly do you expect of the Congress in the present crisis? We have given our answer to that question – we expect nothing but counter-revolutionary sabotage and betrayal, at the earliest opportunity, of that struggle. What do you expect?
 
Attitude Toward Indian Bourgeoisie
But the Congress is leading the struggle today, isn’t it? “What about this present struggle led by the Congress – does Shachtman support it?” Morrow asks (emphasis in original). We are ready to grant that in a “formal” sense the Congress resolution was the event that precipitated the present fight. But we are concerned with the content of the struggle, not its form. The answer to Morrow’s question is not a simple yes or no. Rather, it is yes and no! Yes, the Congress bourgeoisie is “leading the struggle” so as to divert it from revolutionary channels and behead it at the earliest opportunity; no, the Congress is not “leading the struggle” – the real struggle of the workers and peasants dying under British fire, the struggle of the masses seeking to find the road to power. How beautifully our point is symbolized by the presence of Gandhi (the spokesman of the bourgeoisie) in “jail” in the summer palace of Aga Khan! The masses struggle in the streets, in the villages. Its “leaders” are in jail, waiting for the imperialist master to make the first overtures for truce and compromise. It is the duty of a Marxist to lay bare the anti-revolutionary, compromising rfile of the Congress leadership, not to get sloppy over its presence in “jail.” The Indian bourgeoisie has plenty of defenders – that is, compromisers – among the liberals.
Morrow quotes from a statement of the Workers Party issued at the start of the struggle. “We do not know whether Gandhi, Nehru and Azad intend to go through with their call to mass struggle.” Yes, Morrow, we do not have your confidence in the Indian bourgeoisie! This statement was written on the eve of the struggle, before it began, when the Congress leaders were desperately appealing to everyone under the sun in an effort to arrange a last minute compromise. The struggle was forced upon the Congress (that is, its formal endorsement of the struggle) by the people of India, fed up with three years of treachery and Gandhi-ist inaction. Do not cover yourself up by saying: “We ... were and remain certain that the Congress leadership will not go through with the struggle to the end.” We are not talking about the end – we are talking about India today. Sir Stafford Cripps has pointed out in Parliament that “the Congress working committee had passed a resolution accepting the proposal, but Mr. Gandhi intervened and that resolution was subsequently reversed.” The working committee had accepted the sell-out, but Gandhi (who knows the temper of the people much better than Azad, Nehru and the other working committee members) demanded a higher price! There is Morrow’s “Congress leadership” of the “concrete struggle!”
And what role is the Congress leadership playing today, in the midst of battle? All reporters have remarked on the disappearance of the professional congressmen from the scene; the emergence of new, young and militant working-class and student elements! In this elemental and chaotic rebellion of great masses the formal Congress leadership has been swept aside (that is, by everyone but Morrow) and replaced by the first semblances of a new, revolutionary leadership in the earliest pangs and difficulties of its formation. There is, in a sense, a dual power within the nationalist movement itself – the old, decrepit and conservative leadership (wringing its hands and shedding tears at what is transpiring) and this new, yet-to-be leadership emerging from the people. We do not urge that the leadership should be granted formalistically to the old leadership. On the contrary, the fate of the Indian revolution depends upon the seizure of hegemony by the Indian workers and peasants, by new leadership. We are sure that the Congress leaders will be pleased with Morrow’s protests at our failure to recognize and grant their formal leadership!
We now come to our final point. We are charged with nothing less than “an irresponsibility which one can characterize only as criminal.” This charge is launched against us for having raised the question of the Indian bourgeoisie going over to the Japanese. Let us quote the entire section of the article referred to (The New International, August 1942):
Yet, what was it that forced the hand of the Congress (the Indian bourgeoisie) and made it take steps that – despite its desire – precipitated the violent clashes? In our opinion, the causes are two: (1) The threat of Japanese invasion accompanied by a growing pro-Japanese sentiment among the population (2) the insistence and unquenchable demand of the people that a national struggle should be launched immediately. It became necessary for Gandhi, political leader of the Indian bourgeoisie, to act or else be swept aside by other elements. In this respect the Mahatma is infinitely more shrewd and far-sighted than the pitiful and cowardly Nehru!
The successes of Japanese imperialism have had an impressive effect upon the Indian capitalist class. Coupled with the defeats and astounding weaknesses of the British, the native bourgeoisie (or an influential section of it, even if we exclude those merchants and industrialists who are benefiting by large British war orders) has lost confidence in the ruling imperialist power. It. sees the British Empire staggering and tottering under endless blows. Yet – being an abortive product of capitalism in its permanent decline – this native bourgeoisie is unable and unprepared to take over power. It is too small; too weak, too divided, too undernourished – a lightweight contender in the heavyweight struggle for power in India.
But it does not wish to tie its fate to that, of a doomed, bankrupt imperialist power – the British Empire. Therefore, beyond a doubt, the Indian bourgeoisie is casting about for a new master to which it may subordinate itself a new power before which it may lay its claim for junior partnership in the exploitation of the country. Obviously, that new power is the greatly expanded Japanese Empire! It is impossible to say whether a “deal” or tacit understanding has been reached with Japanese imperialism, but it is clear that doubly-parasitic Indian capitalism is seriously pondering the question.
At the same time, the Congress bourgeois leadership has done everything in its power to sabotage and disorganize the struggle against imperialism.
 
For the Revolutionary Masses
The interpretation that Morrow places upon this section is that we accuse the Congress leadership of being Japanese-Axis agents! This section is supposed to give a “theoretical” basis to our “criminal slander”! As a matter of fact, says Morrow, this goes even further than the social-democratic New Leader and could well be utilized by an enterprising British agent.
The disputed section is an historical and social analysis of a given class, the Indian capitalist class. It seeks to explain what motivates the current actions, its rôle in India and the war, its possibilities and its limitations. If Morrow disagrees with our statement that “this native bourgeoisie is unable and unprepared to lake over power,” let him say so. If this pretentious windbag disagrees with our contention that the Indian bourgeoisie is unable to rule in its own name, but must seek a senior partner upon whom to lean for support, let him say so. Let him not answer a concrete historic analysis with a cheap effort at an amalgam between us and British imperialism. If he believes there is no tendency among the Indian bourgeoisie of a pro-Japanese character (he says: “... there is not the slightest sign that the Congress leadership is seeking a ‘deal’ or tacit understanding with Japan”), then he grants the Indian bourgeoisie, by implication, the power and ability to seize and hold power in its own name. Is this really true? Suppose that Japan should successfully, or with partial success, invade India? Can it for a moment be doubted that the Indian capitalist and landlord class, in the manner of the Burmese bourgeoisie, would make its peace with the new foreign masters? Whence comes this intransigence and strength with which Morrow so strangely endows the colonial bourgeoisie?
For our part, while we stand unequivocally behind the revolutionary masses of India in their struggle, we refuse for an instant to whitewash the bourgeois leadership, to spread illusions about its historic rôle or its combativity. The Socialist Workers Party, on this question as well as others, moves further along the opportunist road. Morrow’s painting up of the Indian bourgeoisie is but one aspect of the ideological capitulation of his party to one of the warring imperialist camps, to Stalinism. First we have support to Russia in the war, then support to China in the Allied imperialist camp, and now a glorification of the Indian colonial bourgeoisie I We, on the other hand, stand fundamentally with Trotsky, who propounded the revolutionary road for backward, colonial countries as “an alliance of the proletariat and peasantry in struggle against the liberal bourgeoisie.” The situation in India has always been the opposite. We have had an alliance of the worker and peasant with the liberal bourgeoisie, under the hegemony of the latter. Now that the Indian workers and peasants are, for the first time in their history, challenging the liberal bourgeoisie and seeking to break the hold of the Congress, it is criminal to urge them to bow down in respect before the formal authority of their bourgeoisie. Let that task be performed by those suited to it.
 



The terror and violence against an unarmed people who are insistent upon their right to national independence is continuing without a let-up in India. Although clashes in the big industrial cities of the country have stopped for the time being, many cases of shooting and rioting have been reported from the peasant and small town areas outside the big cities. These reports have come through the tight British censorship and we list some of them below:

In the district of Ashti, near the home of Gandhi, four constables and an inspector were stoned to death and two other constables were burned alive by angry peasants upon whom they had fired.
 
At the town of Chimur four policemen were beaten to death with their own clubs which they had tried to use against demonstrators.
 
Authorities in Patna threatened to use forced labor on the roads and fined two communities $1,500 each for political demonstrations.
 
Nationalist newspapers in Calcutta, Bombay, Lucknow, Delhi, Nagpur and Ahmadabad (numbering: well over twenty-five papers) quit in protest against British censorship provisions.
 
In the United Provinces, seventeen Indian peasants were killed in a clash between demonstrators and a police patrol.
 
In the peasant districts of Bombay Province, a total of five were killed and forty-seven wounded in various clashes with the police and soldiers. Curfew was established in virtually every city of the province.
 
Near the city of Lucknow, Many were injured at a demonstration outside a police station; at Benares a crowd that attacked the railroad station and police booths was fired upon, with seventeen wounded.
 
In Bihar Province the authorities admitted that serious demonstrations had taken place last week, with at least ten killed by the soldiers.
 

Struggle Is Still On
And with all this going on (not to mention the innumerable events that are suppressed by British censorship), the foreign rulers of India speak as if the struggle was over and “law and order” had been established! Obviously, they lie, for the movement is spreading from one end of the country to the other, affecting the great masses of poor peasants. According to a secret statement of the Congress Party issued last week, the climax of the anti-British, pro-freedom movement can be expected within the next four weeks.
By their actions in the past three weeks the British imperialists have lost forever any possibility of winning support from India’s masses. Hundreds (approaching 400 to 500) have already been killed in cold blood; thousands have been wounded in bloody clashes and tens of thousands have been arrested in the three weeks of fascist-like British terror. The only result of their terror is that the 400,000,000 people of that country are more determined than ever that the fight for their freedom must go on.
 



We have now begun the fourth year of the Second World War. If you still remember, it all supposedly began when the troops of German imperialism marched into that obscure corridor created by the First World War – the Polish Corridor. But everyone understands that this petty event, in and of itself, did not cause this war, let alone its subsequent spreading to every continent, every corner and every remote area of the world.
Huge armies now wrestle with one another over barren and bitterly hot waste and in the African deserts; naval forces of great powers do battle around obscure islands in the South Pacific, where the cannibalistic natives are awe-stricken by the infinitely more ferocious appetites and murderous instincts of the “civilized” American and Japanese forces; convoys battle through in the Arctic waters off Murmansk and struggle up the Volga to Stalingrad; great forces train, and prepare for NEXT YEAR’S battles, when the probable effort to open up the second front will be made in Northern France.
The entire world is at war; engaged in a planetary, global struggle that has boiled down to a life-and-death clash between two great camps of imperialism, both built on power politics and policies. The United Nations, headed by the English-American-Russian triumvirate, fights the Axis, headed by the German-Italian-Japanese triumvirate, for mastery of the world.
 
Approach International Stalemate
After the completion of three full years of war, and with our entrance upon the fourth blood-drenched year, it is necessary for us to draw certain conclusions both as to where we stand and where we are going. An innumerable flock of questions – how much longer will the war last? Who will win it? Who is winning now? What will happen before it is over? What will happen when it is over? These and other questions concern every American worker. Roosevelt – in his Labor Day message – has given us HIS answer: Sacrifice, prepare for worse, expect worse and perhaps it will end (some day or other). But he speaks from the narrow, class view of the American ruling class. We must speak from the viewpoint of the working class. We have two main conclusions to offer:
(1) The global, imperialist war is tending to become (if it has not already become) an international stalemate, with both of the battling camps incapable of knocking out the other, putting its knee in the other’s stomach and dictating the terms of a peace.
Both camps are too evenly matched, (the deficiencies of one – for example, in manpower – are matched by the deficiencies of the other – for example, in trained soldiery). Each time Hitler’s forces solve a problem they are confronted by a dozen other problems; each time the Allies hold tight on one front they must rush to hold another front.
This game of give-and-take, push-and-pull proceeds all over the world. Here the Allies lick Rommel in Libya; there Hitler takes Stalingrad in Russia; here the Italians get licked in the Mediterranean; there the Japanese push a few inches closer to Australia, or India. What does the whole thing add up to from the standpoint of imperialism, or world control by one combination of big powers? Zero, ZERO! The war goes on and Hitler (who promised to avoid another winter oh the Russian front) tells his people to prepare themselves for the horrors of a second winter! The rulers, all ruling classes alike, have no solution to the problems they have created through their system.
In three years of war we now realize (or should) that no one great power (Germany or America, for instance) can gain, by itself, mastery of the entire world and dictate its terms pf exploitation and order. There can be no one great, super-imperialism maintaining a stranglehold of world domination and so-called peace. The greatest challenger for this role yet, Germany, has proved the impossibility of this oft-talked-of imperialist Utopia by its failure to really organize, dominate and control the continent of Europe, let alone the world!
This is our first main conclusion: the war is approaching an international stalemate which is accompanied by a further deterioration and exhaustion of all powers involved; that the imperialists cannot bring peace in any manner or form but must continue to drag mankind along the bloody road; that not a single one of the present combatants (either singly or collectively) can win the war in the sense of imposing peace and order by superior armed force and violence.
 
How Long Will It Last?
(2) Our more important conclusion is this: that only the working class, supported by the poor farmers and lowest middle class elements, can break the stalemate and drag itself out of this deadlock. It is, obviously, the great masses of people (workers, farmers and middle classes) who are the victims of the deadlock we have described. They will do the interminable and useless fighting (be it a second front, an eighth front, a millionth front); they will be drowned in the savage blood-lettings of the Nazis; they will sacrifice everything in the war economy schemes of FDR and Churchill. The rulers call the tune, but it is the working class that pays the piper!
This point – that only the revolutionary working class can break the iron ring forged by imperialism – answers the question of how long the war will last. It will last just so long as the workers allow it to last, and not one second longer! It will last until the proletariat takes the deadlock into its own two hands and smashes it to bits with the iron bar of socialist action for peace and fraternization of all the warring forces!
If this does not happen, then – if we accept as scientific and accurate the first conclusion stated above – then the war can last into the indefinite future, with all the grim consequences that such a tragedy would have.
But we would be foolish indeed to think that this stalemate can continue indefinitely. Imperialism is already breaking at one of its weakest links, the great sub-continent of India, whose 400,000,000 have launched themselves unhesitatingly on the correct road. Let there be no mistake about it – the events in India already sound the approaching end of the Second World War!
 



Labor Action has already analyzed and explained in detail the economic proposals of FDR contained in his Labor Day speech and the effect these propositions will have upon American living standards.
Here we want to consider the speech in its broader sense, particularly its POLITICAL meaning as related to the, war effort and the growth of totalitarian forms and techniques in the United States.
 
Different from Past “Precedents”
As everyone knows, war – particularly modern imperialist war against a highly organized and determined totalitarian opponent – can only be conducted in the most centralized manner possible. A democratic capitalist nation, combating a fascist capitalist nation such as Hitler Germany or Hirohito Japan, must adopt, one after the other, the methods, manners and practices that prevail in the country of his opponent, This is what we are witnessing now; this is the pattern, into which the Roosevelt attack upon Congress falls.
Reporters, like Arthur Krock of the New York Times can cite previous wars (the American Civil War and the First World War, under Wilson, for example) to prove that the centralization of supreme authority under Roosevelt is quite a natural thing, during wartime, with numerous precedents in American history. Supreme Court decisions can be quoted from now to doomsday to prove that everything the President does – from his first to his latest war decree – is quite “constitutional.” But all this citation of past history misses the MAIN point, the reason why the speeches and acts of FDR are different in kind from those of his predecessors.
When Lincoln made himself a wartime presidential leader, he was fighting a war to establish progressive capitalism’s right to rule over the whole of the United States. Capitalism, at its birth, was eager and rarin’ to go. After THAT war was over, the military rule (except over the conquered South) vanished and a wave of capitalist prosperity accompanied by the growth of democracy came to America. In the First World War the military and dictatorial powers granted to Wilson likewise proved to be temporary wartime measures which were gradually relinquished in the post-war period. Both these wars took place at a period when American capitalism was still going forward and progressing. The measures taken during the two wars were TEMPORARY and could be abolished by the ruling class once victory had been assured, because capitalist democracy is based upon concessions made to the people by a happy, profit-making capitalist class.
However, the analogy with Roosevelt’s powers and demands is false because his measures are not and cannot be temporary. They are a PERMANENT FEATURE of every capitalist nation, to a greater or lesser degree, today. They represent steps and measures that capitalism MUST adopt if (1) it is to win the war against its fascist opponents and (2) if is it to establish its rule and maintain ITS idea of peace once the war is over.
For instance, instead of the ruling class talking about liquidating its huge standing conscript army once the war is over (as it did the last time), we now hear ONLY talk about its permanency and perpetuation for the purpose of policing the world arid keeping “law and order” throughout the universe! Just this one fact alone shows the DIFFERENCE between today and yesteryear.
 
Roosevelt Demands Greater Powers
Consider the Roosevelt message to Congress, even the FORM in which it was cast. FDR bluntly told Congress (as well as the American people, to whom he held Congress up as an object of ridicule, delaying and hampering the war effort) that if it did not take certain measures he proposed and give him certain powers he demanded, he would take those measures and assume those powers by himself, under his own responsibility. Clearly, this had nothing in common with the traditional powers of Congress, which is supposedly the origin and source of r all Presidential legislative powers.
But how does this represent a growth and step toward totalitarian institutions? Have not previous Presidents threatened and fought with their Congresses? Yes, but again this is different, First, in the magnitude of the powers demanded by the President (right to control wages, prices, etc.). Secondly, in the fact that a GENERAL, authority, rather than a specific bill, is demanded. In other words, the President demands that certain Congressional powers of legislation be handed over to HIM, and removed from Congressional control. And thirdly, no President ever delivered an ultimatum in the form that FDR did – namely, give me what I want or else I take it!
Why the Attack on Congress?
But has not Labor Action maintained that this particular Congress is a pro-capitalist and anti-labor Congress – in fact, the most anti-labor body for many years? Why should not the ruling class be satisfied with this Congress? Why strip it of its powers?
It is, of course, quite true that this is a viciously anti-labor Congress and FDR has not failed to play upon this demagogic note in his efforts to ridicule Congress before the people. But this is not the point, the rulers of American imperialism are well satisfied with Congress’ anti-labor bias. It is rather the fact that, the growth and development of authoritative and military methods of rule DEMAND the sacrifice of such democratic bodies as Congress, which are products of liberal, growing capitalism.
For the dictator, Congress, with its open discussions and investigation committees and public hearings, can prove mighty embarrassing and annoying. It handicaps rapid, determined political and military decisions of the imperialists; it is an annoyance, a luxury that a militarized capitalist regime can no longer afford. The whole tendency of modern society – that is, of modern CAPITALIST society – is to become centralized and fascist in its method of rule. Congress, especially a Congress with the teeth of independent legislative powers, might stand in the way to the extent that it reflects pressure from below. Therefore, it must be shorn of these powers and reduced to Reichstag-like puppetry.
Does this mean that FDR aims, at abolishing Congress and imposing a fascist war dictatorship upon America? Not at all – FDR is not prepared for such measures, as yet. Congress can exist – quietly; Congress can legislate – as FDR’s representatives dictate to it; but Congress must have less to say about the war, war economy and how the war is run. That belongs in the hands of the President, his close advisers, the Army and Navy authorities.
 



The minds of the American people are being prepared for accepting a system of FORCED SAVINGS under which individual purchases of war bonds would be fixed by federal legislation and deductions would be made from the pay envelopes of American workers, automatically. Under, this system, 10 (or perhaps 15) per cent of a workers’ weekly wages would automatically be given to him in the form of bonds. It is stated that the necessity for this is the fact that the voluntary system of war bond purchases has failed.
 
Voluntary Program Has Failed
Here are some of the facts cited to prove that the voluntary system has fallen short of its mark.
The federal Treasury is aiming at a total purchase of twelve billion dollars in war bonds for the year 1942 (this year). This amounts to one billion dollars of purchases a month and is roughly calculated at 10 per cent of the expected national income of 110 billion dollars this year.
However, according to Treasury reports made public, this quota of approximately a billion dollars has not been met. In July only 900 million dollars of bonds was purchased – 10 per cent short of the goal for that month. For the month of August when the goal was set at only 815 million dollars, since it is a vacation month), purchases were 200 million behind – 25 per cent short of the goal!
The quota for September is again set at one billion dollars, but government officials are concerned about the effect that the September 15 income tax collections will have. At the present pace, it is doubtful whether bond purchases for 1942 will reach a total of ten billion dollars, far short of the twelve billion dollar objective. When Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau was asked recently why the August sales were lagging so far behind, he is reported, to have replied: “I don’t know. You might ask the American public that question.”
Unfortunately, Mr. Morgenthau has not taken the trouble to ask his public that question in an effort to find out why. Accordingly, Labor Action is hazarding a guess at an explanation.
 
Dotty Lamour Is Irrelevant
Now, there is no doubt about the attraction that Miss Lamour, Lana Turner and Jimmy Stewart have for the American public. Nor is there any question about how much energy these people put into their leg work, shows and other performances during their war bond tours. But the difficulty doesn’t lie there. Would it not be more sensible, Mr. Secretary, to ask yourself a few more serious and important questions when you seek an explanation to your original question?
We take the liberty of suggesting a few answers as to why you are having so much difficulty:

The rising cost of living – particularly SINCE the so-called price fixing program instituted in Washington – makes the proposal that a 10 per cent voluntary sum be paid for bonds each week equivalent to asking American workers to take a 25% per cent weekly wage cut! That’s an awful lot to ask, Mr. Secretary, particularly when these same workers read about the fancy earnings of Mr. Boss.
 
There is a fundamental distrust of the war and those in charge of it, accompanied by a reluctance to trust the war leaders in anything they say or do. This attitude of cynicism and apathy – often spoken about by the government leaders – is not conducive to the purchase of bonds.
 
Everyone recognizes the complete unfairness of the whole bond purchasing system. A 10 per cent tax is supposedly levied on everyone – regardless of their circumstances, weekly wages, dependents, savings and position in America; Mr. Boss, salaried executive at $15,000 per year, is democratically the equal of Brother Worker, making the war level wage of $2,000 per year! Both are supposed to give 10 per cent! Reports about big corporations buying blocks of bonds for $50,000, etc., only cause a big laugh, for everyone knows about their profits from government contracts.
 
The masses of people, already bearing the real burdens of the war in the form of longer hours and harder work, more taxation and military service, are being threatened too much by the rulers of America. On all sides they hear threats of (a) a federal sales tax; (b) an income tax payable in advance by salary deductions; (c) forced savings plan in the English manner; (d) payroll deductions in advance, etc. In a word, they know, feel and see that the financial burden of the war is being placed on their shoulders. Does this induce them to buy more or less bonds, Mr. Secretary?
 

Labor Action’s Proposal
Save the Hollywood glamor boys and girls for Hollywood! Save wear and tear on the railroad trains and buses that carry the numerous Hollywood Victory Caravans to all parts of the country.
Labor Action has a tax program that will more than pay for the costs of the imperialist war. We’ve suggested it many times and it’s listed in Labor Action every week. Why, only ONE part of that program would take care of the twelve billion dollar war bond fund Secretary Morgenthau wishes to raise this year. This part demands the confiscation of all war profits! After that’s been done, we can continue with the rest of the program and put the burden of the war on those who are responsible for the whole thing to start with.
 



To the south of us lie the twenty-one Latin American nations sometimes politely referred to as republics. Our relation with these countries is, presumably, guided by the “Good Neighbor” policy and ten of them (Mexico being the largest and most important) have joined with the U.S. in declaring war against the Axis. Of the remaining eleven, all but two (Argentina and Chile) have broken off all relations with the Axis Powers and stand by the side of the big friendly brother of the North. The South American bloc is thus an important part of the United Nations and it is worth our while to see how things are going with the 100-odd million people “Down Mexico Way.”
All of the Latin American countries are poor agricultural areas depending upon whatever prosperity comes their way in the form of export and import trade. Each of them specializes in one or another product or raw material (coffee, sugar, bananas, cocoa, meat, etc.) which it sells to the world and the profits of which are used to buy manufactured goods. None of these countries has any real industrial development; all of them are (by comparison with America, England, Germany, etc.) primitive and backward – nations whose populations live at sub-standard levels of housing, clothing and food. The masses of Latin America are poverty-stricken workers and peasants.
 
U.S. Replaces European Customers
When the war began Latin American trade with Europe (except England) was wiped out. This meant a drop of one-third in exports and resulted in a serious depression and great unemployment during the year 1940. Latin America simply lost its markets and, if the United States were to continue to hold these countries in line, it meant that the big imperialist neighbor from up North would have to replace the European customers;
This is exactly what has happened – to such an extent that Latin America is now experiencing somewhat of a business and trade boom, with big profits rolling in. America is now importing goods at the rate of $1,000,000,000 a year from South America – a rate DOUBLE that of 1939, a bad year. This has more than made up for the lost European trade. There is no doubt that 1942 will be the best year for Latin America since 1929 and that large favorable balances of trade (excess of exports over imports) will be rolled up by many Latin American republics: This new wave of prosperity has brought much joy to South American exporters, big cattlemen, bankers and the like. The flow of new American dollars from the Export-Import Bank (for the purpose of stimulating new industrial enterprises like Brazil’s first steel mill and rubber production in Bolivia, etc.) is also something quite welcome to the small but ambitious capitalist classes of the various South American nations.
 
“Prosperity” Raises New Problems
But these obvious gains are bound to be short-lived and the dangers that accompany them are far more serious than the superficial advantages of the moment.

In the first place, only a small section of the population – the native capitalist class – draws any serious benefit from them. The lives of the South American masses remain as before. As for the leaders – while they eagerly grasp the American dollars with one hand, in their minds is a growing fear of this new American imperialist penetration and a growing knowledge of how this means a complete dependence upon American capitalism for their further existence.
 
Furthermore, this “prosperity” is accompanied by many new problems’ of its own:
(a) Shipping losses not only threaten to disrupt the flow of trade, but the Nazi U-boat warfare tends to drag unwilling countries into the war;
(b) South American consumers’ goods (like sugar, coffee, wool, cocoa, food products, etc.) are not being purchased. Non-war materials that South America has always sold are accumulating and rotting on the docks at Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro and Montevideo. This depresses one section of South American economy for the benefit of that section that produces the war materials (rubber, tin ores and metals). The older capitalists and plantation men are hard hit.
(c) Because of shortages in America production of manufactured goods, South America cannot buy from us with their accumulated profits. We do not have the consumers’ goods to ship to them – only money. As a result, there is a shortage of steel, metals and all industrial equipment.

The favorable balances of trade that the new “prosperity” creates thus turn out to be largely an illusion, benefiting only the greedy bankers, etc., and in no way raising the general living standards of the country. They ship us their raw materials, receive nothing but credits in exchange; thus disrupting the very basis upon which their economy has rested.
 
Latin American nations – as a result of this influx of new capital from abroad, as well as the increased trading – now contend that they have an inflationary problem. Argentina would tend to bear this out, as an example. For, in that country, wholesale prices have gone from 100 (1939) to 183 (March 1942). Prices of all imported goods have naturally skyrocketed since the situation we describe above became acute. Of course, this inflation problem affects primarily the native capitalists and the more prosperous middle class layers, since the masses of Latin America never have had the “problem” of purchasing autos, radios, washing machines and other American exports. What price the trade boom, then?
 

Boom Rests on Shaky Basis
All in all, it is clear, that Latin American boom days are resting on a temporary, shaky and insubstantial basis. It is a pure speculation, resulting from the peculiar war conditions and does not represent any normal, healthy and rounded growth in the economic systems of these countries. On the contrary, it represents a special form of imperialist penetration by the grasping hand of “Yankee imperialism.” Instead of occupying the Latin American nations by force, we seize control of them with the American dollar by offering ourselves as the only possible customer and the only source of the small dole of manufactured products we are willing to hand out.
Next week we shall discuss American relations with Argentina – a subject that the American press is full of and which is of great importance since Argentina is the most powerful and important of all the Latin American nations.
 



Whatever may be the outcome of the civil disobedience and nationalist struggles in India – whether reactionary British imperialism succeeds in its effort to crush the movement by sheer brute force, or whether the crisis deepens and, extending itself to larger layers of the population (the proletarian and peasant masses), begins to assume the characteristics of a social revolution and a struggle for political power – whatever may be the outcome of the struggle, it is clear that this movement represents the first great revolutionary upheaval during the course of the Second World War.
Lenin, writing in 1916 of the Irish Easter Rebellion, vigorously aligned himself with this national insurrection against British imperialism and hailed the event as the first break in the imperialist slaughter, the first progressive act of the people directed against world imperialism. In precisely the same sense, revolutionary Marxists cannot but hail the first phase of the Indian Revolution as a major break in the development of the Second World War and a blow at the body of capitalist-imperialism. The fact that these events are occurring in the classic land of imperialism – the vast colonial sub-continent of India, with its 400,000,000 persons living under the backward régime of foreign imperialism, combined with Asiatic feudalism – only underscores one of the major differences between this and the First World War. Namely, that in this war the rôle of the colonies and the colonial peoples, as stimulants of the socialist revolution, is infinitely greater and more impressive than the last time. The repercussions of the Indian events among the colonial peoples in China, Africa, South America, etc., will further emphasize this point.
 
Nature of the Indian Events
What is occurring in India today? We are witnessing the latest stage in the unrolling of India’s nationalist and revolutionary movement – a movement that has been progressing, in fits and spurts, since the Russian Revolution of 1917. Or, to state it more exactly, the first, most elementary and initial stages of the bourgeois democratic phase of the Indian Revolution have begun. The first confused and chaotic steps of the revolution, marred by a strong element of spontaneity and leaderlessness, are nevertheless significant and stamp the character and quality of the future movement. In this sense, the first events in India are vastly promising and hopeful.
In the first place, the Indian proletariat, a proletariat which has grown rapidly in size, weight in the national economy and experience since the last civil disobedience movement of 1931-33, has come rapidly to the fore and has already played a leading rôle in the strikes that have rocked Bombay, Ahmedabad, Allahabad, Poona and all the leading industrial centers of the nation. The workers, side by side with the radical students and left petty bourgeoisie, have taken the movement out of the hands of the conservative bourgeois nationalist leadership (Gandhi-Nehru-Azad) for the time being at least, and are themselves carrying the torch of the national struggle.
In the second place, the spontaneity and dramatic character of the movement, as well as its All-India character, extending from one end of the country to the other, have revealed the depths of national anti-imperialist feeling, as well as a complete distrust and disgust with the cowardly vacillations of the bourgeois Congress leadership. The prompt and vigorous response of the masses in the key centers has shown their desire to struggle for independence now, no matter what the price. We are dealing here with a movement that has sunk the deepest possible roots and that intimately affects every worker and poor peasant in the country’s 400,000,000 population.
And in the third place, this movement has begun, in the sense of proletarian, mass combativity, where all the others left off. Previously (1921, 1931, etc.) the Congress Party has embarked cautiously, step by step, on each new campaign. Anxious not to arouse the revolutionary sentiments of the masses, the Congress sought its base of operations among the merchants, clerks, students, professionals in the cities, and the small, land-holding farmers (kisans) in the rural areas. The working and peasant masses were sucked into the movement, so to speak, only as a final threat before the inevitable compromise and capitulation on the part of Congress to the British imperialists.
 
Workers in Lead
But today, in the arena of world capitalist crisis where the rôle of the colonial bourgeoisie becomes feebler and counter-revolutionary virtually from the start of the struggle, it is the workers and poor peasants who fight the battles virtually from the start! What a devastating answer to those critics and renegades from Marxism who deny the revolutionary capacities and leadership qualities of the working class! The British masters recognize this difference. This is why they precipitate such bloody clashes, why they seek to uproot and wipe out the movement at its inception, no matter how. If the movement continues, grows and takes more solid organizational form, the imperialists realize they will face tens of millions of militant, frenzied workers and peasants who will stop at nothing to gain their revolutionary independence. In a word, this movement has begun on a much higher and more advanced stage of the class struggle. The Indian proletariat is not merely challenging the foreign bourgeoisie: it is challenging its own native bourgeoisie for hegemony over the bourgeois democratic revolution! This is, in essence, the putting into practice of the theory of the permanent revolution. Only this can account for the particularly violent and bloody aspects of this struggle from the start.
But it would be radically wrong to ignore and fail to analyze two great hindrances that lie in the revolutionary path to a workers’ and peasants’ India. We have in mind inner hindrances, rather than the obvious obstacles of British imperialist rule and authority, and the hovering threat of invasion by Japanese imperialism. Nevertheless, the successful surmounting of these outer obstacles depends upon the ability of the Indian masses to defeat these two enemies that stand in its path: (1) The colonial native capitalist class; (2) the Stalinists. These two forces, particularly the former, represent the gravest threat to the movement and must be openly fought.
The Opposition of the native bourgeoisie (politically centered around the right-wing of the Congress) has already taken an overt form. This Opposition consists of fear and terror regarding the violent and drastic nature of the struggle, and the leading participation of the masses. The New York Times reports the conspicuous absence of the traditional, middle aged, white-capped Gandhists from the demonstrating crowds. Merchants are reported to be re-opening their shops. The Associated Press reports: “Indian reporters close to the All-India Congress said its members, for the most part, still were standing apart from the rioting and that many were concerned over the bloody turn ...” (August 13). Bearing in mind that the composition of the Congress is overwhelmingly petty-bourgeois in character (small merchants, clerks, students, Professionals, etc.) this report indirectly reflects the character of the present movement.
 
Bourgeois Pro-Japan?
Yet, what was it that forced the hand of the Congress (the Indian bourgeoisie) and made it take steps that – despite its desire – precipitated the violent clashes? In our opinion, the causes are two: (1) The threat of Japanese invasion accompanied by a growing pro-Japanese sentiment among the population; (2) the insistence and unquenchable demand of the people that a national struggle should be launched immediately. It became necessary for Gandhi, political leader of the Indian bourgeoisie, to act or else be swept aside by other elements. In this respect the Mahatma is infinitely more shrewd and far-sighted than the pitiful and cowardly Nehru!
The successes of Japanese imperialism have had an impressive effect upon the Indian capitalist class. Coupled with the defeats and astounding weaknesses of the British, the native bourgeoisie (or an influential section of it, even if we exclude those merchants and industrialists who are benefiting by large British war Orders) has lost confidence in the ruling imperialist power. It sees the British Empire staggering and tottering under endless blows. Yet – being an abortive product of capitalism in its permanent decline – this native bourgeoisie is unable and unprepared to take over power. It is too small, too weak, too divided, too undernourished – a light-weight contender in the heavyweight struggle for power in India.
But it does not wish to tie its fate to that of a doomed, bankrupt imperialist power – the British Empire. Therefore, beyond a doubt, the Indian bourgeoisie is casting about for a new master to which it may subordinate itself; a new power before which it may lay its claim for junior partnership in the exploitation of the country. Obviously, that new power is the greatly expanded Japanese Empire! It is impossible to say whether a “deal” or tacit understanding has been reached with Japanese imperialism, but it is clear that doubly-parasitic Indian capitalism is seriously pondering the question. At the same time, the Congress bourgeois leadership has done everything in its power to Sabotage and disorganize the struggle against imperialism:
(1) It conducted aimless, futile negotiations with the renegade socialist, Sir Starford Cripps. The Cripps mission – now clearly seen as a gigantic hoax and stage-play perpetrated by Churchill – succeeded in out-maneuvering the Congress leadership before world opinion and spreading about the idea that the British really had offered something, which a divided India had rejected. “In the broader sense, Sir Stafford Cripps has had success. He has fixed the eyes of the world upon the realities of the Indian problem. He has enlightened the American people, who in the past have been woefully misled as to British policy ...” (Great Britain and the East) Such are the cynical claims of an English imperialist journal.
Yet, as Congress President Azad stated in his letter to Cripps on April 11: “It seems that there has been a progressive deterioration in the British government’s attitude as our negotiations proceeded. What we were told in our very first talk with you is now denied or explained away. You told me then that there would be a national government which would function as a cabinet ... The whole of this picture which you (at the first talk) sketched before us has now been completely shattered ...” A disappointed bourgeois, prepared to sell himself, but let down by the prospective purchaser at the last minute! It is no surprise that in the months that passed between the collapse of the Cripps mission and the outbreak of the present struggle, the Congress took not a step toward (a) organizationally preparing the masses; (b) working out a clear political and social program around which to build the struggle. Gandhi, Nehru, Azad and their conservative cohorts bear the responsibility for this.
(2) Up to the very last moment, every possible measure, gesture and step was taken to arrive at an agreement. The original resolution of Gandhi (written by him on July 15) calling for the national struggle was militant and aggressive in tone. It spoke of “our duty to wipe out our unemployment, to bridge the gulf between the rich and the poor, to banish communal strife, to excise the demon of untouchability ...” It spoke of a “workers’ and peasants’ republic.” It demanded that the British government remove its troops, as well as the unwanted American troops. “It is a crying shame to bring foreign troops in, in spite of India’s inexhaustible manpower, and it is proof of the immorality that British imperialism is.”
But by the time that this resolution had reached the final stage and was adopted by the All-India Congress Committee (the day before the arrest of Gandhi and the leadership of the Congress), it had been watered down beyond recognition. Instead, feeble and watery protests; requests to serve the imperialist master (“I am England’s best friend” – Gandhi); urgent pleading for last minute intervention from Roosevelt, Chiang Kai-shek and even (!) Ambassador Maisky! Frightened by the perspective and specter of a violent struggle, the Congress bourgeoisie recoiled in terror and sank back to a position of utter willingness to serve the foreign exploiter – if only for a few crumbs. But the workers spoke a different language! The native bourgeoisie can offer the people nothing: neither leadership, nor program, nor organization, nor hope for the future other than coming under the domination of another, equally perfidious imperialist power.
We have mentioned above another dangerous obstacle in the path of the Indian people – the Communist Party of India (the Stalinists). Recently legalized by the Viceroy (what a coincidence!) these agents of the Russian regime are conducting an openly counter-revolutionary campaign among the workers and within the Congress. “We Indian Communists are trying our hardest to convince our fellow patriots that the course of action suggested by the Congress leadership does not lead to our freedom, but cuts our nation away from freedom’s battle, divides the progressive forces in Britain and India and only helps strengthen the obstinacy of the imperialists ...” (Statement of the Indian Communist Party, Bombay.) While hundreds of their “fellow patriots” die under British gunfire, the Stalinists urge them to drop the struggle, accept the British offer and place themselves at the Service of the United Nations. The fact that the students – who until recently were mainly influenced by the All-India Students Federation (a Stalinist-controlled movement) – are playing such a leading rôle in the movement will indicate the response given to these open agents of imperialism. Yet the Stalinists still represent a great threat to the masses. They will attempt to sow confusion from within, particularly among the trade union workers in the great industrial centers of Bombay, Cawnpore, Nagpur, Calcutta, etc. Aided by the British authorities, who will give them all the publicity and assistance they could possibly need, they will try to undermine the militancy of the workers and peasants in a hundred foul and insidious ways.
A gallery of notables, including Pearl Buck, Dorothy Thompson, Waller Lippmann and Raymond Clapper, have unhesitatingly spoken the mind of the American tribe of liberals on the “Indian Question.” Without exception they have “deplored” and “regretted” the violent effort of British imperialism to crush this progressive nationalist movement; all have spoken of the necessity to do this. Pearl Buck – that substantial and sincere friend of all the darker races – says that “Both England and India say they are agreed on freedom. The disagreement apparently is on timing and administration during the war.” The English terror is a misunderstanding on timing! Dorothy Thompson, the female schizophreniac of the New York Post, writes that “Mr. Gandhi had the choice of being a rebel or a revolutionary. He has chosen to be a rebel.” Lest this confuse the reader, by being a “revolutionary” Miss Thompson means that Gandhi should forego India’s cause and support the United Nations. Walter Lippmann has repeated at length the familiar British propagandist arguments about Indian disunity, Hindu-Moslem discord, etc. All, all have – each in his particular manner – supported the whitewashing editorial policy of the bourgeois press.
But it took the Social-Democratic New Leader to reach a new low in social-patriotic treachery and insolence. Virtually an entire issue of the Rand School’s rag was devoted to a vulgar slandering of the Indian people and its nationalist leadership. Where even the bourgeois press hesitated before the extreme slander of labeling Gandhi and his group as “Japanese-Axis agents,” the decrepit old nags of the New Leader did not hesitate! Where the British authorities only went so far as to say that the Congress Party represents only a minority of the nation, the Social-Democrats did not flinch from publishing an article that attempted to “prove” that the Congress exploits the Indian masses, rather than the British raj! Let it never be said that Algernon Lee did not walk in where imperialists fear to tread! In this policy, of course, the American Social-Democrats are simply following the line of their associates in the British Labor Party – those notorious gentlemen who sit conspicuously with Churchill and applaud his every action and crime.
In the United States, let it be recorded for the future, only two working-class political organizations have come out unqualifiedly in support of the Indian people and their just demands. The Workers Party and the Socialist Workers Party have, in statements to the American proletariat, condemned the imperialist terror and stood by the side of India’s masses. In taking this elementary step of solidarity, the tradition of revolutionary internationalism and support to workers in all lands has been kept alive. But more than this is involved. In the first place, there are thousands of American troops in India – troops whose presence is greatly suspect to the Indian people. Thus, in a direct sense, the “Indian Question” is also an American question.
American imperialism for its own purposes is remaining apart from the issues, but this is only to keep its skirts clean enough to lend plausibility to an attempt to arbitrate the problem at a future date and in its own special interests. Such arbitration as may be attempted can have only one objective in mind – to keep the Indian people in bondage under a high-sounding but deceptive formula. (“We guarantee and underwrite your freedom after the war is over.”) America is involved in the question; America will become more deeply involved because this is a total and global war in which every major development cannot but directly and immediately influence all the component parts that make up the war.
 
Main Struggle Yet to Come
We cannot emphasize too strongly the fact that the major struggles on the revolutionary road are yet to come in India. The August days are the prelude to the broader and more sweeping nationalist and class battles that will shake this sub-continent to its foundations. The movement cannot be killed; it can only be momentarily halted or pushed back a slight distance. The social forces at work, the effect of the war, the national aspirations of 400,000,000 people cannot be counter-acted by the bayonets and bullets of a mere handful of white imperialist soldiers, aided by auxiliary mercenary troops. Even the isolated and sealed “Indian Army” will split wide open and will take sides as the inevitable movement rolls on.
The great task in India is fundamentally the same task that faces the proletariat in every country. That is, the creation of a mass revolutionary party to lead the people. A revolutionary party – the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India – already exists, but it does not yet influence broad masses of workers and peasants. Yet this party was formed in India during the course of the war, under the most difficult circumstances of British repression and illegality. The very fact that it could organize itself, pull itself together out of the many confused and contradictory Marxist elements that lie scattered all over the country and then, in a brilliant analytical and programmatic thesis (see The New International, March–April 1942) clearly present the tasks of the Indian Revolution – this is a sign of growing maturity in the Indian proletariat. Now comes the enormously difficult task of finding a way to the workers and peasants, based upon the powerful ideas of the permanent revolution and the struggle for the seizure of political power. Nobody can say whether the Bolshevik-Leninists of India will succeed; everybody who knows these people understands that they will not flinch for a moment, that they will prove resourceful and courageous under fire. This must not be another Spain, where the proletariat failed. The Indian revolutionists, now in the midst of battle, will see to that.
 



In the past two weeks, British terror in India, directed against an unarmed people, has been responsible for the death of hundreds, the wounding of thousands and the jailing of probably tens of thousands.
For two weeks the country has been shaken by a series of endless clashes, street battles, demonstrations and shootings. British propaganda reports are attempting to give the impression that it is all over and that they hare the situation in hand. THAT IS ABSOLUTELY FALSE! The struggle is shifting back and forth, from city to city, and first beginning to take hold in the great peasant areas that lie outside the main industrial centers.
In the city of Bombay alone, main scene of nationalist clashes to date, the British police and soldiers have killed 31 and wounded 250 since the day when the Indian National Congress adopted a resolution calling for mass civil disobedience against foreign rule.
Virtually every city and large town in India has felt the blows of British clubs and has heard the noise of British machine guns and rifle fire. Every great Indian city (Calcutta, Delhi, Nagpur, Cawnpore, Allahabad, Poona, Madras, etc.) has counted its dead victims and martyrs of the nationalist cause.
It is the workers and poorer sections of the population who have borne and continue to bear the brunt of the struggle. The conservative Congress members (merchants, professionals and middle class people) have been conspicuous by their ABSENCE from the demonstrations.
It is the working class, side by side with radical students, who are meeting the fascist-like methods of the British rulers.
 
Rumors of a Deal
Already the air is full of rumors and reports about attempted compromises. The most reactionary and conservative sections of the Indian population (the landlords and native capitalists) have been terrified by the militancy and revolutionary spirit of the people. They dread – just as much as do the British imperialists – a political and social revolution in India that will be conducted by the masses of people. They know that such a revolution would not stop at ousting the British rulers, but would also oust the native landlords and the native capitalist class. Therefore, they are making efforts to sound out the British and make a deal with them.
A dozen intermediaries and stooges of British rule have already come forward, each with his own particular scheme to settle the question. But each, scheme will fail because all alike deny the people of India the only thing that will mean something to them: immediate and unconditional freedom from the 200-year-old British rule.
 
Can’t Be Compromised
In the United States, various liberals and groups of liberals (Dorothy Thompson, Norman Thomas, Pearl Buck, etc.) are urging the people of India to compromise their cause and call off their struggle for independence. Instead of directing their main criticism against the British terrorists and destroyers of liberty, these liberals place British terror and Indian resistance against this terror on the same level and then criticize both sides! As if the issue in India were a matter of “reason” and “temperance”!
However, the people of India know otherwise. For them the issue is a matter of 400,000,000 people who are being denied their elementary democratic right to national independence. This issue cannot be compromised!
The first wave of India’s renewed fight is over. The period of unorganized demonstrations, leaderless and sporadic strikes, has definitely passed. But the British, who are deploying their armed forces all over the country (those same forces who were supposedly sent to India to fight the Japanese), are not fooled by this. They know better. They are preparing to meet the second wave of nationalist struggle, a wave which they know in advance will be more powerful, better organized and better led than in the first battles.
For the people of India – the workers and peasants – are creating their own new revolutionary leadership, to meet the tests in the long, upward struggle that lies ahead of them.
 







Editor’s Note – Because of the intense propaganda campaign now being conducted by British and American propagandists to the effect that India cannot be freed due to Hindu-Moslem antagonisms and because of the threats being made by M.A. Jinnah, head of the Moslem League, that he will “start a civil war” if India gains independence, we are reprinting an article on the question of Hindu-Moslem relations in India. This article appeared originally in the March 30 issue of Labor Action.





Whenever the problem of India and the incessant demand of its 385,000,000 people for freedom arises, the Hindu-Moslem question is immediately brought in.
The argument runs as follows:
“We (the English) have India’s best interests at heart. We would like to see the country free, and standing on its own feet. But we don’t DARE to free India because of the Hindu and Moslem antagonism. Therefore, we the English people, must – in the name of common humanity – remain to prevent the outbreak of a Hindu-Moslem struggle. The fact that we continue to drain the country of its wealth and exploit its manpower (and, incidentally, now ask the Indians to prepare to scorch the earth of their country as the Japanese advance) is simply a coincidence. We are really remaining in India to prevent civil war between Hindu and Moslem.”
Thus speaks every spokesman and every newspaper of the United Nations.
A tissue of lies from start to finish! It is not true that the Hindu people and the Moslem people hate one another; that they are prepared to slaughter one another; that, therefore, the British must remain to prevent such a catastrophe. And we shall prove this.
What is the difference between a Moslem and a Hindu? Is it a racial difference, a color difference, a language difference?
Absolutely not! The difference between a Hindu and a Moslem is simply and solely a religious difference; a difference in religious beliefs, customs and practices. It is the same sort of difference as exists, let us say, between Catholics and Protestants, or Baptists and Lutherans in the United States. The Moslems (about one-third of the population) are not a separate and distinct race of people – as, for example, are the Negro people in America – they are a different religious community!
Hindus and Moslems live together, side; by side in communities; Hindu peasants and Moslem peasants work side by side; Hindu workers and Moslem workers are in the same factories. If anyone were to suggest that America should be divided between Catholics and Protestants and that these religious communities hate one another, we would say either that the man is crazy or a Ku Klux Klanner. This holds even more true for India. Hindus and Moslems speak the same language, depending on their geographic territory (it is more British propaganda to say that 200 or 300 languages are spoken in India – there are six basic languages used in the country); they face exactly the same political and economic problems (namely, to improve their conditions and to obtain the land stolen from them by their English rulers); they ALL live under the same primitive and poverty-stricken conditions.
Furthermore, there has been such an enormous racial intermixing during India’s thousands of years of history that there is no such thing as a racial group in India. Hindus and Moslems look alike, act alike and follow the same general traditions and customs; they differ only on religious questions. But what about the Indian Nationalist Congress? Isn’t that a Hindu organization? And doesn’t the Moslem League represent the Moslem people? The answer to these questions is NO.
The Congress is not a Hindu nor a religious organization of any kind. It is a POLITICAL organization standing on a POLITICAL program. It participates in political actions and elections. It has no religious program or customs and includes in its ranks members of every religious community in India (Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs, Christians, Parsees, etc.) So do the Democratic Party and the Republican Party in the United States, but that doesn’t make them religious groups.
What is wrong with the India National Congress is its limited political program. The Congress Party is dominated by the Indian capitalist class which fears to precipitate a social revolution and therefore does everything in its power to prevent the workers and peasants from going too far.
 
Why More Hindus
Naturally there are more Hindus than any other group in the Congress because Hindus are two-thirds of the population. But they are there because they are NATIONALISTS and fight for their country’s freedom, not because they are Hindus. There are also many Moslems in the organization. The president of the Congress (Azad) is a Moslem; the leader of the Congress Socialist Party (Meherally) is a Moslem. In the Northwest Frontier Province, which is 90 per cent Moslem, the Congress got 90 per cent of the votes at the last election!
But what about the Moslem League and its spokesman, Jinnah, the wealthy Bombay lawyer, who claims to speak in the name of the entire Moslem community and who threatens to precipitate civil war if the British withdraw from India?

The Moslem League is an organization of religious fanatics, English-bribed landlords and middle-class lawyers and intellectuals. Its prime function is precisely what it is doing now – creating confusion and providing an excellent “excuse” for the British to continue their unwanted and too-long occupation of India. The Moslem League has no mass support among the Moslem poor peasants and workers, whom it deliberately tries to stir up against their Hindu brothers in exactly the same manner as American bosses try to create antagonism between white, and black workers in America.
 
The Moslem League, has never dared participate in political action or elections because that would reveal instantly its lack of support. And, most significant of all, the Moslem League does not stand for a free and independent India. (How convenient for the British!)
 

Some Additional Facts
Here are some additional FACTS (not British propaganda) on the Hindu-Moslem question:

Hindus and Moslems live scattered all over the country, from North to South. To divide them geographically and territorially would be as impossible as to divide America territorially between Catholics and Protestants.
 
The first Moslem state in India was established in 1206. That is, the Moslems came to India over 700 years ago! Their racial and cultural mixing with the original inhabitants has been going on now for more than seven centuries.
 
Ninety per cent of all communal conflicts (Hindu-Moslem riots) take the form of an economic clash between peasants, money-lenders and landlords of different faiths. Thus, what is at bottom an economic and class struggle is described as a “religious” or Hindu-Moslem riot. The other 10 per cent are deliberately provoked by the English dictators in their traditional divide-and-rule policy (similar to Arabs versus Jews in Palestine).
 
The Moslem aristocracy of the Moslem League spends 75 per cent of its propaganda in attacking the nationalist objectives and the agrarian radicalism of the Congress Party.

Hindu and Moslem workers and peasants have shown over and over again, in practice, that they recognize their REAL enemy – foreign imperialist rule.

In Cawnpore, for example, it is reported, “the Moslem workers have joined the union and have defied all efforts to separate them from their Hindu comrades. Some time ago the communalists of the Moslem League tried to make a split in the union by bringing out a Moslem League green flag, but the workers pointed to their red flag and, said that the blood which had dyed it red was not communal or religious.” (Schiff, The Present Conditions of India,” page 174.)

This is THEIR answer to the Hindu-Moslem question.
 
The cause of antagonism between middle-class Moslem intellectuals and Hindus is the limited number of jobs (civil service and government posts) available to educated Indians. The British seek to foster and deepen every petty quarrel between a Moslem and Hindu in exactly the same manner as a boss seeks to set workers of different faiths against one another in the shop.

In two weeks of the present struggle, although the British authorities have hinted over and over again that “communal riots” – that is, Hindu-Moslem strife – could be expected at any moment, they are unable to point to a single example yet! This doesn’t mean that they are not busy at work trying to stir up and create such incidents, but it proves the difficulty that even these criminal imperialists have in turning against one another people who have, in reality, a common enemy and a common objective.
 



Time magazine of this week (August 24) carries the following piece under the heading: Did Mr. Roosevelt Say It? So far, Mr. Roosevelt has not said whether he did or not.
According to this piece,
“Strange news came: out of Washington over the United Press wires. The President, UP declared, has become a great admirer of the policies of the late Andrew W. Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury under Harding, Coolidge and Hoover, and is making plans, to pay off this war’s debt just as Mellon started paying off the debt for World War I ... (The) President is reported to have said heavy taxes should be continued , long enough to pay off the national debt. He wants to go on collecting twenty billion dollars a year in taxes, spending ten billion dollars to run the government and use the balance for the debt.
“The budget-balancing Wall Street Journal said it hoped UP’s informant had heard the President aright ... It may have cheered the National Association of Manufacturers, who have not heard the President promise to balance the budget for a long time …”
 
Good News for the Capitalists
This item would certainly be cheery news to the American rulers who, undoubtedly, are already taking steps to find out whether or not FDR really plans what is reported above. Everybody, worker, capitalist and professional, is deeply concerned about the post-war situation. But the concerns of each class vary widely and reveal the basic antagonisms and cross-purposes that exist within America.
What are the capitalists concerned about? Within the certain totalitarianized structure, and assuming for the moment that there are no cataclysmic changes – primarily, reduction in the heavy corporation taxes they will have paid during the war period. The moment the war ends they will launch a campaign (“back to normalcy”) to cut, shave down and reduce government expenditures to the very bone. Social services – already greatly curtailed by the virtual abolition of NYA, CCC and WPA (how unfamiliar those once familiar terms have now become!) – will be attacked even more viciously by the bosses.
 
Will Oppose Public Works
If the report of Time magazine is correct, it means primarily that FDR will oppose an effort, once the gigantic war program grinds to a halt and the war factories close up by the hundreds – even though U.S. capitalism continues on a modified war basis – FDR will oppose any effort to convert war production into a tremendous public works project. That is, to the demand that will be raised by progressives, labor unions and socialists that production must continue and a great unemployment crisis fought by adopting a housing program, a constructive public works program of parks, recreation centers, swimming pools, etc., to this demand FDR will say: “Sorry, my friends, but the budget must be balanced and the war debts paid off. No can do.”
This, it goes without saying, is precisely the answer that the American capitalist class will want him to give. They are not interested in the fact that war workers will be automatically out of jobs that there will be a severe period of strain and collapse as those industries converted to war production make efforts to get back to consumer production; that the entire purchasing power set-up will be rocked by the sudden jolts it will receive.
They are interested in one thing: profits and their even flow and continuation. War profiteering has aided the big capitalist combines to keep going and to knock out many a small competitor. With the ending of super war profiteering these gentlemen can only keep up their rate of profit by tax REDUCTIONS. That is their basic concern; this is what Roosevelt has apparently promised to them long in advance of the war’s conclusion. What could be more revealing as to which class Roosevelt serves in American society?
 
Big Business Man Mellon
It is worth noting that Andrew Mellon is the man mentioned as the one who has laid down the general methods that FDR will pursue. Mellon, as every American worker knows only, too well, was one of the most reactionary, “Sixty-Family” big business representatives ever to hold a cabinet post in the American government. His name became synonymous with the interests of big business and profiteering. This man – the head of one of America’s largest and tightest trusts, the aluminum trust – was not simply a representative or agent of big business, he was big business personified! And FDR is set – according to this undenied report – to follow in his footsteps by raising twenty billion dollars in taxes each year, cutting federal expenditures to the bone and using the rest to pay off debts (that is, interest and principal) on bonds and loans held by the big banks and financial groups of America.
American workers will not go through the “blood, sweat and tears” of this imperialist war, then get thrown out on their ears and finally, by the war leader himself, be told that there can be no public works program because the budget must be balanced and corporation taxes must be reduced. Here we have the economic basis for the great post-war crisis and struggles that will grip the entire nation. The proletariat of our country will not allow FDR-Mellon to put this one across!
 



According to its leading spokesmen, President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin, the bloc of the United Nations consists of twenty-eight independent, democratic and freedom-loving nations solemnly bound together by mutual ideals and a mutual determination to wage victorious warfare against the fascist Axis bloc. Upon achieving the total destruction of this force for world evil and aggression, the United Nations will reconstruct a democratic world federation of peace and prosperity for all mankind, even educating the aggressive peoples to walk tranquilly in the paths of peace. As the Dean of Canterbury said recently: “This is a war between Supreme Evil and Supreme Good.”
According to these same spokesmen – to whom all matters are simplicity itself, particularly matters of addition – if we base ourselves upon the latest available statistics and total up the population of these twenty-eight United Nations, we arrive at the figure of 1,423,500,000 contrasted to a total world population of 2,155,000,000. That is, 66 per cent of the people of the world belong to the United Nations, or, to put it differently, two out of three are for the victory of the Allied cause.
Unfortunately for the cause of the United Nations, such methods of oversimplification, blandly ignoring the internal situations that exist among the various members of the United Nations, as well as their status with regard to world politics as a whole, can do little more than serve as a consoling mirage for the “democracies” in their games of political deception. We shall try to give a more accurate and scientific description of the United Nations, basing ourselves upon their internal regimes and their status in world economy, as well as their political relationships to the United Nations. For, in reality, just as the rival bloc of the Axis rests upon fraud, force and violence exercised through political, military and economic domination, so do the United Nations use – in their own way – the same weapons and methods in their struggle against the Axis.
The United Nations can be divided into five categories, if we base ourselves upon their political, social and economic status in the World War. These categories are listed in the order of their importance, weight and power within the imperialist bloc of the twenty-eight nations known as “United.”

The colonial countries. Inside this group we include (in alphabetical order) Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, India, Nicaragua and Panama – a total of ten.
 
The semi-colonial countries: China and Mexico – a total of two.
 
The Governments-in-Exile: Free Belgium, Free Czechoslovakia, Free France, Free Greece, Free Holland, Free Luxemburg (yes, this country signed the United Nations pact!), Free Norway, Free Poland and Free Yugoslavia – a total of nine.
 
The semi-independent countries (the British dominions) of Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the Union of South Africa – a total of four.
 
The great, independent powers which run the United Nations: Great Britain, Soviet Russia and the United States – a total of three.
 

The Colonial Countries
Some startling facts strike our attention immediately. The largest single category of the five listed above is the group of subservient colonies, each of which is under the total sway of one or another independent, imperialist power. The population of these ten colonies amounts to 430,000,000 enslaved workers and poor peasants who – let alone not possessing the most elementary forms of democratic liberties – never had a word to say as to whether or not they desired to be included in the bloc of the United Nations! India, a great nation of 385,000,000 alone, is represented in the pact by the “signature” of Sir Bajpai, a contemptible and unknown Hindu aristocrat who gained his noble title from His Britannic Majesty and his post from Lord Linlithgow, Viceroy of India. By what authority can this man pledge the politics and beliefs of India’s masses? Does he speak with any more genuine authority than Hitler’s Gauleiter in Norway, or Pétain in Vichy France? But India is only the most notorious and cynical example among the ten colonies of the United Nations.
Then there are the minute and backward regions of the Caribbean and Central America, long dominated by Wall Street banking, financial, public utility and trading interests. The plantation nations of Nicaragua, El Salvador, etc., run by the United Fruit Corp.; the sugar and hemp areas of Cuba and Haiti run by the National City Bank; the raw material regions of the belt that lies between the United States and South America proper – now more than ever in the grip of the great northern imperialism since the loss of their world markets, and the extension of warfare (in the form of U-boat struggles) to these island and watery territories. Each of these countries, ruled over by compradore militarists in the service of Wall Street (Batista, etc.) likewise failed to consult its millions of people, or to ask them the democratic question: Do you wish to throw your lot in with the United Nations?
 
The Semi-Colonial Countries
In Mexico and China, the two semi-colonial countries of the United Nations bloc, an alliance between the stunted, semi-independent native bourgeoisie and the great powers of the United Nations has been formed. But in this alliance it is the strong, advanced imperialism that lays down the law to its weak allies, while the Chinese and Mexican workers and peasants have nothing to say. (For an analysis in detail of China’s relation to the “democratic” camp, we refer to the June 1942 issue of The New International, Section 2.)
If we total together the population of the colonies and semi-colonies (and this act has every scientific legitimacy from the view-point of the similarity of their general condition and relation to world economy as a whole) we arrive at the figure of 896,000,000 people – that is, 63 per cent of the entire United Nations population of 1,423,500,000! Or, to put it differently – in precise political terms – two out of three of the United Nationeers are in the category of colonial slaves, without a vestige of political or economic freedom, and living under a native or foreign dictatorial rule. We challenge the most ardent patriot of the “democratic” war camp to prove otherwise about the twelve colonies and semi-colonies whose formal signatures can be found to the pact!
Any serious and detailed study of the nine so-called “Governments-in-Exile” (residing in London, with frequent visits to Washington) could not fail to prove the fact that they represent ousted, discredited and corrupt cliques without any real support in their own countries because they proved to be so treacherously ineffectual against the Nazi invasions. Politically, these governments have but two objectives: their restoration to power on the bayonets of the United Nations; rendering military service in various forms to the United Nations. Programatically, they have never offered anything worthy of serious consideration to the peoples of the occupied territories.
 
The Governments-in-Exile
The Free French clique of monarchist de Gaulle, whose odor is so foul that Washington fears to give it full recognition lest sympathy of the French people be further alienated from the Allied cause. In his recently announced program for the French people, de Gaulle proclaimed as point one on his agenda: the full restoration of the pre-war French Empire! This is not a Free French program, but the objective of the battered and mauled French imperialist bourgeoisie, whose most badly beaten section is headed by de Gaulle.
The Free Belgium clique of discredited social democrats (Paul Spaak & Co.), allied with liberals, does not possess a higher caliber. Carrying on its ancient exploitation of the African peoples of the Belgian Congo, it has steadfastly refused to make any concessions to these millions of Negroes. The Belgian capitalist-imperialist class has simply transferred its rentier headquarters from Brussels to London and conducts its former business as usual! With regard to the people of Belgium, this government-in-exile recently announced that it aims at restoring a “modified” monarchy (under Leopold?) in post-war Belgium. Thus, the second leading exile group of “democrats” is permeated with the stink of reactionary monarchism.
The Free Czechoslovakia clique of Benes and his fellow-Czech business men, who openly proclaim their eagerness to restore the old Czechoslovakia as part of the new, second Versailles “peace.” This monstrosity of World War I – resting upon a denial of national freedom to the Slavic and Germanic minorities – was, as Trotsky put it, a sink of national oppression and a breeding ground for imperialist rivalries. Yet the imperialist designs of the United Nations demand its restoration, by any artificial means whatsoever.
The Free Greece clique of King George, notorious Balkan despot and admirer of fascist methodology. This monarch, who placed Dictator Metaxas in power, is despised by his own people for his denial to them of all basic liberties. It was through no accident that Greece achieved its reputation of being the “leading” dictatorship of the European powder-keg.
The Free Holland clique of Queen Wilhelmina, who now demand as their price for adherence to the cause of the United Nations, the return to Dutch rule of the 45,000,000 Dutch East Indians of Java, Sumatra, Bali, etc. Holland – a nation whose bourgeoisie has neither home nor colony – will turn in the hour of its liberation to men like the late Henricus Sneevliet, who did not flee on the first available airplane, but stayed on to continue the revolutionary struggle among the workers.
The Free Luxemburg clique of degenerates and comic-opera royalists, who yearn for the bygone days when wealthy American women, in search of notoriety and title, danced, drank and gambled in the numerous casinoes of their ridiculous “country.” These monarchists, too, now prate about “democracy.” They have no doubt “reformed”!
The Free Norway clique of liberal shipowners and Labor Party reformists – all vying with one another as worshippers of ancient King Haakon – who dream of a return to those days when socialism “grew slowly, but inevitably,” and trade union coffers were well filled. This group of exiled social-democrats has no more life to it – in so far as the struggles of the Norwegian workers are concerned – than do the various groups of German social-democrats who preceded them into London exile.
The Free Poland clique of Sikorsky and his trained crew of anti-Semites, militarists and Polish national-fascists have, beyond doubt, the lowest reputation among all the “governments-in-exile.” They openly announce their intention of reestablishing the former tyranny of Pilsudski-Paderewski, based upon the rule of the Polish landowners. Their anti-Semitism is so blatant that even the Hitler gang have given it respectful recognition in their propaganda work among the Polish people.
The Free Yugoslavia clique of King Peter and his court advisers (bearing every resemblance to the drunken Rumanian gang of King Carol and Lupescu), whose program is to revive that other monstrosity of the first Versailles, in which Croat and Slav minorities were oppressed by the central government at Belgrade. The main talent and qualification offered by the “boy King” for gaining American support to achieve this goal seems to be his admiration for Artie Shaw’s swing style!
Thus the nine “governments-in-exile”! Ridden with imperialism, corrupted with feudal-monarchism, poisoned with anti-Semitism, dominated by militarism!
 
The Semi-Independent Countries (British Dominions)
“Canada remained distinctly the most important foreign country for direct investment by United States business enterprises. The value of investments there has remained virtually unchanged at about $8,000,000,000.” (New York Times, August 1)
The position of the four so-called “white dominions” as semi-independent nations, moving within the orbit of Anglo-American imperialism, is fairly well known and needs no extensive analysis. In the September 1941 and June 1942 issues of The New International material relating to this subject can be found. It is clear, for example, that the very existence of New Zealand and Australia depends upon American military strength, while Canada is under the sway of American economy (far more than British) – with South Africa still remaining a substantial stronghold of Great Britain. These dominions cannot claim the rank of fully matured and independent nations. All important and decisive decisions are made for them, not by them. Their uneven, agrarian and pastoral economies are firmly tied to the great imperialist powers; their internal development (even from the elementary aspect of population!) has virtually ceased. They are what Lenin called “dependent allies.”
Furthermore, the two most important dominions – Canada and the Union of South Africa – are seriously shaken and hampered in their war effectiveness by internal minority problems – the French-Canadians and the Boers in Africa. Both these tendencies, strongly tainted with reaction in one case, and pro-Axis loyalties in the other, could explode with relative ease in the face of the United Nations. Certainly they are problems that have advanced not one step toward solution during this war.
Thus we see that, in reality, the four above mentioned categories of the United Nations bloc (comprising twenty-five out of the twenty-eight nationsl) rest upon a dubious and shaky foundation. In reality it is obvious that only the fifth category – the great independent powers – counts. It is the intra-imperialist alliance (based upon a momentary harmony of basic war aims) that exists between these great powers (United States, Great Britain and Soviet Russia) that binds and holds the United Nations together, with militarism preventing its bursting at the seams.
Again, we shall not write here of the inter-relationships, conflicts and rivalries that exist among these three dominant nations. This is another matter – one that has been described at length in many previous issues of The New International. But the parallel that strikes our eye between this top group of the United Nations and the top group of the Axis is too important to be ignored. Bearing in mind that parallels are not identities, nevertheless we proceed from the Marxist premise that fascist imperialism and “democratic” imperialism – both stemming from capitalist society – are alike in all decisive aspects.

Like the United Nations bloc, the Axis bloc is composed of colonies, semi-independent states, etc., with three great imperialist powers (Germany, Italy and Japan) overlording the bloc as a whole. The former United Nations, now occupied colonies of Malaya, Indo-China, Burma, etc.; the “original” Axis colonies of Libya, Korea; the semi-independent states of Vichy France, Norway, Sweden, etc. – all of these nations correspond to similar categories within the United Nations.
 
Each of the three leading powers within the Axis have surrounding “dependent allies,” satellites and colonies – similar to United Nations fashion. Germany has the conquered nations of Europe; Italy has Albania, Greece, Libya; Japan has the oppressed sections of its Greater East Asian Empire. Can we draw any serious distinction between the British-occupied island of Madagascar and the German-occupied island of Crete; or the “voluntary” signer of the Axis pact – Thailand (Siam) – and the “voluntary” signer of the United Nations pact – Cuba?
 
Each imperialist bloc and warring camp has its puppet governments and its “governments-in-exile.” To balance off the nine governments in exile we have described above, the Axis has corresponding puppet regimes such as the Nanking government of puppet Wang Chin-wei, the so-called “Indian National Provisional Government” of Bose, located in Tokyo, and the various Quisling regimes that dot Europe, with Vichy France foremost of all. Again, is there are serious distinction – particularly if we use as our criterion: do these governments genuinely and democratically represent the people in whose name they speak?
 
Each imperialist bloc retains its followers and keeps its “allies” in line through an organized system of force and militarist violence (or the threat of it), political treachery and tyranny and economic strangulation. Our liberal friends – who specialize in drawing subtle distinctions between the two-year-old military occupation of Norway and the 200-year-old military occupation of India – cry out in protest at this parallel: “But this is true of the Axis only.”

No. It is it true of Britain in India; of America and Britain in China; of Stalinist Russia in the Baltics and Poland (when it held those areas); of America in Cuba, Nicaragua and Panama; of the Free Belgians in the Congo, etc. It is true, in a word, of every oppressing power, for that is the nature and essence of capitalist-imperialism.
In the truest sense of the word, this is a world war which has dragged into its orbit every power and country of the globe. It is the first all-embracing world war of history. Furthermore – and more significant – the war is proceeding between two great blocs of imperialist powers, equally reactionary in the historic sense, and equally predatory in attempting to achieve their objective of a planetary re-division. As a matter of fact, if you total up the countries and colonies dominated by the Axis, it is also twenty-eight!
 



“LONDON, July 22 (UP) – Germany and Japan have established economic contact, the Economic Warfare Ministry disclosed today and a ‘trickle’ of raw materials – chiefly rubber from the Far East – has reached the Reich through the British blockade.
“A Ministry spokesman said the goods exchanged apparently were being sent around Cape Horn, off the southern tip of South America, and that the Germans were believed to be supplying Japan with hall bearings, machine tools and similar manufactured articles.”
The above-quoted dispatch was printed obscurely in many American papers several weeks ago. Since that time its significance has been neglected and ignored by the war leaders of the United Nations.
Now, the importance of the economic contact that has taken place and which is admitted by the British Ministry is primarily a symbolic one. The actual amount of material that has been exchanged between the two Axis partners (Germany and Japan) was probably very small and even insignificant. U-boats and submarines are not effective as cargo vessels. Yet, from a political and economic standpoint, the event was of great significance, particularly if we measure it up against the Axis objectives in the Second World War.
 
Illustrates Strategic Aims
The war up till now has, in simplest terms, been a struggle by the Axis imperialist powers for (1) the conquest and organization of Europe; and (2) the overthrow and seizure of the British Empire. Both of these jobs have been partially accomplished and now the two partners in plunder seek to merge them; to harmonize the fruits of their victories.
Europe is basically the great industrial heart of the Axis, producing the manufactured goods, machinery, machine tools, etc. Germany, a great industrial country in its own right, has succeeded in establishing its control over the balance of Europe’s industrial centers (Belgium, France) and the rulers of that country are already thinking of post-war economic problems. For German imperialism to benefit from the victory it thinks it will win, it must be prepared to trade on favorable terms with the balance of the world.
Asia – particularly the sections conquered by the Japanese warlords – is rich in raw materials (rice, jute, rubber, tin, iron ores, tea, etc.). The Japanese Empire now controls over 90 per cent of the world’s rubber supplies as a result of its conquest of Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, etc. It has a superabundance of these materials. It must trade, it must exchange, it must have contact with other nations in order to keep its economic life alive.
This symbolic contact described in the UP dispatch illustrates the strategic aims of the two great Axis powers – to effect a juncture so that the imperialist and economic gains of each can mutually benefit one another. The whole war strategy of the Axis is directed, in the ultimate sense, toward the effecting of this juncture, this economic contact, on a broad and substantial front, rather than furtively and secretly from hidden rendezvous in the oceans of the world.
The establishment of a common frontier between Germany and Japan (stretching from Russia down through India and the Middle East as far South as the East Coast of Africa) would mean, from the viewpoint of Axis imperialism, its victory in the war. It would symbolize the unification under militarist authority of industrial, capitalist Europe with colonial, raw material producing Asia. Europe under Hitler; Asia under Hirohito! Such is the long-range strategic aim of Hitler’s military adventures in the Caucasus and North Africa and the Mikado’s wars in Burma and the South Pacific. If the Axis were ever to achieve this objective it could confront the world with enormous strength and resources; a world which would oppose it – so to speak – from the outside looking in, since the Europe-Asia Axis Empire would have inner supply lines and communications, with a great industrial core at the center.
 
Why the United Nations Weakness?
The leaders of the United Nations, at any rate some of the more far-sighted leaders, recognize this strategic aim of the Axis. Naturally, they understand that its accomplishment would not end once and for all the difficulties and internal conflicts of the Axis powers, but they understand at the same time that it would be a deadly blow at the United Nations. Yet, the democracies have proved to be virtually helpless at stopping the drive toward this goal! They have failed in North Africa; they are failing in the Caucasus and (by their policy) they are facilitating an Axis victory in India. In this sense, the United Nations are steadily digging their own grave in their battle with their imperialist rivals. This is the essential point in analyzing the “strategy” of the United Nations.
Labor Action and The New International have described in detail and at length the various reasons behind the total failure of the United Nations to wage an effective war, even from the imperialist point of view of these nations. It is not necessary to repeat these points here.
But it is necessary to point out, as we have over and over again, that the disaster that such an Axis victory as we have described above would represent to the workers of the entire world cannot be prevented by pinning one’s hopes and faith upon the “democracies.” They have failed, and failed miserably. Revolutionary class action by the workers (for example, full support to the struggle of the Indian people against both “democratic” British imperialism and fascist Japanese imperialism) is what we have in mind as the only sure means of preventing an Axis victory.
A socialist India and a socialist Germany would knock the props out from under the sinister designs of the Axis powers.
 



Last week in this column we described how, by means of a temporary business boom, the United States is advancing its policy of economic penetration into South America and assuming greater and greater imperialist domination over that continent.
The beating given to Waldo Frank, prominent American writer and former Communist Party supporter, by a gang of fascist hoodlums in Buenos Aires caused a sensation both in Argentina and in the United States. It forcibly brought to everyone’s attention a fact that American papers had been pointing out for some time – namely, that one South American country, at least, was openly resisting American “good neighbor” policy and refusing to line up with the cause of America and the United Nations.
 
What Is Argentina’s Position?
As we pointed out last week, nineteen of the twenty-one Latin American nations have broken off all diplomatic relations with the Axis, and many of these nineteen have followed up that action with a war declaration that brought them into the World War on America’s side. Only Chile and Argentina have failed to take the initial step in breaking off relations and Argentina has vigorously indicated that it has no intention of doing so. The fact that Argentina is the richest, most powerful and industrially advanced of ALL the South American nations make this refusal, this insistence upon retaining its neutrality, of great interest. Why does Argentina act in this manner?
The answer to this question will throw further light on the imperialist character of the war and prove – once more – the underlying economic motives that drive each power into acting the way it does; economic motives, rather than “moral” or “spiritual” reasons, as the propagandists would have us believe!
We have already mentioned that Argentina is the most advanced and industrialized country of Latin America. Yet, despite its high degree of development compared to the other backward South American nations, it is not a completely independent nation! Because of the fact that a large portion of Argentine industry and capital is in the hands of England and America (with England leading), Argentina is more of a semi-independent or semi-colonial country, somewhat like China or Mexico.
But there is a well established and important class of native Argentine capitalists (landowners, cattlemen, exporters, bankers, etc.). This native capitalist class finds itself greatly handicapped by the rival foreign capitalists (or, more accurately, imperialists) who have great influence over the banking, financing, exporting of their country and own great sections of the transportation, land and public utilities. In a word, there is an economic conflict between the native capitalists of Argentina and the foreign (British and American) imperialists. It is this conflict that lies behind the struggle now going on between the government of Argentina and the United States.
Argentina – by virtue of its whole economic life – is far closer to the European economic sphere than to that of the United States. Before the war Argentina had more trade with Europe (shipping its wheat, meat, hides, corn, etc.) than with North America. Furthermore, the materials and commodities of Argentina competed with similar materials and commodities grown by Yankee farmers! Under our competitive-capitalist economic system, this meant trade rivalry, one of the basic causes of modern war.
As a result of all this, Argentine native capitalism is now resisting American penetration because it dreads a victory of United States imperialism (its rival in many fields) more than it does a victory of German-Axis imperialism (its best pre-war customer).
 
Argentine Rulers Divided
Naturally, the Argentine capitalist class is divided within itself. The dominant section of it (now in control of the government) is pro-Hitler and pro-Axis. The non-competitive section is pro-Roosevelt and wishes to support the United Nations in the war. This section is organized into the so-called Radical Democratic Party. To further complicate the situation, there are the pro-British (as against American imperialism) elements, who while on the surface of things must naturally support the United Nations cause, nevertheless have many a doubt, particularly as they see American imperialism steadily oust its British “ally” from one position after the other. This group more or less maintains silence, while the pro-German and pro-American capitalists fight it out among themselves.
On July 21, in a secret session of the Argentine Parliament reported in the New York Times, Foreign Minister Guinazu, spokesman for the “neutral” or pro-Axis capitalists, once more refused to break off relations with the Axis, despite sinkings of Argentine ships by German U-boats. Guinazu cited the failure of his recent military mission to America – a failure, since it failed to get any arms or munitions. He claimed that Roosevelt refused to give any arms unless Argentina agreed to convoy shipping to the United States – a demand that Guinazu could obviously cite as further proof that Roosevelt wanted Argentina dragged into the war via the route of U-boat sinkings. He was upheld in his program, further proof of which group controls the government.
This is the situation in Argentina at the moment: a vicious struggle between two wings of the native capitalist class – one of them pro-German (with tremendous German pressure exerted upon it); another pro-Roosevelt and pro-America. At any moment (especially with more great Nazi victories in the war) a bloody civil war could break out between these factions of the capitalist class.
We must note, of course, that in this violent struggle neither group consults the wishes of the Argentine people (the millions of workers and poor farmers) in the matter. Their native rulers want to tie them to one or another of the two great imperialist blocs, but their desires are more accurately expressed in the program of the revolutionary socialists of Argentina, who call for independent class action against both imperialists and for the freeing of Argentina from the rule of any and all foreign capital. They warn the people against submission to Axis domination, and at the same time oppose a military-naval occupation by forces of the United Nations.
 



The campaign of the Indian people for immediate independence from England, launched by the All-India National Congress, has been met by a wave of terror, shootings, arrests and beatings on the part of the British authorities.
To date (August 11), eighteen people are reported to have been killed, with many hundreds wounded by British police and soldiers, who have fired point-blank into crowds of Indian workers merchants and students demonstrating for their freedom. In Bombay alone, the present center of the struggle, the police have fired ten times in the space of two days.
In every major city of India, stretching from Bombay to Calcutta, there has been at least one criminal assault by the British upon unarmed and defenseless demonstrators.
The British-appointed Viceroy of India is ruling by decree and military authority. Martial law and curfew prevail from one end of the country to the other. British soldiers (supposedly sent to India to fight the Japanese!) are patrolling all the key centers with bayonets and machine guns.
Already hundreds of arrests and imprisonments have taken place. Beginning with Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru and Azad, the most prominent leaders of the Congress Party, and extending to innumerable local leaders and trade union officials, the British dictators are mercilessly hounding them into their concentration camps and jails.
Gandhi has threatened to embark upon an immediate hunger strike. According to the meager British-censored reports that are available, it is clear that the workers of India stand in the front of the movement for immediate independence.
They are shutting down factory after factory, including plants producing munitions. In Bombay alone – a great industrial center – -eighteen large textile mills are closed. The Bombay textile workers played the leading role in the struggles that raged in that city. They were the first victims of the British terror.
This strike action by the workers has extended to the industrial cities of Allahabad, Ahmedabad (textile centers); Lahore (student center); Nagpur and Poona (railroad and steel centers). Side by side, workers and students are participating in violent clashes with the police and soldier authorities.
 
Use Fascist Violence
Recognizing this great challenge on the part of the people, the British imperialists who have dominated this great country for over 200 years are resorting to any and all methods to prevent its spread. They are taking every leaf out of the hated book of Hitler and his Gestapo: murder, assassination, jail and the concentration camp. They have lost forever the right to preach about their “war for democracy” and for “freedom of oppressed peoples.” Their effort to retain power over 400,000,000 people who don’t want them can only be condemned as the method of fascist gangsters who seek to remain in power no matter how! The present mass movement in India is a direct result of the failure of the Cripps mission a few months ago. Since that period the conservative nationalist leaders (headed by Gandhi) have sought continuously to arrive at an agreement with the British, in exchange for which they would support the war.
But the Indian people refused to permit any “deal” or sell-out of their interests. They want freedom and their own government – here and now. Even at the last moment Gandhi sought a compromise, writing letters to the Viceroy, pleading with President Roosevelt for intervention, etc. Even at this late stage it is by no means impossible that Gandhi will seek to check and halt the movement he has set into motion and “make a deal.”
The fact that the Congress leadership spent its last hours in futile appeals to the imperialist authorities – instead of planning and preparing the masses for this great struggle – is of great importance. As a result of this sabotage, the movement at present is without organized leadership and direction. The great peasant masses (70 per cent of the entire population) are yet to be called into action. The Congress leadership has virtually abdicated its leadership and has told everyone to do what he pleases. The workers are taking this seriously and are attempting to establish their leadership over the movement.
 
Independent India Will Fight Japan
The press of America has launched a vicious campaign of slander against the people of India. In the name of “democracy,” the boss press with its collection of “liberal” columnists has the gall to tell 400,000,000 people that they should not fight for democracy and liberty! “Now is not the time,” they shriek.
Every American worker knows that the present, NOW, is the time to fight for freedom. If not NOW, then when? If England, hard pressed as she is, will not grant India her independence now, what reason will there be to believe she will grant independence later. None at all!
And even with respect to warding off the Japanese imperialists, should India – after seeing the miserable British failure to defend Malaya, Burma and the East Indies – intrust its safety and future to these same exploiters and bunglers? Or, as it is trying to do, should not India take its future in its own hands and establish its own government to defend itself from Japanese attack?
Under its own government, there will be 400,000,000 people ready to fight Japanese imperialism, and not a small handful of foreign or Indian mercenary troops. The people of India, once having gained their freedom, will never surrender it to Japan or any other foreign power.
 
A Step Toward Freedom
The struggle now going on in India between the people and imperialism is the first major progressive struggle for democracy and liberty in this war. Instead of the mutual slaughter of one another by workers who have been bamboozled by their own capitalist ruling classes, we have in India, the first step of a great people embarking on the long road that leads to their freedom. It is top early to tell yet whether the British, by sheer brutality and force of arms, will be able to crush the movement before it can make major headway; or whether greater and greater masses of workers and peasants will be drawn into the struggle. If the latter should happen (as we hope), then the struggle in India will become a revolutionary struggle for independence and political power, headed by the revolutionary workers.
But even if the movement should be halted by fascist violence, this can only be temporary and short-lived. For 400,000,000 people, once determined to win their liberation from any and all forms of foreign rule, cannot be halted!
They will come back, fighting harder and more determined than ever. The revolutionary socialists of India – organized today into the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India – are participating actively in the struggle, urging the people to fight to the end and to take over power through their mass organizations.
They stand with the people and we shall watch and support their activity in every possible way.
American workers – bred in the tradition of fighting for one’s rights – should recognize that the people of India are more than worthy of their support. Under hails of British bullets, they are dying to keep the name of people’s independence and liberty alive!
 



In response to the vicious “go-ahead” signal given by Winston Churchill in Parliament, the British authorities in India have unleashed a new campaign of terror against 400,000,000 people struggling. for freedom.
General Sir Allan F. Hartley – assistant to the “great” General Wavell – announced that Indian demonstrators have been machine-gunned five times by airplanes within the last month.
Police and troops have been used again in Bombay and other areas where workers and students joined in independence parades. In the city of Bombay, five men were sentences to death and four banished from the city for life after a bloody clash with police at a police station.
Airplanes sprayed incendiary bombs on the homes and villages of Moslem natives (Hurs) and parachute troops were brought into use against them. General Hartley announced that 200 were arrested and forty-five killed in the war against these people. In Madras Province, demonstrations of workers at salt factories were met with gunfire and many workers were killed. Authorities ordered the arrest of students and teachers in the Dacca district of Bengal Province in a vain effort to halt demonstrations and picketing actions. Many students of nationalist beliefs were arrested and expelled from the regions of Assam Province by the police. The number of arrests and woundings mounted daily and is already in the tens of thousands! And Mr. Churchill, sitting in Parliament, states that “law and order” have returned to Britain’s India colony!
The full meaning of all this criminal activity upon the part of the British was summarized by Sir M. Usman, British-appointed leader of the Council of State (a body made up of reactionary landlords and British business men), in a report delivered by him at the opening session of this body.



Killed by police
Killed by British troops


    390
    331




Total killed


    721









Wounded by police
Wounded by British troops


1,060
    159




Total wounded


1,219



Evidently, the British soldiers, armed with tommy guns and machine guns, are most effective in killing unarmed natives participating in parades and demonstrations!
Despite this terror, the campaign is on in full swing and now covers virtually every section of the country. British claims that they have crushed it are ludicrous and false. The only thing that has changed in the situation is the intensification of British violence and fascist-like action.
But they are finding out that a people determined to secure their full and rightful independence cannot be put down. THE STRUGGLE OF INDIA’S MASSES FOR LIBERATION FROM FOREIGN RULE IS STILL ON IN FULL FORCE!
 



In a recent column, devoted to the political meaning of FDR’s Labor Day speech and attack upon Congress, we explained how this tendency to brush aside Congress is a NATURAL wartime development, something to be expected in the march of American reaction and imperialism toward totalitarian and authoritative forms of rule. Here we want to take up the speech with regard to its MILITARY significance, particularly for the future.
 
A Second Front for 1943
It is clear to all (except possibly the most dim-witted follower of Joseph Stalin) that the Allies, England and America particularly, have no plans or intentions of launching a second front European invasion this year.
But to conclude from this that the second front (or, more accurately, invasion of Europe – since we do not know whether the Russian front will merit being called the first front next year) will not occur would be radically wrong and false. We start our analysis of the military aspects of the war from two simple premises:

German fascist imperialism is the main rival, enemy and obstacle in the path of American imperialism;
 
to remove this obstacle (that is, win the war) American imperialism must invade Germany, defeat it by military force and dictate ITS terms of peace.

Although World War No. 2 differs in many important ways from World War No. 1, this aim can only be accomplished in the same manner as last time – a successful march on. Germany and occupation of the key centers of Nazi power.
The sole question before the American imperialists and militarists is the question when, when shall we attempt this? Every one of them knows that it has to be done, sooner or later. This is why it is nonsense to claim – as the Stalinists and semi-Stalinists – that certain reactionaries (Munichmen!) in America and England oppose the very IDEA of a second front. To say that is equivalent to saying that they are willing to lose the war to their rival imperialist enemy, Germany!
For the imperialists, the question is not: shall we or shall we not invade? It is when have we reached the stage, of necessary preparation along military lines (manpower, air-strength, supply preparations, etc.); when have we reached the necessary political preparatory stage (to take over Europe and prevent social revolution in Germany, France, etc.); when have we reached the necessary stage of moral and psychological preparation of our own people (to withstand the shock of the enormous losses and casualties)?
When the British and American rulers feel they have reached the highest possible point on the chart of military, political and morale preparations, then they will launch the second front, come hell or high water! Not one moment before, unless they are convinced that further delay might mean a DECISIVE German breakthrough and world victory. Of this danger they are not yet convinced; of necessary preparations for invasion they still fall far short. Therefore, no second front as yet! But 1943 is different!
 
FDR’s Speech for 1943
The conclusion of FDR’s Labor Day message spoke of harsher struggles ahead and clearly indicated that next year will be a year of MAJOR American participation on the world military fronts. Here is where his economic program ties in with the second front and 1943. The invasion of Europe may constitute America’s supreme military effort in the war, just as Hitler’s war on Russia marks the high point of the Nazi war machine and its bloody career. A great military campaign, in the era of total warfare, requires a parallel and simultaneous political and economic campaign, aimed at the workers and the people, in general. FDR has embarked on such a campaign in preparation for 1943.

It is characterized by the growing militarization of America’s wartime economy. Real price-fixing power; freezing of labor to the job; plans for universal mobilization and conscription of all male and female labor, etc.
 
It is marked by a speeding up of the draft, a speeding up of the shipment of soldiers overseas; plans for the induction of new age and status groups (18–19 year olds; married men) into the Army. These new forces will serve as replacements and reinforcements for the losses and casualties of the 1943 second front.
 
It is marked by new emphasis on the morale front – the spirit of get tough and hard; the emphasis of the steel-like qualities of our opponents (found in the speeches of ex-Ambassador Grew and other government spokesmen); the necessity to sacrifice all; the philosophy of prepare to kill, or be killed!
 

America’s War Role Only Begun
The real weight of American imperialism in the war is yet to be felt, but it is clear that it cannot long be delayed in coming. That is why the year 1943 may well become known to history as the year in which American imperialism began its great lunge forward for world supremacy. The advance preparations indicated by FDR can mean only this. For imperialism to march forward it must do so over the corpses of its masses, at the same time subjecting those who still live to all the vicious experiences that totalitarian and military forms of rule mean. War economy plus conscription of labor plus an army of 10,000,000 soldiers may thus mean a second front invasion of Europe in 1943.
 



Wendell L. Willkie has now completed his world trip to “kingdoms, Soviets, republics and monarchies” and has retired (temporarily, to be sure) to his Indiana log cabin for rest, repose and writing paper to set down his thoughts.
Mr. Willkie – America’s most ambitious politician – says he went on the trip at the request of his friend, FDR, to carry out certain missions. The character of those missions are secret, so that’s that. But what isn’t a secret (heaven forbid!) is the gigantic, build-up Wendell L. Willkie gave Mr. Willkie. Of all the blown-up, slap-on-the-back, blow-hard, self-inflated and self-advertising politicians America ever produced, Mr. Willkie takes the cake.
 
What His Routine Is Like
Picture Mr. Willkie to yourself as he goes through the routine of his act. Whether he’s with the boys in Egypt, the Soviets in Russia, or Madame Chiang Kai-shek in China, the act is always the same. “I am Wendell L. Willkie from Hoosier, Indiana. I’m a real bluff and hearty American, I love everybody. I’m interested (intensely: so) in everything about you,and your country. I got terrific energy, so I can see everything you got to show in a couple of day, or a couple of hours if need be. Do you want more reinforcements in Egypt? I’m for it! Do you Turks want to join the United Nations? I’m for that! Do you want a second front, Uncle Joe? I’m for that! Do you want independence, Chiang, old pal? Just ask me, I’ll get that too! I’m Wendell L. Willkie of Indiana, an up-and-go-get-’em American!”
And so our former presidential campaigner blew and blasted his way around the world, performing his mission and making himself, in the words of Arthur Krock of the New York Times, “the first world statesman of the United Nations.”
Of course, while he was on his way, Mr. Willkie couldn’t resist needling FDR a couple of times about such questions as aid to embattled China. But politics is politics and Mr. Willkie is mighty ambitious, especially with 1944 not such a long way off!
 
Mr. Willkie, You’re A Fraud!
Mr. Willkie, you’re a fake and a cheap politician to boot! You’re about the crudest, most insincere and hypocritical peanut politician we ever came across.
Your whole career speaks against you. You’re a capitalist and a corporation lawyer from way back; you’ve always defended the interests of the capitalist class against labor. That’s why you got hardly any labor votes in the last elections (even though the workers mistakenly thought that FDR was somehow “better” than you). Furthermore, as everyone realizes now, on the issue of the war you didn’t differ one bit from FDR. You were for American imperialist participation in the war; you supported every single step FDR took once the war began and long before it did begin.
You’re tied up tight with big financial interests and with big publishers like Henry Luce of Time, Fortune and Life, Inc. You hobnob and pal around with big-shot bankers and industrialists. That doesn’t get so much newspaper ballyhoo, does it, Mr. Willkie? You prefer those shots where you “mingle” with the workers, with a great big, happy-go-lucky grin on your face. Or where you’re shown shaking the hand of some liberal Negro leader.
Demagogy is your strong point. You’re “for democracy for the Negroes,” because they control a few million votes; you’re “for freedom for China” because it makes a good platform appeal to liberals and American workers who sympathize with what China has gone through since the Japanese invasion; you’re “pro-Stalin and pro-Soviet” even though you never expressed the slightest sympathy for Soviet Russia in those years before the reactionary Stalin gang got its hands on the country.
It’s popular among certain circles (the Stalinists and the “artistic” friends) to be “hot for the second front.” But at bottom, when at comes to anything that really counts, you’re hottest of all for American imperialism; that’s why you endorse the Henry R. Luce thesis that this is the American Century,” during which America must rule and dominate the entire world.
You talk about the people of Asia being skeptical and not really trusting the United Nations, something which is quite true. But do you ever suggest why? Do you ever suggest that these people (who, in China and India, live under United Nation rule) are skeptical and cynical about “democracy” because they don’t have any?
And while we are on the subject, Mr. Wendell Liberal Willkie, how come you never spoke up against the British terror in India, where the “democracies” have killed almost 1,000 people? Whom are you trying to kid with your liberal pose and concern over the “common people” and the “people’s century”? Every time a real issue comes up, you take your own side – the side of big business!
 
FDR and WLW
FDR is America’s war leader; he is spokesman for American capitalism. WLW is his errand boy, but ready and willing to take over FDR’s seat. We doubt that he ever will because he lacks the necessary polish and cleverness that FDR has. American imperialism wants streamlined, slick and shrewd politicians. FDR has done a brilliant job for his class and they want someone of like caliber. WLW doesn’t fill the bill – he’s too crude. He sounds too much like a hog caller from Indiana!
 



During the past few weeks individual after individual and group after group of American liberals and New Dealers ranging from pious Norman Thomas to Pearl Buck – have issued appeals urging American “intervention and mediation” in the deadlock of India.
The press has been flooded with appeals from a host of liberals and shining intellectuals. No expense, including a full page ad in the New York Times, has been spared. Public meetings, radio talks, ads, statements – every method of modern propaganda has been employed.
All the appeals have the same meaning and content. They are usually directed to President Roosevelt, as leader of the United Nations. They urge (1) a resumption of conferences and negotiations between the Indian nationalist leaders and the British government; (2) the bringing of India into the war as an active partner by means of certain concessions (for example, a provisional government based on some sort of federal system). These liberals are quite in their glory when it comes to writing up “constitutions” and plans for India!
Of course, none of these gentlemen proposes India’s immediate and unconditional liberation. All of them are concerned only with the problem of bringing India openly and usefully into the war. Any pretense that the eminent, Norman Thomas may have made at opposing the war is gone with his signature to the New York Times ad, a statement which had support of the war as its central theme!
 
Spokesmen of American Imperialism
Far more important than this tribe of liberals, whose attitude toward India might well be described as “Let’s give them a couple of bones, then they’ll be only too happy to fight and die for us” – far more important are the words and deeds of America’s ruling class spokesmen and journalists – men like Wendell L. Willkie, Raymond Clapper, the Luce publications (Time, Life and Fortune), etc. They, too, have commented widely upon India in recent week, and their remarks have not been exactly friendly to the British, their companions-in-arms of the United Nations.
These men represent the pinion of the American imperialists and those who are leading America in its war role. They express not merely dissatisfaction with the bungling, stupid, die-hard manner in which Churchill and his gang have handled the India problem, but – and this is most important – they express the longings and desires of American imperialism with respect to India’s future.
These men would like American intervention and “pressure” from FDR not because they are concerned with India’s rights or her demand for liberation, but because they look forward to the day when American capital can force its way into Indian territory against the wishes of England and begin ITS OWN profitable exploitation of that land’s vast wealth and resources. In a word, they are thinking of the future, when American imperialism will oust or seek to oust Britain from its most important and most profitable colony. These spokesmen would like to see the British replaced by their backers, the imperialists, the merchants and financiers of the United States! That is why they keep harping upon the British failure to solve the crisis, hinting how much better they could do if they were only given the opportunity to deal with Gandhi and his associates.
Let no one be mistaken about this question. On the matter of American intervention in India there is bad feeling between London and Washington! Churchill and particularly Amery, his Secretary of State for India, have none too politely told FDR and the “interventionists” to keep their fingers off India; that’s private poaching grounds for ENGLISH imperialism. So far, FDR has done this, but the people of India would be wise to watch out for future intervention. When the rulers of America approach India bearing gifts, it would be well to recall American policy toward ITS colonies, the Philippines, Cuba and Puerto Rica, for example.
 
For Workers’ Intervention
Our attitude toward India has nothing in common with that of the hypocritical liberals of Common Sense magazine, Norman Thomas or any of that group. Of course we also completely oppose any intervention by American capitalism. But we would definitely like to see “intervention” by the American workers and trade unionists. An intervention on behalf of the people of India, protesting the criminal actions of the British government, backing up solidly India’s demand for complete independence from any and all (including America) imperialist powers.
Let us do away with this attitude of condescension and “looking down” upon the people of India. Let us make no mistake about the matter. A great people have begun what will undoubtedly be a long and difficult struggle for their liberation. They are not “naked heathens,” as the imperialist English imply; they are not a backward, ignorant people. We must look upon the events in India as the beginnings of a great social revolution which, if it succeeds, will completely change the face of Asia and the rest of the world.
It is not a matter of a few isolated people fighting, but it is a movement involving almost 400,000,000 people who have opened up a REVOLUTIONARY front of their own against foreign rule.
WE MUST SUPPORT THEM AS WORKERS AND POOR PEOPLE IN EVERY LAND MUST SUPPORT ONE ANOTHER.
 



In the September issue of The New International we gave our reply to Felix Morrow and the Cannonite publication Fourth International, which had accused us of “criminally slandering” the Congress Party of India and refusing to recognize its “leadership” in the present struggle.
As a fitting – and, in our humble opinion, devastating – commentary upon the opportunist Morrow position of uncritical support to the Congress, we quote from the May 1942 Transitional Program of the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India (section of the Fourth International).
Hence the Indian situation not only demands that the Indian proletariat advance by all the means within its power its own class struggle against capitalism, imperialist and native alike. It is also imperative that the proletariat should participate actively in the wider national political’ movement, with the aim of wresting the leadership of the anti-imperialist struggle from the hands of the reactionary native bourgeoisie ...
The necessity to participate in the national political movement does not, however, in the least imply a policy of mass affiliation (individual or collective) to the Indian National Congress which, though predominantly petty bourgeois in composition, is completely dominated and led by the Indian bourgeoisie and functions as the servile instrument of its class policies ... The Bolshevik-Leninist Party therefore characterizes the Indian National Congress as the class party of the Indian bourgeoisie, and falls upon the workers to place no trust whatever in the Congress or its leaders. This does not of course absolve the Bolshevik-Leninists from the task of doing fraction work (of course, in all cases under strict party discipline) within the Congress, as also in other political mass organizations ...
Nor does the Bolshevik-Leninist Party follow a sectarian policy with regard to such activities of the Congress as are progressive. It will discern the progressive acts of the Congress and support them, but critically and independently, without confounding its organization, program or banner with the Congress for a moment. “March separately, strike together” must be the watchword of the policy of the Bolshevik-Leninist Party in relation to all progressive actions under the aegis of the Congress as well as to every oppositional and revolutionary action undertaken by other political organizations in India. At the same time the Bolshevik-Leninist Party must put forward its own slogans, foresee the inevitable betrayals of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois leaders, warn the masses against them, and thus gain the confidence of the masses on the basis of their revolutionary experience. (Our emphasis. – H.J.)
Note how carefully they pose the question: we shall discern and support concrete progressive acts of the Congress Party; unlike the Morrow manner which demands, “Yes or no, do you support the Congress?” To this projected strategy of the Indian Fourth Internationalists, we have nothing to add. It is Trotsky’s colonial revolutionary strategy.
But behold the joke of jokes! The above flagrant violation of Morrow’s “strategy” on India (along with an introduction by the editor – the same Morrow) is published in the October issue of Fourth International! Does Morrow agree or disagree with this strategy? His introduction is silent. He will not reply to us; but the revolutionists of India will demand an answer from him!
 



Victory Through Airpower
by Major Alexander P. de Seversky
Simon & Schuster, Inc., New York, N.Y., 1942
There are now 5,000,000 American youth and young workers, an entire generation, in the armed forces of the United States. According to Assistant Secretary of War McCloy, 600,000 are already overseas, and the armed forces will total close to 10,000,000 by the end of 1943. Clearly, the militarization of American imperialism is proceeding at a rapid rate. And since American imperialism cannot fight on its own shores, but must meet its rivals in foreign lands, these ten millions of armed forces are destined to fight on the continents of Europe, Africa, Asia and Australia.
A book by a bourgeois specialist has caused a national sensation in America, and is still hotly debated. It is a fascinating book, well worth reading by any socialist, particularly with the above in mind. The fact that Walt Disney is planning a super-technicolor production based upon this book, and showing world victory by America through its air arm, should not repel the reader, even though the transformation of America’s most enjoyable cultural contribution (Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse) into a pictorial projection of organised destruction and horror illustrates well what is happening to our nation under present conditions. This fact, rather, reflects upon some of the more fantastic and unreal characteristics of de Seversky’s sensational book!
The book is a compilation of various articles written and published by the author over a period covering the early years of the war, before American entrance, when the world was first attempting to grasp the shocking revelation of what a Luftwaffe blitzkrieg could do. The book suffers stylistically and technically from a vast amount of repetition and padding placed at various points to give the articles some sense of continuity and form, as well as to blow it up to book size. Actually, its central theme could be stated in a few paragraphs and defended in a single long article.
 
What de Seversky Offers Through Airpower
This theme is as follows: We of the United States wish to win the war in the shortest, cheapest and easiest way. Here is the way to do it: We will build a gigantic fleet of super-bombing planes, with a flight radius of 6,000 miles and return. This radius will enable them to bomb and blast to kingdom come every major city, base and strategic location in the world. With this air arm we shall rule the world by (1) wiping out those nations that dare oppose us; or (2) wiping out threatened opposition by the threat to use our air arm. de Seversky does not propose military conquest by armies and by occupation, he proposes the physical destruction of our enemies from the air. “... British aims must be to wreck German economy rather than to take it over” (page 103). Extended to America, de Seversky’s thesis is American mastery of the world by control and patrol of the skies, as once the British controlled the world market with their navy.
To give another concrete illustration of de Seversky’s method: his idea is that we should have planned a completely aerial warfare against Japan, planning to destroy its cities and industries from huge air bases located in the Aleutians, Hawaii, Guam, Midway, etc.
In the author’s scheme of things, airpower is the sine qua non, the common denominator of all military action. He ridicules navies as outmoded and also the traditional imperialist method of launching huge land armies into motion for purposes of territorial conquest. There is no place in his plan for such proposals and military conceptions as the Air-Navy-Army team combination of Hanson Baldwin, wherein all the branches of modern militarism are trained and prepared to stride offensively in a coordinated, integrated manner. de Seversky is a fanatic on the subject of the airplane and its potentialities against rival forces. He subordinates every other military weapon to the plane.
Before we consider some of the rather obvious flaws in the schema of de Seversky, it is worth dwelling upon the meaning of his book. It is, probably, an expression of one of the most cold-blooded and ruthless militarists who ever existed. de Seversky can wipe out a nation and its economy with his adumbrated air force with the same ease and sangfroid that a Potsdam general wipes out a Polish, Czech or Russian village. A Russian White Guardist by birth and experience, an aristocratic specialist of an extremely developed type, de Seversky is as fascist-minded an individual as one is likely to find in the war today. His projected plan of American world aerial mastery is, of course, but the latest and most fantastic in various schemes for American world empire. That is why all bourgeois critics have attacked him only with regard to the possibility of his plan’s realization, and not its aims or objectives, with which they are in accord. de Seversky is welcomed more by the “far-sighted” militarist-minded section of the American army officers’ corps for this reason than by the conservative bureaucrats and brass-hat functionaries, whom he ridicules over and over again.
The fundamental mistake that makes de Seversky’s thesis a fantasy and Utopian imperialist pipe dream is that it lacks any material basis while possessing only the crudest and most over-simplified political basis. His plan is an abstraction, based upon desire and dreams conjured up from his wish to see America master of the world. Thus, the task of building the huge air force he envisages is never even considered. The problems of production, labor, raw materials, relation between capitalism and the all-dominant aircraft industry he proposes – these and a host of other material problems are simply ignored by de Seversky. He reduces the task to the simple one of constructing 100,000 or 200,000 long-range bombers and then going out to smash up everything! The productive limitations of America, its isolation from the world market as a result of war defeats, the capitalization of such a huge industry – such questions do not concern him.
Secondly, the sort of war he pictures (great armadas of planes flying out to lay waste the enemy territory) conflicts with the aims and objectives of imperialist warfare. Why wipe out your rival’s industry and physically destroy his economy when expanding capitalism demands that you seize it for exploitation and use? Even if you destroy and paralyze your enemy from the air, you must still occupy and attempt to organize his territory. This can only be done by armies, still the backbone of imperialism. Besides, the history of capitalist warfare proves the impossibility of completely nullifying the effect of your imperialist rival, except for a short period. Defeat of an imperialist power inevitably sets other forces in operation, forces that (given the continuation of world capitalism) inevitably bring back the defeated power as a new challenger. Germany and the Versailles experiences are the classic illustration of this. To achieve de Seversky’s goal, America would have to systematically annihilate every rival or potential rival. Then it would sit – master of a world of ruins!
 
Explanations of Other Things
De Seversky is a political ignoramus and displays his simple, brute-force mentality each time he touches a political question. There is, for example, his proposal about war with Japan that we have already cited. From the imperialist standpoint it sounds wonderful. But then, why wasn’t it done? Because the imperialist world isn’t so simple and American policy vis-à-vis Japanese imperialism has, since the Russo-Japanese War of 1905, been one of compromise and agreement if possible. How could gigantic air bases be built against Japan when the first Roosevelt sided with Japan in its first expansionist war against Russia; when large sections of American capitalists helped arm Japan to the teeth and gave open support to its predatory war against China? de Seversky does not realize that military preparations and plans must be subordinated to the broader, long-range strategic aims of the imperialist power; that military strategy must give the right of way to imperialist (political) strategy.
His explanation of the collapse of France is, of course, a purely military one in which he takes advantage of the opportunity to emphasize the superior organization and strength of the Nazi Luftwaffe. He credits the Germans with being the first to understand the possibilities of air power. Naturally, there are the usual stupid cracks at French labor and the Popular Front regime. de Seversky’s knowledge of French politics is, to say the least, limited.
But when he writes of aircraft, its power, comparisons of different types and styles of planes, bombing tactics and protection of air armadas, etc., then we recognize a voice of authority from whom the layman can learn a good deal. His description of the various shortcomings of American aircraft models seems to be borne out in the various complaints that come in from Britain, where the American planes are getting their first serious test. His blasting of the conservative army bureaucracy (de Seversky took an important part in the famous “Billy” Mitchell vs. “brass hats” controversy), is a delight to read and emphasizes the Marxist point about the backward and lagging technological methods employed by all reactionary cliques and army corps. De Seversky has apparently had plenty of first-hand experience in the rejection of new designs, models and ideas! De Seversky further blasts the ridiculous method by which the imperialists run their war with separate air forces, under separate commands, for the various branches of military service. There are Army planes, Navy planes, Marine planes, Coast Guard planes, etc. – all without coordination, all functioning independently of one another, if they so choosel It is in the technical and critical parts of his book that we have something to learn, something that makes Victory Through Airpower worth reading, despite its various fantasies. A first step to understanding the meaning of modern warfare and the tools it employs could well be a study of the Second World War’s greatest innovation – the use of airpower.
 



BEFORE GIVING AN account of the past year and a half of treachery heaped upon treachery as displayed in the actions of the INC, we must describe the working-class political elements that make up the left-wing of this classic anti-imperialist People’s Front movement. The INC itself is a mere carbon copy of the infamous Chinese Kuomintang (bloc of 4 classes!) transferred to India. Its predominant right and center sections consist of the native bourgeois, petty-bourgeois and radical-liberal elements. Its so-called left-wing is made up of the workers, i.e., “radical” parties – the All-Indian Congress Socialist Party; the Indian Communist Party, and the Royist tendency (followers of the well-known Indian leader, M.N. Roy, who was released from jail a little over a year ago after serving a long sentence). These three groupings, of which the Congress Socialist Party is the largest, work closely together in the INC as part of the “anti-imperialist People’s Front”.
The character of the Congress Socialist Party is contained in its name. It is petty-bourgeois both in program and in composition. Its arena of activity is limited to the INC (At the last INC Congress it controlled approximately one-third of the delegates.) The party itself has few connections with trade unions in the industrial cities, and still fewer connections with mass peasant organizations. It was organized in 1935 by former followers of Gandhi (mostly Hindu students, educated in England – Oxford and Cambridge – and returned home to “lead” the workers and peasants), who had partially grasped the reasons for the failure of the Gandhi movement and had rebelled against its extreme petty-bourgeois ideology. Vaguely sympathetic to the British ILP, the CSP stands programatically for socialism “in our time”. Its independent program calls for numerous economic reforms and bases its political content on the demand for a Constituent Assembly. But it is infinitely removed (as its presence in and active support of the INC testifies) from a serious Marxian program for carrying-on a revolutionary struggle against Britain based on mass workers and peasant organizations. The CSP is essentially a reformist party. Even its most radical immediate demands such as that of a Constituent Assembly are put forward in an abstract, mechanical and parliamentary fashion. Thus, this proposed Assembly is to be based on adult – not even universal – suffrage! Despite the Marxian phraseology (ill-digested, to be sure!) of its publications, the CSP meekly and pathetically accepts the bourgeois leadership in the Congress.
Its party leader is perhaps the single most important individual developed by the Indian Nationalist movement. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru has not only replaced the largely discredited Gandhi but, in the eyes of the masses, he is looked upon with far greater admiration and from him are expected the greatest revolutionary deeds. An excellent agitator and orator, he has won an immense personal following. Nehru, in his recently published autobiography, describes how he became disillusioned in Gandhism and launches a fierce attack upon Gandhi’s treachery during the “Civil Disobedience” movement. In his presidential speech to the INC at its Lucknow meeting (May, 1936) he attacked middle-class leadership.
“A middle-class leadership is thus often a distracted leadership, looking in two directions at once. In times of crisis and struggle this two-faced leadership is bound to injure the cause and to hold back when a forward movement is called for.”
The Pandit professes to believe in socialism. “The only key to the solution of India’s problems lies in socialism.” How often has he repeated that formula! Yet, à la Earl Browder, he has often stated his willingness and readiness to “die for democracy”. He claims to understand by socialism not some vague, humanitarian Utopia, but the scientific socialism of Marx and Engels. Nehru wears the badge of a Marxist, nothing less. Yet when we come to examine his role in the last INC meeting, as well as his actions since then, we shall see that Nehru, in his tremendous confusion, has been swallowed up by the labor movement’s greatest plague, the line of Stalinism.
As is to be expected, the Indian Stalinists are faithfully carrying out the Comintern’s political instructions. They claim great “progress”. Emerging from their former isolation, they first joined up with the INC (a necessary step in the formation of an Indian People’s Front); without any difficulty dissolved their “Red Flag Unions” into the All-India Trade Union Congress (1936), and proclaimed as their task the building of a “United anti-Imperialist People’s Front”. They advocate a program of the crudest nationalism and call for the unity of “all peoples against the British”. R. Palme Dutt, the Stalinist Indian expert, declares openly that a movement similar to that of the old “national-revolutionary Kuomintang of China” must be built. With incredible cynicism, these people urge the Indian masses to pursue the same course that led to such disaster in China in 1927 (and again in 1938!). They ask the workers and peasants to join their own rulers in “common” cause.
Marx always pointed to the close relationship between the revolutionary cause of England and that of India. The same relationship holds for the cause of reaction and counter-revolution. With the English Stalinists still anxiously seeking to launch a People’s Front in England, despite the abortive failure of their first attempt with the Socialist League and the ILP, it is quite in order to expect a corresponding People’s Front for India. There it is today, already having delivered heavy blows against the liberation struggle. The motive of the Stalinists is clear. They say, in effect:
“Let us get a People’s Front government in England. This government will, we hope, ally itself in the manner of France, with the Soviet Union. So far, so good. But what about the English colonies? What if, encouraged by our success, the oppressed natives should carry on a revolutionary struggle against England for liberation. This will weaken England, Stalin’s ally! We must therefore simultaneously destroy this colonial movement. We must not let it overrun the traditional bounds! Ergo, long live the People’s Front of India!”
The perfidious goal of the Indian People’s Front is to choke off any attempt to fight against England and instead have the Indian masses fight in the approaching World War with imperialist England against Germany, Japan or any country that may attack the Soviet Union. This is the Stalinist policy in India, arrived from Moscow via London.
Does the reader require a practical illustration of the policy? Let us look at the Stalinist line in Indo-China (a colony of French People’s Front imperialism). A little over a year ago, during Blum’s honeymoon period in the Popular Front, Duong Bach Mai, Communist Party Counsellor in the city of Saigon, Indo-China, wrote the following:
“The risk of losing Indo-China [for France] no longer comes from within, but externally” (referring to Japanese-German accord).
“From now on the duty of France is clear. It must immediately restore our dignity and personality among the peoples of the Far East by taking measures that will sincerely attach us to popular and democratic France” (from L’Humanité, Dec. 18th, 1936).
Likewise, the French Stalinists have maintained perfect and lofty silence during the periodic waves of police terror launched by the Popular Front regime of France against the natives of Indo-China, Syria, French Algeria, etc. Perfect silence even when this terror hit their own comrades, as in Indo-China.
Thus, death to the struggle for colonial liberation. That has been the practice in France for almost two years; that is the practice and policy today in India. Furthermore, it must be understood that while the Stalinists would prefer to see an English People’s Front government allied to the Soviet Union – this is not essential. A Tory government at war with Hitler will serve as sufficient excuse for the Indian Stalinists to lend their support (in full) to the predatory aims of England. This is the logic of Stalinism’s colonial “policy”.
Finally, the Royists. The American Lovestone clique has long claimed them as their own. Lately, for sufficient reason, they soft-peddle this relationship. M.N. Roy was a CP member who was expelled along with the Comintern Right Opposition in 1928. His influence was quite extensive at one time and still remains an important force in the city of Bombay. Politically, the Royists have accepted the complete reactionary line of Stalinist People’s Front and are providing theoretical justification for the INC by serving up all the warmed-over arguments of Menshevism. M.N. Roy’s latest work, a collection of letters to the Congress Socialist Party, is replete with this trash. Immediately upon his release from jail, Roy hastened to participate in the INC meeting at Allahabad where he soon displayed how far removed his ideas were from revolutionary Marxism. M.N. Roy had changed to a pure petty-bourgeois Nationalist.
Pledged beforehand to the support of their own native rulers, these three working class tendencies participated in the 50th meeting of the INC, held at Allahabad in December, 1936. Meeting at a time of great uneasiness on all sides, the Congress was to deal specifically with the question of the New Constitution. The bourgeoisie, liberal and conservative sections alike, aimed to make out of the Congress a festival for social peace. Ably aided by the Stalinists, CSP and Royists, they succeeded.
Nehru, to whom as president of the INC fell the job of delivering the keynote speech, sounded loud and familiar notes of harmony and unity. Preparations had previously been made by the Congress Socialist Party for this capitulation to the bourgeois wing of the INC when, at the Lucknow meeting of the INC held in April, 1936, the CSP had withdrawn its resolutions favoring a struggle for economic demands. And now Nehru reiterated his “belief” in socialism, but his readiness to “die fighting for democracy”. All sections were well pleased with the Pandit’s remarks. The Congress then went on record as supporting the Geneva World Peace Congress (influence of Stalinism); adopted another resolution protesting the new “forward” [1] policy of the British; favored the convening of a Constituent Assembly which will create in India a “... genuine, democratic state”.
To the impassioned questions posed by India’s masses there was no answer save that of evading the struggle and preparing to accept Britain’s will. A resolution was passed against the New Constitution, but it deliberately failed to outline any definite program of action to be utilized against its enforcement. The motion advocating a General Strike against the Constitution was tabled with the support of socialist and Stalinist delegates. The Congress refused to adopt any resolution or to even hold discussions on agrarian or labor problems! On the most immediate and practical question of the day – whether or not members of the INC should accept posts in the ministries created under the new Constitution – a step was taken thoroughly preparing for a future opportunism. Decision was postponed until after the elections!
On one lone issue did a fight threaten to develop. That was the matter of the reelection of Nehru as the president of the INC But this skirmish was shortly ended. Under pressure from Gandhi, who emerged from his “retirement” long enough to do another good deed for British imperialism, the Pandit withdrew the ideas he had advanced in his opening speeches about India’s need for socialism and issued a statement saying: “It would be absurd for me to treat this presidential election as a vote for socialism or anti-office acceptances.” As a result, the right-wing withdrew its conservative candidate, all sighed with relief and Nehru was unanimously reflected. As the Times of India (leading English imperialist paper) remarked: “The Pandit’s unanimous election is ... a triumph for the parliamentary wing.” The only practical step taken in the entire INC meeting was the preparation of lists of candidates to run in the April election scheduled under the New Constitution. In short, acceptance of the “Slave Constitution” as an accomplished fact! Thus spoke the Kuomintang of India!
After this disgusting love-feast (with the British Lion as the main guest), the INC faced the elections. It possessed a blank-check, made out to reformism and opportunism. Very radical was its election propaganda.
“This Congress reiterates its entire rejection of the Government of India Act. .. any cooperation with the Constitution is a betrayal of India’s struggle for freedom and a strengthening of the hold of British imperialism ... The Congress therefore repeats its resolve not to submit to this Constitution, nor to cooperate with it, but to combat it, both inside and outside the legislatures, so as to end it.”
Yet the bourgeoisie carefully prepared for office acceptance, i.e., administration by direct methods of Britain’s will. They saw to it that only candidates of their own choice ran for the legislatures. No working class candidates were supported by the INC They drastically curbed the tone and scope of pre-election propaganda.
Yet despite the careful provisions of the Constitution, despite the divisions and strife provoked by the British, despite a sharp wave of terrorism launched by the police during pre-election weeks, the Indian masses rejected the Constitution and signaled once again their great desire to march into combat. The INC was returned with an absolute majority in 6 Provinces and as the biggest party in 3 other Provinces. This out of a total of 11. The power of this blow at British imperialism is further understood when we realize that every single INC candidate elected was pledged to reject and combat the Constitution.
Then the bourgeoisie of India struck swiftly. It revived Gandhi and conducted a great campaign designed to renew his former influence. It preached moderation and temperance. April 1, 1937 – the day of hartal and spontaneous general strike all over India – gave way to July 9 – the day of office acceptance. The Simla correspondent of the Times tells us of these changes:
“Throughout the country generally, Congress leaders are adjusting their policies to meet the new conditions, and the Provincial Congress Ministries are endeavoring to bring their political theories into harmony with constitutional realism ... This reorientation of the attitude of Congress leaders gives emphasis to a statement made by the Premier of Madras, who urged Congress ministers and Congress members to speak with restraint and a sense of responsibility. He also deprecated attacks on the King-Emperor ...”
The inevitable step was taken. The INC formed ministries in 7 out of the 11 Provinces and today rules politically in most of India. Indian bourgeois nationalism once more served its masters. Roy, Nehru and the Stalinists meekly watched (and silently approved) of these actions on the part of those who had just delivered such fierce pledges of their will to struggle against the bribery of office acceptance. The lion of Indian nationalism turned out to be a pathetically bleating lamb.
The period since elections have been months of disillusion and despair for the workers and peasant masses. The INC-controlled ministries have refused to set free political prisoners, failed to put into effect any of the proposed land and labor reforms, broken numerous strikes (in particular, the great strike in the jute industry which assumed the proportions of a general strike involving hundreds of thousands of proletarians), arrested its own members for political and labor activities, endorsed England’s rearmament program for India, and is now openly preparing to accept the second half of Britain’s new program, a Federated and centralized India.
To such an extent has this policy dampened the ardor of the masses that the INC felt it necessary to provide an artificial stimulus as a brace for its evaporating support. On August 1st, 1937, meetings held throughout India were requested to adopt a resolution of confidence in the INC. Part of this resolution read:
“This meeting sends comradely greetings to the Congress Ministers in the 7 provinces where they have taken upon themselves, in spite of limitations and handicaps, the heavy responsibility of steering public policy in accordance with Congress ideals. In this task of realizing Congress objectives, and of combatting the new Constitution [sic!] on the one hand, and of prosecuting the constructive programme on the other, this meeting assures these ministers of its full cooperation.”
Note the familiar hypocrisy and diplomatic language of the politics of betrayal.
Even the Congress Socialist Party is somewhat dubious of the present state of affairs.
“The Congress sail is being filled with reformist wind. The right-wing with its feet in the administrative saddle now thinks in terms of reforms and not revolutionary changes. The constitutional mentality, inescapable with the policy of office acceptance, is growing at a pace even we had not apprehended. In that way lies the danger to militancy in the Congress.” (Congress Socialist, October 16, 1937)
But the CSP offers nothing and stands idly by, wringing its hands in utter despair.
The crying contradiction in Indian politics today is that between the treacherous leadership and the demands and aspirations of the organized masses. Even the peasant organizations (organized on a tremendous scale into the militant All-India Kisan Committee) possess a program far in advance of that of the INC. They demand reduction in land taxes, end of rack-renting, abolition of debts, aid for the unemployed agrarian laborers, end of forced labor and well taxation, etc., etc. Their rallying cry: “Inquilab Zindabad!” (Long live the Revolution!). But the existing parties prevent all struggle; prevent the essential unity of peasant and worker.
It is palpably clear that a regroupment of revolutionary forces, aiming at the formation of a new party is necessary. Without detailing its program, we can state that it will base itself on the struggle of the Indian proletariat allied with the peasantry in an effort to achieve a socialist and agrarian revolution. Above all, the proletariat must learn to conduct a fierce fight against the influence of its own, national bourgeoisie and that, in the words of Trotsky: “the complete and genuine solution of its tasks, democratic and national emancipation, is conceivable only through the dictatorship of the proletariat as the leader of the subjugated nation, and above all of its peasant masses.” Then will the cry of the peasants, “Inquilab Zindabad!” take on life and meaning.
 
Footnote
1. This refers to the series of attacks still being carried on by army and air forces against native tribes far back in India’s hinterland – the imperialists march again!
 
Editor’s Note
1*. This is the third and final section of the article, the first part of which appeared in the April issue and the second part of which appeared in the May issue.



AGAINST THESE TRAINED armed forces, against this rigidly mechanized bureaucracy and colonial state apparatus built up by England with minute and loving care over a period of two centuries, the Indian nationalist movement has raised itself – for the most part, with incredible feebleness, cowardice and subservience. Not because there was lacking the necessary human material and widespread social discontent for a powerful, dynamic liberation movement. These factors have been present ever since those days when England entered the stage of aggressive, imperialist penetration (1840’s). But to the present day, the nationalist movement has been under the complete control of the national Indian bourgeoisie. This bourgeois leadership has aimed primarily at the maintenance and strengthening of England’s grip upon India, because it well knows that any serious liberation struggle against England will set into motion great forces within India itself – forces inevitably bound to threaten its own class existence: the peasant-agrarian revolution against the Hindu landowners, moneylenders, etc., the proletarian revolution against Hindu industrialists and finance-bankers in the large cities.
A real liberation struggle means the class struggle for socialism. India’s capitalists and landlords recognize this and thus basically oppose both liberation and independence. At the most, they desire minor political concessions giving them greater freedom to carry on their own private exploitation of the masses. It is similar to the middleman of capital who, while cheating the farmer, tries to take a little extra “cut” for himself. The most “left” section of the Indian bourgeoisie, the Hindu liberals, desires Dominion Status or “Swaraj” (Home Rule) – that is, the opportunity to set up an Indian parliament, modeled after Britain’s Parliament, in which they can ape their English brothers at playing the game of parliamentary cant. To an unparalleled extent, the Indian bourgeoisie is tied hand and foot to the ruling class of the imperialism oppressing its native country. The official press of both countries continually harps on the fact that there is no real – either internal or external – dissension between them – only slight disagreements. Absolutely true! Yet this class ally of England dominates the liberation movement!
Several years ago the world witnessed violent rioting and fighting between Hindus and Moslems at Chittagong. English and Indian rulers alike united in suppressing not only the riots but also their meaning. The official press (including that of America) plastered the label of “religious strife” over the events. Actually, the riots were a struggle between revolting, land-hungry Moslem peasants and their Hindu landlords! The Midland Daily Telegraph (1930) gives another example of the economic content behind so-called religious riots. “The population of the village [recently destroyed in a “religious” battle] is almost entirely Mohammedan, with a small section of Hindu moneylenders and traders to whom many of the Mohammedans are indebted. Communal feeling is, therefore, aggravated by economic causes.” The fire of class struggle burns with elemental heat within India. It is present in Indian life from its most primitive forms to its most contemporary. Thus it is impossible to speak of the Indian bourgeoisie leading a liberation struggle – it is a formidable obstacle on that road.
The Indian Nationalist Congress (INC) is the best known expression of Indian nationalism. For many years it was an outright pro-British fraternal organization, not even seeking minor political reforms. Through it Britain worked to build up and cultivate the friendship of a native bourgeoisie. Under pressure of the Swarajist Party (a liberal-bourgeois party organized by C.R. Das, who was also an important figure in the English Fabian and cooperative movements), a slight turn was given to the INC helm. Although still made up entirely of native bourgeois organizations, it began to demand certain political concessions from England. These demands, needless to say, were presented in humble, lackey-like fashion. This slight shift took place around 1890 when, for the first time, working class and peasant organizations became known to the Indians. During the pre-war period, under the harsh military rule of Lord Curzon, there appeared the first primitive manifestation of a growing revolutionary spirit – acts of terrorism carried out by Indian students. The inevitably unfavorable rejoinder to this was an Act of Parliament permitting Lord Curzon (and future Indian Viceroys) to exercise a six-month emergency decree-power whenever he so desired. Suppression of newly formed organizations, wholesale arrests, etc., followed.
Meanwhile, to satisfy more vociferous elements in the INC a kind of Parliament was established. (Morley-Minto Constitution of 1909.) Of course, Constitutional provisions assured beforehand English control of the majority membership. (Highly selective voting requirements, a set number of Englishmen to constitute part of the Parliament without having to be elected, etc.) Again, due to the post-war revolutionary fire kindled by the October Bolshevik Revolution, the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms were adopted, granting further political concessions. The Russian Revolution gave to the nationalist movement its first revolutionary element – the Indian Communist Party. (The Social-Democracy had never attempted to organize a colonial movement in India – or, for that matter, in any colonial country.) To further guarantee the friendship of the native bourgeoisie, “Dyarchy,” the greatest political concession up till then, was granted. This reform established Provincial Parliaments with exceedingly minor functions. But the nationalist movement in general and the revolutionary CP of India in particular continued to grow. It was at this time that Gandhi first assumed importance in the Indian movement.
 
2.
What is Gandhism? Of all the innumerable blights weighing down up the long-oppressed Indian masses, the curse inflicted by Gandhism is the worst. Gandhism is the art of leading the Indian people up a blind alley and then showing the way out – straight into the arms of England. The man himself dissolves into insignificance when placed beside his ideas and their tragic effect in disorganizing and disorientating the liberation movement. Yet these ideas have always been reflected in his personal career. Gandhi comes from a high-caste Hindu family and was educated as a barrister in England. He practised law among Indians who had been shanghaied from India and brought to do forced labor in South Africa by the English. There he developed his “nonviolence” and “passive resistance” doctrine, before his return to India. During the World War Gandhi supported the English imperialists and actively helped recruit Indians into the British European armies. (Tens of thousands of Indians fought in Europe, and India paid over to England a total sum of 240 million pounds.) After the War, his ideas were rounded out into a fullblown ideology and he began to recruit the mass movement which reached its height in 1930-1933 under the name of “Civil Disobedience.”
Gandhism is the epitome of petty-bourgeois reactionary doctrine. The two basic ideas are: (1) Liberation can be attained by ethical means – i.e., non-violence; (2) India must return to the ways of the ancient Hindus. These conceptions were employed in India on a gigantic scale and under almost ideal conditions. An elemental movement of the masses, sweeping from the depths of Indian society, was cut off at the very peak of its development when its leaders time after time capitulated before the threats of England. (Delhi Pact, 1931; Poona Agreement, 1934.) Each time, Gandhi strangled the movement when it appeared on the verge of transcending his bourgeois ideas, with the result that his vast following became discouraged and more than ever a prey to the exploitation of the Indian and English bourgeoisie. The objective role of Gandhi has been to handcuff the workers and peasants and then turn them over to the whip of imperialism. He is known as Britain’s greatest policeman in India! The reactionary content of his doctrine is further embodied in his idea that India must return to the past. The one progressive aspect of Britain’s historic rule, that of partly freeing India from the backwardness of Asiatic antiquity, appears to have been, for Gandhi, retrogressive. Petty-bourgeois thought has always been distinguished by its yearnings for the customs of the past, but certainly never on such a scale as Gandhi would have it. His ideal India is that of the hand spinning wheel and distillation of salt from the sea. From this it naturally follows that the present caste-system, remnant of the ancient hereditary labor-division, meets with his full approval. Gandhi desires to “alleviate”, not destroy, the sufferings of the Untouchables. As for the workers, they do not belong in his India. With them he has no concern.
 
3.
A large share of the responsibility for Gandhi’s influence rests upon the Indian Communist Party. We have mentioned its growth in numbers and influence during the post-war period. In 1925, the swing to the right of the Comintern began the period of Stalinist opportunism. Just as it was marked by the tragic defeat of the second Chinese Revolution (1925-1927), so in India it saw the decline of the communist movement and its subordination to petty-bourgeois and bourgeois control. The Indian CP nestled itself deeply in the ISC, under the stifling wing of the “progressive national bourgeoisie”.
The defeat of the Chinese Revolution had its inevitable effect upon the Indian movement. There began a period of decline, retreat, withdrawal. The Indian CP preferred to learn nothing from the events in China and before long, under orders from the Comintern, they executed their turn into the insanity of the “Third Period”. They boycotted not only the Indian Nationalist Congress (now become a nest of Indian “fascists”), but the labor and peasant movement itself. It was the same story as in every country. “Red Trade Unions” (the Girni Kamgar), corresponding to the American TUUL, were organized – on paper; complete aloofness from every slight manifestation of struggle; complete loss of any following or influence among the workers and peasants; bureaucratic expulsions for any opposition to the divine line; complete eclipse of the Indian CP. Yet precisely during these years (1930-1933) the Gandhist influence reached its high point. Through the Civil Disobedience movement Gandhi held full sway over the masses and led them to defeat and humiliation before their British masters. The amazingly limited character of this bourgeois-led movement is shown by the fact that while the peasants stopped rental payments to their British landlords, they were forced to continue these payments to their Hindu landlords. Instead of active participation with the aim of broadening the struggle’s scope, the isolated Indian Stalinists stood aside and launched manifestoes denouncing the “social-fascist” leaders. By the middle of 1933 Civil Disobedience had halted before the tomb that lay in wait for it, and Gandhi was soon on his way to help the British forge new fetters on prostrate India (the Round-Table Conferences).
 
4.
Not till 1936 was there any serious sign of a revival in nationalist or revolutionary sentiments. In that year the INC held two important sessions heralding a new period of activity. A most casual reading of the Indian press at that time was sufficient evidence that Britain was preparing to impose upon India a new constitution, one that had been ten years in the making and which the British imperialists knew would meet the sternest opposition. The year opened amidst a wave of strikes, arrests, police beatings (the infamous lathi charges), enforcement of curfew laws, lockouts, martial law measures, etc., etc. Britain announced that the new Constitution (the Government of India Act, adopted by Parliament in 1935) would be launched officially in April, 1937. India rose almost as one man in opposition. All turned towards the 50th Indian Nationalist Congress to be held at Allahabad, in December of 1936.
What is this New Constitution? Its provisions include the most reactionary measures yet foisted upon the Indian masses. Its broader provisions (not yet put into effect) create a Federal India, abolishing the Native States and welding them into one centralized federation. The old system of “Dyarchy” which granted the provincial assemblies minor powers is abolished. Its general purpose is to make of India one complete political unit under the military domination of the imperialists.
The more concrete measures of the New Constitution are already in effect under the Bill of Provincial Autonomy and Self-Government. Listen to what this liberal and democratic bill contains:

The Governor-General (a British appointee) shall direct and control the Departments of Defense, External Affairs and Ecclesiastical Affairs.
“The Governor-General and the Provincial Governors can issue any executive order, without consultation with either Minister or Legislature, he may consider necessary; he can dismiss and replace any Minister or Ministers, with or without resort to a dissolution of the Legislature, and if he fails to find an alternative Government capable of administering law and order on lines consistent with the discharge of his special responsibility, he will be obliged to declare a breakdown of the Constitution, and to assure himself all such powers as he judges requisite to retrieve the situation.”
The Governor-General can dissolve, prorogue or summon the Legislature; veto all bills and act as he sees fit despite any act to the contrary the Legislature may have adopted.
Any legislation affecting the Sovereign, the Sovereignty of the Crown over any part of British India, the Army Act, the Air Force and Naval Discipline Acts, the Constitution Act itself, etc., is placed beyond the scope of the Legislature.
The same holds true for legislation affecting the Police, the Special Branch (secret police), Indian Reserve Bank and finances in general.
Approximately 10% of the population may vote, since only this percentage fulfills the property and educational qualifications.
There are separate electorates and constituencies for different communities and religions (“Divide and Rule”).
One-third of the seats in the Federal Lower House automatically go to the Indian Princes and Rajahs. Almost one-half are theirs in the Upper House.
Tens of thousands of trade-union voters are automatically disqualified from voting.

“A New Charter of Bondage”, Nehru called it. It presaged a vast expansion of militarism over India, it meant an increase in the permanent armed forces stationed throughout the country, it implied a state of perpetual martial law. With nervous anxiety the British rulers awaited the outcome of the INC meetings. They saw with what eagerness the masses awaited instructions to launch a mass struggle against the proposed “Slave Constitution”.
 
Footnotes
1. This is the second section of the article the first part of which appeared in the April issue.



The Coming Victory Of Democracy
by Thomas Mann
67 pp. Alfred A. Knopf, $1.00.
Before the conglomeration of platitudes, outworn social theories and downright falsehoods in this little book one stands amazed. Can this be the thought of the man whose literary works, with their studies of human nature and psychology, have made him one of the few great writers of our age? The appalling ignorance of social thought and history revealed is only thinly covered by the eloquence of its author – much as, we are forced to say, the fiery demagogy of a Hitler cloaks the reaction and deceit underneath.
In these days of feverish re-armament and war preparations, the noble crusader’s tongue serves well in the task of deluding the masses of people who, through instinct and experience fear from the debaucheries of a new imperialist war. The spontaneous reaction of the world’s masses to the signing of the Munich pact should have convinced the war-makers that only the utmost in the way of fraud and coercion will induce humanity to march again. To this end does Thomas Mann now work. “If even Mann, the pacifist, is for the war, it must be a good war!”
In general, the approach of Dr. Mann to all social problems is basically emotional and often borders on mere hysteria. He is apparently quite untainted by contemporary scientific method. It goes without saying that Marxism is equally foreign to him. We should not, however, neglect consideration of the more reactionary and dangerous ideas presented by him. In more vulgar form they have long been the stock-in-trade of all pro-war agitators in the democratic-imperialist nations.
That fascism threatens the democracies; that fascism and democracy “dwell on different planets” and are unalterably opposed; that collective security can work; that people’s frontism yields sufficient reforms ; these are his basic ideas now torn to shreds by the Four-power pact. But their advocacy is not new; we are familiar with their source. It is only his generalizations and asides on political and social theory; his definitions of basic ideologies; his final and tremblingly vague pointing to a path out that leads us to the complete edifice of his thought.
Thus, he opens his remarks with the incredible reference to America as the classic land of democracy where “democracy is an all-prevailing matter of course”. Even hi the narrow sense – let alone the matter of truth or falsity! – this is incorrect, for England has always been known as the land of pioneer democracy. Mann offers us the tune-honored, shallow definitions of democracy which are characteristic of past humanist creeds. “Democracy is tunelessly human”; “the idea (truth, freedom and justice) will triumph over force”; “the inalienable and indestructible dignity of mankind”; democracy respects man’s “original sin, his spirituality or conscience”; etc.
And how does democracy best express itself? Herr Mann is anti-democratic even in the classic sense of the word. For he makes it perfectly clear that to him democracy means the rule of an intellectual minority, an aristocracy of the mind possessing aristocratic attributes and a special, mysterious spiritual sense. The lower classes, says Mann, must accept the leadership of the better elements. Mob movements are base, barbaric. When Mann approaches the concrete problems of modern democracy, it is merely to endorse the program of Social-Democracy and liberal reformism. The Belgian Vandervelde is quoted with approval. Blum, Masayrk and our own F.D.R. form an ideal triumvirate of aristocratic democrats.
Developing his argument, fascism – which to Mann is an emotional (human) tendency – has this advantage over democracy. It is youthful, novel, new, revolutionary (!). It is dynamic, anti-traditional, rule by the masses, aggressive and militant. And to a man who is “no sans-culotte, no Jacobin, no revolutionary,” whose “whole being is that of a conservative”, all this is distasteful. Is it necessary to point out that each and every one of his objections to fascism could likewise be applied to socialism (bolshevism) ? Mann knows this well, for part of his tirade against fascism contains the statement that it is “a bolshevism of the ignoble”!
Of the historic nature and source of fascism, Mann cannot claim the slightest understanding. He can only utter subjective truisms and empty rhetoric. “Oppression is not only the ultimate goal but the first principle of fascism ...” Fascism in power is “disgraceful, contemptible, honorless ...” Its methods consist of “a lust for human degradation”. How close is all this to current cheap-jack theories which make of fascism a lunacy or aberration of the mind! How useful to the Stalinists and other demagogues of the democratic war-camps and how remote from the scientific Marxist understanding of fascism as a form of capitalism, product of the latter’s endless crisis!
And what is fascism economically? Stepping out of the prophet’s role for the moment, Mann informs us that it is practically identical with bolshevism; that its aim is not to save capitalism but to destroy it; that its war-economy is nothing but a “low” form of socialism! Mann chooses to be blind to the concentrated, monopolistic capitalism existing in Italy and Germany and to ignore the continued rule of private property in the fascist nations.
At a recent Stalinist mass meeting for the purpose of “saving Czechoslovakia”, Dr. Mann appeared as a militant crusader for war. There is nothing surprising in this. Every line of this book says as much. The war-mad Stalinists attending the meeting put on a great demonstration at the end of his address. “For several minutes the Garden was a bedlam of sound as the crowd cheered and clapped ...” (New York Times) “Hitler must fall. This and nothing else will preserve the peace.” These were the words that set on fire the patriotic blood of the assembled friends of democratic capitalism. Hitler must fall, yes, but through the revolutionary action of the German masses. Mann’s method would lead but to another and more stringent Versailles treaty which, in turn, would yield an even more aggressive Hitler. But Thomas Mann, conservative democratic, will always remain blind to this as likewise to the fact that the very democracy whose virtues he praises, when and if it ever goes to war against fascism, will not only ravish the few scraps of liberalism that remain but become the image of what it is fighting against.



ONCE AGAIN THE COLONIAL question comes to the fore. The Far-Eastern War, accompanied by the mighty though unsuccessful resistance of the Chinese people, has again set the stage for a new act in the movements of colonial masses for liberation from their imperialist rulers.
Such movements have always been characterized by the sweep and scope of the revolutionary powers they unleash. There is every historic reason to believe that this new cycle in colonial movements will surpass all others. Thus, the colonial problem demands the imperative study of every Marxist practitioner. As India is an almost ideal illustration of a backward country under the domination of a foreign, imperialist nation a study of its problems should serve to determine concretely what a general, revolutionary colonial policy has to face.
International-imperialist colonial policy today is influenced, above all, by the disintegration of the vast British Empire. In their ever-growing desperation, the imperialist rulers of England turn with renewed ferocity to India for their salvation. This has meant a deepening oppression and exploitation of the Indian masses in the name of senile British capitalism. With this new imperialist speed-up has come its inevitable counter-part – a revival of the Indian National Liberation movement, practically dormant since 1933. The purpose of this article is two-fold: (1) to give a brief sketch of Indian history under British rule, along with the present economic set-up in India; (2) to outline the Indian nationalist and revolutionary movement, including the more recent developments in the Indian Nationalist Congress since its last meeting (Dec., 1936) and the movement’s future prospects.
 
1.
Lord Brentford in his speech to Parliament:
We did not conquer India for the benefit of the Indians. I know that it is said at missionary meetings that we have conquered India to raise the level of the Indians. That is cant. We conquered India as an outlet for the goods of Great Britain. We conquered India by the sword, and by the sword we shall hold it.
I am interested in missionary work in India and have done much work of that kind, but I am not such a hypocrite as to say that we hold India for the Indians. We hold it as the finest outlet for British goods in general, and for Lancashire goods in particular.
F.J. Shore (Indian Colonial Administrator):
The fundamental principle of the English has been to make the whole Indian nation subservient, in every possible way, to the interests and benefits of themselves. They have been taxed to the utmost limit; every successive province, as it has fallen into our possession, has been made a field for higher exaction ... (Quoted in Reynolds, The White Sahibs of India)
For 250 years England has been in India. Writing in 1853, Marx summed up the various phases of Indian policy pursued up to that year in the following words:
“The aristocracy wanted to conquer India, the moneyocracy to plunder it and the millocracy to undersell it.”
As far back as the 1500’s Dutch, English and French merchants had contacted Indian coast towns and brought back to the West the products of its famous handicraft industries. By 1708 the British East India Company – that crowning product of mercantilist, oligarchic England – had secured from the British king the right to monopolize all trade with India. In that year began the territorial conquest of the land of the Hindus. Ancient India had always been a tempting land of easy access to conquerors. It had known scores of invasions from the east and west, the last of antiquity being those of Alexander the Great and the Romans. But because of its great size and its superior civilization India had always been able either to repel or to absorb the invaders.
With the English the story was entirely different. Besides representing the superior western civilization they came from the most advanced and unified country of the time. Utilizing the internal struggles between various warring divisions of the Chief Mogul, The Moguls, Mahrattas and Northern Afghans; British troops began the conquest of East India without much difficulty. They clashed with Dutch and French mercantilists, but the latter were no match for the English. (The Napoleonic Wars, the French and Indian Wars in America, were reflective aspects of this rivalry over India.) Having obtained a free hand, the British were able to secure control over the territory of one Mogul after the other, reaching as far as the Punjab region.
During this extended period of conquest, a revolution – gigantic in its scope and historic implications – was sweeping over British India’s expanding territory: destroying, transforming, uprooting the most remarkable of all ancient civilizations. The British mercantilists and later the British industrial bourgeoisie tore to bits the whole fabric of the ancient Indian social and economic structure. At the same time they laid the material and social basis for the ultimate emancipation of the Indians not only from ancient Asiatic despotism under which they labored for so many centuries but also from the neo-despotism of British rule itself. Marx clearly recognized this.
“Whatever may have been the crimes of England, she was the unconscious tool of bringing about that [future] revolution.” (Article in New York Tribune, June 25, 1854)
While emphatically denouncing the cruelty, hypocrisy and “scientific barbarism” employed in subduing the natives, Marx nevertheless saw the historically progressive role performed by the British. The English rulers might “drink the nectar of India from the skulls of the slain” but that drink would turn into a poison that one day would spell their death!
The nature of this British revolution is clear. Ancient civilizations of the East were built primarily upon two foundations. (1) Communal ownership of the land (no private land-ownership). This Marx called “primitive communism”. (2) A system of artificial soil irrigation, vitally necessary to the agricultural life of the country. (The countries of Asia Minor, Egypt, India.) In India, upon this material foundation there had arisen the independent Indian communal villages and village confederations, with their limited, closed-in economy; the famous handicraft and manufacturing industries (loom and spinning-wheel); the innumerable caste divisions resting upon a minute, hereditary division of labor; the numerous variations of mystical and fantastic religions and cults; finally, the despotic political state (the Mogul) with its bureaucratic and priestly adjuncts. All this the British destroyed.
With the ruthlessness of armed force they overthrew the native village communities and industries. Indian manufactures (mainly hand-woven cloths) were excluded from importation into England as early as 1697. Rickarts, an extensive English writer on Indian affairs, estimated that in 60 years of the 18th Century, one thousand millions sterling had been brought back from India. The London Daily News wrote,
“The whole wealth of the country is absorbed and the development of its industry is checked by a government which hangs like an incubus over it.”
Indian agriculture fell into complete decay as the system of artificial irrigation (a system requiring continual care and repair) broke down. At the famous trial of Warren Hastings in England, it was revealed that in 1771 – a year in which the East India Co. reported a large increase in its dividends – one-third of the Bengal population, i.e., 10,000,000, had died as the result of a ghastly famine! The 18th Century, the century which saw the British East India Company at the height of its power, was for India a time of unequalled pillage and destruction, outstripping even the efforts of Spain’s Conquistadores in Mexico and Peru.
England herself, meanwhile, was changing. The mercantilist-financial aristocracy found itself confronted by an infinitely more powerful English bourgeoisie – private merchants and industrial capitalists. As the exploiter himself changed, so did the nature of his exploitation. By 1813 the old oligarchy (East India Co.) had lost its trade monopoly to private merchants and was well on its way out of Indian affairs. The Company still ruled the land, but open attacks were leveled against it in Parliament. Cotton cloth and cheap manufactures from Manchester mills began to pour into India and complete the destruction of the indigenous industry. In 1813, for the first time India had a trade balance on the importing side.
A new period – one of capitalist-imperialist penetration – had started. India became more important than ever for Industrial England. Further military encroachment, this time under imperialist direction, took place. For the first time in thousands of years of Indian history, systems of private ownership of land and land tenancy (Zemindaree and Ryotwar) were created. India became a prime source of food stuffs. English-owned plantations (run by forced labor) were established to furnish these needs. Heavy land taxes were placed upon the peasantry. The result has been described by Isaiah Bowman in his The New World:
“Pressing upon the people of India in a manner to produce great distress is the land tax, in addition to which is the water tax in the irrigated areas. The land tax keeps the mass of the population in a state bordering upon slavery. Millions cannot get sufficient food. At the end of his year of labour, the farmer finds his crop divided between landlord and the government. He has to go into debt to the village shopkeeper, getting credit for food and seed in the ensuing year. Since 240,000,000 people in India are connected directly or indirectly with agriculture, this means that a large majority of them, probably two-thirds, are living in a state of squalor.”
The primitive agronomy which had sufficed to give each community its simple necessities was thus “improved” upon by private ownership. Railroads – always the forerunner of modern industry – -were built. The static, hereditary Hindu society crumbled. New mobile and shifting classes took the place of the ancient groupings. The “millocracy” came into control both in England and India. Marx wrote in 1853,
“At the same rate at which the cotton manufactures became of vital interest for the whole social frame of Great Britain, East India became of vital interest for the British cotton manufacturers.”
By 1857 the English industrial bourgeoisie was sufficiently powerful at home to force the revocation of the East India Company’s charter. It demagogically used the Great Sepoy Mutiny, which had occurred in that year and had been aimed at all of British rule, as justification for this act. In Parliament, the Mutiny was laid at the door of the Company and its innumerable evils.
The new landlords immediately proceeded to display their passionate love of the Indian masses by levying upon them a tax of 40 million pounds (the cost of suppressing the 1857 Revolt!). The Better Government of India Act was adopted, placing the country under direct control of the British Parliament. From then on the natives received the benefits of naked imperialist rule. “Scientific barbarism” raised to a higher plane took on the form of a different type of exploitation and expropriation of wealth. This is how Marx described it, writing in 1881:
“What the English take from them [the Indians] annually in the form of rent, dividends for railways useless to the Hindus, pensions for military and civil service men, for Afghanistan and other wars, etc., etc. – what they take from them without any equivalent and quite apart from what they appropriate to themselves annually within India, speaking only of the value of the commodities the Indians have to send over to England gratuitously and annually – it amounts to more than the total sum of income of the 60 million agricultural and industrial laborers of India! This is a bleeding process with a vengeance!” (Emphasis as in original.)
It is this same process, now pushed with the energy born of despair, that has continued down to our day.
 
2.
What is the present economic situation within India itself? School teachers generally divide the country into two parts: British India and Native India. Such a division is sheer nonsense, being incorrect even in the geographic sense. All of India is British if by that we understand British military, economic and political domination. The ostensibly “independent” Native Princes (there are, according to the 1930 census, 562 native states covering an area of 711,032 square miles and having a population of 80,838,527 out of the total Indian population of 351,399,880) clearly “rule” only by permission of the British. As will be shown later, these Princes exercise no independent functions in their feudatory states. They are retained solely because they possess that added skill, born of long tradition and practice; in despoiling the peasant masses.
Of the total population, 75% to 80% live on the land. India is therefore overwhelmingly agrarian, consisting almost entirely of a huge, backward peasantry living in a most primitive state. In every respect the country belongs to the group of backward, colonial countries. To an even greater extent than China it is bound to the traditions and social practices of its antiquity. The great variety of religions (Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, Animist, Christian, Sikh, Parsee, Hebrew, etc., etc.) testify to the poverty of historical and scientific development and the ignorance that permeates the entire country. Barbarous practices of the past (sutree, purdah, etc.) date back to days long before the conquest of East India by Alexander. Yet they are still widely practiced. England’s hypocritical attempts to “stamp out” such customs have recorded “success” solely in school text-books.
There is no contradiction between these facts and the historic fact that England fulfilled a revolutionary role in India. The point is that that role has long ceased and has now become the major obstacle to even the most elementary social or cultural advancement. The English bourgeoisie, the international imperialist Frankenstein, bases its work in India today on but a single premise: the more widespread the poverty, superstition and ignorance, the more stable tends to become the British “Raj”. Thus, 320 out of 350 million people are illiterate!
Since the overturn of the native economy there has been relatively little economic or industrial development in the country. Is this due to a paucity in natural resources? On the contrary, the country is rich in mineral and mining deposits. Coal is found in every part of India, copper, iron ore, vast areas of petroleum. Rare minerals exist (tungsten, manganese), but are hardly mined. Transportation is extremely poor and still largely primitive. True, the country has been loosely bound into a single unit by railroads and telegraph, but these connecting links are primarily of military importance. There are only 40,000 miles of railroad, less than 100,000 automobiles and trucks, a few airlines. Every attempt is made to keep apart and, above all, antagonistic toward one another, the 45 different racial groupings of the population with their 200 different languages and dialects.
To imperialist England, India is useful for two primary purposes: to draw forth from the rural population the nourishment provided by its abundant crops of cotton and foodstuffs (wheat, rice, sugar cane, tea, etc.). Then to sell upon the Indian market its cotton and textile manufactures, small manufactured articles, machinery, etc. It should be thoroughly understood that English capitalism and the entire British Empire it has constructed could not possibly survive without the annual stimulants received in the form of Indian raw materials, trade and commerce. This alone disposes of reformist illusions regarding the possibility of a peaceful severance of the ties that bind India to England. Let us sooner expect British capitalism to commit hari-kari than to let go of India! Only deliberate agents of British imperialism such as the leaders of the British Labor Party (Atlee, Citrine, Herbert Morrison ...) envisage a peaceful (that is, no) relinquishing of the hold upon India. To Marxists it is axiomatic that only through a determined revolutionary struggle can the Indian masses hope to free themselves from Britain. The role of Ghandism, to be analyzed below, has further revealed the necessity of an organized, violent struggle.
But England has not completely checked industrial growth. There have been erected – mainly since the World War – 6,713 factories employing 1,215,000 workers (1931). Cotton spinning and weaving mills account for 502 of these and employ 381,265 workers. Next in order of the number of workers employed are the jute industry, rice mills, munition plants, lumber mills, tea factories, etc. We thus find in India that economic class essential to the carrying out of the Indian revolution – the modern, industrial proletariat. The Indian proletariat (including the highly important transport workers) counts in its ranks 10% to 11% of the total working population. Highly exploited because of the rapid concentration of Indian industry in the hands of a few members of the English and Native bourgeoisie, it has quickly arrived at a realization of its historic position and gropes instinctively for revolutionary weapons to employ against its enemies. At the same time, having sprung but recently from out of the great peasant mass, it feels the necessity of forming a revolutionary alliance with (hat section of the population.
We cannot emphasize too strongly capitalist England’s dire necessity to retain its grasp upon India. In 1934 she was Britain’s best customer, taking close to 200 million dollars worth of goods. This meant that England supplied over 40% of the total import trade, with Japan, her sharpest rival in competitive Indian imperialist activity, still far behind (15.7%). Indian raw material exports to England alone were worth 186 million dollars. The Ottawa Imperial Conference (1932), in an attempt to shut out the trade of other nations, forced India to accept preferences upon all British products. In the face of this, nothing short of a gigantic mass movement of the Indian masses, at whose head must stand the incomparably more advanced and clear-sighted Indian proletariat, will win liberation from England. Even such a movement would face a terrific opposition – an opposition that would resort to every modern weapon of mass murder. We shall return to the obstacles faced by the revolution in examining the Indian Nationalist movement.
Before doing that, however, we shall list some of the more direct means employed by England in controlling the restless masses. It will make more apparent the utter hopelessness of the “methods” embodied in the “non-violence” doctrine. The Native Princes and the native bourgeoisie are the first arm of the British “Raj”. The Princes are abject tools of their British masters – the finances and economy of their states are run by the British; foreign affairs and relations, military and taxing powers are no longer in their hands. Real power resides with the British appointed “advisers”. Over the Prince’s head is suspended the perpetual threat of incorporating his land into British India if he should become recalcitrant.
England has likewise assiduously cultivated a native bourgeoisie, made up not only of industrial capitalists, but also of great landowners, money-lenders, and bankers. In actual daily life, it is largely this native bourgeoisie, “middlemen” for British imperialists, which exploits the workers and peasants. Another important adjunct of imperialist domination is the armed force, Britain maintains two highly trained armies in India: the British Regular Army (58,000 men); the Indian Army consisting of 166,000 high caste Indians, officered by Britishers (the infamous Nabobs of Rudyard Kipling). Attached to this armed force is the Royal British Air Force whose English pilots have had great training through bombing (like Mussolini’s pilots in Ethiopia) participants in local tribal revolts deep in the country’s interior. In essence, British rule depends upon these front-line, military forces for its continued sojourn in India. And finally, the Indian Civil Service. For a long period made up solely of the favorite sons of the English aristocracy (from Oxford and Cambridge), or retired army officers, it has now relaxed far enough to include native Hindus from the supremely aristocratic Brahman castes. A rigidly controlled and bureaucratized outfit, it eats up an amazing proportion of the country’s annually producted wealth in the form of salaries and large retirement pensions. Inspectors, land assessors, tax-collectors, petty supervisory officials, etc., swell this hated parasitic growth upon the backs of the Indian masses.
(The second part of this article will be published in the next issue.)
 



The White Sahibs of India
by Reginald Reynolds
xiii+410 pp. New York, Reynals and Hitchcock, $3.00.
The overwhelming bulk of books on India are paeans to the glorious and civilizing virtues of British rule. For this reason Marxists can especially welcome a book containing a serious analysis of British imperialism – particularly when it is written by an Englishman. This is just such a book.
Reynolds, not merely a theoretical opponent of the British “Raj”, but one whose personal experiences in India itself have made him its bitter enemy, gives an account of the subjection of India by the British, from the earliest days down to the new “Slave” Constitution. There is an excellent historical background, bolstered with quotations (invariably from official sources), describing the conquest of India. Here Reynolds gives a rounded picture of how Britain’s needs in India have largely dominated England’s foreign policy for 150 years, including present “life-line” politics. There are revealing chapters on Indian Criminal Law as transplanted to supersede the “barbaric” Hindu law; the employment of forms of perpetual martial law against nationalists; the complicated and miraculous debt system by means of which English imperialists accrue all the profit and the Indian masses all the debts.
It would be hard to imagine a more devastating picture of the incalculable ruin brought upon the Indian people than Reynolds gives us. Each chapter is replete with pitiless quotations and documentation that make a mockery of England’s “civilizing” claims. Each chapter is carefully worked out and summarized by numerous source references.
But in his efforts to suggest a program for India’s problems, Reynolds stumbles badly. A supporter of the British ILP, he exhibits more than the usual errors of that party. Reynolds does state that the socialist revolution alone is capable of giving the decisive reply to India’s needs, but he is unable to pass beyond the limits set up by the Indian Nationalist Congress (INC). His description of recent nationalist history is filled with blunders, misunderstandings and proposals for downright false policies.
Thus, Reynolds doesn’t grasp the role of Gandhi as Britain’s “most successful” policeman in India. He vaguely defends him as a “blunderer”, but Gandhi’s whole career belies this. Gandhism is counter revolutionary as its practical politics of betrayal eloquently reveal.
Reynolds defends the INC, specifically its “left” section, the Congress Socialist Party (CSP). This party aims at turning the INC into a “Workers and Peasants Party”. With the permission of the INC’s dominating bourgeois wing? Would this new, two-class party differ programmatically from the present reactionary, bourgeois INC? These and other questions are carefully avoided. How can one approximate political correctness with such an utter lack of perspective? Instead, the author seeks justification for the INC in his defense of M.N. Roy, the Indian Lovestoneite. But Roy, as shown by all his recent writings, has abandoned any former pretense at being a Marxist and has embraced the ideology of petty-bourgeois nationalism. Even the CSP has sharply criticized Roy – from the left! Roy demands organizational liquidation of the CSP, acceptance of office by its leaders – in a word, adoption of the INC right wing program. If Reynolds is unaware of these facts and his suggested program is based (as it appears to be) upon sentimentality, then his ambiguous ideas regarding an Indian Peoples’ Front can readily be understood.
He categorically opposes an English People’s Front. A British People’s Front regime would mean, for India, a repetition of the MacDonald Labor government experiences. Then, how can Reynolds defend the INC which is not only a continuation of previous Indian government, but a precursor of a future English People’s Front? The INC, today wielding power in 7 provinces of India, has shown its true worth. In People’s Front fashion, it smashed the general strike in the jute industry, continued persecution and arrest of its own members, refused amnesty to political prisoners, accepted Indian re-armament in accord with British demands, etc. Reynolds had prophesized that the INC would reject office and carry on a mass struggle against the new Constitution! But instead, Britain uses the INC as an effective weapon for retaining its grip upon India. And the “revolutionary” CSP pathetically limps along after the INC, accusing its right wing of betrayal! (How reminiscent of the Stalinists in their 1927 dealings with Chiang Kai-shek!) We must ask Reynolds if the INC, which now rules so well for British imperialism, is an example of that class collaboration which, according to him, is “purely oppositional” in India.
Despite these serious errors, there is reason to believe that Reynolds will learn from the experiences contained in present Indian events themselves. A revolutionary party in India must be built up against the INC. The INC will not mobilize the workers and peasants for a revolutionary war against British rule. Reynolds partly understands this because he realizes that only the socialist revolution can achieve even the simplest democratic demands. Not without importance is it that Reynolds’ work does not contain that treacherous cynicism so characteristic of the Lovestone-Thalheimer political groupings. Above all, he is seriously concerned with finding the correct revolutionary solution for India’s momentous problems.



CHARACTERISTIC of the last six months of Indian politics has been the discussions on tactics and methods of struggle carried on in the organ of the Congress Socialist Party, The Congress Socialist. Here followers of M.N. Roy, Stalinist agents working in the INC and members of the Socialist Party (who enjoy referring to themselves as “revolutionary socialists”) have all waged ideological war. Since the beginning of the year a “pause”, apparently accompanied by intense intellectual and theoretical evaluating has set in.
In the interim, the INC (Indian Nationalist Congress – the Peoples’ Front of India) has steadily veered to more and more reformist measures. It now has political sway in seven major provinces and its right-wing element, made up of good reformists, has found the fruits of political office much to its liking. Its intentions are clearly to indefinitely “cooperate peacefully” with the British brethren. Already there has grown up the typically bureaucratic machine and apparatus that come as part of the baggage of reformist politicians. The Congress Socialist significantly asks (July 2nd), “Why are nepotism and power politics so rampant in the Congress today?” And it goes on to point to all types of office corruption, while the CSP executive committee adopts a formal resolution of protest against repressive actions on the part of Congress Ministries in breaking up strikes.
Indian socialists also point to increasing indifference among the masses – an obvious reaction to the “do-nothing” tactics of the INC leadership. “Why is there an ebb of the popular interest in party work? Why is there growing apathy among Congress workers?” The reason is that parliamentary constitutionalism has already run its course so far as the masses are concerned. Careerists of all types, eagerly seeking office and jobs have even gone so far as to raise communal (racial) issues within the INC. This is particularly noticeable in contests for petty local posts.
The last congress of the INC was dominated by right-wingers who saw to it that the policy of office-acceptance and pacifism was adhered to. This was summarized by the election of Bose to the congress Presidency, in place of Nehru. The speeches of Bose are those of the petty-bourgeois democrat who skillfully and demagogically adapts himself to the audience at hand. All too often have we heard the same phrasemongery!
What of the working-class political tendencies in India? How has the year and more of democratic liberties affected them ? What have they to say about the fast-approaching end of this temporary period of British concessions?
The Stalinists and their newly found supporters – the followers of M.N. Roy – openly boast of their imperial attachments to “Mother England”. In their official paper, Kranti (National Front) they agitate the Indian masses to cling to the protective bosom of England so as not to fall into the clutches of the fascist countries. National unity must be preserved in order to strengthen the British Empire! Their demands are limited to ... A Charter of Rights! As for Roy, the ex-revolutionist, suffice it to say that he endorses the Moscow Trials!
When the INC recently rejected a united front with the Muslim League (correctly described by the Congress Socialist Party as a “pro-imperialist, reactionary communal organization – and which, incidently, has not hesitated to launch murderous fascist attacks upon Congress meetings”), the Indian Stalinists declared, “It is anti-national to attack a Congress-Muslim League Pact.” This is the Oriental version of the “out-stretched” hand policy!
The Congress Socialist Party (CSP) is unquestionably the only serious workers’ political organization in all of India. Despite its many (and basic!) errors, it is deeply concerned about the task of removing England’s throttle-hold on India. Yet what a confused and muddled picture it presents in its press! On the one hand, the editor of its paper, Asoka Mehta, writes simon-pure Stalinist articles which advocate collective-security with all the trimmings. This is contradicted by unsigned editorials which launch bitter attacks on collective-security and Stalinism. For example, “They (the Stalinists) expect us to shoulder bayonets in the defence of the British Empire!” ... “The greatest blow for peace that we can therefore deliver is to strike for our national freeedom, is to destroy the British Empire and not bolster it up in its hour of peril.” ... “The grave danger of the present Communist policy lies in the fact that by seeking to circumscribe and bridle the nationalist movement of the colonial peoples they will be led, step by step, to suppressing the movement.” “It (collective security) is an attitude of compromise and capitulation ...” We can hardly believe that these editorials are written by the pro-Stalinist editor!
M.R. Masani, an important leader of the CSP, has contributed numerous articles indicative of serious thought on basic problems. He has rejected People’s Frontism in theory only, unfortunately, for he still advocates remaining in the INC People’s Front. His splendid article on the Moscow Trials which fully accepts the report of the Dewey Commission is worth quoting: He believes in the defense of the Soviet Union despite the fact that the “reign of terror is lowering the very ideal of socialism.” “The grim truth is that the Soviet Union is in as great danger from within as without.” “The heritage of the October Revolution belongs to the workers of the whole world. Let us not allow the present Soviet government to monopolize and dissipate that precious heritage.” (June 18, 1938.)
The CSP is a conglomeration of Stalinists, trade-union and peasant (Kisan) union bureaucrats, Utopian socialists and a good proportion of genuine revolutionary socialists. There is as yet no organized, vociferous grouping which advocates the Marxist policy of demonstratively breaking away from the INC. It can be safely predicted, however, that fissures and splits will develop within this Party as England prepares to put into effect its plan for an Indian Federation. In the international field, the CSP is bound by the pacifism of the Congress which expresses itself in its most “racial” form by the demand for a “League of Peoples” instead of an imperialist League of Nations! While having no formal affiliations the CSP is most friendly to the British ILP and often reprints articles of Fenner Brockway, Reynolds, etc., with favorable comment.
* * *
Last year (1937) was one of unparalleled activity for the Indian proletariat. A total of 647,801 workers were on strike, the largest number in India’s history. 110,000 Bombay workers alone took part in a great general strike of jute workers while 91,000 textile workers in Ahmedabad, Cawnpore and Coimbatore went out With a new and aggravated crisis threatening India; with the apparent inability of the present world trade slump to lift, the Indian working class is again threatening action. There is much talk of strike in the jute, textile, transportation and mining fields. The peasants are over-riding their leaders in parts of the country and seizing land from the landlords. The present widespread wave of communal rioting is partly a method of agitation against Hindu money-lenders and landlords; partly inspired by reactionary Muslim League bands. Both are expressions of intense class conflict. The masses of India still constitute a seething volcano of revolutionary discontent which needs only Marxist leadership to set off history’s greatest revolution.



After two months of negotiations with Indian political leaders, and its failure to bring about an agreement between the Congress Party and the Moslem League, the British Labor Government has announced its own plan for solving the Indian deadlock. Gandhi, leader of the Congress Party, has already indicated his acceptance of these proposals; Jinnah, leader of the Moslem League, has been silent but, at best, will only give his tacit consent to the plan, since his Moslem League is given the short end of the stick by the British. It appears, however, that this plan will be adopted and put into effect by British imperialism. What is it? Will it really lead to independence for India? The answer is NO; but first we must see what the plan is.
It is, above all else, an attempt on the part of Britain to make a satisfactory working arrangement with the Congress Party – that is, with the Indian capitalist class, whose spokesmen are Gandhi, Nehru and other Congress leaders. Britain, in its present difficult world situation, needs a stable, dependable government in India. To obtain this, it must make definite concessions to the Indian capitalists and that is exactly what this plan does. It is an effort on the part of Britain to share power over India’s 400 million workers and peasants with these native capitalists and landlords. It is an effort to strengthen India’s strategic position against Russian imperialism, and to stave off revolution within India itself. The Attlee Labor Government is frank about it – it is making concessions to SAVE India for imperialism. The capitalist Congress Party is the most dependable and conservative force in nationalist India; therefore, the “deal” must be made with it.
In effect, the plan accepts every major proposal put forward by the Congress leadership in recent years. It categorically rejects the demand of Jinnah and his Moslem League for the formation of “Pakistan” – a separate Moslem state within India. The Congress leaders were also bitterly opposed to a separatist Moslem state. No provision is made for any Moslem vote, or expression of opinion, on this issue. The Congress leadership also agrees with this denial of the right to vote on Pakistan by the Moslems. A complicated, vague scheme is suggested by which the Moslem provinces are offered certain “protections” against Hindu discrimination, but there is nothing beyond that.
 
A Congress Party Cabinet
Furthermore, the plan accepts the Congress demand – made for many years now – for a provisional, representative government at the Center. That is, the actual formation of a government, with a Congress majority, which is to be the instrument by which the Congress Party shares political power with the British administration. The Viceroy is meanwhile to have veto powers over this provisional government, but it represents a stage higher in the effort of the Indian capitalists to gain ascendancy in the administration of the country.
It is not clear yet whether the Moslem League will participate in such a coalition government, but it is clear that the increasingly conservative Congress Party is willing and anxious to taste the fruits of political power. The formation of such a government will undoubtedly be the next step in India, with Nehru – the new Congress president – probably occupying the post of Prime Minister. Will it mean Indian freedom? Of course not. It will mean simply that the Congress has agreed to aid the British in preserving their grip on India.
And, finally, the British proposal provides a scheme for drafting a new Constitution, to govern India after the provisional period has ended. This section of the scheme is a reactionary and anti-democratic proposal, and reveals the true content of the whole plan. To draft a new Constitution, requires a Constituent Assembly. How is it proposed to elect such an Assembly? To begin with, the proposed Constituent Assembly is not even to be elected – it is to be appointed.
The report says: “The most satisfactory method obviously (!) would be by an election based on adult franchise but any attempt to introduce such a step now would lead to wholly unacceptable delay in the formation of the new Constitution.” Could a more miserable excuse be made for depriving the Indian people of the basic right to draft their own, independent Constitution? By this token alone the whole British proposal is condemned as a farce and an effort to perpetuate, in new form, 250 years of British tyranny. To this proposal, the Indian Trotskyists counterpose their demand for a Constituent Assembly of the people, elected by every single man and woman in India, with the British having completely withdrawn.
The plan further proposes that delegates to the Constituent Assembly be appointed by the recently elected provincial legislative assemblies. In these elections, less than five per cent of the people participated, because of educational and property qualifications. It was an election of the privileged, based on communal lines, since Moslems could vote only for Moslems, Hindus for Hindus, etc. Furthermore, the feudal Indian princes are to have the right to appoint (no elections here at all) 93 delegates, out of a total of 383 (almost 25 per cent) to the Constituent Assembly.
In a word, this Assembly can only be branded in advance of its convening, as an unrepresentative, undemocratic body that in no sense whatsoever would represent the broad masses of the population. All it would do would be to accept the British “deal” proposals; draft a treaty with England that would continue British rule, in disguised form; and turn over national administrative and political power to the Congress Party and the native Indian capitalist class.
On the basic issues of (1) British troops in India and the demand for their withdrawal; (2) British property holdings in India and the demand for their expropriation and return to the Indian nation; (3) a clear-cut declaration of India’s independence – on these issues the report is entirely silent. India has not gained its freedom by a long shot. It now remains to be seen what will be the reaction of the people in general, and of the Congress Party following in particular, to this plan of imperialism and to Gandhi’s proposal to accept.
 



About the only item agreed on at the recent Paris Conference of the Big Four was that the meeting had gone on long enough and the time had come to adjourn. So, after endless talking, the Foreign Ministers have all returned to their respective countries, each anxious to blame the other and explain how his own proposals were the only true “peace” plans put forward.
In his speech to the American people on July 15, Secretary of State Byrnes presented his standpoint on the Paris Conference, and the coming Conference of the 21 victor nations scheduled for July 29. After an apologetic speech, Byrnes concluded with the hope that the new 21-Power conference will produce more substantial results towards a real, international peace. But the very tone and content of his talk denied his own belief in this. Actually, this new conference will have little power to change or alter previous decisions or “deals” of the Big Four.
 
No Problems Solved
The fact of the matter is that while some progress was made toward drafting peace treaties with Italy and the Balkan powers, not a single one of the basic problems of Europe was resolved. The questions of Germany; the disposition of the Ruhr; Austria’s future; economic and trade rights in the Balkans and more than a dozen other questions related to the Italian and Balkan treaties were not resolved.
Germany still stands as the major obstacle in the strenuous efforts of the Big Four imperialists to agree among themselves. So far apart are the powers on this question that after a presentation of the opposing points of view, the whole conference wound up without the slightest effort to make a “deal.” Austria was not even discussed.
The imperialist nature of each of the participants is revealed in the various proposals on Germany. France wishes to carve living chunks of German territory out of that occupied nation – the Saar and the Ruhr – and force millions of Germans into producing solely for the French capitalists. Molotov, Stalin’s no-man, is opposed to this (to the intense embarrassment of the French Communist Party), but he “merely” wants $10 billion in reparations from Germany, in the form of the produce of German workers. How many billions he has already looted from German-occupied territory Mr. Molotov has not yet reported.
 
Milking the German Cow
America and Britain, working closest together, propose a loosely-federated Germany of all the occupying powers as the most favorable method of achieving a harmonious milking of the German cow. All Four Powers are motived solely by the desire to keep Germany in bondage, prepare strategic strong points in their maneuvers against each other and suck what they can out of the defeated people.
The imperialist character of the Conference is further underlined by the nature of the agreements actually arrived at Italy is, to put it mildly, given the works. Her Navy and merchant fleet are divided up among the Allies, and the question of the Italian colonies – final settlement of which has again been postponed – has been settled at least in so far as Italy is concerned. Furthermore, Italy must pay $200 million in reparations to the Russian “Workers’ State.” The process of driving Italy further toward the status of a tenth-rate nation has been all but accomplished.
On the question of Trieste, Stalin’s Russia has again won a partial victory for its imperialist practices, and taken a big step forward toward domination of another area in the Balkans. The compromise over Trieste gave Russia a foothold in this area, denied the Trieste population the elementary right to express themselves on the matter, and in creating a so- called international zone, merely succeeded in legalizing the New Danzig area of the present war. Nobody considers the question really settled, and the city is already claiming leadership in the scramble for the area to have the “honor” of setting off World War III.
In general, the Paris conference marked the continued victory of Stalinist Russia on the diplomatic and strategic field. The Russians held firm in central and southeastern Europe (Germany, Austria, Poland, the Balkans). This accounts for the apologetic tone of Secretary of State Byrnes. In the sinister game of preparing bases and achieving diplomatic successes as preparatory measures for the next war, imperialist Molotov is still one up on imperialists Byrnes, Bevin and Bidault.
 



The Bomb has been dropped; the Great Experiment is over, or at least, first part of the performance. No tidal waves or earthquakes occurred, and the world’s climate seems to be about the same as before. In the ranks of the politicians, military and naval brass hats and assorted scientists a certain disappointment may be detected. The results SEEM to have been below expectations.
What about the Bikini experiment? What did it prove, if anything? The first thing it proved is that our Government, along with its military experts, is more than ever anxious to keep concealed the truth about atomic warfare. Despite the terrific ballyhoo built up around the Bikini event, who among us except those really in the know, is aware of what actually happened, exactly how effective the Bomb was? The entire matter has been kept in secrecy except for those items the Navy and War Departments publish.
Every official and brass hat involved has extracted from the experiment just what he wanted to extract, and no more. All of them, therefore, are blind or hypocritical so far as the real meaning of Bikini is concerned. The brass hat General who represented the Army at Bikini is more than satisfied with the results. He would be. The Army wants more and better atomic Bombs in its preparations for the next war. It is hot for atomic warfare.
 
What the Admiral Saw
The Navy Admiral who ran the works – a pompous gentleman named Blandy – blandly informed his vast radio audience that the experiment had “proven” that the day of airplane carriers and navies was not over! This a few moments after one lone bomb had sunk, capsized and badly damaged a good many strongly-built battleships of various types!
The scientists present exhibited the usual confusion that prevails among these distinguished gentlemen, particularly on the subject of their invention. All agreed that Their Bomb was an awe-inspiring weapon and that people had better keep out of its way.
As for the politicians and foreign representatives present (at a safe distance), all were “disappointed” at the ‘‘show.” The death-filled cloud of gamma rays wasn’t big enough; the noise not loud enough; the flash-colors not glamorous enough. The Russian representative thought it looked like just another big bomb (and Russia has plenty of those). Not a one seemed a bit concerned about what was going on, insofar as it might affect the masses of people in a future war. They were exclusively concerned with (a) self-interest and entertainment derived from the spectacle; (b) the possible military-strategic value of The Bomb.
 
Bomb a Terrific Weapon
But let nobody kid himself. The Bomb dropped at Bikini was no fraud or fake, in its terrifying powers. Dropped on cities like Hiroshima or Nagasaki, it would have spread the same toll of death and destruction over huge areas as did the two previous Bombs.
Consider just one fact admitted by a scientist present at Bikini: Every sailor on board any of the ships at Bikini would be dead – either from fire, blast result, or explosion; or would be dying from exposure to the gamma rays. The fleet, in a word, would have been put out of action completely – by one Bomb! What more need be said?
The political significance of Bikini is tremendous. How else can it be understood except as a threat and warning to the one great rival of American imperialism still remaining – Stalin’s Russian imperialism. The Bikini experiment was an experiment for war, both politically and militarily, and as such it must be understood.
 



The United Nations General Assembly has now adjourned and the delegates have gone home. Only the Security Council remains in session, disputing the issues of Greek border incidents. In one respect at least, the UN gathering was a massive and weighty matter. The New York Times reports that 200 tons of paper were used in printing and mimeographing reports and resolutions, and a total of 70,000,000 impressions were made!
But one solid (and sufficient) impression was left on the mind of the general public that 200 more tons of paper couldn’t counteract – namely, that the UN IN REALITY did nothing. accomplished nothing and took not the first essential forward step toward a durable world peace.
A study and summary of the seven weeks of the Assembly meeting bear out this general public impression.
 
Play Safe on Franco
In last week’s Labor Action we analyzed the so-called resolution on disarmament and pointed out how, in reality, it meant nothing beyond an agreement to continue negotiations and efforts to make an atomic energy-atomic bomb deal. These negotiations are now continuing and meeting with no success. This can last indefinitely – or, to be more exact, until the great powers are ready to launch the next war.
On the issue of veto power and the right of the Big Five to block any action not suitable to their taste, no important action was accomplished beyond the passing of a resolution “urging” the great powers not to abuse their use of the veto power.
This impotent resolution did not even contain a censure of the powers for having utilized the veto to their narrow, imperialist advantages.
On the question of trusteeship and control of colonies, the General Assembly merely transferred control of former League of Nations mandates to control by the United Nations. A Trusteeship Council was established, the purpose of which will be to carry out the trusteeship agreements over New Guinea (mandated to Australia); Western Samoa (to New Zealand); Ruanda-Urundi (to Belgium); Tanganyika, British Cameroons and British Togoland (to England). The imperialist colonial-mandate system of the defunct League of Nations was simply continued under a new title. Not a single step toward colonial liberation was recorded. A resolution condemning the treatment of Indians in South Africa was passed, but no improvement in this treatment has yet been heard of.
 
Bury UNRRA Officially
On relief and refugee problems, the General Assembly took the step of permitting the end of UNRRA and refusing to vote for the creation of a new international relief agency, as proposed by LaGuardia. Instead, the whole matter has been passed back to the will and interest of the individual governments concerned. UNRRA is now dead and buried officially, by the United Nations.
And this, in essence, was the “work” of the General Assembly of the United Nations. We have not yet heard what is to be done with the 200 tons of paper, but recommend that our readers forward suggestions to the Secretary General himself.
 







Within the colonial world, the problem of the
relations between Hindu and Moslem in India has become of outstanding
importance. A problem that, several years ago, might have been disposed
of in the normal course of historic and nationalist development has
more than redoubled in intensity and has become crucial for the cause
of India’s revolutionary struggle for freedom. The 6,000 corpses in
Calcutta’s streets, a result of a savage and tragic episode of communal
rioting, testify to the Intensity of the feelings involved, along with
the fact that, despite the entry of the Moslem League into Nehru’s
Provisional India Government, the murder of Hindu by Moslem and Moslem
by Hindu continues. In this issue of The New International,
Henry Judd, author of India in Revolt, analyzes the
content of this problem. We also reprint a resolution

suggesting the revolutionary solution proposed by the Indian section of
the Fourth International. — Editor.




These special features of the geography of India are
reflected in her civilisation. To the variations in topography,
climate, flora and fauna, and natural resources correspond wide
differences in cultural patterns and social institutions, as evidenced
by the richness and variety of art, literature, philosophy and religion
in India. Nevertheless, the existence of facilities for communication
within the greater part of the country has led to the growth of social
relationships among different racial groups and created a profound
cultural unity in the midst of diversity; and the comparative isolation
of this great country from the rest of the world has preserved the
conditions for the evolution of a civilisation that is unique and
specifically Indian. — (Industrial Labour in India,
published by the International Labour Office, Geneva, 1938.)
What are the basic facts of the Hindu-Moslem problem?

India is a country with 6,000 known years of history, during the
course of which countless migrations, conquests, assimilations,
divisions, unifications, etc., have occurred. The  Ethnic-racial
mixture of today is the consequence of these 6,000 years of
inter-marriage and social relations.
The first Moslem (Mohammedan, Mussulman) invasion took place in
the year 664, into North India, but large-scale migrations did not
begin until the year 1200, approximately 700 years ago, after which
they took place regularly, leading to the foundation of the Mogul
dynasties.
The Moslems mixed freely with the Aryan peoples, assimilating
their culture and proselytizing for the Islamic religious system among
these people. To escape the rigid, predetermining grip of the Hindu
caste system, many of these Aryans became converts to Islam — that is, became
Moslems. This, of course, also elevated them to the ranks of the
ruling class officialdom.
“Probably as many as 90 per cent of India’s 90 million [1] Moslems are descended from Hindu converts
to Islam.” (Sir Frederick Puckle, The Pakistan Doctrine, Foreign
Affairs Quarterly, pg. 528.) Of the 12 million Moslems in the
Punjab province, 10 million are of Hindu descent, having embraced the
new religion to escape caste and Hindu laws.
According to the latest census figures (1940), India is divided,
along religious-communal lines, as follows:





Hindu


     


255 million




Moslem


  92 million




Sikh


    6 million




Christian


    6 million




Tribal


  26 million




TOTAL


385 million




Approximately two-thirds of the Moslem population of 92
million (59 million, to be exact) live in six of India’s northern
provinces. The remaining 33 million Moslems live scattered far and wide
in India’s five other provinces, native states, etc., constituting
enclaves within the broad Hindu population. In the six northern
provinces of Moslem concentration (reading from left to right on the
map: Baluchistan, Sind, Northwest Frontier, Punjab, Bengal and Assam
Provinces), the 59 million Moslems constitute 56 per cent of
the total six province population strength of 108 million. The other 49
million people are, of course, almost entirely Hindus, except for the
six million Sikhs who live in the Punjab.
 
Not Traditional National Question
Such are the basic facts. Now, what are the essential
differences between Hindu and Moslem, from a social standpoint? These
differences fall under the general heading of religious-communal
differences. That is, we are dealing with two communities,
BUT communities that overlap in many fundamental respects: language,
culture and tradition, racial and ethnic mixture, common conditions of
life (particularly in the village-peasant areas), etc. In a word, the
Hindu-Moslem problem is not a national problem in the
traditional sense of the word. That is, the Moslems do not form a
distinct national minority grouping, with a distinct culture, language,
etc. We are dealing with a special form or expression of the national
question — a problem in which the specific features of
difference between the two vast communities are determined more by
psychology, feelings and sentiment than by easily observable facts. The
Moslem people are not a viable nation; they are an organic part of the
Indian nation, but a part with viable differences and problems that
cannot be dismissed.
As the resolution on “Pakistan” (the demand of the Moslem
League for recognition of the Moslems as a separate nation) adopted by
the Indian Bolshevik-Leninists asserts, the real national
differences within India consist of differences between peoples
residing in regions, or separate provinces, of the country. That is,
regional peoples such as the Punjabis, the Bengalis, the Pathans of the
Northwest Frontier, the Madrasis and Tamils of South India, etc., have
far greater differences and points of division, with respect to
language, race, history and customs, than do the Hindus and Moslems
considered as abstract categories of people! For example, a Moslem and
a Hindu living in the Punjab region of India (that is, Punjabis) have
far more in common with one another culturally, linguistically, etc.,
than they do with a Moslem and a Hindu living in, let us say, Bengal or
Madras provinces. To express it differently, their common
characteristics as Punjabis are more apparent and significant than
their characteristics in common with, respectively, a Bengal or Madras
province Hindu; or a Bengal or Madras province Moslem. But this is not
to deny a common religious-communal bond between the Punjab
Moslem and the Bengal or Madras Moslem; or such a bond between the
Punjab Hindu and the Bengal or Madras Hindu. Such a denial would, of
course, imply that the Hindu-Moslem antagonism has no reality and as
such would be nonsense. At the same time, we must again call attention
to the general, all-pervading Indian-ness that reaches into
every region and province of India and covers each religion, sect,
community, caste and class with its all-embracing national

qualities. This quality of Indian-ness is revealed in common
origins of language and their deep inter-connection (not to mention the
fact that Hindustani, the plurality language, is spoken by one-third of
the entire population); common social and economic life; common
traditions and historic experiences; elaborate communications, etc.
What is the specific nature of the Moslem community of 92 millions?
The vast bulk of this community (over 80 per cent) are poor, illiterate
peasants — either tenant farmers or small landholders. They live within
the lower scales of the socially depressed Indian population. It is
wrong to think that the Moslem community is not internally divided
along economic and class lines. On the contrary, its top sector is an
extremely reactionary and oppressive clique. In Bengal province, with
which the author is most familiar, the Moslem castes are
indistinguishable from the Hindu castes who occupy the other half of
the province. The Moslem landlords, princes (Nizams) and feudal
aristocrats are precisely symmetrical to their class brothers in the
Hindu community. In Hyderabad, the largest and one of the most
oppressive of the so-called native states, a Moslem ruling class of
landlords and feudalists tyrannizes over a Hindu peasant population in
exactly the same manner as do the princes in Hindu native states.
William Phillips, Roosevelt’s personal envoy in India and the
gentleman who was declared persona non grata by the British,
declared in a report,
“... the Moslem community as a political party has
only an artificial unity. Like other religious groups it comprises
various classes which have been more or less welded together
politically by the device of separate electorate. There is already
evidence to indicate that Moslem workers and peasants are becoming
increasingly aware of their unity with Hindus of the same class.” (The
Voice of India, February, 1946, p.248.)
The Moslem community then consists of:

A small handful of landlords, princes and feudal rulers.
A small strata of petty bourgeois intellectuals, government
officials, students, priests and religious teachers, unemployed college
graduates.
A small strata of industrial workers.
A small strata of skilled handicraft workers.
An overwhelming strata of peasants and small landowning farmers.

Unfortunately, we do not possess exact figures on the
actual numbers of the above groups. It is important to note there are
hardly any Moslem industrial bourgeois and comparatively few Moslem
proletarians. In addition, since the Islamic religion frowns upon the
garnering of “interest” and money-lending, the Moslems rarely are found
among the commercial groups of the Indian population. The Hindu bania,
the village money-lender and storekeeper, has a free field, thus
providing a constant source of irritation in Moslem village communities
and farming areas.
 
Sources of Moslem Communalism
The sources of Moslem communalism are not hard to
uncover, once we grasp the basic facts outlined above. In general, the
Moslem people occupy a lower place in the all-India community than
other groups. They do not share proportionally in the general
production or distribution of social wealth; nor do they occupy social
positions commensurate with their numbers and significance. They
therefore feel discriminated against. The ruling ranks of the Moslemic
community likewise strive to share places with the corresponding ruling
ranks of the Hindus. Moslem landlords and princes wish to retain their
class privileges and powers; Moslems wish to become capitalists and
share the profits of the Hindu textile, steel, iron and coal industrial
magnates; Moslem intellectuals are in violent competition with the
Hindu intellectuals and college graduates over jobs in the British
civil service and administration, etc.
 
Resolution Evades Issue
And here, in conclusion, we come to the program and
resolution on Pakistan offered by the Indian Bolshevik-Leninists, the
Indian section of the Fourth International. Insofar as it goes, this
resolution — which we are publishing — proceeds along the correct line
but, in our opinion, does not go far enough and, in a sense, evades the
Moslem issue.
The resolution correctly describes the character of the Moslem
League and its separatism, as well as the hopelessly retrogressive
nature of Pakistan. It places India’s national problem on a realistic
level by pointing to the fact that regional divisions, according to
nationalities (Punjabis, Bengalis, etc.), constitute the real problem.
A united, socialist, federal India is the solution proposed,
similar to the Leninist plan for the solution of Russia’s national
question. To quote from the original constitution of Soviet Russia,
“The workers and peasants of each nation are free to
decide independently at their own plenipotentiary Soviet congresses
whether they desire, and if so, on what conditions, to take part in the
federal government and other federal Soviet institutions.” (Part II,
Chapter 5)
The principle of socialist federalism assumes, of
course, the right of secession from any Federated Indian state. As the
program of the Indian Trotskyism states, only a democratically-elected
Constituent Assembly can decide these questions of Indian independence,
and create the broad outlines of the future nation. But the proposal of
socialist federations is undoubtedly the correct answer to the basic
aspects of the national problem.
But the Moslem problem and relations between the two major
communities overlaps the national, or regional problem! In the present
tense situation, it even tends to dominate the former and replace it.
Moslems live everywhere in India, regardless of nationality, and form
enclaves within the body of India itself, including the predominantly
Hindu sections. And, since it evades this question, the resolution we
publish can be considered satisfactory only insofar as it goes. It does
not go far enough. It is not sufficient to characterize the reactionary
Moslem League, nor lay bare its class motives, since behind
the League stands the dispossessed and degraded Moslem mass, with its
deep and justified suspicions against the Congress party and its
leadership. This cannot be ignored without the charge of “pro-Hinduism”
being leveled against the resolution and its authors.
It Lenin could consider that the Russian anarchists had the right to found a state, or community, of their own; if Lenin could believe that, in general, any group of people with a common set of beliefs and ideas, had separatist rights-then we cannot deny this same right to a group of people such as the Moslems. Not, indeed, merely because Lenin said so, but because we revolutionary socialists stand for the utmost of democracy, above all at a time when the entire bourgeois, Stalinist and reactionary world has discredited itself. The very tenacity with which the Congress bourgeois leadership opposes Pakistan and demands that the Moslem people subject itself to its tender graces, this alone would almost suffice to make us hold an opposite opinion, lest we be identified with Gandhi, Nehru, et al. Thus, we must clearly state that the Moslem people shall have the right to form independent states, including enclaves within Hindu territory, if they so wish and so decide for themselves. We will point out the general economic disadvantages of such separation and the greater advantages that lie in regional affiliation to a Federated India, but we cannot deny the right of the Moslem masses to attempt such a separatist experience, if they so wish. Above all, the Indian Trotskyists must openly proclaim the right of the Moslem people to vote  on such a proposal. Everybody, the British government, the Moslem League, the Congress party — literally everybody denies the Moslem people the right to vote, to express their sentiments. Shall we be among these opponents of elementary democracy? No, in a free India the Moslem masses must have the right to vote, after democratic consideration and discussion, on the issue of separatism. In our opinion, the program of the Indian Fourth Internationalists will not be correct or complete until this is added, in unambiguous form, to the resolution.
 
Footnote
1. The 1940 India
census records 93 million Moslems, rather than Buckle’s figure.



At the meetings of the Big Four Foreign Ministers, now taking place in New York’s Waldorf-Astoria, a tight , deadlock exists and grows deeper. The issues involved, reaching far beyond the fate of that seaport city, have become of such importance that it is claimed that their solving will unloosen the deadlock involving all the Powers and make possible the speedy conclusion of treaties with Italy and other European Powers.
While the Trieste issue has great importance, it is incorrect that its solution would bring a speedy end to the conflict between the Powers and move Europe more rapidly toward peace and reconstruction. Its solution would only pave the way for discussions on the yet more difficult, complex and more controversial problems of treaties with Austria and Germany.
 
Strategic Center
Yet the dispute over Trieste is significant for what it reveals of the motives and methods of the Big Four in handling Europe and its problems. Trieste, and its surrounding territory of Venezia Giulia, is not so much a sore spot in Europe to which the soothing balm of agreement, peace and economic recovery needs to be applied. It is a strategic center, a vital spot in the power game of the imperialist rivals and each is anxious to maneuver so that it dominates the fate of this city.
Trieste is a strategic port on the Adriatic, and whoever wins it wins control over that sea. Trieste is a railway center, branching out in all directions to Yugoslavia, Italy and Austria. Trieste is a valuable shipbuilding center, a trading and commercial center of high importance. In the fundamental division existing between the Anglo-American partners and the Russians with their satellites, Trieste is a prize package worth slipping into anyone’s pocket.
But the longer the negotiations have proceeded, the more serious have the differences become. This does not exclude the final arriving at an agreement, but at the moment this does not appear to be in sight. During the course of the negotiations, the Russians, represented by leading Stalinist Molotov, have cleverly maneuvered so that they (lo and behold!) appear as the democrats, while the Anglo-Americans represented by Byrnes and Bevins appear as the anti-democratic authoritarians! As for the French representative (some stupid Comte or other), he doesn’t appear at all.
 
Reasons for Dispute
How did this occur? A Free Territory of Trieste, established by statutes, is to be established under United Nations control. To this degree, all have agreement. It is over the concrete statutes, investing powers in a proposed Governor of Trieste, police, etc., that the sharp disagreements have taken place. Russian imperialism, knowing that Yugoslavs are a majority in the territory and knowing too that their friend and stooge Marshal Tito is just around the corner where he can exert terror-pressure on the population, is anxious to fix the statutes so that the Yugoslavs can, through supposedly legal forms, seize power and turn the entire area over to Stalinized Yugoslavia. They therefore want a Governor with weakened powers, and with real power resting in the hands of a constituent assembly to be called for the purpose of creating a permanent government for the territory.
Byrnes and Bevin, on the other hand, are most anxious of all to prevent seizure of the area by Tito, and therefore desire to install all kinds of safeguards against such possibilities, as well as statutes that will give them, the Anglo-Americans, the power to intervene at any moment. They therefore wish a Governor with wide powers, including the right to control the police, suspend legislation, issue decrees, declare martial law, etc. This Governor proposed by America and England would, in effect, have the powers of an all-mighty dictator. He would also be appointed by the Security Council of the UN, where the Anglo-Americans have a majority, as against Molotov’s proposal that the Foreign Ministers agree on who he is to be.
 
People Not Consulted
In addition, the whole question of fixing a date for the evacuation of Trieste by foreign, troops is under dispute, with Molotov insisting upon a date 90 days after the Italian treaty goes into effect and the others insisting upon no definite dale at all. They aren’t particularly anxious to pull out and see Tito’s strutting Stalinists walk in the next day!
These differences, of course, reveal the profound and mutual distrust these two power-hungry blocs have for each other. It goes without saying that the desires and wishes of the Trieste people – be they Italian or Yugoslav – are in no way whatever consulted or considered. There is no spokesman from either nationality permitted at the hearings. This is the situation, reactionary and the proposed socialist solution to this hypocritical, as it appears today. For difficult problem, see November 11 issue of Labor Action and the coming issue.
 



La peste brune a passe par la
by Daniel Guérin
Les Editions universelles, 104 pgs.
This newly re-issued brochure of La peste brune a passe par la ... (The Brown Pestilence Passed There) is an eye-witness account of the beginnings (1933) of the Nazi regime by the French comrade Daniel Guérin, well-known to American readers as the author of Fascism and Big Business.
It is his account of a bicycle trip, in May 1933, taken across Germany, with stopovers in its principal cities, at the very moment when Nazidom had taken power and was fulfilling the first brutal steps in its preliminary consolidation of this power. Guerin describes vividly his impressions of the fascist fever, with all its illusions and fantastic sides, that raged in Germany at the moment, as well as the early effects of the tragic defeat upon the ranks of the German Communist and Social-Democratic party members.
Originally published in 1933, this re-issued edition contains the freshness not only of the impressions made upon its author by the German upheaval, but also the somewhat naive and hopeful illusions held by Guérin as to the lack of durability and strength of German fascism. But we must respect this honesty on the author’s part, and his refusal to yield to the temptation of retrospective revision and evaluation. As such, the pamphlet has both its value and interest. Perhaps the most interesting part is the section where Guérin meets rank-and-file members of the German Communist Party who bitterly reject and criticize their party leadership and reveal a far greater understanding of what Hitler’s triumph meant to the German movement than did the Moscow-bound bureaucrats of the party.
Guérin’s work is at its best in explaining the mass character of the Hitler movement and the sweep with which it conquered the nation in 1933.
Fascism, explains Guérin, “... surged from the depths of the German people. It is because it was ‘popular’ that it proved irresistible, that it swept everything aside, that the workers’ parties – divided – could not block its path, that old reactionary and feudal Germany had to, against its will, give way to it.”
Moreover, the dregs of the population found refuge in the Brown Army. There it can bludgeon and play with revolvers to its heart’s joy. But behind it stands the peasant mass, suffering from the low sales price’s obtained for its products or its low wage scales; the entire middle class, decomposing, ruined by inflation, by the economic crisis, struggling desperately against the competition of big business, against the proletarianization that awaits it. And there are also large working class layers whose nerves have been shot due to hunger and idleness, and above all, the youth – that fine and poor German youth, without bread, without work, without future, gnawing its nails in impatience and fever.”
For insight into the early period of Hitlerism in power, we do not hesitate to recommend Guerin’s brochure. Unfortunately, it is accessible at present only to those with a reading knowledge of French. The Labor Action Service will be glad to procure copies ($.75) for those who desire this work. The Book Service intends shortly to offer current French political works to its readers. Watch Labor Action for details.
 



The General Assembly of the United Nations has finally adjourned and the delegates have gone home. In next week’s Labor Action we shall present an over-all analysis of the work of this Assembly. Here we concern ourselves only with the dispute over the issue of disarmament, which often led to sharp exchanges during the last week at Flushing Meadows.
For six weeks the debate on disarmament dominated the Assembly meetings. What were the final results? Will there now be a universal disarming of the Powers, great and small? The answer is a flat NO. Not a single practical result was obtained, beyond the further revelation of the deep conflicts that divide the great ‘powers, particularly Russia and America.
The final resolution, adopted by unanimous consent, referred the entire question to a special meeting of the General Assembly, to be held some time in the future. This special Assembly is to consider practical proposals for disarmament, elimination of atomic and other weapons of mass destruction, plans for withdrawals of foreign troops from abroad, control of atomic energy, etc. But the point is that each one of these questions has already been considered and at great length. The issues have been thoroughly discussed, and are well known to all.
 
Unanimous Bankruptcy
In effect then, the resolution finally adopted merely affirmed that the great powers are today prepared to do nothing whatever toward disarmament, and are incapable of getting together on any common program. They therefore postponed the whole matter until some indefinite future when the futile and aimless process will begin all over again. The unanimous vote is a vote expressing the unanimous bankruptcy of the General Assembly and all the powers, big and small. Armament (production of atom bombs, warships, machines of war, investigation and experimentation into new methods of mass murder, etc.) will continue exactly as before. The League of Nations tale repeats itself unanimously. The disarmament debate occurred over three specific issues:
(a) The question of outlawing the atomic bomb, and control of atomic energy. This was not even on the agenda of the General Assembly, and was only discussed in special committee – whence came nothing, not even a final report and recommendations. This matter still rests with the Atomic Energy Commission, while work at Oak Ridge proceeds and stockpiles grow.
(b) The question of a census of troops at home and abroad. Russia’s spokesman, Molotov, began this cynical and demagogic game with a proposal that only troops in friendly, non-enemy countries be listed – thus giving Russia a chance to hide its troop strength both in Russia proper and in Poland, Germany and , other occupied ex-enemy nations. All week long, Molotov and Vishinsky disputed with the British spokesman, Sir Hartley Shawcross, and the American windbag from Texas, Senator Connolly. Each outdid the other in attempts to embarrass and connive.
At the end, the British and Americans joined in agreement to drop the entire matter and then the General Assembly by 36 to 6 voted to reject the idea of an immediate troop census. The Russians had partly gained their objective of revealing the hypocrisy, of their opponents, but had themselves revealed their unwillingness to have any direct check made by on-the-spot commissions of THEIR armed forces. Matters stand where they stood six weeks ago with the great powers occupying huge sections of the world. (Does it make any difference whether a small, helpless country is ruled by 10,000 foreign troops armed to the teeth, or only by 5,000 of the same?)
(c) The question of actually disarming and reducing weapons and means of waging warfare. As indicated above, nothing was accomplished on this matter. Many hopes and desires were expressed, particularly by the smaller nations, but the opinions of these nations meant nothing. Here, again, the issue has been deferred to negotiations between the big powers.
The debate over disarmament – or, why we must remain armed to the teeth – again emphasizes two major characteristics of the United Nations:

Its complete domination by the force and will of the major powers, above all, America and Russia.
 
Its equally complete impotence to accomplish anything to bring peace and international harmony to the world.

 



In our November issue of The New International
we promised our readers reports on two significant conventions held by
sections of the Fourth International — the Internationalist Communist
Party of France (PCI), and the Revolutionary Communist Party of Great
Britain (RCP). Below we give the most important details of these
conventions, both of which mark definite progress away from the
repetition of sterile, orthodox dogma and progress toward ideologic and
revolutionary clarity:
 
French Trotskyist Convention
The Third Convention of the Parti Communiste
Internationaliste, French Section of the 4th International, was held
from September 7th to 11th. Considerable progress was manifested since
the previous convention in February. A large majority of the 102
delegates, however, felt that the progress would have been much greater
if the leadership elected in February had been more capable —
organizationally and politically.
The progress of the PCI since February, 1946, was considerable in
several fields. The party increased its membership by between “50 and
75 per cent.” The increase was by no means localized at the center. On
the contrary, the increase was notable at the opposite ends of France.
Where groups existed, they grew, e.g., the Bordeaux region doubled.
Entirely new regions came into being where before there were one or two
comrades or none at all. From Alsace-Lorraine to Corsica, from the
Italian to the Belgian frontier regions there are now groups of the PCI.
Another big gain was the legalization of La Verité
in which the pressure of left wing groups all over the world, including
sections of the SP in France and the SWP and WP in the US, played a
part. This was followed by the enlargement of the paper from a tabloid
size two-pager into a full size four-pager attuned more closely to the
life and struggles of the masses.
Of great importance was the role of the PCI in the development of
the revolutionary left wing in the unions and in the recent strike
actions. The left wing workers grouped around the paper Front
Ouvrier played an important part in the recent teachers’ and
CGT (labor federation) conventions as well as in the printers and
postal-telegraph-telephone strikes. Not only did Front Ouvrier,
in which our comrades collaborate, increase its strength, but the PCI
itself made a good name for itself. Particularly in the PTT strike,
where a special issue of La Verité was put out
and well received. There was a valuable discussion of this strike by
the delegates.
The second and third days of the convention were given over to the
political report and its discussion, in which 80 delegates took part.
The following two major tendencies manifested themselves:
1) The Frank tendency — heart of the old
majority — centered around the old Molinier group which fused with the
party during the war. This group, supported by the International
Secretariat, had one-third of the delegates. Its political line
reflects the influence of the SWP (Cannon faction). Its position is
based on its belief that we are in a revolutionary crisis (second
wave), and therefore calls for what amounts to organs of dual power,
and the creation of an extra-parliamentary CP-SP-CGT government. “The
revolutionary crisis engendered by World War II is of a depth and
extension far superior to that of the years 1917-1923,” i.e., to that
which produced the Russian October, a Soviet Hungary and Saxony and
various Soviet revolts in Germany, Finland, Bulgaria, etc., if one
believes the Frank resolution. Not believing that the offensive of the
bourgeoisie against the Socialist-Communist bloc for the May
Constitution, with its virtual abolition of the reactionary Senate,
posed any serious danger of a defeat for the working class, the Frank
group clings to its opposition to the “Yes” stand taken by the PCI.
However, part of the group (Frank) was for a “No” answer and most of it
for a blank ballot.
2) The Geoffroy-Demazière-Craipeau group,
the former minority, had a slight majority at this convention, 52
delegates. For them the situation is characterized by a reconsolidation
of bourgeois rule and a getting into motion of capitalist economy,
accompanied by a series of defeats of the working class and a lowered
level of class consciousness due to the war, the occupation and those
defeats (speedy liquidation of militia, factory committees and all
other workers organs since August 1944, transfer of the struggle to
purely parliamentary forms due to the CP and SP leaders, parliamentary
defeats and retreats — Constitution) and a corresponding rebirth of
parliamentary and democratic illusions. The economic lift opens up new
perspectives of labor struggle although necessarily at a lower level to
start with, due to those defeats and illusions. The party can play a
decisive role by applying its economic and democratic slogans so as to
help set the masses in action and to generalize and raise the level of
such action.
This group has shifted the CP-SP-CGT slogan to “Break the
Coalition.” It offers two reasons. Firstly, because, as a
concretization of the idea of “oust the bourgeois (MRP) ministers” it
no longer has sense since the SP and CP no longer have a majority in
parliament. Secondly, because considering it as a concretization in
immediate agitation of the slogan “Workers and peasants government”
means posing the problem of extraparliamentary power organs, obviously
not sensible today. They therefore replace it in agitation with “Break
the coalition with the bourgeois ministers” and relegate “Workers and
peasants government” to general propaganda.
In addition to these two major (Majority and Minority) tendencies,
there are other small ideological groupings within the party which
oppose the “CP-SP-CGT government” slogan and have varying estimates of
the general situation in France today, as well as different positions
on the basic question of Russia, as indicated below.
 
Differ on Russian Question
The Russian resolution of the old Frank majority takes
the traditional line of defense, while declaring that the occupied
countries remain capitalist but at the same time says that in the
unlikely case “of the Soviet occupation continuing for years and
bringing about a structural assimilation (which they say elsewhere is
the tendency), it would result in a development of the productive
forces far surpassing all that those countries have known during 30
years of capitalist evolution.” They further say that they oppose the
Stalinist methods of struggle against the local capitalists “not
because they are inhuman, but because they are ineffective.” They also
attack “Shachtman and now L., etc.,” who, in “isolating” Trotsky’s
prophesy (that the war, won or lost, would finish Stalin), show that
they “didn’t understand its meaning.” The only error was of “rhythm and
limit and not of analysis,” they say, and to say otherwise one must
“prove that the direction of Russia’s evolution has changed.”
The M. group bases its defensism primarily on its fear of a
capitalist victory opening up new areas to exploitation, but continues
to call Russia a workers’ state.
The newly formed M.C. group is defeatist and considers Russia a
bureaucratic collectivist state, but opposes the use of the term
“imperialist” because they say it leads to confusion with capitalist
imperialism.
The Guerin group is defeatist and its resolution holds that Russia
is imperialist but not capitalist “in the same sense as the others.”
The resolution takes no stand on the problem of State capitalism or
Bureaucratic collectivism.
The multitude of positions convinced everyone that further
discussion is necessary in the party and it was decided to open that
discussion after the convention with a special conference on the
Russian question to be held in six months.

[Revolutionary Communist Party]
The convention of the Revolutionary Communist Party of
Great Britain did not, unfortunately, reveal the same organizational
growth and progress as did that of the French section of the Fourth
International. Recognizing the extreme power and attractiveness of the
Labor Party to the masses of English workers, the convention resolution
dealing with the political situation in England admitted an
overestimation in its previous prognosis of a sharp swing to the left,
based upon a disillusionment with the Labor Government, which would
benefit the RCP. This did not materialize, but unfortunately the
Convention drew only a fatalistic conclusion from it, rejecting
overwhelmingly the proposal of the International Executive Committee
that the RCP join en masse the British Labor Party. The RCP,
in sharp contrast with the French PCI, seems stagnating and incapable
of grappling with the realities of English national political life.
After a long period of ignoring or barely considering the so-called
Russian Question, the RCP finds itself involved in an intense
discussion on this issue. Three different tendencies were revealed at
the Convention during a discussion that will undoubtedly continue in
the post-convention life of the party. The Majority (Haston-Grant)
tendency — the party leadership — has developed the novel
interpretation of Trotsky’s analysis of the Soviet Union to the effect
that, although Russia today has a “capitalistic economy” (exhibiting
all the features of capitalism, including operation of the law of
value, commodity production for the market, wage-labor, etc., etc.), it
nevertheless remains a “Workers’ State.” The party Minority clings to
the traditional (that is, sterile) characterization of Russia and
brands the Majority as revisionist, preparing the way for acceptance of
the “State Capitalist” theory regarding Russia or of the “bureaucratic
collectivist” theory. A small minority, headed by comrades from the
Irish section, advanced substantially the “bureaucratic collectivist”
point of view held by the Workers Party in America. These three
tendencies will now be discussed within the ranks of the party.
It is important to note that these two conventions of the leading
European sections of the Fourth International mark definite progress
toward reconsideration of the entire Russian question — a most welcome
event, long considered necessary by us. The Russian defensist position,
still clung to with desperation by the SWP in America, is becoming
increasingly untenable throughout the International. A thoroughgoing
re-evaluation of this issue is on the order of the day. Bureaucratic
smugness can answer everything but the pressure of history.
H.J.



What with frontal attacks by Stalin’s Russia, open revolts in Palestine, Indo-China and the East Indies, and mass strikes in Singapore, Colombo and African colonial cities, the British Empire is facing difficult days. His Majesty’s Labor Government, dashing about from place to place in desperate efforts to stem the breaks, is developing a case of the one-armed paper hanger with the hives.
And perhaps Britain is about to confront the most difficult problem of all, in a new, heightened form – that is, the eternal problem of India and the demand of its 400,000,000 people for full national independence. For several weeks now, in the great cities of Calcutta and Bombay, things have been stirring – strikes, riots, armed clashes with the British police and soldiers.
These events are familiar stories in India’s history, always heralding a revival of a movement that can never be crushed. During the war, the British held power by open military force. At one period it had no less than 25,000 leaders and members of the India National Congress in jail (or better, concentration camps). Since the war ended, however, a large portion of these nationalists – although by no means, all of them – have been set free. The revival of colonial nationalism has, of course, had its effects upon India and now things are stirring.
 
No Compromise Possible
In recent elections for the Central Legislative Assembly (a small parliamentary body without any independent powers), fewer than 500,000 out of India’s 400 million people were permitted to vote. That is, ½ of 1% have the right to vote! Yet even in these “rich man elections” as they are known, the Congress party won a clear majority. In local, provincial elections to be held this month and March, it is certain that the party standing for independence will win even greater victories, since more people will vote in these elections.
The British, as is well known, are not particularly popular among the workers, peasants and middle-class people of India. Their universal unpopularity holds despite any communal or religious differences among the Indian people themselves. An AP correspondent, writing from Bombay, reports the widespread belief that “by March there will be bloody uprisings and that the full force of the British Army still in uniform in India will be required to suppress it, if suppression is possible.”
Since the war’s end, the British government through Prime Minister Attlee and Viscount Lord Wavell – have made various efforts to compromise the problem of freedom through some sort of constitutional measures. These offers have been uniformly unsuccessful. Even the most conservative Congress party leaders, men like Gandhi, Patel and Nehru, have rejected the various approaches made to them for participation in a joint, coalition government with the British. The atmosphere and feeling of the people, now facing difficult economic times, is such that even these leaders have been forced to reiterate the “Quit India Now” slogan, and stick to the Congress demand for full freedom, without strings.
Now a new offer is being prepared. “It seems fairly safe to say that, barring a sudden change of plans, India will have a clear indication of the British Government’s intentions by the middle of February.” (N.Y. Times, January 30.) Of course, the Indian people know only too well these intentions – they haven’t changed for 200 years! To hold onto India, no matter what the cost: to continue to exploit, rob and plunder the labor and resources of this, the world’s greatest colony.
 
Famine Threatens
Behind all the fancy maneuvering of the conservative Congress leadership and the imperialist labor Government of Attlee, there stand far graver and more menacing problems. On top of unemployment and rising living costs caused by the abrupt end of the war, there is the permanent spectre of mass famine that has haunted this country for so long. In the great Bengal famine of 1943, in which the government admits that a minimum of 1½ millions died of outright starvation, a situation developed that threatens now to repeat itself.
Crop shortages, due to inadequate imports of food, and crop failures in the Punjab and South India, are about to threaten 100 million people. The only solution is a tremendous import in food from America and other sources. It is estimated that 2 million tons of food are needed to prevent Immediate famine, but plans exist today to import less than half of this amount. The areas most in danger are farming, peasant areas – Burma, Madras province and south- central India – the home of at least 100 million people. The whole question is now being debated in the Central Assembly, where the government spokesmen, while recognizing and describing the situation, fail to propose any solution or measures.
The war has ended for the Western world, but the great masses of colonial people in Asia still continue under the same bondage as before. For them, the war has meant nothing. Its conclusion has simply meant that their white masters from England, France, Holland and America can now devote their full, undivided attention to keeping them enslaved. The colonial people of Indo-China, Indonesia, Palestine and the Near East have already begun their reply to all this. Now the time for the people of India is approaching once again.
Labor Action will report their struggles to its readers as it has done for the struggles of all peoples, everywhere. Meanwhile, Labor Action sends its greetings to its comrades in India, the valiant members of the Bolshevik-Leninist Party of India, who organized their party and kept it alive during the war and who now participate with the people in the fight for national independence of their country.
 



Ernest Bevin, England’s top labor leader, stated the facts – but only half the truth – when he admitted, over a year ago, that England was broke as a result of the war. Actually, the current $14 billion indebtedness of the mother country to the dominions and colonies of its empire – a dramatic reversal of England’s traditional position – is a far more accurate description of the situation than Bevin’s admission. England is “broke” and deeply in debt, with the island’s historic markets threatened as never before. The Marxist contention that the war would immeasurably speed the general decline of the British Empire is clearly verified.
To pay for her imports and maintain her living standards even at their present and war level, Britain “must increase her exports by sixty per cent – which means that her exports of manufactured articles must expand by no less than one hundred per cent,” according to the journalist Pertinax. In other words, an England in desperate need of housing, its factories hit by bombing, and its railroad and plant equipment seriously worn out and deteriorated from six years of strain – this tired. England, is called upon to redouble its exports of precisely the things it needs most – machinery and textiles; raw and finished products vital for solution of its rehousing problem, etc.! This is the obvious and insoluble post-war problem of the empire’s mother country.
This classic land of capitalism, whose crucial problems of social life and history are always expressed and concretized in economic terms (exports, imports and their financing; investments, foreign shares and securities; invisible items and the balance of payments, etc.), is now hard up against the most crucial of its problems. How does the British bourgeoisie propose to tackle it? Nothing could further bring home to us the seriousness of the matter than the crisis within the British Tory Party itself, the party of modern British imperialism. Not only did its great war leader, Churchill, suffer a smashing defeat but the party’s present internal crisis, again directed against Churchill, reflects its inability to devise a sound bourgeois program, in the classic Tory tradition, and its inability to answer questions. On the issue of the American loan to Britain (that “bitter pill for Britain” – The Economist) – a question of such magnitude that one might have expected a real and great debate in Parliament – the Tory Party could do no more than whine, criticize the terms of the loan, and then abstain from the vote! An admission, in effect, of political bankruptcy; that it too was helpless before England’s general predicament and would have done what the Labor Party did, except for some secondary details. Hence, our conclusion that the British bourgeoisie has entered a deep crisis of uncertainty and insecurity in which it seeks to adjust itself to new conditions and prepare a conspiratorial solution to impose upon .the British people and working class.
 
Policies of the Labor Government
Meanwhile, the Labor Party has consolidated its election victory, taken over the responsibility of government and postwar Britain has its Labor Government. From the viewpoint of the British bourgeoisie, as it prepares its inevitable counterattack upon the people, its capitalistic interests are in safe hands. The Labor leadership, in foreign affairs, simply carries on the Tory policy of “not presiding over the liquidation of His Majesty’s Empire”; while, in internal affairs, it stems and blocks the social aspirations of the British workers, creating the necessary atmosphere for the ultimate attack by the British ruling class. In general, the policies of the Labor Government may be summarized as follows:

To continue to hold the Empire together, by all means and methods, that may be necessary (Palestine, Java, India, etc.); to continue the. unending series of rear-guard, defensive battles launched by British imperialism twenty-five years ago in an effort to slow up the rate of the Empire’s disintegration. This is the first and principal objective of the Labor Government.
To speed up the process of industrial reconversion so that England’s position in the world market shall not become even weaker than it has; to revive trade and commerce within the Empire as much as possible, as well as with Europe; to sharply raise the volume of production available for export trade.
To organize, in Europe, its conception of the “western bloc,” comprising the nations and small states of western Europe together with the British occupied zone of Germany; to stand at the head of this bloc and to maneuver it successfully in its commercial, political and diplomatic war with Russia and America.
To carry out the program of internal social reform on which the party came to power (“nationalization” and “ socialization”) only to the extent to which it is forced to, in order to quell the Labor Party ranks and retain its indubitable popular support; to shadow box with the British working class as long as possible.

But the Labor Government does not function within a vacuum. It was elected with a certain mandate and it is undoubtedly correct to say that, of all the existing governments today, it is the one most closely linked to the people supporting it and most sensitive to criticism and mass attacks upon it. As we shall see when we examine the “nationalization” measures of the government, the real class treachery of the Labor leadership comes into play when it specifically and deliberately attempts to cheat the British people out of the fruits of victory and to substitute a counterfeit program for the real content of, the workers’ program. It is in this sense that the Revolutionary Communist Party of Great Britain – the British section of the Fourth International – is correct in pressing upon the government its revolutionary transitional program for nationalization and workers’ control of industry – the legitimate expression of what the British proletariat meant when it put its Labor Government in office.
 
Post-War Living Conditions
We are all familiar with the story of the strain and sufferings endured by the British people during the six years’ war. Likewise, it is not difficult to understand that the desire to gain a meaningful reward for these years, plus the even stronger desire to see that such a war would never happen again were the basic drives behind the Labor election victory. But what is not so familiar is the actual condition in which England and its forty million people emerged out of the war; the wholesale shortages of all materials and commodities, the general low standards of living and recreation.
The British soldier who, on the average served five years (as contrasted with the American GIs three years) has been demobilized to confront an even worse housing shortage than his fellow American soldier. English housing suffered not only from a lack of new building, but also from the outright destruction of hundreds of thousands of housing units by bombing. Clothing is more stringently rationed now than during the war, accounting for the worn-out appearance of the suits, dresses, coats and shoes worn by the people. The food diet, as anyone who has spent any period in England is keenly aware of, is poor, monotonous, unhealthy and inadequate. General health standards are considerably below pre-war rates. Particularly among industrial workers, small middle-class people and children there is a considerable fatigue and weakness noticeable. In general, it is accurate to state that British living standards today are only slightly above those of France, a country victimized by outright conquest, pillage and occupation. Life is better organized and more orderly in England, but the wartime measures (“temporary,” according to the English bourgeoisie) of rationing, shortages, brownouts, etc., are in full force under the government that proposes to solve shortages by increasing exports.
As for Britain’s industry – the “workshop of the world” – it is clearly in bad physical and technological shape today. Many detailed studies have been made of Britain’s coal, textile, metallurgical, chemical, railway, etc., industries, and their backward status. To this falling behind must be added the war’s terrific wear and tear, destruction from bombing and overstraining, failure to keep apace with modernization and technological invention and a general inability (nothing new to English industry) to rationalize, properly plan and divide production. John L. Lewis is not exaggerating when he boasts that an American coal miner can triple the daily productivity of an English miner. The same deterioration has affected the railroad system, backbone of economic life. Trains average ten to fifteen miles per hour (six hours to travel between London and Oxford, a distance of about seventy miles) and experienced railroaders claim equipment and stock are badly worn. English industry requires, if it is to approach its American competitor, nothing less than a thorough overhauling, modernization, capital renewal and planned reorganization. But the British capitalist class – just like the French bourgeoisie – is incapable of such an undertaking, and can only resort to reactionary measures (that is, measures that tend to further lower production, both in rate and total volume) in order to artificially keep up its profits. Actually, it has turned the whole problem over to the Labor Government and we shall see how these successful labor careerists, led by the mouselike Mr. Attlee, go about handling the matter. Then we can fully appreciate the accusation of treachery and backsliding directed by the British Trotskyists against the entire Labor Government. For, instead of taking those stern measures demanded by the situation (and already approved of by the British people) that could lift British industry out of the slough of underproduction, backwardness and volume-planning for a limited market; instead of deliberately removing all these worn-out capitalist brakes upon production, the Labor Government is simply attempting to fall in with the economic strategy of the ruling class.
 
Labor’s Foreign Policy
We are already familiar with the government’s black record in the international field. Everywhere, without a single exception, its record is black and bloody. Greece, Palestine and the Near East, Indo-China and Indonesia, India and China ... Let us summarize and leave the matter by pointing out that not a single action or policy has failed to win the approval of His Majesty’s loyal Tory opposition leader, Churchill.
Internal policy was most effectively displayed by the efforts of the government to break the London dockers’ strike; by the constant speeches, articles and preaching on the part of Labor ministers to the effect that “one must go slow” and “stand behind” the government; by the efforts to slow down the rate of demobilization of the armed forces to as slow a pace as the public would stand for, and by a complete failure to advance through Parliament any of the social, reform legislation promised by the Labor Party leadership. But what of the nationalization measures, it will be asked? Has not the LaborGovernment pressed forward at least on this part of its program?
To begin with, it must be recognized that the nationalization program advanced by the Labor Party in its election campaign has, this time at least, proved to be something more than promises. Slowly and reluctantly the government has proceeded to action. Although to date only legislation nationalizing the Bank of England has been carried out, there are bills and measures, in various stages, preparing for the nationalization of the coal industry, public ownership of civil aviation, nationalization of cable and wireless communications and plans for drafting bills providing for public ownership of fuel and power, inland transportation (railroads, highways, canals, etc.), iron and steel industries, etc. Despite everything, it is clear that this Labor Government is subject to pressures unknown by its infamous predecessor, headed by MacDonald. The pressure of these ties to the people, plus their dear mandate for basic changes, have already pushed the leaders much further than they had intended. But, when we analyze the concrete terms of some of these actions, or proposed measures, the story is rather different. Then we .see that they are, after all, tied down by the British capitalist class and have only adapted the methods of MacDonald to new historic conditions.
 
The Bank of England
The plan to nationalize the Bank of England has already been passed and is being put into effect. Concretely examined, it is seen as a deception and not what it should be; that is, a measure to wrest control of England’s finance, credit and money out of the hands of the ruling class:

The British Government is exchanging for each $400 worth of stock (formerly drawing twelve per cent interest), $1,200 worth of government stock (drawing three per cent interest)! This switch guarantees the stockholders their prior interest rate, plus a neat profit, since the actual stock exchange value of the government bonds they will get is higher than their former Bank of England stock. This is a worthwhile “expropriation”!
Lord Catto, governor of the Bank and a big-shot representative of finance in England, remains as chairman of the new Board of Governors.
The Joint Stock Banks, which issue and control the bulk of new credits to industry, have large holdings already due to their loan powers and are considerably more important to industry, in an immediate sense, than the Bank of England – these are untouched by the measure. The relation of these commercial banks to the newly nationalized Bank of England rests in the hands of Lord Catto.

Such is the reality of the first “nationalization” measure to be adopted. It stands in true contrast with the simple measure proposed by the British Trotskyists, “Nationalization of the Bank of England together with the Big Five (commercial banks) and all financial institutions without compensation ...” Let us examine another measure, the proposed nationalization plans for the coal industry, now under discussion.
Reuter’s reports (December 26, 1945),
“The coal nationalization bill introduced last week into the British House of Commons has been fairly well received by the Stock Exchange – so far. Coal mining shares, which had risen appreciably since the first shock of Labor’s victory at the polls last July, rose on the feeling that arrangements made in the bill for arbitration tribunals to assess the compensation the owners will receive are ‘reasonable’.”
What are these reasonable assurances?

A National Coal Board, which is to have control of the entire coal industry, is to be appointed by the government on an “unrepresentative” basis. The government has rejected demands by the miners’ labor organizations to be represented, as such, on the board.
A special tribunal of two Supreme Court judges and one accountant is to determine the amount of compensation paid to the mine owners!
The value of coal mines and attached properties is to be fixed according to the. principle of what amount might have been expected “if the bill had not been passed and they had been sold on a specified date in the open market to a willing buyer.” That is, their current market value, or compensation in full. As with compensation payments for the Bank of England, this money will be paid in government securities. Its total is variously estimated at $4 to $6 billions. This sum, we should add, is guaranteed by the government and its value (plus the interest it yields) are completely unrelated to the coal industry’s future! Coal industry shareholders thus exchange uncertain, fluctuating shares of a declining industry for comparatively stable “gilt-edged” government securities.
In general, the same group of managers, technicians, administrators (among them, ex-owners) will be retained to run the coal industry.
 

Nationalization Summed Up
In summary, then, we may draw the following conclusions regarding the nature of the Labor Government’s conception of “nationalization of industry.”

It has nothing in common with the socialist conception of nationalization under control of the British working class and its organizations (factory and mine committees, trade unions, councils of producers and consumers, etc.): the British people do not become the direct controllers, administrators or beneficiaries of this type of nationalization. It is capitalist “nationalization” as distinguished from the socialization of heavy industry and finance that a revolutionary government would enforce.
The British taxpayers – that is, the masses of workers and middle-class people – are to have a super-burden imposed upon them; a burden that, in effect, is a subsidizing of the coal industry, banking, and any other industry or service which the Labor Government intends to “nationalize” in its generous (with other people’s money) compensatory style. The burden of these billions in government securities (their cashing-in value, annual dividends and amortization) must, of course, be paid for by the British people.
Fundamentally, this type of “nationalization” falls into line and harmonizes with the basic trends of British capitalism – greater state control and intervention; further concentration and rationalization of heavy industries that now face stiff American competition; in a word, what the Germans called “autarchie”. Weak industries (such as coal) are subsidized, modernized and better organized, with the people’s money, while the same class of financiers, big industrialists and bankers still retain control from above.

This is declining capitalism, squirming and maneuvering for new capital (its life-blood) and planning to pass off the costs of its decline upon the workers and middle-class; with socialism it has nothing whatever in common. To quote Reuters again, on the practical effect of “nationalization” of the coal industry, “In effect the government is taking only the shareholders’ interest in the industry – retaining perhaps more power over the ‘directors’ than shareholders usually exercise though not necessarily more than shareholders should.” In this respect, the Labor Government marches in step with British capitalism.
 
England and America
Finally, in studying the actions of the Labor Government, we must consider the recently concluded loan agreement between America and England. We may safely pass over the ignorant statements or ultra-reactionary American Congressmen and their supporters who spread the stupid lie that kindhearted America (Uncle Sucker) has again been sold down the river by our English cousins, this time to the tune of $3¾ billions.
No, Uncle Sam drove “a hard bargain” (The Economist) and made clear the actual relationship that exists between the American and British economies. In accepting this loan, with its harsh terms, the Labor Government extended into the field of foreign commerce the same policy of class capitulation and service to the bourgeoisie that its domestic policies indicate. In effect, British industry has mortgaged itself to American imperialism, and the first great step toward penetration and undermining of the Empire closed market has been made. True, it was inevitable that bourgeois England must accept a subordinate status, but it was not inevitable that an alleged people’s Labor Government should perform this task for its own bourgeoisie. However, this is what has occurred. Let us examine the principal points of the agreement.

In return for its loan of $3¾ billions, America is to receive (a) ultimate repayment of this sum in dollars, plus (b) interest amounting ultimately to over $2 billions! It should also be understood that these dollars will never leave America, since they are credit dollars to pay for American exports to England and the Empire. So much for the fairy-tale of “giving billions to those Limeys.”
Britain agrees to remove immediately all exchange restrictions in its transactions with America, including all restrictions on imports. Do we agree to reciprocate? No.
Finally, and most important from a long-range point of view, is the agreement affecting the so-called Sterling Area. [1] Most important because it represents the means by which American imperialism hopes to break up Britain’s Empire trade monopoly and penetrate into colonial fields. This agreement has various aspects:



The Sterling Area wartime dollar pool is terminated and those Sterling Area nations having dollars in this pool may now spend them directly within the United States ... “the Government of the United Kingdom agrees that any sterling balances released ... will ... be freely available for current transactions in any currency area without discrimination.” “... each member of the Sterling Area will have its current sterling and dollar receipts at its free disposition for current transactions anywhere.”
Britain is to take steps at once to “unfreeze, fund, and have cancelled” various parts of the $15 billion indebtedness which it now owes to the Empire and Sterling Area, as a result of war purchases, etc. Such steps will raise the world value of sterling, facilitate its exchange and conversion into dollars and thus stimulate trade; specifically, trade between America and those Empire countries to whom England is now indebted. “The Government of the United Kingdom intends to make agreements with the countries concerned ... for an early settlement covering the sterling balances accumulated by sterling area.” This will indirectly stimulate trade between America and the Empire areas.
 


Dollar Imperialism
The real beneficiary, in summary, of the whole agreement is American imperialism, which clamps a stranglehold on future British industrial profits and trade and, simultaneously, takes a long step forward toward replacing England as principal exporter and trader to the Empire. As Lord Keynes pointed out during the debate in Parliament; England had no other alternative, since other countries, to whom England might have turned, “we already owe more money than we can pay,” besides not having any money themselves and therefore being unable to buy from England or anyone else, for that matter. The real shrewdness of “Uncle Sucker’s” deal with England lies in the fact that with the dollars loaned England will have to pay (or settle up) her debts abroad, thus furnishing American dollars to those very countries whom “Uncle Sucker” wishes to seduce away from British competitive trade! Thus, it is the Labor Government which bears the responsibility for accepting and signing this wily agreement baited by American imperialism. As we have previously indicated, the Tory Party in power would have had to do likewise, but it is the Labor leadership that accepted this dirty chore, in actuality.
Largely discredited by the war, sharply defeated in the July general elections, the British capitalist class and its Tory Party have accepted the temporary necessity of retreat and, even, a momentary hiding. During this period of eclipse this most reactionary and decadent of world bourgeoisies relies upon the Labor leaders and their government to hold power for them and retain the substantial props of imperialism and the Empire. We have seen that this confidence is far from misplaced; the Tories know what manner of men they are dealing with.
Meanwhile, the British bourgeoisie plans and plots for its return to direct ruling and governmental power. No one can predict what shape or form this inevitable attack upon the people will take – whether it will be a unique form of British fascism, organization of a new political party, etc. At the same time, the new Labor Government is still tied to, and susceptible to, the Labor Party masses. The British working class is now in the midst of its Labor Government experiment, with all the militancy, hopes, desires and illusions that such an experience entails. It would be mistaken to conclude there is already widespread disillusion, and a tendency by the people to seek out other ways. The experience still goes on, with its great possibilities and its great dangers.
It is in such a transitional situation as England finds itself today that we can see the profound and realistic value of Trotsky’s revolutionary transitional program; a lever for the mobilization of the British people. The Revolutionary Communist Party of Great Britain, the English Fourth Internationalists, must succeed in their efforts to win popular support for the carrying out of this program. It is the only way to forestall and prepare for the conspiratorial reaction that the rulers of England will attempt to impose upon the English people.
HENRY JUDD



The next issue of The New International will contain Part III of this series, France in 1946.



 

Footnote
1. This area includes the British Isles, any Dominion, India, any colony or mandate, Egypt, Sudan and Iraq. Canada is not included.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Stanley Plastrik.
 



“... there were some other Societies which were formed with a wider and more elevated purpose, which knew that the upsetting of an existing Government was but a passing stage in the great impending struggle, and which intended to keep together and to prepare the party, whose nucleus they formed, for the last decisive combat which must, one day or another, crush forever in Europe the domination, not of mere ‘tyrants,’ ‘despots’ and ‘usurpers,’ but of a power far superior, and far more formidable than theirs: that of capital over labor.” (Revolution and Counter-Revolution or Germany in 1848, Karl Marx)
The long and tortured history of the German nation is replete with abortive historic events; movements that began but which, for varying reasons, were never fulfilled – the Peasant War of the 1500s, the struggle for unification against Napoleon, the revolution of 1848, the Bismarckian and post-Bismarck drive for world imperial power, the 1919 revolution against the Kaiser, etc. But finally, ironically enough, it must be recognized that an historic “event”, so profoundly reactionary in nature that the like of it has never before been seen (except for the Nazi régime itself), is being imposed upon the German nation, and that this event, or action, is being fulfilled to its lowest, vilest and most humiliating depths. We refer, of course, to the Four Power occupation and destruction of Germany, an action whose course and meaning we wish to describe in some detail.
Why should we study the details of the German occupation? Because it adds to the mounting weight of material explaining the true purposes of those powers that participated in the war, banishing forever the myth of a democratic “rehabilitation” of the German people; because it indicates the “retrogressive” depths to which capitalist imperialism and barbarism must plunge conquered nations and peoples in its wars; because the tragic fate of whole nations and even continents, in future wars, is already pictured for us in the fate of Germany, and because, in this study, we may find indicated the difficult road the German people must labor up, if they are to free themselves. And finally, each of the occupying powers (France, England, America and Russia), in the section of Germany allotted to its peculiar form of occupation, clearly mirrors and reflects the nature, problems and contradictions of its own internal, home régime. French-Germany, EnglishGermany, American-Germany and Russian-Germany are in a sense, images of present-day France, England, America and Russia, each extending its policies and economies to its German colonial possession.
Under the Nazi régime, all centralizing trends within Germany reached their highest possible development, within the grasp of the super police state. This condition has been described in many studies. In May 1945 the Nazi state structure lay inert on the ground, a twisted mass of iron and steel without any frame. Nothing arose within Germany itself to replace it; not a single “dual power” tendency came forward. Into this emptiness rushed the Allied and Russian military forces, imposing their military will upon the former German nation, now without any economic, political or administrative machinery.
After almost a full year of occupation, we offer the following overall description of its results: The only adequate terms to describe Germany today would be those employed by medical science in detailing the condition of a paralytic. Atrophy of organs, lassitude and general feebleness, muscular degeneration and breaking down of cell life, with a general trend to sink lower and lower. What are some of the symptoms of this German paralysis?
 
The Physical Destruction
First and most obvious is the physical destruction of the basic industrial plant and the key cities. These plants, market and transportation centers remain as they were, heaps of rubble. Nor does shoveling rubble into neat piles on sidewalks revive the life of modern cities. Secondly, the major industrial centers, as we shall see when we examine the specific areas of occupation, remain largely silent and idle. Saar mining, Ruhr production, Berlin electric power, etc., have experienced a revival, but completely inadequate for needs. Whatever coordination existed between sectors of economy – peacetime industry, or the highly developed war planning of the Nazis – has, of course, been entirely broken. This massive breakdown really explains the paralysis of production. In general, the agricultural east has been shut off from the industrial west (despite clauses of the Potsdam Agreement), while a further breakdown exists within these two basic regions – agrarian Bavaria (Bayern) has no economic exchange with the Ruhr industrial areas; the Saar and Ruhr are in limited contact (both have no ties with eastern Silesia). Canal, river, motor and rail transportation are so slight as to further accentuate this isolation and stagnation of the separate production centers.
The results of this process, in all areas, are apparent: production of machinery, capital goods or reconstruction has virtually ceased. Consumer’s production (soap, matches, clothing and textiles, canned foods, etc.) is minute and not near 5 per cent of needs. Raw materials are not used, with the exception of coal; plant equipment rusts away, with the exception of small plants handy for occupation use. The only real production in Germany today is agricultural; it is the only real production planned for the future. Some roads have been repaired, some bridges rebuilt (if they lie along military supply lines) and rubble has been shoved on the sidewalks. The rest is paralysis. Germany’s present living standard is closely approaching that of Europe’s most devastated areas, and steadily falling. Accumulated stocks of food, clothing, tobacco have already been dispersed. Money is meaningless – there is nothing to purchase.
In many respects, the Anglo-American occupation of Germany is quite peaceful, moderate and even tolerant. There is no open “terror” against the people (this, of course, does not hold for the Russian or French zones, as we shall see below), no concentration camps, beatings, etc., to affect the civilians. The elementary, physical fears of the German have largely vanished. The bulk of the British and American forces have been withdrawn, except for the actual occupation forces. Within his city or town, the average German goes about as he pleases, except for the 5 or 6 hours of nightly curfew. He may travel about freely within the zone, with nothing but his regular identification papers. No travel permit is needed. He has his radio and some newspapers, and movies have reopened. Many elementary schools and half a dozen universities have also reopened. The soldiers walk freely about, without weapons, and mingle in quite friendly fashion with the Germans. Many Germans work alongside of the occupation troops, in bureaus, army installations, repair gangs, etc. There is little or no trouble. Political parties,’ meetings, concerts, organization of trade unions are now, by official Military Government proclamation, permitted. Even the released German war prisoners go about their business unmolested. Certainly these people have no feeling of direct “oppression,” or “fear,” in the usual sense of the word.
 
The Economic Life
It is in the sphere of economic life that Germany feels, and will continue to feel, the harshness of the punishment imposed by the Allied-Russian powers. This takes place in many ways, of which the following are most important. These methods fall into two general categories, direct seizures and expropriations; methods partially veiled in the processes of production and finance. It is well to bear in mind that the popular belief (even held by some Germans!) that the Potsdam reparation terms are lighter and “softer” than the terms of the original Versailles Treaty – that this belief is absurd. On the contrary, they are infinitely harder! This notion is based upon the fact that Potsdam reparation terms are stated in generalities, with no round, sum total figures; while Versailles terms were stated as blunt figures. The Germans are discovering their illusion.
“Static” Reparations:

Material wealth (cattle, grain supplies, stored foods, jewelry. furniture, radios, etc.) openly taken or consumed by the occupying armies. Most important, of course, in the Russian, Russian-Polish and French occupational zones.
Factory equipment (tools, machines, plans, etc.) merchant ships, locomotives and rolling stock, raw material stock piles, etc., distributed outright among the “Big Three.”
Distribution among the “Big Three” of German foreign assets (investments, raw material sources, stocks and cash).
Distribution of additional German capital goods and equipment among the 14 “small” nations who filed claims at the Small Powers Reparations Conference.
Seizure and freezing of all German funds, savings, “big industry” accounts, Nazi organizations and party member holdings and wealth. Ultimate disposition of these vast funds is unknown as yet, but will be worked into the general reparations scheme.
Devaluation of German mark and de facto liquidation of German national debt. [1]

“Productive” Reparations:
“We intend the ‘tapping’ of German production for perhaps six years.” (Mr. Pauley, American representative to Reparations Commission.)
The “victors” utilize:

The labor power of approximately 4,000,000 German prisoners of war, working in Germany and a dozen other nations, for their food. This all-European reserve pool of labor is used and shifted about at will.
The breakup and paralysis of heavy industry has thrown hundreds of thousands of prôletarians and skilled workers out of industry and, through the pressure of unemployment, forced them into the desired channels of light industry, agriculture and employment by the occupation powers.
Current production of the extractive industries (coal, iron ore, all mined raw materials) are mainly distributed among the armies of occupation, and the European nations. Except for public utility needs, Germany receives nothing.
Entire production of finished light industry products, or remnants of heavy industry, goes to occupational forces (synthetic oil and gasoline; photographic lenses and porcelain ware; films and cameras; leather goods; truck and car assembly; toys and gifts, etc.). This also consumes current commodity-material stockpiles.
German labor and German factories directly producing for the occupational forces, under their direct management (in military installations bureaus, road and engineering projects, etc.).
German payment for above production costs and costs of occupation. German labor directly employed by occupational forces is paid out of local, town, city or district funds raised by taxes, or taken from treasury surpluses. Bills and claims of factory owners, in addition to all property-damage or injury claims against the occupants, are turned over to Military Government for payment by local or higher German authority. In other words, the Germans themselves pay! When treasury funds are exhausted, frozen funds of “big industry” and Nazis will provide a further source.

Such are the realities of the occupation of Germany. When we examine the various areas of occupation we shall learn more details of this unprecedented (except by the Nazis themselves) robbery and exploitation of peoples. Its effect upon living standards is obvious. Labor rates and prices are similar to those that prevailed under the Nazi government. Yet, in effect, rates and prices in destroyed Germany are meaningless categories. The real value of the marks received for labor is determined by what they can buy. At present, and for a long period to come, purchasing power of the Germans will remain at the same dead-level, sub-standard; that is, rations to enable them to exist from day to day. Money has largely lost its meaning. Every German – “rich” or “poor” – working or unemployed – is able to draw his daily rations in exchange for his paper marks. Food received is enough to enable him to survive and continue working; his fuel is hauled from the local forest (sufficient to have heated one room during this past winter), and on rare occasions he may obtain one or more of those commodities assumed necessary for life comforts. (There is no soap, few matches, no toilet articles, no new shoes or clothing, no furniture, no luxury item.) The German rationing system is the world’s simplest, applied only to standard foods, such as bread, meat and fats. Whether one produces or not, he lives essentially the same.
 
Effect Upon the People
Such a disaster could not have overwhelmed any people, let alone a great nation of 75 millions, without the most profound political and moral effects. Beginning with Hitler’s 1933 successes in overcoming the working class parties and institutions, along with every remnant of progressive thought and action, this ideologic decline continued until it reached its low point in the apathetic collapse of the nation before the invading armies. The Nazi régime had steadily lost support in the years of its decline, but the fact remains that the German masses struck not a single blow against the régime during its greatest crisis. It is this weariness, confusion of mind and thought, social and political atomism, that has colored the whole reaction of the German people to defeat and occupation. It has meant, up till now, a continuation of the same apathy and intense individualism that prevents any formation of definite German trends.
The German bourgeois, or capitalist, where he has not been arrested or done away with, has placed himself at the disposal of the occupant and tries to retain some power through an essentially Quisling rôle. If one can speak of the German bourgeoisie as a whole, it is only in the sense of a colonial, “compradore” bourgeoisie, thoroughly subordinate to the master. The highly diversified German middle class (petty bourgeoisie) has reacted with characteristic bewilderment, but essentially seeks to find a new life within the occupation fold, with a “perspective” based upon growing differences between the master powers. That is, the petty bourgeois in the Russian area searches for a place in the new administration (or the Communist Party) while the petty bourgeois in the American zone sells his possessions and his soul to the Black Market and prays for war with Russia.
“We knew nothing; we just believed; had we only known; how we have been betrayed.” Every hope and emotion they had seen embodied in Hitler has now come home to roost, and the German petty bourgeois is filled with lamentation, remorse and self-pity. Despair is their lot, abasement their future and grovelling support to the powers-that-be is their present. Pastor Niemoller is their popular preacher; Professor Jaspers of Heidelberg their metaphysical theologian. Repentance, guilt, acceptance and subservience are their themes. But such moods cannot last long and will vanish with the first stirrings at national and revived political life.
The German Frau, the older German woman – those who are (or were) married, who have children; those past 30 and approaching middle aged – form a distinct and substantial stratum of the population. They are found in the remains of the Ruhr cities, in Berlin, in Nürnberg, Kassel, Breslau, Dresden; out on the farms and in the small villages. There are many millions of them and they have already borne the burden of the failures of the Weimar Republic, the years of war preparation and then the war itself. Now they must bear the burden of the occupation. Probably no group heretofore has undergone what these women have gone through – the years of endless labor, the struggle to keep families alive, the bombings and now the daily fight for food, winter fuel and material to patch up homes in the destroyed cities. For many of them, their men are gone forever. They are among the 4 million estimated German dead. They will never remarry, since estimates already show approximately 2½ women for every German man. They continue their lonely existence primarily for the sake of their children. All forms of work and labor are familiar to them. They are the bulk of the farm laborers; they clean the streets of the bombed cities; they participate in the slight rebuilding; they stand on the long bread lines; they go into the forests for wood and pull back the carts .... The bulk of their labor is unpaid for, except rations for themselves and their children. They are the women of Kathe Kollwitz’s famous lithographs, whom may simply say, “Mein Mann ist in Russland gefallen,” or “In Frankreich vermisst,” or “In Kriegsgefangenschaft.” [2] But they will be of major importance in any future German freedom movement.
 
The Young Generation
By German youth we do not mean any fixed category since many soldiers and young workers belong in its ranks. Nevertheless, the young German boys and girls form a distinct stratum of German society, largely based on those remnants of the systematic Hitler indoctrination, with its simple slogans and fixed prejudices. The social vacuum in which this youth lives in all zones [3] has its obvious results in the continuation and festering within the minds of German youth of these Nazi doctrines. How significant is it that the first “opposition” to the occupation comes from these demoralized young people and takes on the most reactionary, chauvinistic forms! Its main thesis is condemnation of any and all forms of fraternization between the German people and the foreign soldiers, under the leadership of ex-Gestapo and Wehrmacht officers. In the general misery that envelops the country, the new masters have failed to revive the educational system (only the first four grades of elementary school and a few theological and medical universities are open); have failed to open a professional or career outlet to the intellectual youth; have failed to create clubs, sport associations, etc.; and have failed to offer anything to the youth wandering through the cities and countryside. The most shameful moral indictment of all against the régime of occupation is, it goes without saying, what has happened to the young German girls. They have reached the lowest level, at the greatest speed. The story is too well known to need repetition, except to emphasize the fact that the many thousands of military government officers (particularly the Americans and Russians) are the guiltiest among the guilty. “The rehabilitation of German society!” The false method of resistance already employed by small sections of the German youth is a condemnation in itself of the entire occupation, but also a bad sign for the future of Germany’s liberation movement.
 
The German Veteran
Great masses of German soldiers have already been released from the prisoner of war camps. Although millions still remain, particularly in Russian and French hands, the German veteran is another distinct stratum.
He has found his way home, or to what remains of home. But many have remained in farm areas, preferring this drudging life (where food is available) to returning to ruined cities, or the Russian occupation zone .. Of all groups within Germany, the former Wehrmacht soldiery is the most difficult to penetrate or understand. The rank-and-file veterans are silent and opposed to any and all political parties, political activities and political thought. Only the former officers or army leaders have recovered to the extent of proclaiming some thought or program. This we shall consider later, but the real point is that the weary, exhausted and ragged veterans are still passing through that stage of weighing and evaluating the meaning of what has happened. As the inevitable regrouping and reorganization of German life proceeds, it is impossible to know or predict what paths these men will follow.
 
The German Workers
Much has been written of the German worker; the former Social-Democratic or Communist proletarian. American CIO and AFL labor leaders have toured the country and, basing the entire problem around the question of “growth of German trade unions,” have rendered optimistic or pessimistic reports, depending upon their eyesight. But this superficial nonsense is not confined to the liberal, or labor-bureaucratic press, unfortunately. The basic fact that there is today no German labor movement, in a political or organizational or ideologic sense, must first be grasped. The reconstituted political parties (see below) must not be confused with the tremendous task confronting the German working class – that is, wiping out the effects of Nazism within its ranks, reviving free and democratic trade unions and organizing a revolutionary, internationalist vanguard not bound by the Social-Democracy, or to Stalinism. In the February New International Comrade Johnson writes, “The German workers failed to achieve a coordinated revolt. The exact reasons for this we do not know and doubtless before very long they will tell us for themselves.” This wishful thinking belongs to the field of subjective mysticism, not clear analysis. The contention that the German working class, as a whole-that broken, ground-down, atomized and confused mass of workers now endeavoring to pull themselves to their feet – is capable of consciously analyzing its great failures and defeats simply ignores what has occurred and in no way aids the problem. Furthermore, the reasons for this failure to “revolt” are well known and have been written about for years. They are rooted in the process of fascism itself and in the nature of the war just concluded, in which the bourgeoisie succeeded, thanks primarily to the Stalinist movement, in keeping the world prôletariat sharply divided.
In a previous article we described what has happened to the German working class and the point at which it resumes its historic life. It is worth a brief repetition. The German prôletariat was mobilized and fought in the war, including its best sections (miners, steel workers, machinists, etc.), It suffered enormous casualties in dead, wounded and those who remain as prisoners. In the physical destruction of German industry, large numbers of workers were scattered about, in towns and villages, away from their factories. Most of them remain there still. They have become farm hands, along with their families; or handicraft workers. This tendency, this drop in the ranks of German prôletarians, can only increase with the application of the Potsdam agreements. Only coal, iron ore and railway workers remain in any substantial, organized numbers. The rest are engaged in light, domestic industries. As to the new unions, we shall discuss below their real nature as instruments of economic class struggle. Meanwhile, let us not place impossible tasks before this prôletariat. Its problems are on a much lower level. Those who, as Johnson apparently does, still consider Germany the “key to the European situation” are worthless counsellors to those German socialists and revolutionists who are seriously attempting to answer the problem of how to revive the German labor movement.
 
The Political Parties
But what about, we may be asked, the various political parties? Is there not an active German political life, party discussions and conventions, campaigns and elections, newspapers and platforms? As with the trade unions, which bear only a nominal resemblance to the class struggle trade unions of pre-Hitler days, the newly revived German political parties only caricature their former selves. We refer not merely to size, membership, influence and resources, but primarily to their strictly limited rôle in German life.
Since the Potsdam Conference decided that political parties may operate legally in all occupied sections, thus extending the Russian method to the Allied zone, four political parties have been organized, operate openly and participate in elections. Political contact between these parties in the various zones, at first very slight, has now increased. The four parties are:

The Liberal-Democratic Party – a small party of traditional German liberals, professionals and business men;
the Christian-Democratic Union (primarily in Bavaria) – an openly conservative party of the Catholic Church, landlords and peasant proprietors, guided by experienced civil service functionaries;
the Social-Democratic Party and
the Communist Party.

In most small towns and cities these parties have no actual organization, being confined largely to the big centers.
Formally speaking, the four parties have essentially the same program. The Communist Party works for a “united people’s Germany”; the Social-Democratic Party for “... a parliamentary-democratic Republic, with all democratic rights and freedoms for the German people” (Bayrischer Tag), and the two bourgeois parties are also “for democracy.” Formally speaking, furthermore, all parties agree on the following basic points:

Germany must accept, collaborate with and assist the Allied-Russian occupation, the Potsdam agreements and any and all additional burdens imposed upon the country.
The German people, as a whole, are “war guilty” and must accept the consequences of this “guilt.”
No drastic, radical measures of “nationalization of industry” shall be advocated; a slow evolution of the people toward a “democratic régime,” under Allied-Russian guidance.

Such is the formal basis of the present four-party agreement. It need hardly be added that not a one proposes an end to the occupation, proclaims Germany’s right of self-determination, protests against the reparations proposals, or advocates methods of economic struggle to the new German “trade unions.” Henry Morrison, in the March New International, has described in detail the politics of these parties, although we cannot accept his implied preference for the Social Democracy. The point is that not one of these parties represents anything but capitulation, humiliation and quisling subordination on the part of the German people to their present oppressors. The bourgeois parties represent the remnants of the German bourgeoisie, capable of only a “compradore” rôle in German life; the Social Democrats serve the Allied occupants as political stooges, while the Communists are, of course, the despicable quislings of the Moscow oppressors. All alike offer no hope for the nation.
The German people are well aware, of course, of the manner in which each of these parties, lacking a genuine independence and program, is tied down to one or another of the occupying powers. This explains the slight effect, or interest, their activities have upon the masses. This indifference is not due solely to the preoccupation with the problem of food and elementary survival. Since in no sense of the word do the Germans consider themselves “war guilty,” it is clear that they reject, psychologically, the spirit of meek resignation and passivity implied in the activities of the four parties. Refusing to enter the Sacred Convent of Repentant Peoples and don the Veil of Guilt, but finding no other home offered to them at present, they stand still. The four parties bore and annoy them (particularly with their newspapers). Only the old folks derive interest from this so-called party life. The youth, ex-soldiers and workers are thoroughly uninterested.
 
The SP-CP Merger Question
But one significant political issue has arisen in which there is undoubtedly widespread interest and concern. That is the effort of the Communist Party to merge with the Social Democracy, or rather, to swallow up the Social Democracy after a shotgun wedding. C.L. Sulzberger writes in the NY Times) “In the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany tremendous pressure has been brought on the Social Democrats to favor the merger with the Communists. Certain Social Democrat leaders opposing this have disappeared. Communists and pro-Communist Socialists have received special favors and rations.” The Russian military governors have even hinted at an easing of the occupation and withdrawal of large forces, provided the merger goes through shortly. On the other hand, they have bared their criminal fists by reopening old concentration camps, to house unwelcome opponents of the merger, including many who have spent years in the concentration camps of Hitler.
Such a merger would and could have only reactionary consequences, both for the possibility of independent political life and for the Russian-occupied zone. It would make firmer the totalitarian control of the Stalinists, destroy the Social Democratic party and provide Russia with an effective, quisling-like, method of maintaining its control over half of Germany even after the withdrawal of its troops. The struggle against such a merger with Stalinism [4] is the first progressive political step toward revival of an independent, class-conscious labor movement. The 2,500 delegates at the Berlin Social Democratic congress who voted 80 per cent against their leader who had proposed it were, in effect, taking the first step forward of the German working class, notwithstanding the fact that the anti-merger movement is led by Social Democrats who prefer to serve the Anglo-Americans. The Social Democratic workers are moved by a concern to maintain the independence of this movement, even if more concerned with national than class independence.
We must conclude that today, as has been the case since the 1933 capitulation of the German Communist Party before Hitler, the German working class has no political, vanguard leadership. It is a class without a representative party, and this fact must be the starting point in our analysis of how to reconstruct the German labor movement. Neither the Social-Democracy nor Stalinism; both basically committed – although to lesser degrees – to quisling rôles in German life, will serve the beaten working class of Germany. A quisling rôle means approval of national oppression arid foreign-enslavement, concretely. This fact alone is sufficient to damn them in the eyes of the prôletariat. But there are today no other working class parties to which they can turn.
 
The Zones of Occupation
In similarity of methods, the occupation forces fall into two categories – the Russians and French; the British, and Americans. In harshness, primitiveness of method and brutality, the Russian and French administrators stand closest together, although here the similarity ends. Both employed, particularly at first, the same technique of plunder, looting, raping, open confiscation of wealth and factories, living off the population and its land, etc. A report from the French zone states,
“The French administration is a definitely rightist régime. Almost the entire officer corps consists of adherents of the Vichy régime, of royalists and members of the Croix de Feu. A German Nazi is much nearer to many of them than a left-wing Frenchman. This the local Nazis understood quite well. Few of them fled. Many are leading a conspicuous existence in the smaller cities and are holding offices in the administration.”
A long trip, by the writer, through the French zone in late 1945 verified this, plus the additional fact that reconstruction (elementary repair work) has been at a minimum. The Saar district, principal French occupation area, is in a miserable state of semi-starvation and low productivity. The French occupation has well been compared with the colonial, imperial system of the Romans, with its overbearing administration of French praetors and proconsuls. It reflects the most savage form of French imperialist bourgeois spirit of revenge and expansion, and is guided by the policy of annexation of the Rhineland, Ruhr and the Saar (or as much as can be obtained with American approval). It is the frankest and most avowed of the capitalist-imperialist occupation zones.
 
Russian Occupation Policy
The methods employed by the Russians in their occupation of half of Germany are now familiar to all, and have often been described. Its barbaric and criminal character, including the forced migrations of millions, on a scale not even employed by the Nazis, has silenced all but the most blind defenders of the theory that Russia is, despite all, a “Workers’ State,” and that its seizure of enemy territories will be accompanied by popular risings and revolutionary waves. But silence, of course, explains nothing and it is more than ever incumbent upon these comrades to explain themselves and their illusions. The truth is that the greatest and most intense hatred against the occupying forces exists in the Russian zone. At every opportunity, the population (particularly the workers) demonstrate their hatred of the Russians and what they have done. The workers, at present, can only demonstrate their attitude in the trade unions, where they defeat the Stalinist candidates at each chance, and in the Social Democratic party, in the struggle against unification. In this sense, the struggle against the merger has a national character.
But what of Russian social and economic policy? Despite the totalitarian set-up in the zone, isn’t this progressive? Isn’t “socialization of industry,” destruction of Junkerdom and the bourgeoisie, etc., a step forward? Perhaps the German workers and peasants are too backward and under Nazi influence to appreciate what is being done for them! What can be wrong, then, if the Russians impose “socialism” (with all its benefits) upon them?
The theoreticians of the “Workers’ State” theory are, perhaps, toying with such treacherous concepts (else, why should they continue their silence on this question?). All the more reason to state firmly that not only does Russian occupation policy have nothing whatever in common with socialism, but it has not the slightest “progressive” content and is, on the contrary, reactionary and against every interest of the German workers and peasants.
Why do we say this? To begin with, socialism requires the elevation and expansion of the, productive forces. That is basic. Russian imperialism loots, destroys and lowers the productive forces of the occupied nation.
“Reports from the Russian occupied zone of Germany indicate that a second wave of dismantling industrial plants is under way by Soviet Military authorities, the first having taken place last summer. In the latest instance the stripping of machinery and equipment from plants for shipment to the east has concentrated especially on sugar refineries adjacent to Magdeburg, said to be the largest in the world .. Six hundred plants are said to have been marked for transfer ...” (NY Times, March 23, 1946)
When the Germans protested, they were informed that the Russians, under Potsdam, were entitled to much more and they, the Germans, should be content that the rest had not been taken! The grand total of means of production stolen, looted, destroyed and “legally” acquired under Potsdam is not known, but an authentic guess would place it at about 5.0 per cent of the total in the zone. Its social effect upon the German working, class, now deprived of their means of livelihood, is clear. Perhaps the “Workers’ State” defenders will tell us that the “progressive” nature of this imperialist robbery lies in the fact that these former private means of production now become collective in Russia!
But what of Russian land policy, what of the “socialization” of those factories and mines that remain? What of the administration being created? Is it not a fact that the historically reactionary Junker landlord class has been wiped out, along with substantial sections of the German bourgeoisie in the occupied zone? A recent report describes how a plebiscite, to be held shortly, will decide on the “nationalization” of 3,600 industrial establishments (size not given) out of an estimated 4,000 in the whole area. Coal mines in Sachsen (Saxony), textile mills, electrical works, etc., are taken from their former owners (without compensation), and turned over for control and operation by the new state apparatus. A law “promulgated by the Soviet Military Government and covering the socialization of industries” will shortly be published. 7,000 large estates, totaling 4,0000,000 acres, have been distributed to date among 270,000 peasants and share-croppers, with the process continuing. Junkerdom and capitalism are finished in Russian-occupied Germany! Is this not social revolution?
To begin with, the action of breaking up the Junker estates and dividing them among the peasantry, is not a socialist measure, but one familiar to many types of bourgeois-democratic or Bonapartist movements. (Cardenas in Mexico; Peron in Argentina, etc.) Particularly under the given circumstances in Germany today, where it is apparent that a later development toward socialist collective farming is out of the question (due to the low industrial productivity that will prevail in the zone), the whole action takes on a dubious character. “Even Communist organs have come out with the statement that 200,000 of the 270,000 new farmers have been left in the air, without the wherewithal to get going.” (NY Times, Dec. 20, 1945.) Despite the destruction of the Junker class, this action, under bureaucratic aegis, without the mobilization of the peasantry into democratic committees, with no prospects of procuring machinery and industrial products, but a distinct prospect of violent grain requisitioning, this dividing up of the large estates has little in common with the “land to the peasants” slogan of the Russian Revolution. Above all, it shows little prospect of moving along the line of more productive, collective farming.
Nationalization of industry by decree has the same non-socialist character. The exact nature and conditions of this nationalization are not known, but it has nothing in common with workers’ control, management and regulation. The whole process is imposed from above, by the Soviet military authorities, who fix wages and labor conditions, then announce production goals! The German workers do not participate in this act, and their unions – dominated by Stalinist leadership have as little to say as the unions in Russia proper. The setup is totalitarian, by decree; there is not a tinge of workers’ democracy in it. Particularly must be borne in mind the fact that the production of these nationalized industries falls into Russian hands, through outright appropriation, or commercial action. For the Russian masters, this so-called nationalization is a method of obtaining the fruits of that German industry upon which they have not yet laid their hands. That capitalism, as we know it, has been destroyed (or so limited that, in effect, it doesn’t exist) is undeniable. That a reactionary totalitarian economy, centered in a new state apparatus controlled in turn by a foreign power, has replaced it is likewise undeniable.
What is the nature of Russian-occupied Germany? It is a semi-colony of Stalinist, Russian imperialism. The phenomenon of Russian imperialism, something distinct from Anglo-American imperialism, is new to us. It is in a state of flux and development and therefore not readily describable, like the older, classic imperialisms. But it is far more than a mere system of robbing and looting capital goods, and wealth in general. Classic British imperialism, in its early days of primitive robbery and accumulation, was represented by the East India company, but soon learned that a more organized, systematic method must be adopted. The same holds true for neo-Russian imperialism. In Germany, its first stage of naked plundering is finished and it is now organizing for systematic exploitation. It is developing new methods, but obeys the general law that a state-apparatus most easy to control, and parallel to the state-apparatus at home, is the most effective of methods. The British imperialists in India had their princes, landlords and “compradore” bourgeois; the Russians have their ex-Nazi “technicians,” civil service bureaucrats and above all, their Communist Party. The methods of British imperialism flowed from the nature of British finance and industrial capitalism; the methods of Russian imperialism (strategic, economic and political in character) flow from the nature of Russian bureaucratic state collectivism. Just as the Indian masses became the slaves of foreign imperialism, so will the German workers and peasants become the slaves, under a totalitarian state system, of Russian imperialism, provided the Russians succeed in completing what they are now in process of erecting. But that process is far from complete.
HENRY JUDD

Footnotes
1. Allied Military Government and the Russians claim to have prevented inflation, rise in prices and the runaway panic of the 1920’s. By this superficial claim is meant that the entire process of inflation and drastic deflation after the last war – a process of several years’ duration – was accomplished this time by decree within a space of three months! Actually, the devaluation has been even more drastic, since middle class savings (bonds, forced governmental savings) have been entirely destroyed, and the important companies and industries that managed to revive after the uncontrolled inflation of the 20’s have this time ceased to exist! The German middle class and the small business man are infinitely more “deflated” now than at the end of their previous experience. The German mark (devalued from 2½ to three to a dollar to ten to a dollar) therefore now has 25 per cent or 33 per cent of its pre-war value.
2. “My husband was killed in Russia,” or “missing in France,” or “a prisoner of war.”
3. In the Russian zone, the Communist Party appeals to the former Hitlerjugend to join the young Communist organization; an appeal that has no political content to it but is aimed as a mere substitution of one movement for the other.
4. It is important to distinguish between the rôle or the German Communist Party In the Russian zone, and its rôle in the Allied zone. In the former it is, of course, a pure quisling, bureaucratic setup; in the Allied zone it is an opposition party, opposing the military government setup and demagogically critical of everything. But, of course, the Party functions as a united Party under centralized leadership from Berlin.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Stanley Plastrik.
 



We got a tough assignment last week. “I want the goods,” said our editor. “The UN delegates are in town today for the opening session, and you’re going out to get an exclusive on Molotov and Vishinsky.” Well, we tried to tell him it couldn’t be done, but ...
So, we set out to cover the United Nations opening day, and interview the chief delegates of Russia. We went first to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, located on ritzy Park Avenue. A formal luncheon was scheduled in the Grand Ballroom of the hotel. There had been a reception at City Hall previously, for the 1,000 odd delegates, but we didn’t bother with that angle of the opening events.
The delegates had ridden, down through Manhattan, in their motor cavalcade, to be greeted by the acting Mayor of New York. President of the Assembly, Paul-Henri Spaak – Belgium’s left-wing socialist renegade, grown remarkably fat and sleek-looking on his success – complained at the City Hall reception about the “coolness and lack of enthusiasm” on the part of New Yorkers. Seems that the Wall Street white-collar workers hadn’t dumped enough ticker tape out of the windows when he passed. Manuilsky (David), Stalin’s stooge Foreign Minister for Ukrainia, also joined in this complaint.
The entire square block surrounding the gaudy Hotel was roped off by New York’s “Finest.” Hundreds of ex-GIs, now rookie policemen, dressed in their army clothing, were placed along the lines. A crowd of curious pushed around the hotel. We had arrived in time. Shrieking sirens informed us that the motor cavalcade was approaching from downtown City Hall. Headed by the inevitable motorcycle cops, a stream of cars swept up Park Avenue and rounded the corner, headed for the hotel garages.
 
Almost, But Not Quite
And then, as the traffic halted for a moment, within an arm’s length from us, standing on the corner, was the open car of the Russian delegation. Vyshinsky and Molotov, there was no mistaking those two gentlemen. Molotov, seated on the outside, and looking like a sleek old grey rat; Vyshinsky, likewise grey, but with slits for eyes and a sneer on his face.
It took no imagination to picture these two men in the roles they have filled. One, the cynical actor and bargainer; the other, the vicious persecutor of oppositionists, the hangman of the old Russian revolutionists. So these were Russia’s chief spokesmen, two bosom friends of Joseph Stalin! Ugh!
While we were trying to decide what to do at this moment, the cavalcade continued on its way. Almost as good as an interview, we figured, but we continued on our grim assignment and plunged right into the Waldorf-Astoria! Someone was making a speech, and we barely had time to grab a peek at the menu (stuffed pheasant and liqueurs were included) before one of New York’s “Finest” had us on our way again.
The General Assembly was scheduled to open at four o’clock, somewhere out on the Flushing Meadows (ex-World’s Fair), so we took a nickel ride out on the subway. Surely Molotov and Vyshinsky would be there! Spaak was going to open up the meeting with the first bit of gab, and then President Truman – he was coming here in his “Sacred Cow” – would follow him up. Out we went to Flushing. It looked like the war was about to begin all over again. Hundreds of cops, dicks, detectives, UN policemen, ex-GI rookies were lined up all over the place. We walked out to the old swimming pool (now the UN Assembly Hall).
And there it was – this “Iron Curtain” they’ve been talking about. It’s about 12 feet high, solid as Molotov’s loyalty to Joseph Stalin, and surrounding the area as closely as Vyshinsky’s GPU surrounds a nest of oppositionists. Massive Marine guards (dressed just Mike those recruitment posters) stood at the gates. A platoon of them came hup-hupping along the path surrounding the “Iron Curtain.” A small crowd – the Public – stood forlornly about each gate. But we persevered. We had Press Cards, had we not?
Just then the President’s car, “The Missouri Mule,” came screaming up the road, and sped into the enclosure. The delegates from Manhattan’s Waldorf followed after. All vanished into the Assembly building that seemed half a mile away. Numerous New York members of the social elite, dowagers, matrons and expensively dressed executive-looking types pushed at the gates, presenting passes. We went around to the Press Gate.
The Marine Captain, flanked on one side by a UN policeman and on the other by a UN bureaucrat, looked over our Press passes. “Labor Action – what’s that?” Your reporters had one foot inside the “Iron Curtain.” The other foot never got the chance to follow. “You need special press passes around here, buddy.”
We got home in time to turn on the radio and here the final pious words of our President, his usual appeal to God for help. As usual, Truman was putting all the emphasis on all the wrong words.
 




South Africa
Joining together with other sections of the Fourth International,
the Trotskyist organization of South Africa has gone on record
favoring unification of the American movement. We quote in full a
resolution recently adopted by these comrades and forwarded to us.
We regret that the Workers International League of South Africa
has not yet achieved a full and rounded understanding of the 1939–40
fight in the Socialist Workers Party which led to the split and
formation of the Workers Party. Points one to four in their
resolution indicate that they still adhere to the version of the
Cannon majority which Trotsky unfortunately shared. The facts are not
wholly accurate and the interpretation is most unsound.
However, this difference over an interpretation of the past is of
secondary importance to the key question of unity today. It is
because of this that we find the position of our South African
comrades so welcome. Unlike the unprincipled position of the Cannon
faction of the SWP. the South Africans do not make agreement on the
causes of the 1940 split a precondition to unity today.
Their resolution follows:
Although the Workers International League is not yet
officially a section of the Fourth International, we are however
vitally interested in the discussions now proceeding in the Socialist
Workers Party on unification with the Workers Party and after
examination of all available documents and material, the Executive
Committee has taken the following stand:
1. That the Socialist Workers Party minority in 1940 was
completely unjustified in splitting from the SWP and its action dealt
a. cruel blow to the Fourth International in a time of world crisis.
In the principal ideological dispute of the Russian question we agree
with Comrade Trotsky’s characterization of Soviet Russia as a
degenerated workers state, yet worthy of unconditional defense
against imperialist aggression. We reject the WP theory of the
Russian state as being one of bureaucratic collectivism.
2. Although pointing out the petty-bourgeois nature of
the opposition in 1940 Trotsky sought to maintain the unity of the
SWP and affirmed that the ideas of the minority were compatible with
remaining inside the Fourth International.
3. Six years after the split the minority organized in
the WP has expressed its dew sire to reunite with the SWP and to take
its place in the ranks of the only world party of socialist
revolution the Fourth International. During these six years of its
independent existence, the WP has maintained a Leninist attitude to
its own ruling class-calling for the continuation of the class
struggle against American capitalism and its reactionary war.
Burnham, the chief representative of the petty-bourgeois tendency,
left the WP and other petty-bourgeois tendency, left the WP and other
bourgeois members rubbed off their petty-bourgeois dusting by coming
into close contact with the working class in the factories and army.
This can give new impetus to the fusion of the two organizations and
aid the building up of the mass Bolshevik revolutionary party for America.
4. The chief obstacle towards unity was the refusal of
the WP membership to subordinate themselves to the majority decision
inside the SWP and to abide by the principles of democratic
centralism. The move towards unity indicates a change of attitude and
readiness to accept the principle of democratic centralism and to
work as disciplined members in the carrying out of the program and
the policies of the SWP.
5. The unity of the two organizations is a progressive
step in the development of the Fourth International in America, a
pooling of revolutionary resources which we fully support. It would
also influence the International towards cohesion and give new
strength to the struggling Trotskyist groups elsewhere and serve to
discourage splits and fruitless division in the other Trotskyist groups.
6. We firmly believe that the ideas of the WP are
compatible with membership in one organization with the SWP. The SWP
has grown significantly during the war years and has brought the
ideas of Trotskyism to increasing sections of the workers. Unity with
the WP would remove a rival organization and clear up the confusion
that the present co-existence of two Trotskyist parties with similar
programs must necessarily have created in the minds of the advanced
workers of America.
7. In order to facilitate the fusion of the two parties
we support the holding of joint membership meetings, the issuing of
joint bulletins and the engaging in common action in trade unions.
elections, etc., so that a firm and lasting unity can be achieved.
8. We strongly urge the SWP majority to bring about unity
with the WP and in this way prevent any further split in the
Trotskyist ranks. We also urge its minority not to split but to
continue to work for the consolidation of all the revolutionary
forces in America.
March 13, 1946
*

India-Ceylon
A note published in the August 1946 New International regarding the position of the Ceylon section of the Fourth
International on the problem of China’s role in the Second World
War requires correction and amplification. It was not only the Ceylon
section that adopted the same position as that held by the Workers
Party in America – namely, the impermissibility of supporting
China’s war within the general confines of the world imperialist
struggle. The Bolshevik Leninist Party of India, to which the
Ceylon section is federated as its Ceylon unit, adopted the
resolution, along the political lines presented by Comrade Max Shachtman in The New International Supplement, June 1942.
Contact with the Indian section of the Fourth International, and
its unit in Ceylon, has now been re-established. We shall devote the
major part of our December issue to the problems of India today,
including the Hindu-Moslem question, the Pakistan slogan and a
theoretical document explaining the approach of the Ceylon unit to
the problem of the national revolution in their country.
The Indian party now publishes a legal paper, Spark, as
well as a theoretical magazine of high quality, The Permanent
Revolution. The Ceylon unit issues four publications, a
fortnightly newspaper in English titled Fight, and newspapers
in Singhalese, Tamil and another language of Ceylon and South India.
All these publications have legal status and a correspondingly wide
circulation. The Ceylon unit is a legally functioning organization,
while the Indian section – suppressed during the war – is slowly
achieving legal status in the nation.
Both organizations participate actively in the class struggles of
their respective countries. We hope to publish details on their work.
A split of serious proportions has taken place, immediately after the
end of the war, within the ranks of the former Lanka Sama Samaj Party
of Ceylon, resulting in the formation of the above-mentioned Ceylon
unit of the Fourth International, with a partly new and partly old
leadership. The causes and nature of the split are not yet too clear.
The former Lanka Sama Samaj Party (still functioning in Ceylon, under
the same name) undoubtedly is the stronger and more popular of the
two organizations, retaining its mass popularity among the workers
and peasants of the island. Its exact political stand on the split is
not known to us as yet. It must, however, be noted that the Lanka
Sama Samaj, although claiming to be a Trotskyist and Fourth
Internationalist party, has gone far along the road leading to
capitulation to Stalinism. It has hailed, in its press, the demagogic
activities of Russia and the Stalinist movement in behalf of the
colonies and has accepted the fatal illusion that Stalinism is
swinging toward a “revolutionary stand.” We quote from an issue
of their paper (Samasamajist, July 24, 1946) to illustrate the
extent of this trend:
“The struggle between the forces of democracy and
semi-feudal reaction in Persia is sweeping the entire country....
Britain is on the side of reaction and conservatism, whilst the
Soviet Union is encouraging the democratic and working-class forces
to organize themselves to overthrow feudal reaction and end British
imperialist domination of the land of Iran ... a phase of the
development of democratic and working class forces which are
struggling to liberate themselves.”
In general, the Lanka Sama Samaj Party leadership is permeated
with the fiction that Russia is working in behalf of the colonial
movements for national liberation.
*

France
From September 7 to September 12, the PCI (Workers’ Communist
Party) of France, French section of the Fourth International, held a
special convention for discussion of basic political questions. On
the agenda were questions of the present situation in France,
including the issue of “yes” or “no” voting in the past
referendum on the defeated French constitution, as well as the
question of support to the slogan of a “Socialist-Communist-CGT”
government. The question of the Russian state and a revolutionary
attitude toward Stalinism likewise occupied the representatives of
this major Fourth Internationalist section in Europe. In our next
issue we hope to present in detail the results of the convention, as
well as extracts from the various resolutions presented. Several
different tendencies, including one standing close to the political
line of the Workers Party, were represented at the convention. The
RCP (Revolutionary Communist Party) of England likewise held a
convention, the details of which we hope to report also.
*

Stalinism at Work
We give two examples of Stalinism at work.

It has been revealed in the Indian nationalist and
Trotskyist press, by a former leading member of the Indian Communist
Party, that the leader of that organization – a cynical scoundrel
by the name of P.C. Joshi – acted directly as a police agent and
police spy for the British government during the war. Joshi kept a
special file, giving details on nationalists and radicals, for the
benefit of the British CID (the FBI of India). The British made
ample use of it for their arrests.
 
Action, a French Stalinist literary and political
publication, has posed the question, in serious vein, whether
Kafka’s works should be burned because of their “social
pessimism.” The violent attack upon the famous expressionist
author, Franz Kafka, leaves little doubt as to the answer of these
neo-totalitarian book-burners to their own question. We hope to
report in more detail on this event, and its repercussions among
French writers and intellectuals. An anti-Stalinist tendency is
growing rapidly among French writers and supporters of the
“existentialiste” school, so important during the
movement of the French Resistance.

 



Final results in the French elections of November 10, with the exception of 15 colonial seats yet to be accounted for, reveal the following division in seats for France’s new National Assembly, the body that henceforth will govern the nation in accordance with the Constitution adopted in the October 13 referendum.



Communist Party


186 seats




Socialist Party


108 seats




Total


294 seats




MRP (Bidault-Catholic Party)


162 seats




Radical-Socialist Party


  63 seats




PRL and Gaullist Union Party


  85 seats




Total


310 seats



In terms of the popular vote, the final results were as follows:



Communist Party


  5,576,000 – 28%




Socialist Party


  3,454,000 – 18%




Total


  9,030,000 – 46%




MRP (Bidault-Catholic Party)


  5,100,000 – 26%




Radical-Socialist Party


  1,971,000 – 11%




PRL and Gaullist Union Party


  3,137,000 – 17%




Total


10,208,000 – 54%




No Decisive Shifts in Forces
From the above statistics, it is clear that as yet no final, decisive shifting of forces and opinions has taken place in France, although significant tendencies are revealed by contrasting these reports with those of previous elections. Some of these symptomatic signs are the following:

Whereas a year ago, as a result of the October elections to the Constituent Assembly, the reformist Socialist Party and the Stalinist Party – both together supported by the French working class – had a clear-cut majority in the nation, this is no longer the case. At that time, these two parties had 282 seats in the Assembly, an absolute majority, whereas today they have together 16 seats less than the necessary majority. In October of last year, these two parties counted 9,700,000 votes – again, an absolute majority of the popular vote – as against 9,000,000 today, or only 46 per cent.
 
Within the working class movement, however, the Stalinist Party has retained its support and influence. It has even grown slightly, at the expense of the Socialists. In three separate elections, the Stalinists received respectively 26 per cent, 26.2 per cent and finally 28 per cent of the vote. They also increased their popular vote from 5,100,000 to 5,300,000 and finally to 5,576,000. The Socialist Party, on the other hand, has declined steadily, losing to the Stalinists and the Catholic MRP. It has dropped from 4,600,000 to 3,454,000 (a mere 18 per cent of the popular vote) within one year, thus underscoring the severe crisis existing within that party.
 

Abstentions Indicate Rising Disgust

Today; the bourgeois, conservative and pro-capitalist parties ranging from the middleclass, Catholic-liberal party of Bidault (MRP) to the extremely reactionary, semi-fascistic PRL and Union Gaulliste, have an absolute majority, both in popular votes and seats in the new National Assembly, revealing a basic transformation in the situation since last year. Most significant of all is the sharp growth in the PRL, the reactionary center of the French bourgeoisie, army officers and pro-fascist de Gaullist supporters. This party has grown from 2,500,000 votes to 3,137,000 votes, an increase almost as great as the decline in the Socialist vote. But the fact that the vote of the MRP has remained almost constant during the course of all elections indicates that the vast French middle class is still unwilling to throw its tacit support to any violent, militaristic solution to the impasse in French politics. Thus, while the parties of the left have received definite warnings, by no means have final, clear-cut positions been taken. The ebb and flow in the French political movement is bound to continue for the next period.
 
Finally, it is worthy of (notice to point to the gradual decline in the number of those who voted. Out of 24,000,000 Frenchmen eligible to vote, only 19,071,755 voted on November 10, signifying an abstention of 21.6 per cent of the eligibles. There were 600,000 more non-voters in this election than in October of 1945; 1,150,000 more non-voters in this election than in June, 1946. This indicates an increasing disgust and disenchantment with the coalition governments and, in general, with the ability of the existing parties to grapple with the permanent crisis in French economic and social life.
 

A New Hypocritical Maneuver
With the elections completed, the most treacherous and hypocritical maneuvering has begun among the big parties (Communist Party, MRP, Socialist Party, Radical Socialist Party) for the purpose of arriving at agreement to form the new government and elect a president in January 1947. The Stalinists have clearly indicated their willingness, in their own political interests, to continue the class collaboration coalition government with the MRP and the. Socialist Party, and to even sit together with the Radical Socialists in a modernized variation of the 1936 Popular Frontist government.
These maneuvers are, of course, suitable at present to French Stalinist and Russian foreign objectives, since the present world situation does not favor any sharp break with its previous policies of stifling the militancy of the French working class. The declining Socialist Party can only serve as a broker between the Stalinists and the MRP, during the negotiations. If, however, the combined parties of the right (now wielding a clear majority) attempt to elect de Gaulle as president of France in January, then a sharp political struggle will ensue, the consequences of which cannot be seen.
In all likelihood, a coalition government, will be formed, since neither political BLOC (right or left) is by itself capable of governing France, nor is either prepared for a violent resolving of the stalemate that exists. An unstable, semi-paralyzed “government of truce” will be created, marking a continuation in the drifting, temporizing and indecisive path of French affairs.
The real stimulus to the class struggle in France will come out of the ranks of the workers who, pressed forward by the undoubted partial revival in French economic life and production, will move into action – as the postal employees already have – to achieve their economic and social demands. But will not their efforts be sabotaged by the French Stalinists who, anxious to penetrate into every crevice of government and hold France in line for continued neutrality or active support to Russian foreign policy, have hitherto put the damper on all working class struggles?
 
PCI Activity A Welcome Sign
The problem of winning the French workers away from their present support to the Stalinist Party is, obviously, the key problem to the political situation in France. The fact remains, as borne out by the elections, that the French workers persist in their support to the Communist Party. There are many, varied reasons for this – this party has become a traditional party for the French workers, “their” party; it is able to most skilfully and demagogically exploit the hopes and aspirations of the French workers; it can still pose as the party that led the anti-Nazi resistance movement; it can pin the blame for the continued difficulties in French economic life on the other coalition parties – the MRP and the Socialists – and get away with this hypocrisy; it can still appear, on necessary occasions, as the party of the Russian October Revolution, etc.
Furthermore, it must be recognized that the French working class and labor movement, thanks to years of Stalinist and reformist Socialist leadership, has to a considerable extent lost its initiative for class action along independent lines. Just as the German workers who supported the Social Democracy became lulled and corrupted by years of exclusively parliamentary life on the part of their party, so the same process of deadening of class activity and self-reliance has affected the French working class. Parliamentary maneuverism by its two major parties has certainly had its reactionary effects, despite the undoubted militancy and desire for revolutionary action that exists. The task of winning over the French proletarians is no easy, short-range prospect.
In this situation, the growth and activity of the French Trotskyist Party (PCI) is a welcome sign. Its election vote, particularly in the Paris proletarian districts (see report on page 1), is REVOLUTIONARY PROGRESS THAT WILL UNDOUBTEDLY CONTINUE. But the PCI, unfortunately in our opinion, has neither understood the nature of French Stalinism, nor has it learned how to combat it. Instead of appearing before the French workers, whom it must win to its banner, as a clear-cut, anti-Stalinist revolutionary party, the PCI made the blunder of proposing an election “deal” to the Stalinist Party. In return for withdrawing all our candidates except one, and voting for your candidates, said the leadership of the PCI to Messrs. Stalinists Thorez, Duclos, etc., will you elect our one candidate?
 
An Open Attack on Stalinism
The clear purpose of this was to expose the Communist Party, and some comrades in France claim that it helped raise the PCI vote in the Paris suburbs. Why should any French worker, who belongs to or supports the Stalinist Party, lose faith and confidence in his party when the Trotskyists stand ready to endorse it (in exchange for what will appear to workers as a parliamentary crumb)? How can the true character of the French Stalinist movement be explained by such maneuvers? Why should French workers and Socialist Party members to whom the nature of Stalinism, as the world’s most anti-revolutionary force, is first becoming clear, why should they join or support a party that proposes such “arrangements” with the CP? Instead of exposure there is confusion.
We believe a political error was committed by the PCI, but an error the implications of which are more serious than the act itself. For, while we completely support the present slogan of the French Trotskyists that the Socialist and Communist parties must break their present coalition with the capitalist parties and refuse to administer French capitalism, we consider this only a partial step on the road to unmasking Stalinism before the workers.
The PCI indicates it shares, to a considerable extent, the illusions about Stalinism that prevail among the French workers. Not by yielding either to Stalinism or these illusions .will the PCI grow as a force, but only by rejecting such vain efforts at exposure and above all, by forthright attack upon the French Stalinist Party as a non-revolutionary, totalitarian movement, despite its working class support.
 






STATEMENT OF COMMANDING OFFICER OF 572nd AAA AIR WARNING BATTALION, U.S. ZONE, GERMANY:
“Displaced Persons (DP’s) will perform those deeds and serve those interests we prefer. They will serve, prepare meals, wash dishes, floors, windows, latrines, dispose of garbage and perform other unskilled, disagreeable and toilsome tasks that we may direct. They will perform those duties to our satisfaction or we will throw them out and obtain Prisoners of War as laborers. They will not be permitted to attend the 6:30 show although there are adequate seats. They will not eat at the table with American soldiers. Girls will not enter the Enlisted Men’s Club except on Saturday evening. We are not concerned with their entertainment. We are not running a nursery. This is an army base. We are in charge and want them to know it. DP’s will receive for their basic 48 hours of service the standard wage rate of 120–150 marks a month. ($12–$15 per month – Editor.) Furthermore, we expect them to do a full day’s work in exchange for the food, clothing, shelter and considerate treatment extended them by the authorities. Tell them to take the lead out of you know where, or there will be some disagreeable changes taking place TOUT DE SUITE.”



*
In January, President Truman proposed that 3900 DP’s be admitted to the United States each month. Actually, until October, the figure admitted each month did hot reach 1,000.
*
The expression “Displaced Person” (DP) was first created by the American military authorities. It was a characteristically cold-blooded term, meant to apply to those haunted and bewildered hundreds of thousands whom the American armies drove before them as they advanced into Germany. It has already become one of the self-righteous myths of American benevolent imperialism that only this country tried to handle the DP problem in a humane way and did not treat these people as cattle. With the exception of the repatriation of the French prisoners of war – a comparatively simple problem – this is untrue.
The fact is that 2,885,000 person were repatriated from the American zone in the eight months from the war’s end to January 1946. A democratic repatriation in which these close to three millions would have been prepared for a resumption of life in their former countries, would have been economically fitted out and readjusted for future work, or would even have been given the elementary democratic right to decide whether or not they wanted to return to their native country – all this was ignored in the haste to get rid of the DP’s. Get them off our hands was American policy. As any GI witness to the events will readily relate, these victims of war and repression were herded off the American preserves and dumped onto the hands of broken-down and unstable governments.
 
The DP Problem Is Still Not Solved
Again, contrary to popular belief, the problem and tragic plight, of the DP’s is still with us: These victims of capitalist social decline occupy an important place on the agenda of the present General Assembly of the United Nations. The end of UNRRA, scheduled for January 1, 1947, demands that concrete measures be taken, but it is unlikely that the UN will provide anything but temporary continuation of the UNRRA camps and techniques. There are actually three categories of DP’s today: those still remaining in Germany who refuse to return to Russian-occupied lands; the Jewish refugees; and the whole new category of DG’s (Displaced Germans) expelled from lands long ago occupied by German settlers. Here are the latest available facts on these three categories of human beings, declared by society to be excess and unwanted:
(1) The State Department, on October 25, estimated a total of 1,000,000 DP’s in Greater Germany – 700,000 located in UNRRA DP camps; 300.000 not in camps. Half of this 1,000,000 total – 532,000 to be exact – are in the American occupied zones of Germany and Austria. The other half are scattered over the remaining zones. By far the greatest group of these – 353,000 – are Poles, the group on which the greatest pressure to return home (to Stalin’s Polish stooge regime) is now being put. Many Poles, convinced by their experience that to remain in their present state is to stagnate and sink lower, are reluctantly returning to their occupied land.
Their total possessions, aside from the clothing on their backs, are food supplies for 60 days. In addition, there are tens of thousands of homeless, hopeless peoples from other lands under Russia’s heel – Latvians, Lithuanians, Estonians, Slavs, Russians, etc. The Russian principle is, of course, that these people must be returned to their lands, to swell Stalin’s supply of available labor. The Russians state, in effect, “These are our slaves. We want them back.” With the coming collapse of UNRRA, will it be long before these people are swept up in Stalin’s labor net?
 
The Plight of Europe’s Jews
(2) UNRRA does not classify Jews as DP’s, but rather as refugees. This false distinction is doubly wrong since the bulk of DP’s are actually refugees from the Stalinist regimes of Eastern Europe, and since the Jews of Germany, Poland and White Russia are certainly displaced persons without homes or the prospect of absorption into economic-social life. The exodus of Polish Jews to the UNRRA camps is well known, and continues. During September a new peak of 28,090 refugee Jews fleeing into the American occupation zone was reported. An all-time high of 117,000 is now in the zone, hoping for a Palestinian solution to their problem. Altogether, there are 143,000 Jews in Germany and 33,000 in the Austrian UNRRA camps. One out of every five DP’s is a Jew, constituting the group next in size to the Poles. The plight of these people has often been described in Labor Action and we will not repeat it.
(3) Finally, there is the enormous, million-numbered category of the dispossessed Germans, thrown out of Russian and Polish-seized German territories (approximately 6,000,000); plus 2,377,000 Germans scheduled for expulsion from the Sudetenland; plus many more hundreds of thousands expelled from Rumania, Hungary and the Balkan countries. By June of this year, 477,000 Sudetenland Germans alone had arrived in the American zone, three-fourths of them women and children. To be more accurate, they were dumped there, much as the 6,000,000 who were driven out of their lands by the Russians and Poles.
In fact, there is little doubt that the fate of these 9,000,000 Germans – scattered at will about this defeated and economically destroyed land – constitutes, in the long run, the most extreme and greatest example of the entire problem.
At the approaching discussion on the problem of Europe’s DP’s we will again have the opportunity to see how little capitalism, along with Russian totalitarianism, has to offer in the way of hope or relief to these categories of people.
 



Every time Stalin grants an interview to some ambitious press correspondent and grunts a few cryptic answers to a few loaded questions, the leading capitalist newspapers break out in the largest size type and propose that a world, shivering in fear over the prospects of a new world war, settle down and breathe a deep sigh of relief. Premier Joseph Stalin, it would appear, is the true, authentic spokesman of Russian foreign policy and he, by contrast with spokesman Vyshinsky and Molotov, is a reasonable, peace-loving man!
Some have even gone so far as to suggest a serious split and division existing between Stalin, the Apostle of a peaceful life; and Molotov, the Apostle of international disorder and world revolution! This split, we are informed, exists within the Politburo – highest body of the Stalinist Russian dictatorship – where one group now dominates, and then another group. This dispute is supposedly the cause of the vacillations and changes in Russian foreign policy.
 
A Kindergarten Tale
Molotov is stern, adamant and pugnacious. Vyshinsky is sly, tricky and threatening. Manuilsky, the Ukrainian representative, is positively rude, revolutionary and denunciatory. He is the one who mouths all the pseudo-Marxist phrases of caustic criticism of Anglo-American imperialism. This group of Molotov, Vyshinsky and Manuilsky are the “left-wingers” in Russia. So goes this fairy-tale for kindergarten inmates – that is, American liberals.
But Stalin – there is a man of peace, desiring only to live in harmony with the external world. In his interview with Hugh Baillie on October 28, Stalin even denied any increase in tension between the United States and Russia! This reasonable man was “indifferent” toward the presence of American warships, “unconcerned” about the atomic bomb, “hopeful” about concluding a peace treaty with Germany; and, in general, a paragon of calm objectivity about every other ticklish issue. The world had good cause, so we are told, to sigh again with deep relief. Stalin had spoken and given us the “true” Russian foreign policy.
But no sooner had everyone exhaled his sigh of relief than Molotov – nasty old Molotov – spoke out again! Unbending and stiff, Molotov denounced American imperialism, insisted upon retention of the veto power, presented Russian demands in unambiguous terms. At the current meeting of the Big Four Foreign Ministers, Molotov, “The Hammer,” conducts himself with total disregard for recommendations made at the Paris Peace Conference, and refuses to budge an inch on Russian demands. Trieste, treaties with the Balkans, every other issue remains unresolved. Oh, if we only had Stalin here – then everything might be settled amicably! And bristling Colonel General Andrei A. Zhdanov had to make an aggressive, threatening speech at the Moscow celebration of the 29th anniversary of the October Revolution, while Stalin didn’t even open his mouth! Surely something is up.
 
Division of Labor
Any belief that a serious split exists in Russian foreign policy is naive beyond reason. Certainly there are differences within the top leadership as to how, by what means and methods, certain goals are to be attained – but nothing more than these passing, tactical differences can exist. All these Russian expansionist scoundrels – through Stalin – are firmly united around one another when it comes to increasing their territorial control, consolidating what they have already plundered and taken over, protecting their holdings of today.
Naturally, like any other imperialist power concerned exclusively with its own expansion at the expense of other nations and rivals, the foreign policy of Russia has its ups and downs, its changes and retreats, its maneuvers and digressions. Maneuvering about in the unsettled, chaotic world of today is a difficult, hazardous proposition.
All kinds of doors – for retreats, advances, renewals of old alignments, creation of new ones, etc. – must constantly be kept open, And so, the Russian bureaucratic rulers utilize different men for different purposes. One speaks with stern, thundering tones; another is a bargainer, ready for a “reasonable” deal at the expense of a third party. A monstrous division of labor in the field of foreign policy exists, and some people fall for this myth of “conflict” within the Russian ruling class.
 
Molotov-Byrnes
The story is a familiar one. With certain differences, Hitler and his fellow Nazis pulled the same stunts. With other differences, Truman and his fellow American imperialists attempt the same sly game. Hitler was the “hard” Nazi, aching for war and expansion. Von Ribbentrop was his mollifier, ready to cook up a peaceful settlement over a bottle of champagne. One seconded and complimented the dirty work of the other. With Russian foreign policy, the roles are slightly different, the characters speak Russian and make their deals over vodka bottles. But the similarity in hypocritical, reactionary methods and aims – for the expansion and consolidation of a socially reactionary regime at the expense of other peoples – is all too striking. Socialists reserve the same contempt for one as for the other.
Thus, Molotov the intransigent, puts forward the full program of Russian imperialism, in open conflict with Byrnes, the champion of rival American imperialism. Full mastery over Eastern Europe; plunder rights in Asia; control of the Dardanelles; penetration into the Mediterranean, etc. Stalin, master hand in the play, remains in the rear – cajoling, willing to “reason,” ready to bargain, prepared to deal with a spokesman of America. Each supplements the other; each aids the political and propagandistic preparation for what may ultimately be a war between American and Russian imperialism, for world domination.
 



A careful reading of the above article by Comrade Leder convinces me that, in effect, there are no serious differences in our respective viewpoints, but rather misunderstandings, or differences in emphasis. Leder is correct, in section VII of his article, in emphasizing the internationalist causes and aspects of the decline of the German working class movement – that is, the tragic consequences of the lack of general class solidarity with the German proletariat, and that feeling, prevalent in the German worker, that he stands alone. But aside from this, we must regretfully express our opinion that Leder either has too hastily read the articles on Germany, or that he read only the incomplete Part I, published in the May 1946 issue of The New International. We find no basis for his exaggerated polemical comments, nor for his conclusions.
“The only thing that they (the German workers) cannot become is the prediction of Henry Judd: ‘farmers and artisans’.” So remarks Comrade Leder. Is it his opinion that we prophesize that the German working class, as a whole, will become “farmers and artisans”? If so, it is a clear case of misunderstanding, obviously. Nevertheless, it remains a cold fact that large numbers (statistics unknown, naturally) of German workers have been reduced to precisely such a status in order to live; they will remain so, unless and until a serious revival in German economic life takes place. This “declassed” German worker is a familiar figure throughout Germany; I would gladly put Leder in touch with some whom I know, if he wishes.
Likewise, Leder objects to my remarks that the remnants of the German bourgeoisie, in the Western half, continues on in a subordinate capacity, a sort of “compradore bourgeoisie.” This, he says, is the “only thing that cannot happen to them ...” But what then is the nature of the German capitalists remaining all in the American, British and French zones, operating their plants within the framework permitted by the occupying power? Leder himself answers this when he writes, “The foreign overlord wants to curb the old and new industries. The struggle is mainly against foreign imperialism, with the German capitalists – insofar as they still exist – playing only a minor role.” Wherein does this differ from our description of the remnants of the German bourgeoisie, and its part in the new Germany? We do not understand.
Judd’s “predictions are utterly misleading.” Which predictions, we must inquire? These articles on Germany predicted little or nothing; they were essentially descriptive in character, and indicated the basis on which we believe a revival of the German movement can take place. Does Leder disagree with this; specifically, with Part II of the series? We think not. He writes, “In Germany today, the German proletariat feels more the loss of national freedom and oppression by foreign imperialist powers than does any other social class. It cannot make the slightest move forward without coming into conflict with the powers which have deprived the German nation of its independence and which challenge the right of the German people to exist as a nation.” Exactly, we accept every word. But we must point out how these concluding remarks contradict the tone and meaning of the opening section of his article, where his general position seems much closer to that of Comrades Ria Stone and Willie Gorman (May 1946, The New International) – that is, the position that the German proletariat is still essentially intact, capable of leading the nation today, etc. In his justified anxiety to defend the German workers against their imperialist slanderers and malicious-minded detractors, Comrade Leder has confused the issue. We will defend the German workers against any and all imperialist propaganda, but at the same time analyse objectively their actual state and capacities in the Germany of today. These two needs do not conflict.
 
“Antifa” Committees and the “Dual Power”
“Even the facts he reports are outdated, or will be within a few months.” But Leder makes this accusation without giving a single example of these “outdated facts,” with one exception that we shall mention below. What facts are wrong or outdated?
We find a terribly exaggerated misunderstanding of certain facts in Leder’s article, concerning the alleged creation of “local revolutionary governments,” established with the downfall of the Nazis. That “Antifa” committees did come into being, as the Allies overran Germany, is a well-established fact. That they were committees representing a revolutionary “dual power” is nonsense. They were spontaneously organized committees for the purpose of the orderly handing over of power to the Allied authorities – that is, ending the war. One can speculate on their potential capacity as organs of “dual power,” but this is not fact. It did not happen, nor could it have been expected, given the circumstances. Likewise, is it a fact that, as Leder writes, “The final course of the war was also modified by the fear of a revolutionary conclusion to the war?” But then, why did Roosevelt, Stalin & Company persist, up to the very end, on their “unconditional surrender” formula? They were well aware that this demand was the final prop under the Nazi war machine, the ultimate fear that prolonged the war as long as it did. Why did they not remove this slogan, if they feared revolution? The fact is that they had no such fear; every Allied document dealing with the early occupation and control of Germany (and I had the opportunity to read many long before the actual surrender) indicates the absence of such a fear. Unfortunate, no doubt, but true. Leder himself gives many indications as to why it was impossible to have such a perspective. Again, his completely understandable and justified emotional revulsion against the smug traducers of the German workers has led him afield.
Finally, there are two more personal, subjective attacks directed against me which cannot be ignored. It is unfortunate that Leder saw fit to introduce these remarks, particularly in a far from objective manner. Both are false to the core, and I deeply resent them. Their falseness can be shown to anyone willing to examine these “between the lines” remarks in their context, not in the manner in which they are presented by Leder. Thus, the entire responsibility for the demoralization of the young German girls is clearly placed upon the system of occupation. In reference to, (1) my alleged “contempt for the Germans,” it is simply inconceivable that anyone could find a single trace of this in these articles, describing one of history’s most tragically betrayed and oppressed peoples. In reference to, (2) my alleged “great contrast between Anglo-American and Russian methods of occupation,” permit me merely one quotation from the original as to any glorification of the “democratic” occupation as contrasted with the Stalinist occupation.
“Although each imperialist occupant pursues radically different methods of exploitation within its zone, all have much in common – pillage and robbery of German wealth and resources, denial of independence and meaningful democracy, imposition on great masses of an unwanted, oppressive regime.”
Or,
“... every principle, method, tactic or means employed by one and all of the four occupying powers must be cleaned off the slate.”
One of the major purposes of the articles, beyond their descriptive purposes, was to indicate that, despite the differences, the various imperialisms worked hand in glove in achieving certain common aims, that the general, overall aspects of the occupation, as affecting the mass of Germans, was essentially the same. It is almost beyond belief that any other meaning could have been established.
Finally, although we do not grasp Leder’s ideas on the question of European and German stability, and although we do not at all grasp his motivation or evidence in predicting a period of “acute crisis,” we take it for granted that any real, durable stability in Germany is out of the question, if alone for the reason that growing conflicts between the rivals exclude this. What the imperialist powers had in common is now rapidly being replaced with what they do not have in common – their mutual desires and needs to court and win Germany as a whole. This is perfectly clear, particularly since Byrnes’ Stuttgart address. The concrete consequences of this falling apart of the thieves are just beginning to be felt, and are of the utmost objective significance for the slowly reviving German working class movement. It is our intention to analyze these new trends in Germany and their results in the next, December issue of The New International, for this represents a new phase in the entire process, but certainly not disconnected from the first phase we have previously described.
HENRY JUDD

Note by ETOL
1*. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Sidney Plastrik.
 



So India is to be free! What better news could there be for those who have asked for this for many years? No fuss, no feathers, no trouble, no rioting or bloodshed – India is to be free, and it doesn’t even have to remain in the British Empire if it doesn’t care to. It’s all too wonderful for words, and we have the personal guarantee of Mr. Attlee (he’s the Prime Minister of England, you know, and a very important man) to this effect. Why, said Mr. Attlee, only last week – we know that the people of India want their independence and we’re for it! They don’t have to fight for it – here it is, just take it.
It reminds us of the time Sadsack was “invited” into the Officers’ Club. He wound up cleaning the latrine. And so with Mr. Attlee’s latest announcement to the people of India; the greatest skepticism and caution must be maintained. For 200 years blood has flowed at every attempt of the Indian people to claim their freedom. A phoney declaration doesn’t wipe out history. What is it really all about?
 
What’s the Hitch?
Are we to believe that suddenly, after fighting with violent might and main, the imperialists of Great Britain are turning loose their precious possession – the wealth, resources, labor and sweat of this nation of 400,000,000 people? And the capitalists of England – those men with their huge investments in Indian plantations, commerce, factories and mines, bank and transportation (valued at over $4 billions before the war began) – are they going to turn all this over to the people of India? You must excuse us while we politely snicker.
What has happened is basically nothing new. The British government has been approaching India for 30 years now with various offers, promises and fancy tales. Always with one eye on the outside world, in an effort to make a good impression, the British have sent missions by the score. The latest Cripps mission now in India has had many a predecessor. Always the story has been the same – so many strings were attached to the “offer” that not a one was acceptable. There is little or no reason as yet to think the present mission comes in any different spirit, or with any less strings attached to it than previous ones.
But, hasn’t Attlee gone further than other Prime Ministers ip his House of Commons statement? Didn’t he talk about complete independence this time? Let’s hold on – not quite!
He made this “offer” with the basic stipulation that all Indians and their parties must get together and agree on the form and content of a new constitution. If they don’t, or cannot, then it’s no soap. This is EXACTLY the condition laid down by every other British government. And who is to decide whether the Indians have gotten together? Why, Mr. Attlee and >his fellow Labor Government imperialists, of course.
And how convenient was the immediate response of the reactionary M.A. Jinnah, head of the Moslem League. He announced that, suddenly, the Moslem people of India had become a “nation” and would accept nothing less than a division of India in two – Hindu India and Moslem India. Without this, Mr. Jinnah threatened civil war (an old threat of his). Never before in the history of Indian nationalism has the claim been made that the Moslems of that country are a separate people and nation! The claim is false from top to bottom and further emphasizes the reactionary role of the Moslem League leadership.
 
What Is Attlee After?
But, nevertheless, isn’t it true that the British have gone further than at previous times? Aren’t they playing with fire when they broadcast such statements? Undoubtedly this is so. It reflects the increasingly difficult situation of the Empire in the post-war world. The colonies are seething with revolt; America is pressing for commercial entry into India and the Empire markets; the Russians are pressing dangerously close to the Indian lifeline. The offer of Attlee thus recognizes the gravity of the situation and is an effort to find allies for the struggle for Empire preservation.
Whom does Attlee seek as his ally? The Indian Nationalist Congress Party – that is, the political party of the Indian capitalist class. This party, led by Gandhi, Nehru and other spokesmen for Indian capitalism, is in a fine bargaining position today and will drive a hard bargain with Attlee and company. It is not at all impossible that a “deal” will be made, granting important political concessions and giving greater freedom to the Indian capitalists. If this “deal” does not come off, then Attlee will resort to the familiar argument that India is too divided internally to be given independence.
The reactionary Moslem League and its spokesmen, fearful of a deal with the Congress Party over their heads, are screaming their empty threats for this reason. At present it is too early to see the outcome of these new negotiations, but some form of agreement is very likely. In London circles, it is already rumored that the whole matter has been privately arranged and cooked up. The real aim of British imperialism now is to make a ruling bloc with the Indian capitalist and landlord class, since it recognizes that it can no longer hold India without such a bloc.
But such a deal would answer not a single one of the nation’s fundamental problems: the misery of the workers and peasants; the question of who is to own and get the benefits of the nation’s resources and industry; the question of the agrarian revolution and a democratically federated, united India, etc. It would be a mutual accord between the old imperialists and the native capitalists AGAINST the people. It would not mean real freedom.
 
What Is Real Freedom?
In the first place, what right do the British have to influence or regulate in any way whatsoever the future of India, or the nature of its new Constitution? Independence means that all outside pressures and influences are withdrawn, leaving the Indian people themselves to decide what they want.
Thus Point One in a real independence program requires the British to announce immediately that India is completely free, and to prove this by beginning the immediate withdrawal of all their troops. In a word, to carry out in practice the “Quit India” slogan.
Then there is the question of the new Constitution for India. What right do the British (who allegedly are no longer rulers of a sovereign nation) have to say what kind of a Constitution shall be written and, above all, how the body that drafts this Constitution shall be convened?
Thus Point Two in a real independence program requires the convening, by the Indian people themselves, of a freely elected Constituent Assembly, based on committees of Indian workers, peasants and middle class, and elected with everybody voting as a citizen of a Free India – not according to so-called communal, religious or caste distinctions.
The British must have nothing to do with this Constituent Assembly – either its work or the manner of its convening. This is a basic issue. Let this body decide the proper solution for the Moslem problem and other minority problems. Let this body conduct, if it is found desirable, a popular referendum among the 90,000,000 Moslem people to see whether or not they wish to organize a nation of their own. But any Constituent Assembly touched by the British is bound to be poisoned with imperialism.
And what of British property rights, privileges and wealth? What conditions are placed on this question of questions? It must all be confiscated, expropriated without a cent of compensation and returned to its rightful owners – the masses of India. In other words, real freedom requires the full, unhesitating and ruthless destruction of the whole system of colonial, imperialist exploitation set up by the British.
Is this what Attlee and his commission are offering to India? The question answers itself. India’s struggle for independence goes on. Not the Congress Party (Gandhi), nor the British government (Attlee), nor the Moslem League (Jinnah) can give India freedom.
 



What’s going on in India behind the scenes? For several weeks now, a mission from the British Cabinet has been in that independence-hungry country, negotiating with the various parties. But so far, the whole matter has been very silent, and the nature of these negotiations is a deep secret. What kind of raw deal is being cooked up?
Will the Congress Party bargain away the demand of the people for complete, unqualified, unconditional independence, without a single string attached to it? This is what the British mission would like to do. They would like to weight in advance, for their advantage, any Indian Constituent Assembly convened to write a new constitution for the country. Will the conservative Congress leaders (Gandhi, Nehru and friends) accept a constitution-making body elected according to BRITISH terms?
And what’s happening with Mr. Jinnah, so-called leader of the Moslems of India? He is talking about “civil war,” if he doesn’t get his demand for a division of India into Hindu state and Moslem state. Is there anything behind this talk, or is he just complaining, in advance, about the deal to be made at his expense?
These and many other questions cannot be answered yet, nor will they be answered until the whole story comes out of hiding to where it properly belongs – in open discussion before the 400 million Indian people, the people whose future is at stake. The program of the Indian Trotskyists sums up the real desires and aspirations of these people:

No secret deal with British imperialism; an end to secret discussions.
 
The convening of a freely-elected, democratic Constituent Assembly, for which every Indian votes, to declare India free, and draft a new Constitution.
 
The immediate withdrawal of all British and American troops, and the turning over of the country to the Indian nation.
 
The settlement of all internal differences (religious and national in character) by the Indian people themselves.

In a word, let the imperialists quit India and then keep their hands off!
 



Over half of America’s total in the combined armed forces have now been discharged, and men continue to pour out of the services. Many of these soldiers, sailors and marines have now gone back to work, either at their old or at new jobs. Despite the fact, announced by the Veterans’ Administration, that there are at present 2,500,000 unemployed veterans, it is still true that many millions of vets are back in the ranks of employed workers.
It is impossible, so quickly, to make any sweeping generalizations about the GI’s who have returned to the job. There are no definite or clear-cut ideas or trends sweeping the ranks of these millions of new workers. But certain things can be stated already. Having gone to work, since discharge, in a large auto assembly plant in Detroit – filled with returned GI veterans – my observations are strictly limited to what has been seen in this particular shop.
 
Learn in Shops
Most of the GI’s who return to work have no set or fast opinions about the labor movement and unions. It all depends on what happens to them within the shop. Although the army filled them up with anti-union propaganda, this can easily be dispelled especially since there is no longer any grounds for this type of propaganda; that is, the GI is no longer a soldier, but a veteran-worker and his viewpoint shifts. It all depends how he is handled within the shop, department or unit where he works.
When the union and his representatives approach him promptly, are friendly and helpful to him in getting readjusted to the monotony of factory work, explain what the score is and what gains the union has won for him (pay increases, job protection for veterans, better working conditions, cancellations of union initiation fees for veterans, etc.) – than the GI rapidly and swiftly becomes union-conscious and a good union man. Older, more experienced men in the shops play an important part in this, for they are the ones who, by the proper attitude, can quickly cancel out the GI’s prejudices and explain why he must be a good union man.
Many veterans are shocked, too, to learn the company’s attitude toward them. While it may hire him ahead of others, in preferential fashion, it treats the GI just the same as any other worker so far as speed-up attempts, general indifference to problems, etc., are concerned. Once in the shop, the veteran ceases to be a veteran so far as the extraction of work from him goes! He’s just the same as any other worker and, in fact, the company expects more from him, due to his youth and better physical condition. The GI soon learns that the pious phrases of praise for him from the big corporations have no meaning. Just another cog in that production wheel ...
The monotony and dullness of mass scale, divided up production weighs very heavily on the discharged veteran. Memories of Paris, Tokyo and Berlin, not to speak of battle and army life memories, contrast dimly with the routine of factory life and the 8-hours in which he must repeat his one assembly-line motion. For this reason, it isn’t strange to find a considerable turnover among GI’s in the shops. Many of them, for understandable reasons, can’t stand it. But the tendency will be for them to settle down into the routine, due to economic compulsion.
 
Will Be Pro-Union
The GI going back to work is anti-company and disillusioned. In many cases, he is also neutral on the union question, but will rapidly be pro-union provided the union is militant on the job, that its stewards and representatives carry on a fight against the speed-up and for contract enforcement. He often considers himself apart from the older workers, and the war workers, but the older plant workers are quite effective in breaking this down. Probably the real source of antagonism within the shop, and among the workers, lies between the veterans and those men who only have the war years, or less, to their credit so far as seniority is concerned.
The older men, with 10, 15 and 20 years in the shop are not worried. But those with 2 or 3 years only are worried about lay-offs, because they know that the veteran, with 3 or more years of army to his credit, may edge him out of the job when lay-offs come. This is a serious question, only answerable through the struggle for more employment and jobs, and a shorter working week.
But, on the whole, the GI returning to the production line can be counted upon to participate as a solid unionist in the great union struggles of the future.
 






[The article printed below is the first in a series of four articles dealing with the Europe of today. Succeeding articles will be concerned with England and its Labor Government; France in 1946 and “The Germanies.” In this related series, the author is not primarily concerned with descriptions of Europe’s major countries, but rather with questions of American imperialist penetration into Europe, the status and perspective of the labor movement in the Europe of 1946, and new aspects of the “national question” since the end of the war. Henry Judd has recently returned from a year and a half in Europe. – EDITORS]
 




PART I
It is almost impossible to imagine the low and sunken state of Europe as it enters the dreaded winter of 1945-46. Early snows are covering the ruined cities, concealing the rubble and dirt, but every European and every soldier who has passed through the broken Continent knows what is beneath. Soon a full year will have gone by since Europe emerged from history’s most terrible war into what Time has called “history’s most terrifying peace.” The revolutionary truism that the war has ended in name only is so apparent as to need no stressing. In terms of restrictions upon liberties and democratic rights; persecutions of minorities and national groups; the violent wrenching of masses of people from one area and their dispersion to another; the widespread employment of slave laborers – in a word, in terms of everything that made the war ultra-reactionary and hated by the simplest individual, the war continues as though the “ceasefire” order had not been heard. The cannonading and the bombing have halted, the general staffs are receding to their traditional hidden recesses, but the Continent – divided against itself as never before – rocks and heaves. The totalitarian, Bonapartist and reactionary political regimes have simply replaced the general staffs.
Chaos and disintegration are the two words that apply to Europe, and these tendencies are apparent in every aspect of Europe’s post-war life. Not merely did capitalism and imperialism devastate Europe during five and a half years of war, shattering its entire economic structure, but – and here is the main point that concerns us – it is plunging Europe as a whole toward even lower levels and has proven itself incapable of any serious recovery efforts or steps toward reconstruction. The living standards of Europe’s masses have reached an incredible low, particularly when we realize that we are dealing with the historic continental-center of social, cultural and moral progress. Country after country reveals the same pattern. The average working class, middle class or peasant family living at the subsistence edge of real hunger, with its entire energy consumed in the struggle for food, warmth, housing and clothing; a major decline in general health standards, accompanied by sharp rises in death and infant mortality rates (with the fear of mass epidemics hovering everywhere); a breaking-up of all transportation systems, means of transport and methods of communication; an overall collapse of normal forms of trading and commerce, and a throw back to primitive individual, regional and even intra-national barter methods, with the ultra-reactionary system of Black Marketing replacing the normal exchange market of traditional capitalism.
 
Declining Standards
With economic debasement and widespread misery there marches a corresponding decline in moral and ideologic standards. Each family, each individual within the family, every member of European society is thrown into the wild struggle for a share, substantial enough to survive on, of Europe’s meagre commodities and the thin trickle coming from America. Petty thievery, robbery and wholesale banditry are commonplace. Women from the most bourgeois of backgrounds, paragons of middle class prudery, step out on the road of prostitution. Only the uniform and the language of their purchasers vary. Children, maturing in an atmosphere of uncertainty, insecurity and general social paralysis, Uevelop the skills ol grubbing, pimping, stealing and flattering. Nimble fingers and sly minds are their educational heritage. The number of venereal victims and the national syphilis rates reach such heights that it is “safe to assume” that a young Polish, or Italian, or German girl is infected. As for European art and culture, its practice and expression as a living tradition is confined to London and Paris, cities that survived the worst offered by the war. In general, even the survival of bourgeois culture is threatened by the atrophy of bourgeois Europe. The importance of such a type as Louis Aragon, the rather despicable French Stalinist, in Parisian intellectual life is sufficient illustration.
Ideologically, as we shall explain in this series, the same processes of “falling-apart” and degeneration must be recognized. The Nazi method aroused and lifted to new heights all the ancient, sleeping chauvinisms and national hatreds. The Allied-Russian methods completed the break-up of European life to fantastic and fractional degrees (4-Power occupation of minute Austria; 4-Power occupation of Berlin and Vienna). Just as, in general, each individual unit of the European-national family was forced into the mad scramble for a share of his town’s, or region’s, or city’s production, so whole sections of nations (southern France, Sicily, Bavaria, etc.), and whole nations are thrown into violent antagonism with one another in the scramble for Europe’s surviving wealth and production. The various national bourgeoisies, military governments of occupation and totalitarian creations of Moscow have given freedom and full play to all centrifugal forces within the battered Continent. Now Europe is dog tired, with its factories, mines and transport wrecked by war and occupation; no raw materials to begin production again; not enough coal to build up steam; its best laborers scattered and torn away from their machines. And on both flanks, the weight of two great powers whose future and whose intentions with respect to Europe, are either unknown or, when known, are only too clear.
 
Europe: 1946
France and Belgium: lacking materials, railroad systems shattered, black markets absorbing their remaining strength and meagre production, bomb destroyed ports. France, with its devastated Normandy; Belgium with its devastated Ardennes. Spain: still under Franco, still living in the aftermath of its Civil War. Portugal: under its traditional military despot. Italy: ripped open from end to end, systematically shot up, with hungry Sicily at its toe. The Balkans: its mysteriously expanding totalitarian dictatorships, swallowing up Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Roumania. Greece: under a White Terror, reduced to hunger and cave-dwelling. Norway: salt herring as the main food and the aftermath of five years of occupation to overcome. Holland: half-drowned and dieting on American “C” rations. Central Europe: war-destroyed Poland and Hungary, and 800,000 Russian soldiers camping on a minute portion of minute Austria. Czechoslovakia: without supplies and gripped by its minority questions. And finally, rapidly outstripping all other nations in the depths to which it has sunk. Germany: cut up, dispersed, as a reality non-existent. Such is, in summary, the state of Europe, 1946.
Do we mean, then, that the situation in Europe is one of complete hopelessness, with only the blackest of perspectives? No, this is not at all our contention. On the contrary, despite these most unfavorable circumstances, the European masses have already made several important efforts to lift themselves up (the overthrow of Italian fascism, the French movement of resistance, ending in the Paris insurrection, the Belgian strike struggles), and have shown repeatedly the general direction in which their social and ideologic thought is moving (British elections, French elections, etc.). Still more important is the definite, steady and growing revival of the Fourth International movement, and its European sections. There could be no greater error than to cross off Europe as a source of revolutionary action and thought. Bleeding and groggy as it may be, the old continent is still alive, still has great natural resources and its cultural tradition to lean upon and, above all, it can look forward to the re-building of its proletarian classes, along with the labor movement. Our concern, in describing the real conditions of Europe, is with what is, not with what we would like to see. Failure to grasp these harsh realities could only result in false perspectives, with inevitable disillusion; false slogans, with inevitable failure to stir up the tendencies toward revolutionary revival; and false action. Many Marxist comrades, both in Europe and America, have already gone astray by attempting to impose upon this greatly changed Europe either their outworn formulas, or wishful fantasies of their own creation. There is a revolutionary perspective in Europe, but the real problem still is one of finding the correct road toward it and the correct method of mobilizing people to march on that road.
 
Role of US in Europe
Now, where does America and its imperialist bourgeoisie fit into this chaos of modern Europe? The illusion that America is on the verge of leaving Europe to its fate and washing its hands of the continent, fostered by the rapid withdrawal of our military forces from Europe, seems fairly widespread. Of course this idea is nonsense. Certain die-hard remnants of “isolationism” may still urge total withdrawal, but the reality is otherwise. To begin with, even the completion of redeployment by our armed forces will leave 600,000 soldiers (300,000 of them in the American zone of occupied Germany alone). This considerable force, highly armed, well trained and built around fast moving armored units, is more than sufficient to fulfill any task that American imperialism may call upon it for.
But America’s main weapons in Europe are economic in character. As the great victor power in the war, with its industrial capacity and its raw material wealth not only unharmed but greatly expanded, America is far ahead of other victor powers with respect to its bargaining strength. Our weapons are those of commerce and trade, supply of raw materials and purchase of European products, extension of loans and credits, etc. We can, in effect, determine not only the tempo of recovery and reconstruction within each nation of Europe, but we can actually determine whether that nation shall recover at alll There is not a single capitalist country of Europe today capable of lifting itself to its feet without considerable imports of coal, fuel, machinery, raw materials for its factories and extensive credits for the financing of its recapitalization needs. To whom can these nations turn for their needs? England? Stalin’s Russia, which completes the plundering and looting of capital goods begun by the Nazis? America, in this sense, wields an unprecedented whip-hand.
Although, as we shall describe later, there are contradictions in this position that prevent its attaining perfection, the general awareness of our superiority is the determining factor in American policy, behavior and attitude toward Europe. Even the common attitudes and the daily actions of the American GI toward the people of Europe can be traced back to this knowledge of imperialist superiority and domination. The American soldier (as we are. beginning to realize more and more) is generally intensely disliked in Europe. What could be more startling than the fact, clearly admitted by bourgeois journalists, that the American soldier is liked by (and, in turn, likes) the German people – the “enemy,” conquered nation – and is heartily disliked by (and, in turn, dislikes) the English, French, Belgian, etc., peoples – the “allied,” liberated nations! The politically backward and ignorant GI, particularly in France, displays that typical imperialistic arrogance associated with conqueror nations. He practices, even in small ways, that typical economic callousness associated with petty exploiters. He is a bulwark of the Black Market, one of Europe’s most sinister institutions. (Carton of cigarettes, $10.00 – cost to him, $.50; “K” ration, $1.00 – cost to him, zero; and cast-off army clothing sells for fantastic prices.)
Even Leon Trotsky’s well known warning that America aimed at destroying the European market and then placing the continent on rations, even this may be described as an understatement of the facts. Even Trotsky’s perception could not foresee the literal correctness of his: prediction – great masses of Europeans living on the tasteless “G” and “K” rations of American mechanized production; a. large percentage of Europeans dressed in the worn, cast-off clothing of American GI’s and American charity donors (black marketed to them at fancy prices). In placing Europe upon material, financial and political rations American imperialism believes it has so cornered the continent that the ultimate objectives of its policy are within range, of fulfillment. In addition to this rationing scheme, America – as we shall illustrate in this series – pursues virtually any method that will further weaken, divide and disintegrate Europe. America will, not hesitate to let loose any force that will add to the sum total of centrifugal forces which are now whirling Europe about and causing its further break-up, provided, of course, such measures fit in with our general imperialist objectives.
 
The Objectives
What are these objectives? To the thinking European individual they were most concretely expressed in the “plan” of Bernard Baruch, published some time last year. They may be summarized as follows:

To keep Europe iii a weakened and internally divided state, thus making the continent much easier to “handle.”
 
To prevent the reorganization, reconstruction and growth of such industries and exports as have, in the past, seriously interefered with American economic life; to limit and control (whenever possible) the recovery of other industries and agricultural life.
 
To halt, or block, the growth of any popular democratic, revolutionary, unifying or competing tendencies within Europe.
 
To consolidate and maintain control over the European division of the world market, as an essential step on the road to conquest of the latter.
 
To organize (through diplomatic maneuvers, blocs, power politics, etc.) Europe, in its preliminary phases, for its future participation, under American leadership, in the Third World War.

It is understood that every world power having sufficient strength left after the exhausting years of war is likewise intriguing and maneuvering in Europe. Imperialist America and Stalinist Russia are merely the leaders in this victimization of Europe’s masses, with England and France – their concrete action shaped by their particular designs and interests – following close behind. Nor dp the ruling cliques of the satellites of these great powers hesitate to fall in with the game. Conspiracies, plots and intrigues; blocs and counter-blocs; bribery and treachery; power politics and counter-politics are so rampant in the Europe of 1946 that the entire continent resembles the court life, with its atmosphere of stink and decadence, generally associated with any of the pre-war Balkan monarchies. .The territorial “Balkanization” of Europe by the victors is accompanied by a “Balkanization” of its political and social life, with the proletariat and small petty bourgeois, including the farmers and peasantry, as its victims.
 
Threat of a New War
Yet, as any European will promptly reply to his questioner, the basic trend in this maze is already clear, too clear. A Swiss newspaper iretently summarized this general view by stating that every maneuver and each effort on the part of the powers tends toward the erection of a “line of steel” down the heart of Europe. Above and “beyond” the many national boundaries that divide the masses of each nation from one another there stands the armed line that separates yesterday’s Allies from one another. Splitting Europe and its former leading-nation, Germany, almost in twain, this line has a greater significance today that the most traditional, fought-over national or geographic boundary. For the peoples of Europe it symbolizes the most frightening of their new fears – the dreaded possibility of a new, Third World War. How ironic they find it that this artificial, bristling “line of steel” – the most closely watched boundary oh the continent – should be precisely the same line where, scarcely a year ago, the enlightened Allies joyously met, supposedly to end the agonized war and begin the task of a reconstructed Europe at peace! On the western side, of this fateful line stand the Anglo-American imperialists with their satellites; on the eastern side stand the neo-Russian imperialists with their satellites. All Europe knows this and while it knows that war will not come “tomorrow,” it has nothing bin a weary hope that “tomorrow” will never come. It is against this dark background that we must list and measure the general aspect of present European problems. During the period of the war itself, the Workers Party and virtually every section bf the Fourth International concerned itself at “great length with the so-called “national question” in Europe. That question is still very much alive today, and it would be a mistake of a high order to think that the formal end of the war has abolished the question, or its prominence. Those comrades arid tRbse European sections of the International who refused to recognize any “national question,” who clung to orthodox formulae, proved to be catastrophically wrong. They deceived themselves cruelly about a coming “German revolution;” or a lasting dual power in northern Italy; their central political slogan for a unity of Europe proved to be an abstraction of abstractions; the scope and power of the French and other resistance movements caught them open-mouthed and unprepared; and, most telling proof of a false analysis and perspective, in a period of growth and upsurge they remained virtually stagnant. It seems to us that only the German refugee Marxists, of the IKD, had a consistent, thorough and understanding grasp of Europe and its needs. The “national problem of Europe” received its clearest exposition (and still does) from comrades originating in the most nationally-oppressed country of Europe today – Germany.
Let those who consider the “national question” non-existent, or resolved by the war’s end, consider the following propositions:

A whole new series of nations and vast territories have been hurled back into a state of national oppression, foreign occupation and lack of independence. Germany stands at the head of a list that includes every nation beaten down in the Russian zones of occupation and influence (the Baltic states, Poland, etc.). In these areas the problem of national independence has been re-posed in an acute and immediate sense.
 
A whole new series of small nations and weakened nations feel the presence, weight and pressure of the foreign, victor imperialisms in a manner that directly relates to their social and historic future, right down to the elementary problems of recovery and reconstruction. These nations, at whose head stands Frence, lie in the shadow area of national oppression. The Central European states (Austria, Czechoslovakia, etc.) and the Balkan states feel the Russian weight, while those of Western Europe (Belgium, Holland, etc.) feel that of combined Anglo-American imperialism. To deny the “national question” in these areas is to deny the possibility of correctly posing their future. [1]
 
Standing in the background, but conspicuously in evidence, is the general, all-European aspect of the “national question.” That is, in what manner and by what means shall the peoples of Europe, taken as an entity, free themselves from the burdensome weight of the great powers? How shall they prevent the Anglo-American bloc and the Russian bloc from further disintegrating the continent, robbing and oppressing its peoples, blocking their hopes for recovery and peace? Has not the problem long ago posed by Trotsky become, now, Europe versus America and Russia? [1*]

It goes without saying that without a definite economic revival, a setting in motion of the factory wheels, a rise in agricultural produce, a reorganization of a labor force and an organized working class, a renewal of trade and commerce, etc., it would be impossible to hope for a reconstitution of the general European labor movement, and a lifting of Europe out of its present dependency and misery. But since all these questions are in turn dependent upon Europe’s relations with the rest of the world, particularly with the victor powers, it is obvious that their solution is an organic part of the European “national question.” Naturally, individual countries may benefit from time to time due to conflicts and deliberate competition provided by the Big Three in the unfolding of their intrigues against one another. But, since the Big Three are in accord on the basic issue of a weak Europe that shall not be permitted to stand squarely upon its feet again, these episodic economic stimulations can be of only secondary importance. The economic resurrection of Europe, and therefore the solution of its “national question” can only come from the masses of Europe themselves, and the manner in which they pose and attempt to solve this same national problem.



(Part II – England – The Labor Government – will appear in the next issue of The New International.)



* * *
Footnote
1. We note the reported threat, by American imperialism, to place a coal embargo upon Switzerland. Even the most stubborn, traditional and aloof “independent” nation of Europe finds itself threatened, and thereby drawn into the general struggle. In a manner that even the Nazis did not attempt to apply to it!
* * *
Note by ETOL
1*. In the original published version there is no point 3 and this point is numbered 4.
 



Dear Comrade:
In a recent issue of Labor Action, an article by Comrade Gates on the subject of the alleged “civil war” in China refers to Yenan Province (that section of China dominated and controlled exclusively by the Chinese Stalinists) as an extension of Soviet Russia; that is, presumably, a bureaucratically collectivized territory similar to the Baltic states in Europe.
This statement, as can be verified, is not correct. In their area of China, the Stalinists have not nationalized (or even distributed) the land; they have not collectivized the slight industry that exists; nor have they expropriated the local landed gentry or bourgeoisie. They have treated their areas in much the same manner as traditional Chinese War Lords, retaining the social structure of semi- feudal, capitalist China. I refer the interested reader to a lengthy article in Science and Society, Fall 1945, pages 309 to 317, The Government of Yenan, by Yung-Ying Hsu; also, the various books of Edgar Snow on China. The Chinese Stalinists operate in a political and social “bloc” with the landowners and merchants.
Of course, this has nothing to do with the political correctness of Comrade Gate’s article, in which it was demonstrated that the “civil war” in China had nothing whatever involved in it worthy of the support of China’s workers and peasants, but it is important to understand fully what the Chinese Stalinists are up to, and how they conduct themselves even at “home.” Now that they have fully capitulated to Chiang Kai-shek on the question of the new government (even to the point of endorsing the phoney “Democratic Assembly” appointed by Chiang’s party!), and the question of a possible “civil war” has vanished, it is worth knowing that these people have not the slightest claim to any pretext of “progressiveness.”
       Comradely,
Henry Judd  

 



The long-talked of crisis has finally burst out openly in India, and that nation’s 400,000,000 people are moving into action in their demand to enforce their “Quit India” slogan upon the detested British occupants.
At the head of this movement today are the thousands of Indian sailors of the Royal Indian Navy who are, in the harbors of Bombay, Karachi and in the military centers of New Delhi and Poona, in open revolt against the British authorities. These revolting seamen are fighting for, according to reports, “swifter demobilization, pay raises, assurances regarding their economic future, as well as better food.” But it is important to note that in Bombay they have raised the Congress Party flag of freedom on their ships, after hauling down the British flag of slavery and national oppression. This proves that the struggle of the Indian seamen is highly political in character – that is, a conscious effort on their part to assume their place with the people of India. The Bombay population has understood this, for, according to reports, they have demonstrated in great masses around the besieged Castle Barracks in the city, to prove their solidarity with the sailors.
Previous naval and sailors’ revolts come immediately to mind. The famous revolt of the seamen of the Russian Czar’s Navy, headed by the crew of S.S. Potemkin; the mutiny of the German sailors at, Kiel in 1918; the revolt of the sailors at Cattaro; the French revolt in the Black Sea in 1921, etc. Each of these dramatic events heralded great mass actions on the part of oppressed peoples – the Russia revolution of 1905, the overthrow of German Kaiserism in 1919, the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It may well be that the present struggle of the Indian seamen will precipitate great struggles on the part of India’s workers and peasants.
The response of the British government has been, of course, similar to their action in Palestine, Indo-China, Indonesia, Malaya and every other section of the Empire where the colonial peoples are demanding liberation. Declare a state of “open mutiny,” rush in soldiers, tanks and airplanes, and shoot them down!
The “Labor” government of Attlee and his fellow British imperialists is well on its way to establishing the bloodiest and most reactionary reputation of all recent British governments with respect to the people of the Empire. Already, its hands are blooded with the lives of thousands of Javanese, Jews and Arabs, Indians and Indo-Chinese. If the revolt of the Indian sailors should spread, we can rest assured the British Will utilize every method of terror warfare to suppress it.
What stands behind these events? The situation in India is undoubtedly confusing in many respects, but certain things are clear. The conclusion of the war has led directly to a period of open revolt on the part of colonial people everywhere (Palestine, Indo-China, Java, etc.). This movement has now extended to India, where it is first beginning. The conclusion of the war has also resulted in great unemployment among the Indian war workers, with rising prices to offset any gains they had made. And, finally, there is the great famine threat in the cities and provinces.
The Viceroy, Viscount Wavell, has added to this threat by announcing to the people a cut in rations to a level of twelve ounces of grain per day – not even a pound of food to eat per day! (We must remember that grains are the bulk of the Indian people’s diet.) The Viceroy admitted that India is short millions of tons of food, and that mass starvation is imminent unless help comes immediately.
The people responded to this starvation proposal (“share the hunger”) by mighty demonstrations. Over 180,000 met in Cawnpore; a general protest strike was held in Allahabad, where 50,000 workers paraded through the streets. In the cities of Meerut, Calcutta, New Delhi, Bombay, etc., similar demonstrations took place. The people are obviously not prepared to accept starvation. Even Nehru, support of the conservative Gandhi in the Congress Party, has called upon the peasants of United Provinces, Madras and the Punjab to revolt rather than face hunger. “If people die of hunger,” he said, “their deaths will be avenged.” But meanwhile a continued drought in the Punjab has further worsened the food situation and its prospects. This wheat center of India is now expected to produce only half of its annual 4,000,000-ton crop.
Furthermore, there has been the whole issue of the Indian National Army to further complicate the situation. This is the army organized by the former Congress leader, Subhas Bose, who became a supporter of the Japanese. He formed the army from those Indian soldiers who had surrendered to the Japanese at Singapore and Hong Kong, demagogically distorting the desires of these soldiers to help participate in India’s freedom fight. Now many leaders and men of this Indian National Army are being tried and sentenced by reactionary British court-martial boards. This has aroused great feeling, particularly in Calcutta, where Bose was the traditional popular leader. In that city great demonstrations were held against the British, to protest these sentences. Over 45 were killed and 400 injured (including 37 American soldiers) in violent fighting. An important aspect of this affair is that the Moslem people (majority of the Calcutta population) led it, thus belying the traditional propaganda that the Moslems are “for the British” because they fear the Hindus.
Labor Action’s demand that all American troops be withdrawn from the colonies and foreign areas is right to the point now, particularly since the American Army leaders arc ready, without hesitation, to help their British “comrades” quell any nation-wide revolt. The time is here to remove every last American GI from India!
What is happening within the Indian national political front? Here the story is still vaguer, due to lack of information and press censorship. The conservative Congress leaders, still anxious for a “deal” with the British, are nevertheless aware of the demand for action that exists among the people.
Nehru, the middle-class “socialist” Congress leader, tours the country, making radical speeches and announcing to Attlee that the first requirement is “recognition and proclamation of India’s right to full independence.” But the next moment both he, Gandhi and Azad, president of the Congress, join together in statements denouncing the masses of the great cities for their violent action, offering to cooperate with the British authorities to “Solve the food crisis,” and offering themselves, finally, as mediators between the British rulers and the revolting Indian seamen.
These leaders, who run the Congress Party today, desire nothing more than a settlement, a “deal” negotiated in peace, between themselves and the Labor Government imperialists. Their last wish is to see a mass revolt of the people; they can be counted upon to do everything possible to prevent this.
In addition, there is the Moslem League, headed by M.A. Jinnah, which claims to speak, for India’s 90 million Moslems. While it cannot be denied that Moslem “communalism” and “nationalism” have grown in the last years, there is no truth whatsoever to this claim. It must be noted that at the very moment when Hindus and Moslems are participating in mass strikes and actions, side by Side, against the common British enemy, Mr. Jinnah utters dark threats about civil war between Hindu and Moslem, if independence is won. These threats sound strikingly welcome to British ears at this crucial time! The issue of Moslem-Hindu can only be settled properly AFTER the expulsion of the British.
While these political leaders and parties maneuver about, negotiate and plot against one another, the real struggle takes place in the cities and villages. Now a new Cripps mission is being prepared to leave for India shortly, to continue the endless negotiations. We freely predict it will not succeed, and India will once again bid goodbye to Mr. Cripps. For today there seems one thing on which the vast Indian masses – workers and peasants, Hindus and Moslems, students and middle class – are united. They are fed up with 200 years of British rule and determined to enforce the “Quit India” slogan.
Labor Action and the Workers Party, complete supporters of the Indian seamen and the people who stand behind them, will follow this struggle as it unrolls and do all in their power to bring the true story to the American workers.
 



The great struggle of the Indian seamen of the Royal Indian Navy has been temporarily quelled by overwhelming force, and the efforts of the Indian people to win their freedom have shifted elsewhere. The seamen have been forced to surrender and return to work, despite the efforts of the people of Bombay, Karachi and New Delhi to come to their assistance.
The revolt has received a setback, but the seamen have not been defeated – they have retreated. The strike committee has announced it would immediately renew the struggle if a single one of their comrades is punished or victimized for their actions. Meanwhile, a general strike in the harbor city of Madras, by the textile workers, took place in support of the Indian seamen, while revolts were likewise reported among soldiers of the Indian army. The struggle for India’s independence is by no means over!
But, at the same time, we must recognize the fact that never was a revolutionary struggle so betrayed and sabotaged as was the week-long revolt of the Indian seamen! The 7,000 sailors who, defying the threats and violence of the British, organized their committees of action, went out into the streets of the harbor cities and demonstrated in face of the police and British troops, these 7,000 sailors were openly sold down the river by the reactionary and conservative leaders of the Congress party and by the Moslem League.
Jinnah, leader of the Moslem League, called no rallies and made no efforts on behalf of the sailors. He stood aside and now offers his services as a lawyer for any Moslem seamen who may be tried by courts- martial! The Congress leaders – including the so-called “socialist” Nehru – went even further.
The Congress offered itself as an “intermediary” between the British and the Indian seamen, at the same time urging the sailors to surrender, go back to work, and “arbitrate” their grievances. The leaders openly condemned the demonstrations, rioting and defensive actions against British brutality on the part of the people. Addressing a crowd of 250,000 people in Bombay, Nehru condemned “last week’s anti-British rioting” and declared that the people who led the movement were “counter-revolutionaries!” What a vile slander this amounts to – the 200 to 300 sailors and workers of Bombay who died under British guns were “counter-revolutionaries,” who – to further quote this would-be Kerensky of India – “were destroying their own goal of independence.”
Instead of supporting the seamen, calling upon the Congress Party masses for demonstrations of sympathy and solidarity – in a word, anything that would help their cause – these leaders, both Congress Party and Moslem League, lined up with the British authorities and openly sabotaged the people’s struggle. This is the basic reason why the British succeeded, once more, in clamping on the lid and why they can report a return to “normality” in the cities. The Congress and Moslem leaders, of course, were particularly anxious to quiet matters because the new Cripps Mission is about due to arrive in India. Since they desire only a peaceful “solution” to the India crisis, they are anxious to have a calm, orderly atmosphere for their political negotiations.
But, as has been demonstrated innumerable times in the past, the underlying factors remain and will not permit such a compromise. The demand for independence, the great misery and poverty of the country, the hatred of the British exploiters, the threat of hunger and famine, the critical land situation, the unemployment of the tens of thousands of workers made idle by the war’s end – all these and innumerable other factors make a revival of the seamen’s mutiny and a continuation of the struggle, inevitable. The revolt of India’s 7,000 sailors will go down as a great event in India’s freedom fight.
 



“You ask me, monsieur, what the French in general think about you, the American soldier, a year after you have come to Europe? I will answer you frankly, monsieur. Nous sommes tellement deçu! (We are so disappointed.) Many of your soldiers are good fellows (braves gars), but most of you are, to us, les grands enfants et les gros egoistes (big kids and very selfish). You are now leaving Europe and we are happy to see you go. Best for Europe that it be left to itself, without you. Your soldiers understand nothing about Europe, they know nothing about France and our history. You treat the Germans too well, you keep the Nazi men in authority still. You do not punish the Germans severely enough ...
“But most of all, there is our feeling that you treat us with contempt, and look down upon us and consider us fit only to do your dirty work. Frenchmen are very proud, as you know. They consider themselves a cultured people, inferior to no one. We do not like the way your soldiers sneer at us, call us ‘frogs’ (les grenouilles) and trust us with nothing serious ...” — Told to the author by a young French worker-soldier in 1940, member of the Resistance Militia and Communist Party supporter.
In no country of Europe has the conflict between the national sentiments of the masses of people and the narrow, chauvinistic “nationalism” of the political leaders and bourgeois class so stood out as it has in France. Out of these deep French desires for national independence and freedom from foreign domination, for peace and economic reconstruction, for popular democracy and a new social order, the revived bourgeois leadership (with the indispensable aid of the French Communist and Socialist Parties) has succeeded largely in renewing the traditional blind patriotism, restoring the old relations of peasant and working class exploitation and continuing the political regime of police Bonapartism and bureaucracy. The net result of one and a half years of Allied “liberation” is that the pre-war economic, political and social crises remain, more hopeless of solution under capitalism than ever. It is worth our while to review briefly these traditional problems of France.
The general economic decline of French capitalism can be stated in the following descriptive terms:
“... that during the interim between the two wars we witness, despite certain appearances, a progressive weakening of French economy. This weakening has entailed, for French capitalism, mounting difficulties in its relations with world economy. It has entailed the breaking up of France’s monetary and financial system, as well as a fundamental trade balance disequilibrium, a disequilibrium full of the weightiest consequences for the continuation of those important sections of the French industrial apparatus depending upon import possibilities.” (La Crise Française, Essais et Documents, Editions du Pavois, 1945, pp.11, 12.)
Specifically, this weakening has taken place in the fields of industry, agriculture, foreign commerce and the monetary system. Industrially, the number of workers engaged in industry and transport grew only by 200,000 during the 30-year period between 1906 and 1936 — 7,225,000 (1906) to 7,415,000 (1936). A more basic symptom of industrial stagnation is the fact that the proportion of men in industry, out of the entire male population, which reached 44.4 per cent in 1931, dropped to 42.1 per cent in 1936 — not much above 35 per cent in 1906. The economist, Charles Bettelheim, in La Crise Française, page 15, takes the year 1913 as his industrial base line for French production. Reckoning that year’s production at 100, a maximum of 140 was reached in 1930, then a steady decline to 95 in 1938, “despite the return to France of the Alsace-Lorraine industrial regions.... The 1930 production level has never again been reached, signifying a stagnation of industrial production to a level approximating that of 1913.” (Ibid., page 15.) Despite technical advances, reconstruction of regions devastated in the First World War, etc., the greater part of French industry has remained at this low level of productivity. In 1913 France possessed 7.2 per cent of world industrial strength, in 1937 only 5.1 per cent; in 1913 French production was 14.7 per cent of European production, in 1937 it had fallen to a mere 9.3 per cent (Russia included).
 
Agriculture and Foreign Trade
In agriculture, this stagnation is not so marked. Total production increased about 10 per cent between 1913 and 1933. (Ibid., page 17.) But this contrasts poorly with yield increases registered by other European nations, due to the low technical level of French agronomy. Surplus agricultural products (wheat, beet sugar and wine) fared poorly on the international market due to their high prices in relation to those of competitive nations. Any brief trip through the French village and countryside reveals the sorry state of French agriculture: houses and buildings uncared for, roads and fences in poor shape, farming equipment badly worn, etc. The system of small-scale farming continues to drag French agriculture toward lower, unproductive levels and retains its traditional backwardness.
Most striking of all aspects of French economic decline has been that in foreign trade. Taking the year 1912 as a base equal to 100, the index of trade readied a high of 121 in 1929, then fell to 70, 82 and 95 for the years 1936, 1937 and 1938. “Thus, in 1936, the net total of French foreign trade was 30 per cent below what it was in 1912, despite the return to France of Alsace-Lorraine.” (Ibid., page 20.) Since this decline affected exports more than imports, there is an almost constant increase in the unfavorable trade balance. This deficit grew from 1½ billion francs in 1912 to 2½ billion francs in 1938, basing ourselves upon the stable gold franc. We witness
“... a progressive reduction of the nation’s purchasing power on the world market, entailing problems more and more difficult of solution so far as purchases of raw materials are concerned; raw materials particularly needed by French industry since it depends upon the world market for supplies.” (Ibid., page 24.)
The general causes behind this over-all decline in French economy are clear:

France proved to be one of the “weakest links in the economic world” and was therefore harder hit than other capitalist nations by the economic crisis culminating in the 1929 crash;
France suffers severely from a paucity of raw materials (metallurgical ores, coal, iron, oil, etc.);
France is extremely backward in its technological development, both for industry and agriculture, and
France has been burdened by monopolistic and banking formations which have limited the internal market, while simultaneously building up high tariff walls around the country.

Bettelheim summarizes this economic Malthusianism as follows:
“This action of the monopolies puts an end to the spontaneous expansion of production that, in the sphere of economic competition, results from the obligation of each producer to constantly improve his means of production so as not to be eliminated from the market. Since the beginning of the twentieth century, monopoly has progressively taken the place of competition in numerous sectors of French economic life ... limiting its production and investment to the immediate absorption possibilities of the market.” (Ibid., page 33.)
This monopolistic repression by the “200 Families” is still the principal factor weighing upon the French nation; the monopolists are as powerful as ever within the country, even if they have lost ground relative to the world market.
 
Basic Political Problems Remain
Politically, the same basic problems remain — the twin evils of government bureaucracy and the Bonapartist state. The eternal, self-perpetuating French civil service “fonctionnaires,” heads of government bureaus, manipulators and middle-men between the government and the top French bourgeois — this same crew that remained at its posts during the Vichy government interlude is still there. A minute fraction of this administrative caste has been touched by the so-called collaborationist purge of the de Gaullist government. It continues its mission of blocking, side-stepping and sabotaging whatever measures of a social character that the government may undertake, as well as weighing down France with what is undoubtedly the largest (in proportion to population), most cumbersome and antiquated bureaucracy of any nation. As for the de Gaullist state, established with Allied approval, suffice to state for the moment that it continues the Bonapartist police tradition kndwn to France since parliamentary democracy entered its permanent crisis after the First World War. The first basic acts of the neo-Bonapartist state were

to liquidate the independent militia of the Resistance movement, along with every form, or shadowy semblance of “dual state power” that arose during the early days of liberation from the Nazis; and
to insure the continuity of the state machinery (stemming directly out of the Vichy-Pétain regime), rebuild the pre-war army and police force (Garde Mobile included), with their former officers’ cadres maintained in charge.

That is, the de Gaullist “liberators” concerned themselves first and foremost with the revival of all the old institutions, bulwarks and forms of violence that were linked with the preoccupation and occupation methods of rule. We shall examine more of the “Fourth Republic’s” acts in more detail below.
And finally, the great social problems peculiar to the French nation have maintained their traditional sharpness. To begin with, the well-known problem of France’s declining birth rate and gradual depopulation (small number of youth; progressive aging of the population) is far from a possible solution. [1] The narrow backwardness of French provincial, village and rural life; the general insecurity of the city people before the dangers of unemployment, illness, old age, etc.; the very physical appearance of the cities and villages, lacking the simplest refinements of modern community living — all these testify to the acuteness of these old social problems. The recent struggle over control of the national educational system and its subsidization (l’ecole laique of the state versus l’école libre of Catholicism), with its complementary issue of separation of church and state is another instance of the tenacity with which reaction holds fast to France and refuses to let the people lift themselves out of the old ruts. The rigid hierarchization of the classes of French society into exclusive low-castes and sub-castes, so often forming the psychological basis of great French literature, has been largely untouched, even by the catastrophic events of defeat, occupation and liberation. The petty nobility, the aristocracy of the Parisian faubourgs, the cliques of bureau chiefs, the officers’ caste, the industrial and banking monopolists of the “200 Families,” the infinitesimal shadings of the petty bourgeoisie so elaborately described by Jules remains, the privileged workers’ aristocracy, the proletarians of Paris, Lyons, Lille and Clermont-Ferrand, the landlords and vineyard capitalists, the small land-holding peasant mass, the sharecroppers, the agricultural laborers. ... All classes, castes and cliques engage, as before, in an exhausting and uncreative struggle for the limited national wealth and production of a nation in decline, whose economic weakness lies at the heart of every political and social problem.
  
French War Losses
But we must examine and describe the more specific features of this long French decay and decline, as they are today. Obviously, the Six Years’ War can only have forced this downward tempo, and piled on additional burdens and hindrances. To begin with, we shall summarize the war losses of France. During four years of occupation, the Germans requisitioned, according to the French Ministry of Agriculture, eight million tons of grains and meat; 643,000 horses; 40¼ million tons of food products; nine million cubic meters of wood and lumber; one and a quarter billion liters of wines and liquors. This includes only those items officially requisitioned, exclusive of stolen goods, packages sent home by German soldiers, black market operations, etc. A plundering of France’s wealth on a mass scale! It is also estimated that the Germans imposed a total occupational cost of 1,000 billion francs ($20 billion, if we value the franc at its war value of two cents) upon the nation!
Then came the actual destruction caused by bombings and the fighting in Normandy and Southern France. The magazine, La Quatrième Internationale, summarizes this destruction as follows: 1,400 miles of railroad lines destroyed; more than 3,000 bridges blown up; about two-thirds of the nation’s locomotives and one-half the trucks destroyed; 1½ million homes damaged (of which 163,000 were entirely destroyed) as contrasted with one million in the war of 1914. The global cost of reconstruction (merely to bring the country back to its 1938 level) is estimated at 2,000 billion francs! The French merchant fleet has disappeared from the seas, while the famous fishing fleets of Brittany and Calais have dropped from a 1929 tonnage of 150,000 to 8,500 today. In October of 1945, France had 78,000 freight cars in service, a drop from a pre-war total of 434,000. In capital losses, France has suffered far beyond its losses in the First World War.
To what extent has normal production been resumed? Charles Bettelheim estimates that “industrial production at the beginning of 1945 represented only 30 to 35 per cent of 1938 production, while in agriculture there has been a considerable drop in the principal crops as well as livestock.” (Op. cit., pages 55-56.) This percentage of 1938 production has now gone up (one year later) to approximately 50 per cent, i.e., half of its pre-war total. But bearing in mind those requirements of French economic life not fulfilled by home production (e.g., prewar France only produced 60 per cent of its required coal), as well as the fact that import trade has resumed only on a minute scale, we see how desperately below normal is the country’s economic production. Actually, the situation signifies that no real national economy exists, but that economic life has been thrown back to a local (city and village), departmental and provincial basis. While it is estimated that 75 per cent of the nation’s productive capacity is still available, idle factories and machines are not solving the great struggle for national production. Le Monde (October 20, 1945) cited the great needs of French industry as follows: coal and lignite; electrical power; coke, steel and all metal ores; oil gasoline and carburants; glass, jute and textiles, etc.
But what of France’s import trade, clearly necessary for revival? Has that not resumed? We summarize a recent article by Marcel Tardy, from Le Monde:
“Can we import? Our program of imports has caused great disappointment in France. Three million two hundred thousand tons of imports planned up to September, 1945, but even this is uncertain due to shipping problems. In 1938 we imported forty-seven million tons; fifty-seven million tons in 1937. But to repair our damages we must import even more than before the war. Our import possibilities are and will remain greatly reduced for a long time. Today we are poor. What can we offer abroad in exchange for what we lack? Our agriculture barely feeds us; our luxury articles no longer exist; what remains of our credits abroad would hardly suffice for our exchange needs. Before the war, one-fourth of our imports came from continental Europe. What can a devastated Europe sell us? We need raw materials, and machines, but every other European country will keep for itself whatever it can produce. Aside from some coal and the return of some machinery and material, shattered Germany can give us nothing. North Africa and our colonies only furnished seven million tons annually before the war. They have little industrial raw materials to furnish us, aside from phosphates.”
This gloomy passage sums up the import situation, both reality and potentiality ... With an import program of $2½ billion designed for 1946, the Finance Minister further underscored this reality by remarking that France “must draw largely on foreign credits, notably in dollars, and without these credits our convalescence will drag on and we run the risk of vegetating in autarchy.” Pointed remarks directed at President Truman, who displayed his customary dull-wittedness and heard nothing.
 
The Financial Situation
And financially, how does the nation stand today? A 50 per cent devaluation of the franc has just taken place, making the franc equivalent to one miserable copper American cent! The once proud franc, with its 1913 value of approximately 23 cents, can now be purchased at 100 for the dollar (200 or more for a dollar on the black market). The sou and centime sub-divisions of the franc have disappeared from sight; worthless and meaningless. And already voices warn of a further possible devaluation. Mendes-France, former Minister of National Economy, wrote in the January 12 France-Soir: “unless France organizes a defense of the franc by internal and external recovery,” there might be a second devaluation within the year. Today in France, even after a reissue and partial confiscation of inflationary currency, there are 450 billion francs circulating, compared with 150 billion in 1939 — a tripling. The same financial madness applies to the basic question of the government’s budget deficits. This debt, which increased from 409 billion francs in 1939 to 1,000 billion francs in 1944, has been covered up to the end of 1944 in the following manner (La Quatrième Internationale, No.20-21, 1945):




30 per cent of debt paid by taxes,
47 per cent of debt paid by short-term borrowing,
23 per cent of debt paid by Bank of France advances.




In other words, the government runs at a 70 per cent deficit! Mendes-France has stated, to top the picture, that this year’s expected deficit: of 200 billion francs is, really, 300 billion francs because “the railway deficit, those of the departments and communes and the costs of liquidating lend-lease,” plus subsidies, for bread and meat, are not shown in the budget at all! But the master-minds of de Gaulle’s coalition government are not nettled by the mere addition of another 100 billion francs to their country’s debt ...
During the war, and while laboring in German enslavement, 350,000 Frenchmen lost their lives. A weakened nation like France could ill afford this loss of some of its best youth and popular leaders. The 2,000,000 who emerged out of the German wreck were in a weakened state, morally and physically. They returned to a homeland whose living standards were little superior to those of the German labor camps and prisons. Of clothing, decent housing and comforts, they found nil; a national black market sucked up the limited production and turned the best of everything over to those possessing the inflated francs of the Vichy-Nazi occupation. Food was drab, unvaried and as colorless as was the daily life, without recreation or cultural activities, except for Paris. Even the Parisian cannot find his beloved vin rouge et blanc, except on the black market! Present official rations represent, from a scientific dietary standpoint, about half the necessary minimum. The Parisian today gets about 1,750 calories average, 200 more than the German, who is admittedly on a starvation diet, and 700 below the minimum required (the American GI in Europe averages 3,500 per day). In addition, he is spending his second winter without any heat, and bread rationing at a standard lower than during the German occupation is to be resumed.
Thus we have the war consequences, heaped upon a national economy and life already in a sad state of decline. “Increased deterioration of equipment which, already antiquated before the war, has not been renovated for six years and which has been used under conditions that have not even allowed for normal maintenance; pillaging of means of production and articles of consumption by the Nazi occupants; massive destruction, notably in fixed properties; reduction in industrial and agricultural production; due to lack of labor and raw materials; lowering of living standards; aggravation of the financial and monetary situation.” (Ibid., page 53.)
 
The Governmental Crisis
The elections in October, 1945, brought about a contradictory political situation, reflected in the creation of the present coalition “Popular Front” government that rules France. The masses of people, by their overwhelming, two-thirds support to the working-class parties of France (Communist Party and Socialist Party), indicated dearly enough the nature of their political and social aspiration, as dearly as the British people had done earlier. But on the issue of a Constituent Assembly having full, untrammeled powers while drafting a new Constitution, these same masses split, with half following the line of the reformist Socialist leadership by voting real political power to be retained by the regime of de Gaulle. At the same time, the MRP (Mouvement Republicain Populaire) emerged as the new political face of de Gaulle and the French bourgeoisie he represents. François Mauriac, in the MRP paper Figaro, tells us the nature of this new political center of French reaction:
“The cliches about trusts, nationalizations and laicism are a sort of smokescreen that hides a heedless conflict in which there is no truce. We feel that what is at stake touches our very essence. It is the totalitarian spirit locked in battle with the Christian spirit in the whole world.”
Little wonder that every discredited politician, de Gaullist functionary, ex-collaborationist and the Catholic hierarchy have rallied to the MRP!
After a brief political crisis marked by the capitulation of the Communist and Socialist Parties to the General, a coalition cabinet including the three large parties was formed. The world press proclaimed the revival of living French democracy, but the new mixture refused to jell. Instead, as time approached for the general elections scheduled to be held in May of this year (under the new Constitution supposedly being drawn up by the present Constituent Assembly), the Cabinet became increasingly a battleground of the three big parties (MRP, Communist and Socialist), and the flimsy coalition rocked on its feet. De Gaulle’s position finally became untenable and he preferred to rid himself of governmental responsibility rather than risk further discredit prior to the elections.
We have already described how the historic roots of the de Gaullist regime led back, by way of Nazi-Vichy-Pétain, to the traditional regimes of decadent French capitalism and the “200 Families.” We know, likewise, the energetic consistencies of the General in resurrecting all the institutions of exploitation and oppression traditional to France (bureaucracy, police, army, courts, etc.). The Boulanger of today is out of office but not out of politics. He quietly mobilizes his forces, rebuilds and enforces his instruments of reaction, and prepares his future candidacy as the third Bonaparte seeking to strangle the not-yet born Fourth Republic.
 
Foreign Policy
Foreign policy reflects internal policy, so that we find this government strictly in line with all specific aspects and drives of traditional French imperialism. The North African colonies are held, by the same methods, as before. The nationalist uprising of the Indo-Chinese is bloodily suppressed, by tanks borrowed from the anti-colonial “lend-lease” pool of Britain, America, China and Japan. The “Socialist Youth” of Leon Blum’s party, prematurely aged young cynics, announce the undying cultural and moral debt of the Indo-Chinese people to France; the Communists call upon the North Africans to produce more food for the motherland and are silent at the behavior of their imperialist generals in Syria and Lebanon. In Europe proper, de Gaullism imposes a ferocious vengeance upon those sections of Germany turned over to it by the Allies. [2] Too weak a victor in the Allied war camp to lay outright claim to the Ruhr district of Germany, neo-French imperialism has had to be content with the badly damaged Saar coal and iron ore districts. The General has stated tersely his program of European expansionism by his reiteration of the crude slogan of the ultra-chauvinist Marshal Foch: “The Rhine must become a French river.” He thereby affirms his heritage and places himself alongside the henchmen of Allied victory, whose efforts are directed toward maintaining a divided Europe, and a high-pitched degree of racialism and nationalism. But de Gaulle has an orientation in still other directions than that of Europe. Recognizing the pivotal position of France as the only nation of Europe proper that has emerged from the war with any strength or stability left, he desires the country to become the continental leader of the Western European “bloc.” England, of course, must be the acknowledged supervisor and organizer of this “bloc,” but France can find a suitable substitution for its shattered, pre-war Versailles system in this role of subordination to England; an orientation commensurate with its weaknesses and current abilities. Furthermore, there is the question of the relations between French imperialism and America. For de Gaulle, this is of vital significance since French economy admittedly can never recover without the fullest material support from the United States. The political struggles over foreign policy proceed within this area of a strictly limited national independence, with its varying orientations of subordination to England’s future Western European “bloc,” and dependency upon American imperialism. Clearly, France has little elbow room. Leon Blum’s Social Democrats wish to point the nation toward England and its Labor Government; de Gaulle is primarily concerned with America; while the French Stalinists are violently opposed to both these orientations (particularly the former) and, naturally, can only see Stalin’s Russia. But the treaty of alliance with Russia, against Germany, is largely meaningless — since Germany is about as much a threat to either power as Leon Blum is to French capitalism — and the building of a Western European “bloc,” along with dependency upon America, are becoming harsh realities. Therefore, the French Communist Party can only tend to become more and more an opposition party — opposition in the sense that it wants to subordinate France’s national independence to Russia; while de Gaulle and the Socialists have chosen other foreign masters. But all alike are caught in the same net of imperialist entanglements. None of these parties foresees any other future for France and its people than subordination to a stronger power, one or more of the Big Three, or a bloc organized by one or more of the Big Three. It is in this sense that the problem of national freedom for the French people is still a live issue and has not vanished with the ousting of the German occupant.
  
Historic Significance of the Resistance
The broad Resistance movement sprang from the depths of the French people, as their response to the German oppression and conquest. Yet, as is well known, this movement was no abstraction. It was no mystic order of patriots bound together by a romantic idealism, but a many-sided movement, with numerous (and conflicting) trends, currents and ideas. These trends, in turn, reflected through the prism of the national freedom slogan the underlying class struggles within the national entity that is France. Those who attempted to grapple with the Resistance as though it was a unified whole made the grave error of lumping together all tendencies under the self-same heading of “patriotism,” “la Résistance Sacrée,” as was designed by the self-appointed leader, General de Gaulle. How blind it was to consider one and the same thing the de Gaullist leadership (spokesmen of French, anti-German capitalism); the Communist-Socialist leadership; the petty bourgeois leadership (best expressed in the Resistance newspapers, Franc-Tireur, Combat) and, finally, working class leadership from the pre-occupation labor movement. Obviously, only the worst political errors could be committed by those who considered the French worker, to whom national liberation meant freedom from Gestapo oppression and exploitation by German imperialism, on a par with the French bourgeois, to whom this same slogan of national liberation meant a return to a full, unshared control of his factory, property and profits.
The New International has often stated its understanding and position on the “national question” and has candidly criticized the sectarian and dogmatic attitude adopted, in theory and practice, by the European (including French) sections of the Fourth International. We shall not repeat here the arguments and material contained in these easily available articles, but we cannot resist stating our belief that the history of France, occupation and post-occupation period, confirmed our basic position of the necessity for participation in the Resistance movement, as its revolutionary wing, by the French Trotskyists, under the slogan of national liberation instead of their sectarian policy which resulted in isolation and sterility, despite their heroic sacrifices in the struggle against the Nazis.
Nor does it improve matters by reverting to the other extreme and now denying the “existence” of any Resistance movement, or calling it “a metaphysical formula.” (La Quatrième Internationale, ibid.) What is needed is an objective analysis, a study of this movement for what it was and what it remains today; a clear differentiation of its various currents and ideas; a recognition of errors committed by its supporters and abstainers — in order words, an historic evaluation. Nor are we proposing an interesting but abstract lesson in history. We have already tried to make clear (in Part I) our opinion that the “national question,” while it has shifted its ground, emphasis and specific relations of forces, still retains its vital urgency and importance for Europe. It is time for the European revolutionists, now emerging from their most difficult period, to recognize this. Neither “metaphysical formula” nor a Gallic shrug of the shoulders, but analysis and estimation ...
 
Assembly in Impasse
What of the present Constituent Assembly, parliamentary (that is, cretin-like) expression of the decline and break-up of the Resistance movement? What a pitiful contrast this body makes with the classic Assemblies of revolutionary France, when live issues were debated and real social forces contended with one another for popular support! It bears a far greater resemblance to the impotent and multi-divided parliament that led France to disaster in the war; its show of unanimity on secondary measures is shattered by its utter division on basic questions of framing the new Constitution, the question of the army and military credits, the question of division of power between the Bonapartist pretender de Gaulle and the Assembly itself, the question of foreign affairs and orientation, the question of just how to revive French economic life, the question of the colonies and Empire, etc., etc. The Assembly, elected in October, 1945, and meeting since November (3 months) has made little progress on the problem for which it was ostensibly elected — the drawing up of a new Constitution for the Fourth Republic, and the preparation of the general elections to be held under the new Constitution in May of this year. During its brief career, this “supreme body of the French nation” has idly watched a worsening of France’s food situation to an extent that has brought the nation’s diet to levels never known during the worst days of Nazi occupation. Even the program of “nationalization,” in the style of the British Labor government, proposed by the Socialist and Communist parties have not been advanced (yet these two parties have a clear majority in the Assembly). The one important social measure adopted has been the alleged nationalization of the Bank of France. Shares in the nationalized Bank are being exchanged for “dividend-bearing instruments” yielding 2 per cent annually, to be bought back later by the government; the new National Council of Credit (to direct banking and credit) is composed of representatives of industry, business, finance and the former Governor of the Bank of France, with the inevitable handful of labor representatives thrown in. The measure no more breaks the financial hold of the “200 Families” on the national economy than did the similar measure in England.
In summary then, the Constituent Assembly — while reflecting the vague and generalized aspirations of the people by the very fact that the left-wing parties constitute its overwhelming membership — is a dangerous failure. It has opened up no new and independent paths, but has limited itself to being a pliant tool of the various political parties and a rather revolting spectacle of petty chicanery and maneuvering; “politics” in its pettiest sense. It has proven itself inescapable of fundamental solutions and has, therefore, contributed in its own way to a prolongation of the decay and decline which has so deeply permeated every pore of French life.
Most important of all, the atmosphere of disillusion, incapacity and helplessness which such an Assembly spreads provides the perfect yellow fog in which a militarist-Bonapartist candidate, à la de Gaulle, can plot and build his reactionary cadres for an attack upon the revived French labor and revolutionary movement. Nobody will dare predict when and in what form a right wing coup will be attempted, but it is absolutely inevitable. Under the slogan of “down with the Assembly-Parliament of do-nothing talkers; up with the National Hero of Action,” the Bonapartist apostle will attempt to accomplish what the German conqueror failed in. It is in light of this that one must follow the new activities of the French Fourth Internationalists (PCI) as they stubbornly but surely attempt to emerge from their semi-illegal status, and advance their political ideas in the light of full, open public life. [3] More than one encouraging sign (election vote, growth, recruitment among Communists, etc.) exists to indicate that the trend of revolutionary opinion is moving toward this party which, despite our open differences with it, commands our respect for its courage under the Nazi occupation and its vigorous efforts to gain influence among the people. It has bright possibilities to become an important factor in France, to lead the struggle against de Gaullist coup d’état attempts.
January 1946
 
Footnotes
1. For a brilliant theoretical study of the Marxian approach to the problem of population, we refer the reader to the essay, L’enfant et le Titre de Rente by Pierre Bessaignet, contained In La Crime Française, Editions du Pavels, Paris, page 153.
2. Part IV of this series will contain a description of French occupational methods.
3. Let it never be forgotten that André Malraux. the de Gaullist Minister of Public Information who has till this day denied the quest of the Trotskyists to publish their pape, La Verité, legally, is the same André Malraux who authored Man’s Fate and Man’s Hope! Bleak indeed would France’s hope and fate be if such a type’s influence were to remain decisive.
 



The American Army now numbers 1,550,000 men in uniform. Approximately one-half of the armed forces (704,000) remain in the United States. Over 800,000 American soldiers are still overseas:

There are 346,000 men still in Europe, with 300,000 of them in the occupation of Germany.
 
There are 438,000 men still in the Pacific areas, with most of them stationed in Japan.
 
There are 40,000 men stationed in Caribbean bases, plus 22,000 up in Alaska.

Some 800,000-odd American boys, scattered over Europe and the Pacific; 1,550,000 soldiers altogether, to cost $8 billion for upkeep and expenses during 1946. Such are the basic facts of the American Army today, according to the United States News, May 1946. What is the story, in its smaller, more human terms? Here is the story of Erika Krebs and Robert E. Flannigan:
*
Her name is Erika Krebs, blond, rather plump and pretty, and 21. She comes from the completely flattened city of Nuremberg, Germany. Now she is living in an American-run German prison and will doubtless remain there the rest of her natural life.
His name was Robert E. Flannigan, a sergeant. He came from the quiet and conservative American city of Peoria, Ill. Now he is six feet underground, in an American cemetery in Germany, and will doubtless remain there for the rest of time.
Erika Krebs would undoubtedly also be resting underground today, with a garrotted neck or a few bullet holes through her body, were it not for the fact that she is pregnant. For Erika was found guilty of murdering Sergeant Flannigan of Peoria, with his .45 revolver. Within a few months she will give birth to a child, an offspring of German-American relations; a fruit of the occupation of one-third of Germany by 300,000 American youth.
 
Tragedies Bred by System
At first, the stupendous brains of our military leaders forbade fraternization in any form. GI’s, hardened and calloused in battle, “fraternized” in their own way, with the aid of pistols, bayonets and threats. The writer knows of men, tried and convicted for rape and criminal assault, who, among other counts, were indicted on the charge of “fraternization”! The military mind decided that rape likewise constituted a violation of the non-fraternization law! This system didn’t last long and met its finish a year ago.
But what system replaced it? Remember that hundreds of thousands of young American boys now live under this system, from one to two years, during part of the formative period of their lives. It isn’t exactly a minor matter. Their experiences and observations will have their effects upon them. It is a system of reactionary, imperialist occupation of a foreign country, based ultimately on superior force, and wrong in every respect. It is a system that the American people would surely oppose, provided they knew enough about it and had the opportunity to express their opinion. It is a system that breeds such tragedies as the one we have outlined, that creates cheap and sordid relationships between men and women, that spreads disease and vileness everywhere. It is the system forever associated with an unwanted occupation.
 
Whole Set-Up Is Poisoned
Amid the ruins and wreckage of one-third of Germany – an agricultural area of great beauty, with several large but destroyed cities – are living 300,000 American youth. Contrasted with the poverty of those about them, they form oases of wealth, security and comfort. They have all the symbols of wealth. Cigarettes, symbol of physical comfort; coffee and food, symbols of nourishment; chocolate bars, now symbol of sex. They have all the symbols of power. Tanks on the ground, airplanes in the air, carbine on the shoulder, pistol on the hip. They are masters over approximately 16,000,000 Germans – one GI for each 533 German men, women and children. What they do is the law; they cannot be arrested or tried by any German tribunal. Who believes that these 300,000 American boys – mostly just out of high school, green and inexperienced, unmarried kids who never even had the battle experience associated with war – who will believe that they are not affected by the situation? That is, that a process of moral and emotional corruption and, decay does not begin its work? It would be fantastic to expect otherwise.
What happens? Black markets, frauleins, “housekeeping,” arrogance and swaggering, sordid situations and, often, personal tragedies. It is inevitable. The whole set-up is poisoned to begin with and poisons everything related to it.
Is it difficult to imagine what happened in the case we have mentioned? Erika Krebs. 21 now, was eight years old when Hitler took control of her. Her middle class Munich family joined the Nazis out of expediency, and Erika learned a few simple, wrong “ideas” from her weekly meetings, as a member of the Hitlermaedel organization. Hitler died, Germany collapsed and Erika’s “ideas” went with them. A single idea came into her mind – to have a good time with the “Amis,” to make up for all the unpleasant war years. To smoke, eat chocolate and fool around. Robert Flannigan, American sergeant, came along and was agreeable. He was running this conquered country, and he enjoyed the servile willingness with which people listened to him and made way for him. He enjoyed being with his fraulein, but he wasn’t serious – he was also fooling around.
The time came for him to be shipped home and discharged, but Erika Krebs was pregnant. With everyone around him, particularly his officers, setting the example, that didn’t bother him. He prepared to leave. The rest we know about. So, a family in Munich lost its daughter; a family in Peoria lost its son; and the world will have another illegitimate child, born in a nation itself regarded as “illegitimate” by its occupiers.
This is how the imperialist occupation of Germany works out, not in political terms, but in simple personal terms. The sooner it is ended, the sooner the 300,000 American youth are brought home and withdrawn. the better for them and the better for the German people.
 



The firing of Henry Wallace by President Truman has not, and will not, bring an end to the case of Mr. Wallace. The issues stirred up are basic and the consequences may be immense for the future of American history. The floundering tactics of the Little Man in the White House have settled nothing. It is our business to ask, and clearly answer, the question – what does Henry R. Wallace represent, what does he want, how do we differ from him?
Wallace is 100 per cent correct in his posing of the essential issue – war or peace: “... an atomic war which will undoubtedly be directed primarily against civilian populations and may well mean the end of modern civilization.” In these words Wallace stated his case in his now famous July 23 letter to President Truman.
This letter of Wallace is by itself a damning indictment of the Truman administration and its preparation for another World War. Every word of accusation published heretofore in Labor Action blasting American imperialism and its plans for world conquest are confirmed by Wallace. And who is Wallace? A former vice-president who came within an inch of being president; a leading figure and spokesman in the Democratic Party, the nation’s ruling political party; an exmember of the administration’s cabinet. Listen to his description of the plans his Party has in store for us:
“For the next fiscal year and for the year immediately ahead by far the largest category of federal spending is the national defense ... These items total $28,000,000,000, or about 80 per cent of the total recommended expenditures.”
“... $13,000,000,000 for the War and Navy Departments, the Bikini tests of the atomic bomb and continued production of bombs, the plan to arm Latin America with our weapons, production of R-29s and planned production of B-36s and the effort to secure air bases spread over half the globe from which the other half of the globe can be bombed. I cannot but feel that these actions must make it look to the rest of the world, as if we were only paying lip service to peace at the conference table.”
In the light of such revelations by a leading government official, is it any wonder that the press of America demanded the head, blood and innards of Wallace? But Wallace has not finished his indictment. Pointing out that the “atomic race (which) is on in deadly earnest,” “will inevitably result in a neurotic, fear-ridden, itching-trigger psychology in all the peoples of the world,” Wallace concludes his description of Truman’s deliberate preparations for war by claiming that, in Washington,
“There is a school of military thinking which recognizes these facts ... This school of thought therefore advocates a ‘preventive war,’ an attack on Russia now before Russia has atomic bombs.”
Wallace does not state that Truman belongs to this school. But he clearly implies that Truman’s differences with this school are merely a matter of tactics. And there we have as clear-cut an indictment of the Washington government as any revolutionary paper could ever publish!
 
Wallace Is Aware of Public Fears
As one of the last representatives of Roosevelt “New Dealism,” as a leader of the Democratic Party’s increasingly feeble left-wing section, Wallace’s ear is far more sharply attuned to popular sentiment and opinion than that of the President. The murmurs of the vast American middle-class, the small farmers and merchants, and the CIO and AFL workers reach Wallace, while Truman straddles and surrenders to the more powerful sections of big business. Wallace knows, in this sense, what is going on. He knows, in his own words, that there is a “growing feeling among the American people that another war is coming ...” It is just because Wallace has given voice to these vague, uneasy fears that he is of such importance, not as Wallace the individual. In its shrill attacks upon him, the monopolist press of the country has only displayed its intense desire to smash, in advance, any effort to explain to the American people upon what path we are now treading, even if this explanation is only partial and covered up, as in the case of Wallace. Wallace also speaks for many industrialists who fear the consequences of an early drift into war. The very violence with which Byrnes has been defended should be enough to prove the basic validity of the Wallace accusations. But having, made his accusations, where does Mr. Wallace stand?
“I believe,” writes Wallace, “that for the United States and Russia to live together in peace is the most important single problem facing the world today.” Let us grant, for the moment, the truth of this statement. Although we would not describe the “most important single problem” in exactly these terms, such a statement is sufficiently based on truth for our purposes. Russia and America are today the two dominant world powers. A war between them would obviously be disastrous for the world, as well as for themselves. Therefore, the issue of peace is vital enough. But how to get it, how to assure it, how to guarantee it? Here is what Wallace, so keenly conscious of the drift toward World War III, proposes:

A free hand to Russia, “to develop a security zone,” in Eastern and Middle Europe; in exchange for our free hand to develop “military power and air bases” in Greenland, Okinawa and many other places.
 
A satisfactory “deal” with Russia on the issue of atomic bombs and, atomic energy, with the abolition of the Baruch-Truman demand that Russia abandon its “veto” powers on atomic control issues.
 
The ending of the present alliance with Britain, directed against Russian expansion; the abandonment of Truman’s efforts to halt this “security” expansion, and the liquidation of all efforts by America to encircle Russian territory.
 
A clear division of the world into separate poaching preserves; one delineated for Russia, the other for America. “... we have no more business in the political affairs of Eastern Europe than Russia has in the political affairs of Latin America, Western Europe and the United States.”
 
A policy of doing business with Russia, based on substantial commerce and trade, bolstered up by long-term loans to Stalin. This is the cement with which Wallace, as a business man, would firmly hold together his Russian-American world alliance, or MODUS VIVENDI.

The above is the heart of what Wallace proposes. He is against the Truman foreign policy since it is a war policy; this is his foreign policy on the basis of which he can conceivably become a Presidential candidate, appealing to the widespread anti-war sentiment of the American people.
 
Two Imperialist Policies
That Labor Action is against the Truman policy – a policy of overt imperialism and war preparation – every reader knows. We are just as categorically opposed to the Wallace policy. Our opposition is based upon many factors, including (1) its meaning and consequences, by and of itself; (2) its false illusions and dangerous implications to the development of the American labor and political scene and (3) our belief as to its absolute inability to halt the war that approaches between America and Russia. Therefore, as much as we appreciate the confirmation by Wallace as to our analysis of Truman and his government, we cannot but state that the program of Wallace is, in its own way, every bit as reactionary, imperialist and wrong. Labor Action must return to this theme again and again – it will become one of the major issues in American political development. Let us here indicate, only briefly, our basic opposition to Wallace and his tendency.
The term “appeasement” is used, by the Truman-Byrnes supporters, to describe the Wallace plan. This largely meaningless term would imply that Wallace deliberately and willingly wants to turn everything over to Russia and Stalin, to prevent war. The terms of the Wallace plan quoted above show how ridiculous this is – the division isn’t between “appeasers” and “resistors,” it is between those of the American capitalist, imperialist class who differ as to HOW to accomplish their ends. Byrnes proposes one way; Wallace another – his plans are those of the more cautious-minded, slower and less grasping section of the ruling class; those not so distantly removed from the people in the monopolist-Big Business stratosphere of Truman. The Wallace tactics and strategy are merely, in this respect, different methods of achieving results – domination of Latin America, domination of Western Europe and joint world administration by Russia and the United States. Wallace, let us never forget, is an outspoken advocate of capitalism, expansionism and division of world markets. His BRAND, not his content, is different.
Furthermore, Wallace represents a great danger for the American working class in that he may attempt to forestall the creation of America’s great need – an independent working class, Labor Party. Keen to such a growing trend, and sharp enough to know how such a development would challenge the very capitalism that he advocates, Wallace may well attempt to turn this development aside, in an alliance with the Stalinist Party, into a pro-capitalist, liberal Third Party movement, with himself as Presidential candidate. Such a party would campaign on reviving FDR’s program and policy (remember how that led us into World War II?); again, a program of “liberal” capitalism.
Finally, there is the whole question as to whether carrying out of the Wallace program would prevent war. In our opinion, it would not. At best, it would temporarily delay the inevitable disaster. Inevitable, we say, because the present social and economic system of America and Russia must inevitably clash, to determine final mastery. Inevitable, because both systems are expanding exploiting systems that rub and tear and ruffle against one another in every part of the world.
Stalin’s Russia is driven by economic forces to constantly expand, to seek new territories for looting and robbing, new peoples to enslave and force into its slave-labor camps. It is an IMPERIALIST power. The same holds true, even though in different ways and guises, for American capitalism, Truman’s America. Our economy is also an expanding one, seeking new markets for its products, new areas for investment, new sources of raw materials, etc. America is an IMPERIALIST power. In other words, BOTH social systems are imperialist in nature, despite their many and profound differences. And expanding imperialism, as we know, leads to war. The world is just so big; it is not big enough for Stalin’s expanding Russia, and expanding capitalist America, be it of the Truman or Wallace variety.
This, in short, is the basis for our rejection of Wallace and his program, despite the significance of this split in capitalist America.
 



Last week’s dispute between Yugoslavia and America over the shooting down of American pilots and alleged violation of frontiers has subsided from the heights of war-mongering propaganda (Daily News proposal to drop atomic bombs on Yugoslavia) to the level of diplomatic talks and discussions. But no sooner had this dispute subsided than a whole series of others, all issuing from the great struggle now on between America and Russia, were launched on their way, to feed the flames of future war.
There was a major struggle shaping up over future control of the strategic Dardanelles. Turkey, friendly to the Anglo-American allies, is now guardian of the Straits, but Stalin’s Russia proposes that this guardianship be shared by Turkey, Russia and Russia’s Balkan satellites. America and Britain have announced their absolute opposition to this.
There was another struggle coming up over the approaching September elections in Poland, a country dominated by Russian imperialism and sorely squeezed between Russian and Allied pressure.
There was the dispute over Greece, threatening once more to disrupt the already weary delegates at the impotent Paris Peace Conference, and underscoring the sharpness of the clash between England and Russia over the Near East and the Mediterranean.
There was the expanding civil war in China, between the American-backed Chungking government and the Russian-backed Hunan Stalinist government.
 
Yugoslavia Dispute
Against this background of worldwide clashes between America and Russia, the clash over Yugoslavia takes on its proper proportion. It was a test, an experiment carried out at a distance and by indirect means, through which imperialist-dictator Stalin hoped to probe his Anglo-American rivals in a sore spot, and see their reactions. Would they yield? Would they retreat? Would they bluff, or would they react sharply and match threat with threat, force with force?
American imperialism, in the form of a diplomatic “ultimatum,” gave its partial answer. It was that of a great imperialist power not ready or willing, at the moment, to precipitate a premature military clash and go to war. The so-called ultimatum, despite its violent writing up in the press, did nothing more than threaten to haul Marshal Tito before the United Nations.
But neither, of course, was Stalin prepared for war over such an issue. True, he is extremely anxious to establish his puppet Tito in control of Trieste (thus completing Russian domination over the Balkan peninsula and the Adriatic), but not at the cost of a premature world conflict – Russia is not prepared today for war. In this sinister game, Marshal Tito, who apes his master Stalin even to the degree of wearing a replica of the uniform of the Kremlin dictator, was only a willing tool in the hands of the latter. He too, of course, wants Trieste and Venezia Giula for his country’s expansion policy, but when Stalin gave the word to retreat and yield on the American “ultimatum,” Tito responded as a lackey always does. Now he will escort the bodies of the flyers he shot down last week!
Russia versus America; America versus Russia – one imperialist giant against another imperialist giant. This is the underlying story of the Paris Peace Conference, the Yugoslavian crisis, the Chinese civil war, and of other crises and disputes that will inevitably take place.
 
Will There Be War?
Will there be war now? Within the immediate future? There is little likelihood of this. Instead, in a never-ending, constantly broadening and deepening “war of nerves,” these two power-giants will dispute over every political, territorial and diplomatic issue that arises in the future.
Both powers are engaging in vast strategic maneuvers, consolidating territories already occupied or under their influence, strengthening ties and bonds with their respective puppets and agents, shifting forces and building up reserves, etc. As things stand at present, this period of pre-war preparation – that is, preparation for the Third World War – may last a long time. Nobody can predict when the actual and inevitable explosion will come, but it is already clear to most of us that come it will UNLESS ...
Unless what? Unless the workers’ movement proves able and powerful enough to call a halt to the war plans of the two leading imperialist powers. The world of imperialism cannot prevent war, as the current Paris Peace Conference clearly attests to. The world of Russian and American imperialism can only clear the way for a conflict in which these two monsters attempt to destroy the other and become the top, total Master of the entire world. This is the conflict now being prepared, this is the background of the clash with Yugoslavia.
 



A provisional Indian government has been formed, a step marking a new relationship in India between master and ruled, between British imperialism and that section of the Indian – the Congress Party – claiming to speak for India’s nationalist cause. At the head of this government stands Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, an important figure in today’s world, a man whose words and actions are of concern to all the colonial peoples of India, China, Indo-China and a large section of the world.
What manner of man is Nehru? In 1941, during the war, this writer had the opportunity to interview Nehru and carried away certain impressions of the man which were subsequently published in The New International of April 1941 under the title of Eton Brahmin. We reprint below extracts and some additions to this interview, since the differences between the man who yearned for power, five years ago, and the man who today holds power (with British permission, of course) seem to be so slight in nature as to change virtually nothing in the former article.
*
Next to the Mahatma (Gandhi) himself, Nehru has been the most popular figure to emerge from the turbulent Indian political scene. His aristocratic bearing, his sweeping literary and oratorical style – heavily tinged with a false-sounding “idealism” – his lofty Brahmanical descent, his unquestionable personal sacrifices for Indian nationalism (16 years in British jails) – all these characteristics have endeared Jawaharlal Nehru to middle-class radicals and liberals throughout the world.
My first (and only) meeting with Nehru took place at the home of his sisters, shortly before his last arrest, during the war. At that time, the Congress had been pushed to the wall by the iron stand of British imperialism. The issue was clear: To yield, or launch a nation-wide mass struggle for immediate independence. A special session of the AllIndia Congress Committee was to be held at Poona, with the objective of making definitive decisions. In visiting Nehru, I wished to learn from him, a member of the Congress Working Committee, what could be expected at the Poona session.
His grande entrée into the room from a nearby balcony, along with his obvious patronizing air (in sharp contrast to the more welcome and sincere humble mannerisms of Gandhi) made a most unpleasant impression. In the course of a four-hour discussion, his personal characteristics became more marked. Nehru is both pompous and pretentious; arrogant and self-conscious when one touches upon his weaknesses and constant vacillations. That “sensitiveness of character,” so often eulogized by those whose ideal he is, merely reflects his self-embarrassment before his own incompetence, his inability to rise to the capacity of revolutionary leadership, his ineffectiveness in grasping the complexities of modern politics. The constantly reiterated theme of his talk was, “I do not know what will happen.” “The sands of time are running out.” “All is chaos.” The Brahmin of England’s Eton college was dubbed India’s High Priest of Confusion.
It soon became clear that this man had no intention of proposing, let alone leading, a mass struggle during the war. As is known, he spent the balance of the war in an imperialist jail. Nehru indicated that his “ethical” outlook forbid him from striking heavy blows at England during the period of its war difficulties. “... for we could not wholly forget the old lesson which Gandhi had taught us, that our objective should not be to embarrass the opponent in his hour of need.” Behind this moral hypocrisy, Nehru was prepared to allow the continuation of one of history’s oldest and most criminal immoral acts – namely, the mass exploitation of 389,000,000 Indian people by a handful of British imperialists. This was, indeed, a full measure of the man. He indicated that, in his opinion, anyone who proposed a struggle against British rule, during the war, was guilty of aiding and comforting the cause of Hitler and his Axis! This judgment included the writer too, who had mildly protested the pro-British attitude expressed by Nehru. As his reward, Nehru spent almost four years in jail, beginning with his arrest in 1942.
What are some of the essential characteristics of this man, now heading India’s provisional government? He is, above all, an adjutant of Gandhi. Although he has wandered slightly afield, Nehru invariably returns to the ideas, methods and practices of the Mahatma. He has been the latter’s political agent among peasant, trade union and mass organizations. As such, he has consistently attempted to reconcile the conflicting interests of these popular organizations to those of the Indian capitalists and landlords.
In practical politics and policies, Nehru has been, still is, and will continue to be the prisoner of the Congress Working Committee (High Command), the most conservative body in Indian nationalism. In the deliberate Gandhi policy of blocking a mass struggle under war (or postwar) conditions, Nehru has been a supporter of the Working Committee. We have already mentioned the historic, 1941, session of the Congress, Central Committee. Nehru’s role at this meeting was typical. The right-wing of the Congress had proposed a. resolution of support to the war and a united partnership with British imperialism. Nehru was supposed to lead the fight against this resolution. Those who knew the man were skeptical, with justification.
 
Faces Turbulent Future
In the turgid, confused language of the man he proceeded to state his position on this resolution of betrayal. “As a member of the Working Committee I assume full responsibility for this resolution.” But, “as you know, I do not feel very sure with respect to this proposal.” And then,’in the actual voting, Nehru abstained. In other words, the man was “for,” timidly “against,” and then “neutral” – all on the self-same measure! Can this man lead India to its freedom and a democratic solution of its internal problems? His is the language of capitalist diplomacy and self-deceit which, against the background of downtrodden, colonial India – can only be a language of compromise and capitulation. His first words as head of the new government, an apology for assuming power with British approval and support, are illustrative.
But this does not mean that, a reluctant, imploring, pleading Nehru may not be forced to take certain measures in behalf of his provisional government that may displease its master, the Viceroy. Nehru, in taking the responsibility of joint power with the British, has taken the bit into his mouth. The atmosphere in India, brought to a stormy point by mass discontent, communal antagonisms and the famine threat, makes impossible any calm transition to a capitalist Indian regime. Nehru today, holding “power” but utterly incapable of utilizing it for anything, may be the first to go, once the social tensions present are released. Nehru had no answer in 1941; he has none in 1946. He is only the weak spokesman of the feeble Indian industrialist, landlord, merchant and commercial class. As such, Nehru is infinitely closer to the master British imperialists than to his own people, the working and peasant masses of India.
 



On every front – at the gathering of the “peace” diplomats in Paris; at the meeting of the United Nations Security Council; in half a dozen strategic areas of the world – the fundamental antagonism between the two great powers of the world, Russia and America, has grown. Every political event and action of the day, diplomatic or strategic in character, reflects this struggle between the two master imperialist powers, to one degree or another.
At the Paris Peace Conference, now wearily entering its sixth week with not a single finished job to its credit, the keynote, is stagnation, paralysis and delay. Although appointed commissions are now examining the Treaties drawn up, with their multitude of points under dispute, no progress has been made toward resolving these differences. In many cases, the 21 Powers are still disputing the preambles to the Treaties!
The issues of economic control of the Balkan states by Russia, versus Anglo-American efforts to open up these areas for “free trade” still exist; as well as the whole question of Trieste and its delicate implications. Clearly, without an arranged understanding between America and Russia not a single one of these matters can be settled at the impotent gathering of the 21 nations.
With this in mind, the Big Four (America, Russia, England and France) who had arranged the conference, held a private session last week. This session aimed at breaking the deadlock and bringing some results before world public opinion’s attitude toward the gathering becomes completely cynical. Obviously, something must happen shortly at Paris, or the Conference will simply adjourn with zero as its accomplishment. But even this private meeting of the Big Four failed to yield results, or to provide an impetus to the dying meeting.
Now “no-man” Molotov has gone back to Russia, to consult with Joseph Stalin and receive further instructions in the game of wearing out Russia’s imperialist rivals. But it is certain that the Power Masters of Europe and the world will shortly begin to bring forth results in the dividing up of Europe, or else the Paris meeting will be disbanded. The complete powerlessness of the so-called democratic Small Powers is revealed by the fact that nothing can be done without prior Russian and American accord.
Outside the walls of the Paris assembly, disputes mounted and grew in number and depth. Over and over again, the basic Russian-American clash was underscored, clearly outlining the battle-arena for World War III. Moscow renewed its violent press campaign against Turkey and for the right to participate in military control over the Dardanelle straits; the expanding,“civil war” in China passed through a few days of comparative quiet, during which truce talk was timidly renewed, but soon yielded to a new series of clashes between Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist, American-supported forces and Stalinist Yenan’s, Russian-supported forces. Harsh words were exchanged in the press between Australia and Russia over Stalin’s reparation demands from the Balkan countries. (The Australians had better re-examine their reparation demands on Japan before they curse out others as robbers and plunderers!)
Sharpest clash of all was over the Greek plebiscite on the monarchy issue. Greece, now a satellite of British imperialism, even down to the point of being occupied by tens of thousands of Tommies, is considered by the Allies as their last secure foothold in the Balkans. A “fortress of democracy,” as the imperialist journalists describe this land of military dictatorship, foreign occupation and now, Monarchy. Russia, bearing down hard upon Greece, for its conquest and enslavement would mean (a) complete domination of the Balkans, and (b) control of the Eastern Mediterranean, the Aegean Sea and half-encirclement of Turkey, likewise was deeply interested in Greece and its election.
After a week of violent attacks upon one another, during which both sides neatly explained their sinister interest in Greece and their equally hypocritical contempt for the Greek people, Anglo-American imperialism won a victory, with, the pro-Monarchy vote. Another country had been forced to make the Devil’s choice, between “democratic” imperialist occupation and domination, or “totalitarian” Stalinist rule and domination. But, win one or the other, popular democracy and national freedom had lost out in another struggle. Where will the next fight take place? China? Or over Turkey? We know only that it will inevitably occur ...
Meanwhile, at the Lake Success (!), New York, gathering of the United Nations Security Council, the American-Russian dispute took the form of debate, diplomacy and clever motions. “Veto” Gromyko, Stalin’s United Nations man, introduced a motion proposing that Allied nations report on their military strength in non-enemy countries. This bit of cleverness would, of course, reveal American strength throughout the world, without forcing Russia to tell how many troops it has in Poland, the Balkans, Germany, Austria, etc., etc. The British would, of course, also have to give reports on their Empire military establishments.
America will propose to extend the reports to all countries and then, undoubtedly, this bit of diplomatic demagogy will die a silent death, in the archives and pigeon-holes. A sharp struggle also took place over the issue of admitting Russian satellites (Inner Mongolia, Finland, etc.) to the United Nations. Again, we have the same conflict, the same general impotence and inability to organize anything. These disputes now promise to have an indefinite career. Neither the world of capitalism, nor that of Russian totalitarianism can bring peace or tranquility to the world.
 
War of Nerves
Does all this add up to war, in the immediate future? To believe so would be a serious error in judgment. Between analysing the situation today as one in which war is ultimately inherent, and one in which war may be precipitated at any moment, there is a great deal of difference. We hold to the former view – war will not come today; this is a period in which the strategic, diplomatic, military, propagandistic, etc., preparations for an ultimate, inevitable war are being laid down.
This is what we are seeing today – an imperialist “war of nerves,” conducted by the Kremlin gangster and his American rival. But we have no illusion that, without definite and sharp successes for the cause of socialist. revolution, all this will ultimately end with World War III – that is, Atomic War I.
The task, meanwhile, is to understand what these two imperialist rivals are up to, what they are preparing for and how they must be subdued by the people before they overwhelm us with their rivalry.
 



Animal Farm
by George Orwell
Harcourt, Brace & Company, New York; $1.75, 118 pages.
GEORGE ORWELL’s fable of the Animal Farm has aroused much interest and comment, particularly about the inner meaning of the tale. We would like to begin this review by recommending the book for, regardless of the opinion one may hold as to its political content, it is in most respects a delightful story. The book has had widespread circulation in England, where its author is a well-known literary critic and contributor to the London Tribune, publication of the left-wing Labor Party leaders. It promises to have a broad circulation in America.
This parable of the Russian Revolution is presented in the form of a popular animal rebellion against Man, the farmer and exploiter of the Animal Kingdom. Orwell has a keen insight into and sympathy for the animals of his imaginary farm, their characteristics and mannerisms. In fact, the story of the animals considered per se – their relations with each other, their desires and efforts – is told in such a friendly, warm-hearted fashion that the reader’s sympathies are won from the start.
But, of course, Orwell has intended much more by his story. Some of the individual scenes are executed with taste and dash – the rejoicing of the animal-brothers after the success of their Rebellion; the dramatic struggle against Man’s counter-revolution; the heartbreaking episodes of the animals’ struggle with the physical obstacles standing in the way of their socialist farm; the tragic episodes as an animal pig-bureaucracy moves steadfastly on the road to power and, ultimately, the final triumph of the Counter-Rebellion, an episode of Thermidorean tragedy and horror.
 
The Vivid Picture of Animal Life
The animals on Mr. Jones’ Manor Farm represent the Animal Kingdom in all its strata and divisions. Old Major, the wise prize boar, combines the wisdom of theoretical understanding with the driving passion for action. His young disciples among the pigs are the elite “animals of action,” learning and preparing for the day of Rebellion. The work-horses of the farm, Boxer and Clover, represent the best of solidity in honesty and integrity of character; the sheep are manifestations of that dull-gray mass, so easily deceived, so often betrayed, yet so downtrodden. But each animal presented has a personality all of its own. By grasping the special animal-traits of the different species, by bringing these traits to life in simple illustrations, Orwell succeeds in creating a unique, live community.
Old Major Lenin, the prize boar, has given meaning to this animal life of exploitation by explaining its why and wherefore and by showing a path to liberation. His song of freedom, Beasts of England is more than a rallying song, it becomes their CREDO. The Rebellion is led by the two boars, Snowball Trotsky and Napoleon Stalin. Man, the exploiter, is driven out. The socialist Animal Farm, guided by laws of equality (“all animals are equal”), and brotherhood (“no animal shall kill any other animal”) is set up.
In harmony and happiness, the animals begin to work their own community, to build and repair, to learn the new knowledge, and unlearn the old ways. But in the atmosphere of an intensified hostility between Napoleon Stalin and Snowball Trotsky, the opening wedge of discord, petty privilege and dissension begins to make its way and grow.
A sharp clash takes place over the issue of farm industrialization and, in the course of it, Snowball Trotsky is driven off the farm. It is discovered by the animal mass that sly Napoleon Stalin his been secretly erecting his own flank of solid supporters – dogs and young porkers. The Rebellion has reached its moral apex, henceforth it can only decline, both organically and spiritually. The rest of the Animal Farm tells us, in easily recognizable form, the familiar episodes of the decline and degeneration of the Russian revolution into its present barbaric stage, culminating in the renovation of the farm’s ancient name under Farmer Jones, “The Manor House,” as the pig-bureaucracy takes on the form, shape and function of the once-defeated exploiter, Man. The story does not, of course, parallel the actual happenings in Russian history, but sufficiently suggests the events.
 
Various Interpretations of the Fable
Now, as a political parable, Animal Farm has been interpreted in diverse ways. This varied reading of Orwell’s book is not hard to understand, since it results from the most apparent flaw of the tale. We do not, naturally, refer to those deliberate misinterpretations that can be found in the Stalinist or semi-Stalinist press; nor to simple blockheads (like Ely Culbertson) who could not even grasp the fact that the parable had Russia in mind. The New Republic reviewer, for example, who certainly knows better, considers the rivalry between Snowball Trotsky and Napoleon Stalin to be the story of Trotsky’s supposed rivalry with Lenin!
A parable would be dull indeed if nothing were left to imagination and suggestion. No one demands that everything be labeled and classified for the reader. The value, taste and flavor of a parable comes precisely from that gap between the tale and its reality in which the reader’s imaginative fancy is free to roam and grasp at suggestions.
But nevertheless, in this reviewer’s opinion, there is a serious flaw in Orwell’s work. We cannot, therefore, accept the opinion expressed by some that Animal Farm is a “minor masterpiece” destined to join the great allegories of literature.
A parable, in simple terms, is a method of setting forth an event through the medium of a tale, the better to suggest or point out a profound truth. The parables of Jesus in The New Testament are classic examples of this. But Orwell’s parable does not, in our opinion, satisfy this essential demand. When one has read the book, therefore, he is still at a loss as to precisely how the whole thing is meant, what he is to understand by it all. Perhaps this failure is due to the fact that the necessary “gap” between fancy and reality is, throughout the book, too narrow – often non-existent when the story moves almost on a perfect parallel with the events of the Russian Thermidor.
 
The Political Confusion of Orwell
But we feel the explanation is closer to the author, more political in character. It lies in the general confusion of Orwell, and, we believe, in the fact that he really does not himself know what to conclude from his tale – therefore, his inability to write a true parable.
Actually, what is Orwell saying to us in the Animal Farm? Many have interpreted it, with much justification, as a rejection of the conception that it is possible to build a socialist, equalitarian community in this world; that the degeneration into Napoleon Stalin’s pig-collective State was a natural, inevitable process. The causes of Napoleon’s success in getting the upper hand are weakly stated, indeed; as are the issues between him and Snowball Trotsky.
The portrait of Snowball Trotsky is more than weak, it is unobjective and distorted. He is made out to be a pompous fanatic (but not above participation in a bureaucratic act of personal privilege, along with Napoleon Stalin) of doubtful character. Once driven off the farm, he vanishes utterly from the scene, except as vilely reported through the words and deeds of his enemy, Napoleon. There is no suggestion that he attempts to continue the traditions of the Rebellion; he is simply vanquished. Napoleon triumphs in full, without reservations. Is not the anti-socialist or liberal reader entitled to draw the conclusion that the tale is meant as a parable on the utopian character of the socialist cause? We believe so, although Orwell has not had the political conviction or courage to make this clear, perhaps reflecting the very uncertainty reigning in his mind.
 



The Bureau of Labor Statistics, a branch of the government’s Labor Department, maintains What it calls a Consumers’ Price Index. This index is based upon the prices of twenty-eight (28) basic commodities – the various staples, and necessities people in the United States live on from day to day. It reflects price changes as they take place in both wholesale and retail (primary) markets, and is one of the sources for the what’s-what on prices.
This Consumers’ Price Index of the Labor Department is a system of comparison, based upon 100 for the price averages of these twenty-eight basic commodities over the four-year period of 1935 to 1939. Or, in other words,
100 equals average price rate from 1935 to 1939
How does this Consumers’ Price Index stand today, in August 1946? This will give us an idea of how prices have gone up in post-war America and prices, as we know, mean the cost of living, our living standards.
Here’s the dope on prices – again using the governmental Bureau of Labor Statistics.
In July, 1945 – shortly after the abolition of OPA and before its reestablishment in its present impotent form – the index stood at 129.4. That is, according to the government, there had been a price increase of 29.4 per cent (over the 100 average of 1935–1939) since the war began in 1939.
By July 15, 1945 – this same price index had gone up to 140 – an increase of 40 per cent (!) over the index of 1939.
And finally, to top it off, the index stood at 141.8 on August 1 of this year – its all time high, but still going higher. Thus, again according to official government sources, the cost of living has risen almost 42 per cent in the last seven years.



WAGES AND PRICES*
Or, Living Standards of Post-War America




WAGES

Average Weekly Wage for Factory Workers†


PRICES
Weekly Living Costs
Index (BLS)




January 1939


$23.19


  99.4




January 1941


$26.64


102.0




January 1944 (wartime peak)


$54.29


122.0




POST-WAR AMERICA




July 1945


$45.12


129.4




December 1945


$41.21


 




February 1946


$40.55


 




March 1946


$42.14


130.9




July 1946


$43.00


140.0




August 1946


?


141.8




* Sources: Monthly Labor Review, and AFL Economic Reports, Bureau of Labor Statistics, CIO
† The average income of all wage earners would bring these figures down considerably.



The same source of information (Bureau of Labor Statistics) likewise indicates the following cost of living increases over recent years. They are worth reporting:
A 50 per cent rise in the price of food from 1939 to April 1946 – from 95.2 to 141.7 on the index scale.
An 84 per cent rise in the cost of cotton clothing, a 48 per cent rise in that of woolen clothing, and a 45 per cent rise in silk and rayon articles – a general clothing increase from 106.5 to 154.3 on the index scale, covering the same period from 1939 to April 1946.
A general cost-of-living rise of 20 per cent since the OPA went out of existence on June 30, 1946. OPA, as everyone knows, is in its new form, nothing but an institution of the government for “legalizing” price increases for manufacturers (coffee, last week, 10 to 13 cents more per pound; canned fruit, last week, 1 to 7 cents more per can; 10 to 15 per cent rise in cotton goods, etc.).
 
Labor and Gov’t Statistics
Both the CIO and AFL have challenged the above statistics, furnished by the government, as being on the conservative side. This index, says the labor movement, does not take into account such factors as the lowered quality of goods, the scarcity of low-priced goods, compulsory changes in living habits due to housing shortages and the necessity to eat out, etc. Nor does it measure any changes in total family income costs. The Bureau of Labor Statistics has admitted these criticisms. We give an illustration of the difference in approach of labor economists and government economists in measuring living costs. Obviously, the labor men have the more accurate figures since they are more real, and based upon effects upon workers – that is, the masses of American people.
According to both organizations (AFL-CIO) as compared with the government, the following changes occurred in living costs from January 1941 to January 1944.



Commodity


CIO-AFL
Estimate
%


  


Gov’t
Estimate
%




Food cost increased by:


74.2


40.2




Clothing cost increased by:


72.2


33.7




Rent cost increased by:


15.0


  3.0




Fuel cost increased by:


  8.6


  8.6




Furnishings cost increased by:


62.0


27.8




Miscellaneous cost increased by:


15.9


15.9




Average Increase of:
[Double estimate of government]
 


43.5


23.4




What About Wages?
But what about wages? Haven’t they, too, gone up? The chart above indicates a wage average of $23.19 in January 1939, mounting upwards to $43.00 in July 1946. That represents an increase of 85 per cent for industrial wages, over the past six and a half years – truly a magnificent advance!
Labor Action would be the last to deny this general wage increase for large numbers of factory workers, primarily due to the organizing activity and strength of the unions. Even if we discount about half of this 85 per cent wage increase (because of the corresponding 40 per cent price increase, according to the government, over the same period), we still have a substantial increase in real wages for living standards. Even if we discount more than half of this wage increase (because of the weighted conservatism of government statistics), we still have a substantial increase in real wages since 1939 – a phenomena not known in any other major country and testifying to the strength and determination of the American labor movement.
This is only one side of the picture, Whereas the rise in the cost of living applies to all workers, the people as a whole, the available figures refer to only one section of the working class, the organized workers. To get a complete picture of the situation, it must be remembered that two-thirds of all wage earners received less than $3,000 per year; that one-third of the nation live under sub-standard conditions!
But, despite all this, look at the story in Post-war America! Wages are today frozen, by government fiat and labor leadership conservatism. But prices (living costs) steadily mount and mount. And weekly wage averages, for many reasons, have sunk steadily – out of the $50 weekly average, into the lower $40 bracket. In a word, the living standards of the American worker are under sharp attack and are being driven downwards. That is the partial story of our statistics. That is the false promise held out in post-war America – a promise redeemable only through the militant action of the labor movement in its self-defense and protection. On the price front, for lowering of cost of living; on the wage front, for raising the standard of living.
 



Here it is! The new, expanded, and hard-hitting eight-page Labor Action that you’ve been waiting for. Take a good look at it – we think it’s a good socialist paper and hope you agree with us. We aim to make it better as we go along.
This column is to help stimulate circulation and subscriptions to the new eight-page Labor Action. From next week on, it will be turned over exclusively to the many and devoted Labor Action agents we have all over the country. It will be a column recording their circulation feats, the number of subs they’ve sold from week to week, and their ideas for increasing the press run of the paper.
 
Some Facts on the New Eight-Page Labor Action

Eight pages, at five cents per individual copy.
 
Bundle orders to agents at three cents per copy, with additional copies available for special distributions at one cent per additional copy.
 
A six-month subscription anywhere in the U.S. for 50 cents. A year’s subscription anywhere in the U.S. For $1.00.
 
Any bundle orders, or changes in bundle orders, must be in our office by noon on Thursdays.
 

Labor Action Agents Speak Up
From Detroit our charming peaches- and-cream agent, Miriam Evans, sends us a detailed report on the Detroit branch’s plans for the new eight-page Labor Action. Writes Miriam:
“The Literature Committee has begun to make plans for selling the new Labor Action. So far, this is what we’ve decided to do: (1) Regular sales at newsstands; (2) Regular sales at local union meetings. We are going to have regular salesmen for each local meeting; (3) Special and city-wide meetings. We are going to sell at veterans’ meetings, NAACP meetings, Zionist rallies, PAC and rallies on the OPA question, etc.”
From Chicago, irrepressible Dan Leeds, the new Chicago literature agent, sends this idea for consideration:
“For contact work we are going to assemble a literature kit made up of Labor Action, The New International, Plenty for All pamphlet and five five-cent pamphlets which will all be for sale at 25 cents.”
From San Pedro, Agent Brent writes about future circulation plans of the branch:
“We plan to try to get the paper on newsstands. We’ll let you know how we make out on this score. Our branch distribution concentration is longshore. We plan to send in an article on the maritime situation every other week to Labor Action. The issues of Labor Action containing these articles will be sold and distributed at the Longshore hiring hall.”
Labor Action agents: This column is for you. Write in to it and we will see to it that your ideas, complaints and proposals are circulated.
 



The knock-down fight between America’s representative, Byrnes, and Russia’s Molotov continued to dominate the scene at the Paris royal battleground, sometimes mistakenly referred to as a peace conference.
Name-calling, accusation and counter-charge, abuse and mutual slander marked the exchange of opinion between the two leading spokesmen of their respective imperialist governments. The dove of peace is still hovering outside the Luxemburg Palace, waiting to be called in to the ring. Poor bird ...
It has been suggested that the Russian delegates are using filibustering tactics at the conference, with deliberate intention. This may well be the case. Behind the Russian “iron curtain,” cutting Europe in two, the Stalinist agents are busy at work completing the job of (a) destroying any and all opposition; (b) imposing unwanted and dictatorial regimes upon the occupied countries; (c) carting off the last pieces of loot, plunder and machinery; (d) moving whole sections of peoples about, into Russia and other lands, for the Stalinist slave labor camps, and (e) taking steps to bring the economic life of these countries into line with Russian economy. All this requires time. Stalin needs time to finish his murderous assignments and face the other nations with accomplished facts. This lies behind his stalling tactics at the peace conference and elsewhere.
 
Cold Shoulder to Italy
On every conceivable question, big or small, that has arisen to date, America and Russia have sharply clashed. This is the basic note of the Paris gathering, underscoring this fundamental world disagreement that exists between the two major imperialist powers of the globe. As yet, the conference has not even discussed any important issues, such as the actual treaties themselves. This discussion will prove even more bitter than those held up till now.
But it must be noticed that when it comes to the question of “ganging up” on a helpless, defeated nation, even the two conference giants manage to get together, for the sake of extracting their rewards. Such is the case with Italy, whose Premier de Gasperi made a pitiful appeal for mercy from the hostile, cold delegates. Molotov has denounced this appeal, along with his six satellite stooges, and America has had nothing to say on Italy’s behalf as yet. Byrnes’ handshake with the Italian Premier will be cold comfort to Italy’s 45,000,000 people who must suffer the iniquitous terms of the robber treaty about to be imposed upon them.
 
Where They Act
Concurrent with the conference, the big powers continue their war of nerves and unilateral action in Europe proper, each seeking to out-maneuver the other. These acts are far more important than the empty words of the conference and will shape the clashes of the future. Among them are:

The open struggle between Russia and America in Austria over the issue of nationalization.
 
The merger of the British and American zones of Germany, already in process and aimed at creating a solid Allied Germany to confront the solid Russian Germany.
 
Russia’s threatening notes and moves against Turkey and her reported demand for reopening the question of control of the Dardanelles.
 
The vast strategic shift in British imperialist line-ups in the Mediterranean. involving the entire Palestinian and Near Eastern areas.

The rubber-stamping conference continues, with much sound and fury and less “peace” than ever. But the real game goes on outside the conference chambers, where action and the shifting of forces takes place.
 



On the eve of probable assumption of political power by the All-India Congress Party (Gandhi and Nehru), the most violent and deadly Hindu- Moslem rioting in many years has shaken India. Hundreds of dead lie in the streets of Calcutta, India’s second largest city, after days of bloody rioting between Hindus and Moslems, led by fanatics on both sides. This tragic situation marks a great increase in tension and bitterness between the two largest communities of the Indian nation.
At the same time, there is every indication that the conservative Congress Party, dominated by the largely Hindu capitalist class of India, is about to take political responsibility for the government, thus forming an alliance with British imperialism. After months of endless negotiations, the Congress is on the verge of forming an Executive Council, with the British Viceroy’s approval. The outburst of Hindu-Moslem communal discord may prevent, or delay, this action. But it is clear that Nehru, the president and official spokesman of the Congress Party, is willing and anxious to make the deal with imperialism and assume office. His lifelong ambition to become Prime Minister of India seems on the point of fulfillment, regardless of the fact that it will take place with British support.
The Moslem League will not be in the provisional government’s cabinet, unless its leader, Jinnah, withdraws his previous declination. It will be a purely Congress Party cabinet, with little minority representation. This provisional government is supposed to last until the convocation of the British-called-and-dominated Constituent Assembly which is, in turn, supposed to create a new constitution and government for the country. It is highly doubtful that things will work out this way and that the Congress Party of native capitalists will achieve its goal – namely, a peaceful transition to partnership rule, shared by Indian capitalists and British imperialists. The situation is far too tense, complicated and explosive to expect such a solution.
The Calcutta communal riots represent the greatest tragedy imaginable for India’s freedom cause, and the future of its revolutionary movement. Hindu and Moslem mobs, led by religious fanatics, instead of uniting against the common enemy, are wasting their lives and blood in futile attacks upon one another. Whose is the responsibility for this tragic situation?
First and foremost, the British rulers who have consistently played off one community against the other, in line with traditional “divide-and- rule” strategy. Instigation of one group against the other is an old story in India. Rarely, certainly not for years, has it been so extreme. So long as the British troops and masters remain, the problem will become worse and never approach a solution.
For the immediate situation, heavy responsibility falls upon the reactionary Moslem League and its treacherous leader, Mohammed Ali Jinnah. Dissatisfied in his negotiations with the British and Congress Party, Jinnah broke off his previously accepted deal and called upon his followers to “prepare civil war,” and organize demonstrations against the Congress Party. In Calcutta, the rioting began with attacks on Congress Party newspapers and headquarters – NOT demonstrations against British rule.
This was Jinnah’s way of attempting to force the Congress to yield further to his demands for Moslem separationism in the new India. Jinnah is guilty of the greatest crime of all – dividing the Indian people and thus aiding the perpetuation of British rule. His League, headed by religious fanatics, students and big landlords of the Moslem comnmunity, has dealt a heavy blow at India’s struggle for national independence.
But the Congress Party of Gandhi and Nehru is far from blameless in the situation. Its present goal is to take power, along with the British, over the Indian nation, without seriously attempting to solve the basic questions of the country – famine, unemployment, food, freedom. The people of India are very suspicious of the Congress plans, particularly the Moslem masses who have already tasted Congress rule during a prior experience. And, most of all, by refusing to guarantee the Moslem population its democratic rights – including the right to organize a separate “Pakistan” country if they so desire – the Congress leaders have given Jinnah every opportunity to carry on his vicious, demagogic work. Thus all alike – British imperialist, Moslem League landlord and Hindu feudal capitalist – are guilty of the confused atmosphere in which Hindu and Moslem engage in senseless self-slaughter.
The Indian Trotskyists propose the summoning of a nationwide Constituent Assembly, elected by the people on the basis of universal suffrage, which shall have power to create a democratic government and solve the minority problem according to popular will.
 



On July 29, one year after the cessation of the war, twenty- one victor nations will convene in Paris to draft and sign peace treaties with certain of their former opponents, Italy, Finland, the Balkan nations. This Conference, we are reliably informed, will end the state of war and post-war tension that exists in Europe and pave the way for that continent’s transformation to a peaceful, unified area.
This optimistic picture, unfortunately, does not describe the Conference as it really will be when it gets down to business. To begin with the convenors of the Conference, the Big Four, have already worked out the terms of the treaties to be signed and the Conference will be largely a formality. The small powers present, each one of which is under the domination of one of the Big Four to one degree or another, will have little to say on the real issues. Whatever disagreements or disputes take place will, therefore, merely reflect the differences among the Big Four themselves.
Is the Peace Conference a democratic assembly of peace-seeking delegates? Or is it an assembly of bargain-hunting, deal-seeking and double-dealing slick capitalist politicians? We believe the latter to be true, based upon the whole manner in which the Conference has been organized.
Each of the Big Four imperialist powers, anxious to extend and consolidate her sway in Europe is responsible for this prearranged gathering. Not a single delegate has been elected by his people. All are self-appointed by the same government that is trying to outmaneuver its rivals. Not a single one of the issues involved in the various treaties, the internationalization of Trieste, reparations from the Balkan countries and Italy, transfer of lands from one nation to another (Breda to France; Bessarabia to Russia; Tyrol to Italy, etc., etc.), not a single serious issue has been submitted to popular vote for ratification by the people. The dirty deals have been made between Mssrs. Bidault, Bevin, Byrnes and Molotov and now 17 additional imperialist politicians will endorse them. What has all this to do with peace and the reorganization of Europe?
The most striking issue facing Europe today is the fate of Germany. Yet it is clear that this Conference cannot settle that problem. Perhaps it will not even consider it. Any issue on which the Great Powers do not have a pre-arranged agreement cannot even be talked over by the twenty-one ostensibly peace-making powers! Yet nothing is more revealing of the general state of Europe than the condition of Germany with its divided economic and political life.
 
Problem in Germany
The Big Four are basically divided on the issue of Germany. In this division the chief rivalry is between the United States and Russia. The issue is: Which power shall most successfully milk the German cow. To achieve this, each power has its own scheme:

FRANCE wants to annex the Saar (a clearly German region), separate the Ruhr and Rhineland from Germany, and, in general, dismember and weaken that nation beyond recognition.
 
ENGLAND wants to retain the Ruhr within Germany, organize a decentralized Federated Germany, and get production going again for its own trade purposes.
 
THE UNITED STATES wants to organize a Western Germany together with the British; keep the country under firm control with a Federation of German States and, in general, prepare bases in its portion of Germany for use in a future war against Russia.
 
RUSSIA wants to consolidate its totalitarian, Stalinist rule in Eastern Germany and then continue its expansionist efforts toward greater influence over the rest of Germany.

Of all the powers, Russia wants the strongest Germany PROVIDED it will be under Stalinist domination. Molotov, in his final speech at the Big Four July Conference, appealed to German nationalism to join with him in political war upon the Western Powers. Whether he is heading for an ultimate renewal of the Russian-German alliance against Poland and France, as Walter Lippman believes, is too early to state definitely.
What may be expected to come out of the Paris Conference? Treaties with the defeated minor powers that will legalize the situation of stagnation prevailing today, with Russia in control of huge portions of Europe. Little or no effort will be made to settle the problem of Germany since the powers are still too far apart to make a deal. There will be much talk about peace, of course, but everything about the Conference, the manner of its calling, its domination by a few big powers, and its evasion of fundamental problems, will give the proper hypocritical tone to the diplomatic words. The Paris Peace Conference assembles not for peace, but to rubber-stamp the imperialist deals already negotiated.
 



Whatever hopes the people may have had for a democratic People’s Peace and rehabilitation of a war-battered and tired world have quickly been dashed in the opening week of the Paris Peace Conference. Birds of many hues and feathers are gathered together in the Luxemburg Palace of Paris, but the mild and gentle dove of peace is reported to have beaten a hasty retreat out of the nearest window on the Conference’s opening day. The atmosphere of shabby double-dealing, cynical trickery and deceit proved too much for her.
Twenty-one nations have gathered together, for the announced purpose of restoring harmony and peace to broken Europe: the harmony and peace which is supposed to lift the old Continent out of its divisions, economic doldrums and atmosphere of hunger and decay. Yet, it is clear, one week of the Conference indicates that anything but this will occur; that the division of Europe into two sharply opposed camps (the Anglo-American Europe and the Russian Europe) will be intensified; that little or nothing will be done to revive economic and social life. The fact that UNRRA goes out of existence in December of this year has not yet been mentioned at the European Peace Conference!
 
Peace Is Not the Imposing of Arbitrary Boundaries
The Big Four Powers, who dominate the conference, have presented the 17 other nations, with a series of proposed treaties to be imposed upon the unwilling, humiliated nations of Italy, Rumania, Hungary, Bulgaria and Finland – the losers of World War II. A study of the details of these Treaties (including the disputed sections) clearly reveals the first and basic truth about the whole Conference: we have here a gathering of victor imperialist Powers, with their satellites, determined to impose robber, imperialist, reparation and territorial grabbing Treaties upon vanquished peoples. These proposed Treaties are harsh treaties of revenge and cruelty, signifying the effort to permanently enslave millions of Italians, Rumanians, Bulgarians, Hungarians and Finns.
Boundaries are to be arbitrarily fixed, traded and exchanged. But boundaries involve people, the Finns formerly within Petsamo province who now will go to Russian totalitarian hands; the Rumanians of Bessarabia who will likewise fall into Stalin’s bloody hands; the Italians of Breda who must go to the French; the Italians of Venezia Giulia, who will feel Tito’s boot on their neck, etc. Are not these people to be given a choice or say in the matter? According to the Big Four treaties, no! Each boundary settlement of the “peacemakers,” then cannot but fail to become a sore point for another war.
 
Peace Is Not the Extraction of Reparations from Starving People

Italy – to pay $100 million in goods produced, for Stalin’s Russia.
 
Rumania – to pay $300 million in goods produced, for Stalin’s Russia.
 
Hungary – to pay $300 million in gold and goods produced, for Stalin’s Russia.
 
Finland – to pay $300 million in gold, for Stalin’s Russia.

Russia will extract, with the approval of the Big Four (and the little Seventeen), $1 billion from the poor people, the workers and peasants, of the defeated lands. We know the politicians won’t pay for this; it will come from the toil and blood of the castdown peoples.
Furthermore, it is already estimated that Russia alone has robbed and plundered to the tune of $2 billion from these same countries (making a grand total of $3 billion). America, Britain and France have likewise, although not to the same degree, taken substantial swag from Germany, Austria and Italy. The hands of the “democracies” are also burdened with loot.
 
Peace Is Not Denial of National Independence
The Treaties so weaken and nullify the nations upon which they are to be imposed that, in effect, they cease to exist as free and independent countries. Italy loses Trieste, a major economic port for the country’s life; Italy has its merchant fleet divided up among the Powers; its colonies are taken away (into the hands of England, to be sure, and not into the hands of the native people who live in them); its navy is destroyed. Italy will be a third or fourth rate Power, producing reparations for Russia.
Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria are turned over to the Russian economic sphere; deprived of all but minute armies and forced to swallow a diet of reparations to Russia, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia. Finland must lease whole cities and bases for occupation indefinitely by Russian troops. Land grabs, reparations and economic subjection – this is the content of the Big Four Treaties.
 
Peace Is Not the Struggle of Power Bloc vs. Power Bloc
The Conference is dominated by blocs of imperialist nations, each busy at work to outmaneuver the other.
There is the Russian bloc, dominated by Stalinist Russia. If this bloc has its way, it will gain de facto
control over Trieste and the Adriatic ocean through its treaty with Italy. It will win a billion dollars in reparations. It will have undisputed control over the Balkans, the Danubian and other waterways of Central and Southern Europe; the whole of Eastern and Central Europe will be under its sway.
The Russian bloc, dominated entirely by Russia proper, is obviously the most aggressive and best organized group at the Conference. Its victory would mean an enormous thrust by Stalinist imperialism, with its barbaric regime of totalitarianism, into the heart of Europe.
Then there is the Anglo-American bloc, fighting for its own interests against the Russian bloc. It seeks to slow up Stalin’s onrush, to lessen the degree to which Russia shapes the occupied territories after its own dictatorial image. It wants to preserve its own property rights and interests in the defeated countries occupied by the Russian Army, from brutal-handed expropriation and nationalization by Stalin and his supporters. Thus, it fights to keep open the Balkans to free trade, and make the Danubian riverways available for use by all nations. This bloc, today in retreat, is likewise anxious to propagandize and prepare for future struggles against its chief opponent bloc.
Finally, there is the Big Four (or Five, if we include China) bloc, symbolizing the plane on which the chief imperialists get together – at the expense of the conquered powers, the small nations, and for their mutual benefits. Principles are discarded and the common sharing of loot from Germany, Italy, Austria, etc., is agreed upon.
This bloc extends, when necessary, to the political plane and is used as a club against the small nations, to shove the iniquitous treaty measures down: their unwilling throats. On this plane, the whole Conference was prearranged and has no real powers – it cannot vote changes in the Treaties, only recommendations. It cannot actually assert any real influence, if the Big Four have ordained otherwise.
 
Farcical Struggle over Two-Thirds Vote vs. Majority Vote
The small nations demand decisions by majority vote. The Big Four, particularly Russia’s man Molotov, reject this. Russia’s continuance at the Conference depends upon the retaining of the two thirds vote system – that is, a guarantee that nothing Russia does not want will be inserted into the treaties, since Russia already controls 8 (over one third of the votes). Listen to what reporter Sulzberger writes in the New York Times (August 5):
“For the Big Four, plus the five Russian satellites, will all vote in favor of the decisions of the Big Four. This makes nine certain votes, or enough to prevent a two-thirds majority from overruling the Big Four decisions.”
The dice are loaded by the Big Four, cry to the Heavens though the small nations will. Honest men are not wanted at Luxembourg Palace. The Big Four spokesmen may score debating points against one another, but thieves notoriously stick together when a common danger comes round the corner.
 
Real Problems of Peace Excluded from Agenda
Our analysis of the conference would be incomplete without pointing to the basic problems omitted (deliberately) by the convenors:

What will be the fate of Germany?
 
What will be the fate of Austria, latest battleground of rivalry between America and Russia?
 
How will atomic warfare and the Atomic Bomb be handled?
 
What is the goal and ultimate objective of Russian imperialism? World War III?
 
What is the goal and ultimate objective of Anglo-American imperialism? World War III?

A conference for Peace? Only the free, independent, socialist united peoples of the earth could convene such a conference. This Conference, dominated by every contrary motive, is a conference ground for political and diplomatic pre-war maneuvers. Discord and disharmony are its key notes, plunder and pillage its actions, continued economic chaos and sinking living standards will be its results. Scoundrels, bandits and despoilers are in conference – let honest people be on guard.
 



Lieutenant General Clay, the American Deputy Military Governor of occupied Germany, plans to evacuate the zone of American troops some time in 1948. By that time, he estimates, the overall policy of America toward its zone will have been fulfilled. What are these objectives? The General states them as follows: destruction of Germany’s military potential; completion of demilitarization and deindustrialization; restoration of democratic processes; creation of a provisional central German government accompanied by the abolition of the four zone system.
The military mind is fond of summing up matters in simple stages of bureaucratic formula. Behind the many reports of the American military authorities lies the story of the ruthless destruction of German industry and productive capacity, in line with the original Morgenthau-Baruch scheme. The basic objective of America is to destroy the competitive capacity and ability of a nation that threatened to be its greatest rival in the struggle for control of the world market. Everything else – “democratization,” education, propaganda, etc. is secondary and subordinate to this aim. The gradual resumption of German export trade, forecast by the head of the Military Government economic department, gives us the story in another form. Today, German export life is nil, but clearly there must be some export life in the future, if only to be applied against necessary food imports to prevent starvation. What export trade is contemplated? “Textiles, lumber, potash, certain medicines, light metal goods, cameras, carbon brushes and miscellaneous articles.” In a word, the products of light, minor industry; things not dependent upon heavy, basic industry, and clearly of such a nature as not to compete with American export trade.
In the American zone, the resumption of industrial life is on the lowest of all levels. In November, 1945, General Eisenhower boasted that such had been the success of his administration that he had reduced production to ten per cent of its prewar level! Almost one year after its victory over German imperialism, the United States has successfully prevented, in its zone, the resumption of mining; reconstruction of the ruined cities and transport systems (for which heavy industry is indispensable); resumption of manufacture of machinery, assembly work, etc. Only that industrial activity unavoidable for primitive economic life (milling, canning of food, handicraft repair shops, etc.) has been tolerated (not to mention those light, skilled industries, the products of which – cameras, cookoo clocks, pottery, leather goods, ceramics – our American occupation officers and troops are especially fond of).
Of the great IG Farben plants, 22 out of 42 in the American zone have been destroyed or dismantled for reparations. This complex monopoly of the German chemical, dye and munitions industry formed the heart of industrial life in the essentially agrarian sector occupied by American imperialism. Seizure, dismantling, distribution among the smaller powers [1] – such is the fate of German industry at American hands, belying the complaints from some quarters that America is “soft and friendly” to German industrialists. The ranks of the unemployed in the American zone constantly mount, facilitating the reactionary drive to force the skilled German workers back into farm life, handicraft and “luxury” industry. Hundreds of thousands of ex-Wehrmacht men wander about, idling in the countryside or the cities, gazing reflectively upon the ruins of a nation that would require several decades of unrelenting work to rebuild. But American imperialism has destroyed a rival and must keep that rival inert. The whole struggle in the American sector will unfold around the issue of the right of 22,000,000 people to live, produce and rebuild their ruins. The bitter reality of our occupation policy in Germany is summed up in the following food value table of what has been recommended by American medical authorities, and what actually is:




Diet in calories from VE Day until March 1946 – 1550 per day
Diet in calories recommended by Army medical men,
as a non-starvation minimum productive diet – 1750 to 2000 per day
Diet in calories ordered by Military decree, March 1946 – 1250 per day
 




The Democratization Program
But have we not brought a democratic regime to our portion of Germany? Every village and hamlet is plastered with placards, announcing the right to enjoy free speech and press, to form democratic trade unions, to organize political parties, etc. Are we not gradually turning back the country, after free elections, to control by the German people through elected representatives? Have we not freed the masses from the curse of the rabid Nazis, by persistent elimination of such types from public life?
Much has been already reported on the concrete functioning of the American administration. The validity of the many criticisms – top-heavy bureaucratic machinery that does not function; arrogance, ignorance and incompetence on the part of the American officers; failure to carry out directives and proposals, etc. – is undeniable and attested to by the most conservative of reporters. The general swinishness of the American occupation heads, symbolized by the late General Patton (popularly known to the Germans as the new Mad King of Bavaria!), is only accentuated by the attitudes of the occupation troops themselves, living in their walled oases of plenty amidst the general German misery. A secret survey of AMG recently revealed the real dislike and hatred that exists in the population toward the Americans. This report also claimed that “mention of a new Freikorps or Feme had been frequent and that it was expected in many quarters that the desperation and idleness of youth would have violent consequences.” The discovery of an organized Hitlerjugend resistance network proved the validity of this report and, in itself, contains a damning indictment of the American administration because the very fact that organized resistance takes on such a reactionary, chauvinistic, ultra-nationalist form (despite the fact that the mass of Germans are utterly through with Nazism, in an ideological sense) testifies to the general feeling regarding the occupying power. If American imperialism, in its German administration, had carried through its alleged democratic aims, such a movement as the Hitlerjugend, symbolizing an effort to revive a political tendency that brought total destruction to the German nation, would not dare lift its head. Today, in the general apathy of the Germans, Nazism revives, feeding on stagnation and economic misery.
But these criticisms of our American liberals and churchmen are superficial in character, evading the real question. The Fourth International, on the contrary, states categorically the right of the German people to full independence and self-determination. The American Workers Party demands the withdrawal of our occupation troops and the return of German government to its people – that is, not reforms in the military administration, but its abolition. In the given situation of Germany, the alleged “democratic” reforms are meaningless, forms without substance.
The right to form trade unions is granted, but these unions cannot carry on the class struggle, i.e., go on strike. Furthermore, in the general poverty of the area – mass unemployment, lack of significant productive activity, lack of food and commodities in general – the traditional role of unions in fighting for improved living conditions becomes largely meaningless. Fight for higher wages? But there is nothing to buy!
The right to form political parties and vote for candidates of one’s choice is granted. But only those parties approved by AMG can be formed; that is, quisling parties that agree to accept the occupation. Furthermore, the AMG concept of political democracy belongs to the Jacksonian era of frontier townships and the New England doctrine of selectmen councils. The right of a German village to elect a group of men to deal with trivialities has nothing to do with the right to settle broad issues involving government, economic reconstruction, etc.
We could go down the list of democratic “rights” allegedly granted to the Germans and discover the same “catch” attached to each. The very existence of AMG invalidates the premises of political democracy, even from the standpoint of traditional liberal doctrine.
In summary then, America occupies its section of Germany in an imperialist fashion, destroying an economic and commercial rival, reducing 22,000,000 people to a primitive level of existence, robbing a territory of its resources and industry for the benefit of its general imperialist policy and throwing back a great area into an agrarian, pastoral stage that implies retrogression and stagnation in all fields. There is not a single feature of the American occupation that cannot but be condemned as reactionary. In this general respect, the American zone takes its place with the French, Russian and British zones.
 
The British Administration
“At the contemplated level (of rationing) they foresee a sharply accelerated death rate, widespread hunger and rickets, as well as the possibility of epidemics resulting from malnutrition. Furthermore, it will hamper even minimal industrial recovery. Production in the British zone has fallen ten per cent since the ration cut.” (UP report)
“The Ruhr is producing less than a fourth of its pre-war capacity of 2,500,000 tons (of coal) a week and German mines are not meeting essential army requirements ...”(New York Times)
******
Many a liberal journalist and ambitious American military governor has admired the alleged skill, experience and efficiency of the British as administrators of foreign territories. A more accurate portrayal of British imperialism is offered by Trotsky. “The English bourgeoisie has been trained to mercilessness by all the conditions of its insular position, its Calvinist moral philosophy, its colonial practice, its national arrogance.” (Whither England, p.187) The two reports quoted above are more realistic appraisals of alleged administrative ability and efficiency. British imperialism, occupying the former industrial heart of Germany, acts no differently than the other powers – that is, it seeks to fulfill the concrete objectives of its program, to fit its German sector into the imperial world struggle for commercial and economic survival.
The Labor Government wants British-Germany to produce because it conceives of the Ruhr and its industrial remnants as a factor of assistance in its commercial battle with America. Not that the coal and steel taken from Germany can offer direct competition to America, to be sure, but rather for their value in the effort to revive European economy and thus reestablish the trade of the smaller countries with England and lessen their dependency upon American “charity.” Thus, for example, the bulk of Ruhr coal production now goes to France (with whom the Labor Government is anxious to form an alliance); Belgium, Norway, Denmark and Luxembourg. This production is considered a basic force in the strategy of building up England’s desired “Western bloc” in Europe. It accounts for the differences between British policy and Russian, French and American policy, so far as the survival of German industrial activity is concerned. But this policy is no less ruthless toward the German bourgeoisie, with respect to the latter’s continued existence, than that of the other occupying powers. In fact, the elimination of the great Ruhr steel and coal monopolists has been complete, including the placing of these gentlemen in jail! In January, 1946, the British Military Government expropriated without compensation the coal and steel industries of their sector, placing itself in the position of complete owner of all properties; under British control and management. The former owners are now in jail facing trials as war criminals. To make things perfectly clear, the British Military Government followed up this action by extending it to all properties in their zone and taking control of all industries completely out of German hands. Thus, in. effect, the British zone approximates more closely a colony in the traditional sense of the word than do the other zones. The basic aim of these actions, we repeat, was to most effectively employ German coal and steel in the struggle for European influence against America and Russia. It was the unique method dictated to British imperialism in its difficulty. Simply stated, it was a necessity to produce coal to compensate for the still ominously declining English coal production.
Was the effort successful, By no means. The entire population of Europe went cold this past winter, while even France failed to register gains in return to industrial life. The Ruhr is producing 25 per cent of its capacity, while reconstruction of bombed pit-heads and steel mills has not even started. Output, of course, is much below the pre-war standards. German miners, lacking proper nourishment, proper equipment and protection, are not effectual – plus their knowledge of the fact that their country receives virtually nothing of what they dig.
The whole future of the Ruhr area is, of course, a bone of bitter contention among the imperialists. But Britain will not lightly give it up, even at the expense of its desired alliance with France. Far more important for us is the future of the 11,000,000 Germans who inhabit the Ruhr, 5½ million of them in the great cities of the inner Ruhr. (Essen, Wupperthal, etc.) What is their future under British rule?
The recent decision of the Central Control Council fixing steel production at below 6,000,000 tons yearly and preventing the regrowth of industry by constant inspection of plants constitutes a terrific blow at the workers of the Ruhr. The Ruhr employed approximately 1,000,000 workers in iron and steel, plus 2,000,000 in allied industries. Less than half of this proletarian concentration of 3,000,000 will find work under the imposed schedule! A British intelligence officer predicts that perhaps 5,000,000 will be affected. “What do you think will happen in the Ruhr next winter with perhaps 5,000,000 people deprived of jobs and security? What do you think they will turn to”? And he answers his own question by predicting a fierce resistance movement. (New York Times, January 26, 1946) A German Social-Democrat, working for the British, states matters more effectively.
“The Allies are now setting up conditions which twenty years ago fostered nazism and which, if they continue, inevitably will force German youth into some new expression in militarism and fascism ... You cannot teach a man to be a democrat by taking away his job and his future and threatening him with starvation.”
Thus we see that even British imperialism, the sole power among the four that has any interest, from its own narrow standpoint, of reviving German economic life, is incapable. of doing this within the broader arena of the general occupation and subjugation of the German nation. In the most highly industrialized and wealthiest section of Germany rules a power that desires to utilize, to its own advantage, these benefits. But so thoroughly retrogressive has imperialism become, in all its forms, that this area threatens to surpass all the others in the depths of its misery for the population. Hunger and unemployment are what the “devoted and selfless” British administrators offer to their colonial wards, backed up by the armored units at their disposal. Their rule differs in no essential aspect from that of the other powers.
****
“... German industrial capacity after reparation removals should be physically capable of producing a standard of living equivalent to the European average in, say, 1948. Given the difficult problems of administration and economic organization which the German peacetime economy will still face in 1948, It may be doubted that industrial equipment remaining in Germany at that time will in fact produce at full capacity, so that the standard of living realized in Germany is likely for some time to fall short of the European average.” (State Department declaration on Germany, December 11, 1945)
 
Basic Policy of Big Four
We have examined in summary form the administrations of the various zones carved out of the German nation. Although each imperialist occupant pursues radically different methods of exploitation within its zone, all have much in common – pillage and robbery of German wealth and resouces, denial of independence and meaningful democracy, imposition on great masses of an unwanted, oppressive regime. The differences in the working out of each powers’ plans varies strictly according to the unique, special interests of that power. At Berlin, through the medium of the central Allied Control Council, the four powers attempt to minimize these differences, and work out a coordinated plan for common exploitation of the 66,000,000 remaining Germans.
Despite their differences, despite their failure to achieve any coordination between the four zones (in terms of the trade and commerce proposed in the Potsdam agreement), the Big Four have no difficulty in devising a common attitude toward the Germans. This may be summarized as follows:

Germany shall be kept weak and divided and a combined light-industry, agricultural economy shall prevail in place of Europe’s former most high-powered, industrialized nation.
The German bourgeoisie shall be reduced to that small, light-industry, consumers’ goods section of capitalists who may continue to exist under Allied supervision. (Thus we have the spectacle of American capitalism, the bulwark of world capitalism, placing under arrest the banking officers and the “Big 6” German banks, and preparing to try these bankers as war criminals! The United States has likewise proposed the decentralization of the German banking system, and the liquidation and dissolution of the “Big 6” banks.) The big German bourgeoisie of Ruhr monopolists and munition manufacturers and their Junker allies are historically finished as a ruling class in Germany.
The German people shall pay, in every conceivable way, for the costs of the war and reparations. Although, as an American report has admitted, “the truth is that no one has a clear idea of Germany’s current assets, expenditures and tax revenues,” the Allies will work out a system to drain the country of its liquid wealth. Today, when a widespread credit and currency inflation has begun despite. Allied boasts to the contrary [2], the German internal national debt of 400 billion Marks stands in a state of suspension, while the Allied financial experts debate how to annul it and soak up, in their respective zones, whatever remains of German wealth.
The area of agreement between the powers has been summed up in the recent accord of the Control Council, fixing the nature and extent of German economic life over an indefinite period. The powers must get together in some fashion, to prevent their mutual disagreements from undermining the whole purpose of the occupation.

Naturally, this getting together can only be on the backs of the prostrate German nation, as the following chart of Germany’s future life indicates:



Industries Abolished

synthetic gasoline
synthetic oil
synthetic rubber
ball bearings
ammonia
aluminum and magnesium mining
heavy farming tractors
heavy machine tools
radio transmission
aircraft
ocean vessels
cement



 


Industries Restricted

steel
chemicals
(40 to 70% cut in pre-war)
machine tools
(11.4% of 1938 production)
locomotives
(none to 1949)



 




 


Industries Allowed

agriculture
coal mining
potash mining
building construction
light and handicraft goods



 



Here we have, in essence, the story of the destruction of Germany’s means of production.
 
The Future of the German People
The German people today constitute a subjugated nation, cast back by world imperialism into a state of division, decentralization and overt national oppression. Lenin’s characterization of the Versailles Treaty and its consequences as a “national humiliation” of the German masses is a hundred-fold truth, applied to the Potsdam Treaty. Any starting point in evolving a political program for the future of Germany must, if it is to have any realistic orientation, begin with the right of self-determination for the 66 million Germans. That is, the categoric declaration that the occupation must cease, the troops of the occupation must be withdrawn, the artificial division into four zones must be done away with, and the right of the Germans to create their own, freely-elected government must be re-established. Or, to put it differently, every principle, method, tactic or means employed by one and all of the four occupying powers must be cleaned off the slate.
The broken-up Germany of today, with its ruined economy, has often been compared with the Germany of Napoleon Bonaparte’s time, subsequent to the 1848 revolution, when the process of national unification began to move forward. Naturally, there are certain resemblances, but the differences are more basic. Despite its familiar vacillations on the issues of unifying Germany and fulfilling the democratic revolution, the German bourgeoisie of that period was an up-and-coming class, with an economic and political future ahead of it, and an expanding world economy within which to move about. Today, this bourgeoisie is largely destroyed and has no future but one of quisling-subservience to more powerful bourgeoisies of foreign nations. The preliminary problems of the German revolution therefore, – i.e., those problems posed anew to the people as a direct consequence of the war disaster (unification of Germany, winning of national independence, reconstruction of a national economy, solving of the agrarian question, building of a democratic government, etc.) – these democratic problems can only be handled and solved by the masses of German people themselves: the workers and the peasants. The remnants of the German capitalist class cannot play any part in the mobilization of the German people for resistance and national freedom. This is precisely why the growing-over, the continuation of the future popular, democratic revolution into its socialist phase, under clear-cut leadership by the German workers, may be expected to take place rapidly, but this expectation does not avoid the necessity of understanding that Germany must pass through a period of mass, popular, unformed, confused national resistance (in the style of the French resistance movement) in which an independent class movement of the proletariat can establish itself and in which the German revolutionary vanguard must wholeheartedly participate. Talk about a “coming German revolution”; ultimatistic demands for the “hegemony of the German proletariat”; slogans of soviets and the like, is abstractionist misunderstanding of the entire situation in Germany today.
The question is one of grasping the fact that (a) a gigantic resistance movement, a nationalist movement centering around the issue of a Free Germany will inevitably develop as the first phase of post-Hitler German history; (b) that a revolutionary group and a revolutionary party must openly, willingly and unashamedly take its place in such a movement, accepting its broad slogans and objectives as its own, while – it goes without saying – advancing proletarian class hegemony and the socialist program as the ultimate means of achieving these objectives, assuring them and moving ahead. This point of view was advocated by the Workers Party during the period of the occupation of France by the Nazis; it is familiar to readers of our press and we shall not repeat it here, except to state we consider it even more applicable to Germany today and tomorrow. It is the point of view of the German section of the Fourth International (IKD), those comrades to whom falls the concrete task of working out this approach in living practice.
A manifesto of International Solidarity with the German Proletariat (Fourth International, January 1946), signed by ten European sections of the Fourth International, proclaims “we are for self-determination of the German people.” But this manifesto of elementary solidarity with and support to the German workers in their struggles nowhere tells us what this means! The whole document is so written and weighted that it seems to be addressed to a proletariat engaged in a sharp class struggle with its own ruling class; certainly not the doubly nationally oppressed workers and peasants of occupied Germany. Its abstract granting of the right of self-determination is negated by everything else, summed up in the final slogan of “Long live the German proletarian revolution!” Furthermore, while continuing to support the slogan of “the right of each people to self determination”, the European Secretariat of the Fourth International at the same moment “rejects as it did during the war the idea of a ‘democratic national’ revolution through which the struggle of the revolutionary proletariat must first pass, drawing behind it the national masses, before it can develop on the basis of its own socialist program and finally wind up with the proletarian revolution.” (Internal Bulletin, SWP, Vol. VII No.3, February, 1946)
And here is exactly the point that makes this whole approach so unreal and dogmatic – what proletarian movement? We already have given some details on the status of the German worker – his defeat, his confusion and groping, his preoccupation with the struggle to survive. Even the thesis of the European Secretariat mentioned above recognizes this, in part. “On the day after the military defeat, the material and human premises for all important revolutionary activity by the masses in Germany were already lacking.” A modest understatement of reality, but more important is the further admission that “the rebuilding of the German labor movement will henceforth reflect the progress of the revival of the country’s economic life, of the integration of the proletariat into production, and the amelioration of the new repressive regime of the occupying forces.” But, as we know, the exact opposite to this has taken place – that is, the economic life of the country has sunk lower, the proletariat has become more dispersed and more unemployed, while the repressiveness of the regimes has hardly diminished! Therefore, the problem before the German workers is the same, only more so, as it was “on the day after the military defeat" – namely, “the rebuilding of the German labor movement!” That’s the point, not resounding phrases about proletarian revolution, etc. – all addressed to a working class that has yet to re-establish its elementary forms of bare economic struggle. The proposals of the Fourth International with regard to Germany are just as empty of meaning, as hopelessly sectarian as were their proposals to the French movement during the period of the Resistance.
But what about the German workers? Are they to submit themselves to the middle-class democrats, to follow along behind this amorphous national movement for a “democratic” Germany? Of course not, but we must recognize the point from which the German worker starts out today. He is not the French worker, who lived under Nazism – and then, only in an indirect form – during a short period. The first steps of the German workers – the formation of the new unions – are halting steps, in the effort to find the best form of organization for the future. It is the hesitant step of an infant movement, not the revival of German classic trade-unionism. It is in the struggle to live, the assertion of his right to live, that the German worker will find his class independence, it cannot be imposed by manifesto. Correctly, the German proletariat will fight for retention of the national industries; for operation of those factories that remain idle; for a revival, in general, of economic, industrial and commercial life. Work, food, shelter, reconstruction, educational possibilities, recreation, etc. – it is through the concrete working out of these problems that revolutionists will aid in the reformation of the German labor movement and, by that fact alone, gain its independence as the spearhead and clearest section of the national resistance movement. The Communist Party, recognized by most workers as an instrument of Stalinist imperialism, has less appeal in Germany than anywhere else in Europe. The way is clear for a genuine workers’ party, providing it understands the tasks of this period. “If the Allies create a situation in western Germany in which there is no hope for a decent economic future, they will in the long run create a situation where any party with dynamic leadership and a program which promises economic betterment can gain great strength among the industrial workers who are most affected.” The situation has been created, not only in western Germany but in all of Germany. Drew Middleton, the shrewd New York Times reporter, understood this; now the Fourth Internationalists of Germany must prepare for its fulfillment.
HENRY JUDD
Footnotes
1. The United States has not yet begun the delivery of the 15 per cent surplus plant equipment promised to Russia under the Potsdam accord – a convenient excuse used by the Russians for their continued seizures of plants in their zone!
2. Seventy billions Marks in circulation (December 1945), as compared with six billion Marks in circulation (1933).
 
Note ny ETOL
1. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Stanley Plastrik.
 



The Paris Peace Conference, after thirteen unhappy weeks of it, has finally come to an end. This ending, strangely enough, has left the twenty-one participating nations in exactly the same spot where they were thirteen weeks ago, facing the same basic split between East and West and with the same unresolved problems.
The proposed drafts of five treaties, with Rumania, Bulgaria, Italy, Hungary and Finland, have now been adopted – each by a vote of 15 to 6. But these treaties are far from being in effect – they are simply drafts, with various recommendations. They must now go to the forthcoming conference of the Big Four foreign ministers, the selfsame crew of diplomats (Molotov, Byrnes, Bevin and Bidault) who called together the Paris conference to smooth over their differences and disagreements.
 
Complete a Circle
The Paris conference completed a circle of diplomatic maneuver and gab to return to its starting point! The same set of problems handed to this conference by the Big Four has been handed back to the same Big Four. The chasm between the two great world rivals, Russia and America, is as deep as ever.
In his final denunciation of America at the conference, during the discussion over Finland, Molotov declared, “In all votes in the conference it was enough for the American delegate to vote and another 12 or 13 votes were assured.” Thus, proclaimed Molotov, America dominated the conference. True enough, so far as the majority voting went.
No less true was it, as Byrnes might have paraphrased Molotov’s remarks: “In all votes in the conference it was enough for the Russian delegates to vote and another five votes were assured.” That is, the votes of those nations unfortunate enough to be occupied by Russian imperialism, or close enough to fear occupation.
It was clear that these two blocs (15 to 6) dominated the Paris sessions, and that each antagonist used the proceedings solely to score propagandistic points on his opponent, and embarrass the other. The pitiable dove of Peace never had a look-in at the Luxemburg Palace.
 
Was Anything Accomplished?
What, if anything, was actually accomplished at the conference?
To say that peace has been restored to Europe; that tranquillity and harmony reign once more; that there is real hope for an economic revival and solution of the food shortage – to say that these things, real hopes and desires on the part of the European peoples, were accomplished would be a mockery of the facts. Not the slightest advance was made in one of these directions. The approaching winter is guaranteed to be as cold and hungry for Europe as was last winter; national economics are still stagnant, with absolutely little hope of an immediate revival.
The conference was limited to start with. Its duties were merely to “advise and recommend” changes in treaties whose basic drafts had already been drawn up by the Big Four. The really basic European problems of treaties with Austria and Germany, in particular, weren’t ever on the Paris agenda, and were not mentioned in 13 weeks of endless talk and equally endless hypocritical debate!
At the forthcoming Foreign Ministers conference, even the various recommendations and changes adopted have no actual power, since any one of the Big Four can, by exercising its veto power, ride roughshod over the recommendations. Molotov has already announced his intention to reject the recommendations not suitable to him and Russia. Then why did the conference even bother to meet?
The game had to be played through, the suspicions of the “small powers” had to be satisfied in some manner, the farce had to be completed. Now, once completed, the questions at stake are again posed to those who really decide these matters – the imperialist masters of the Big Four, or – to be more accurate – the Big Two, Russia and America. If the Big Four ministers cannot work out satisfactory deals over the disputes, still disputed treaties, then the whole thing is dropped into the laps of the Security Council of the United Nations – that is, another body where America and Russia equally comfort one another, except through different spokesmen. Such is the actual “achievement” of the Paris conference.
 
Treaties as Drafted
But the treaties already adopted, or recommended, themselves reveal the nature of the gathering. This holds for the points of agreement, as well as those of disagreement. Here are essential points in the five treaties, country by country.

ITALY: Dodecanese Islands to Greece; small Alpine border regions to France; disposition of African colonies postponed a year, with England meanwhile remaining in possession; reparation payments (in form of production) of $325 million to Russia, Yugoslavia, Greece and Ethiopia. No plebiscites or voting will take place in the transferred territories, and the Italian government will be forced to carry out the treaty whether it signs or not. The issue of Trieste remains as before, completely unsettled and with completely divergent plans.
 
HUNGARY: To cede Transylvania to Rumania; to pay $300 million in reparations to Russia and Yugoslavia; and with no prospect of a near withdrawal of Russia’s life-draining soldiers of occupation.
 
RUMANIA: To lose Dobruja to Rumania [?] and Bessarabia-Bukovina to Russia, in permanence; to pay $300 million to Russia, in addition to the hundreds of millions already drained off by the Russian tyrants.
 
BULGARIA: To pay $125 million to Greece and Yugoslavia; and to remain for the time being under Russian domination.
 
FINLAND: To cede the port of Petsamo, Finnish Karelia and various military bases to Russia; to pay $300 million in reparations to Russia. Altogether, Russia stands to collect $1 billion and over in reparations from the defeated powers.
 

Issues at Stake
This terse summary of the actually adopted treaty recommendations presents the grasping and reactionary nature of these treaties in full.
The additional points in disagreement, and far from being settled, reflect those issues at stake between America and Russia which have not yet been successfully “arranged” to their mutual satisfaction. They are the, issues of Trieste, and the problem of “free,” that is, American trade on the Danube versus Russian exclusive domination of the Danubian nations.
Not peace, but the preparation of future wars. This is our conclusion regarding the work of the Paris conference. Nothing else might have been expected from this gathering of yesterday’s Allies, but today’s rivals who will drag us into tomorrow’s war unless they are brought to a halt.
 



Kravchenko’s book [1], subtitled The Personal and Political Life of a Soviet Official, has become shrouded by political sensationalism, but this does not negate its intrinsic and objective values as a description of Stalinist Russia, and its monstrous dictatorship. The book must be approached cautiously, but not in such a skeptical spirit as to toss away its definite merits.
It is useless and unnecessary to become embroiled in the dispute regarding the personality of Kravchenko, or to attempt any subjective appraisal of his character. That is, at best, of secondary importance and a subject on which one man’s opinion is as good, or valueless, as another’s. Suffice it to indicate that the American Stalinist machine, in its panicky attempt to discredit the author, has dwelled exclusively upon his personality, without attempting to seriously refute the damning picture of their “socialist homeland” drawn by Kravchenko.
The author himself, although casting an obviously idealized and self-ennobling image of himself throughout the book, nevertheless does not conceal the basic facts regarding himself and his former status in Stalin’s Russia. In fact, this is essential for the descriptive purposes of the book. Kravchenko came from a family of vaguely humanitarian, non-party revolutionists. His father, who instilled a certain socialist romanticism in the son, seems to have been a semi-intellectual Russian whose historic grasp was exhausted by the 1905 Revolution. Maturing in the early years of the October Revolution, but apparently without any flair for Marxist politics and study, the young Kravchenko was swept up into the ranks of the young Comsomols and Party members whose ardor and enthusiasm were expressed particularly during the First Five Year Plan. The sincerity and faith of the young Kravchenko are unquestionable, as is his political ignorance and lack of background.
 
Kravchenko’s Background
As a political thinker or theoretician Kravchenko, of course, has nothing to offer us. His present acceptance of the dogmas of American liberalism and the theories of Russian capitalist restorationists is but the reverse coin of his youthfully simple acceptance of the Stalinist “we-are-building-socialism” line. To exchange the sinister Stalin-GPU bureau.cracy for the liberal-capitalist ideologists is, perhaps, a moral progression, but hardly a political one. But we know of no book that offers so much to the reader in terms of a detailed description of how the damned and bloody machine of Stalin operates, from its highest to its lowest summits.
Kravchenko was in the Party; he participated in the forced collectivization; the violent strains of industrialization; the sweeping purges of Stalin’s unilateral civil war to exterminate his opponents; the mobilization of the nation for the German war, etc. Kravchenko participated in the epoch of the Revolution’s ebbtide and final counter-revolutionary overthrow. He was in on all levels – as a young Comsomol sent to tame the resistant peasantry; as an industrial engineer; as a Party man, etc. He knows Stalin’s Russia as few do who have lived through it, or escaped from it.
The value of his tale does not lie in the more general and “theoretical” aspects of these sweeping events that the author attempts to picture for us. Rarely do his generalizations rise above the level of sloganeering, simplification and downright petty gossip filled with implied naive moralizing. Kravchenko’s real merit is in his simple, effective and down-to-earth descriptions of what these events meant in terms of the Russian masses. He takes us to the village during the forced collectivization; he escorts us through NKVD prison-labor camps; he talks to factory proletarians in the shops he is managing; he brings us to a unit meeting of the ruling Party during the purges; he makes us participate in his “interviews” with the NKVD, to see and feel its cruel, crude-handed methods; he advances us to the rank and office of a high government official in the Kremlin; we become a member of the bureaucracy overseas, etc.
In other words, we see and learn, in minute detail, how the whole gigantic machine operates. Thus, the book offers a valuable supplement to the great theoretic works of Comrade Trotsky and others on the Soviet Revolution and the process of its degeneration. The descriptive details that Trotsky and other political theoreticians necessarily could not provide to bolster up their work is provided – and over provided – by Kravchenko.
The book has another merit, perhaps of greater importance than its eloquent descriptions. That is the story of the Russian people and their attitude toward the regime. The familiar and nauseating story, so widespread among American liberals and Russian fellow-travelers, would have us believe that dictatorial, “strong” regimes are a natural, acceptable and essential system in Russia, peculiar to the historic nature of the people and justified by all of Russian history. “The Russians had the Czar for centuries; now they have a strong and successful government that has built up the nation.” Kravchenko’s book, in its description of the popular attitude toward Stalin (The Bossman) and the new barii (Masters), is a stinging refutation of this sinister totalitarian apologism. It is this aspect of the book that the American Stalinists have found most irksome. They have not answered it with a single argument, of course. The simple question of why the beloved regime and its exalted ruler require a NKVD secret police force numbering a million or more, this simple question is conveniently lost amid the lengthy attacks on the author’s personality.
For, as Kravchenko shows us time after time, the truth is that the Russian masses – the workers and peasants of the country – groan and strain endlessly under the alplike weight of history’s tyranny of tyrannies. To think otherwise is an insult to the sufferings of these people, and a flat denial of a history rich in dramatic struggles for democratic advancement and freedom. In episode after episode in his book, Kravchenko reveals to us the true feelings of the Russian worker, the Russian peasant and even the minor functionaries and bureaucrats within the regime’s institutions. Kravchenko does not color the remarks or reactions, most of which are today couched in terms of apathy, despair and helplessness. This lends them an authentic ring, because nobody knows better than the Russian people the task involved in overthrowing the bureaucratic collectivist tyranny. Yet it is clear that the regime is widely hated and despised, that the “system” causes aversion and disgust, that vague, ill-defined conceptions of genuine socialist democracy prevails among the workers and intellectuals, that the Russian revolutionary tradition is far from extinguished.
Although the end of Stalinism is not in sight, it is just as sure that a favorable turning of historic circumstances will find a responsive movement among the masses of Russia. These people are neither the docile slaves of a neo-Czarism, as our American liberals would have us believe; nor are they the dehumanized, barbarized cogs of a neo-Totalitarian order, as our professional anti-Stalinists and Politics authors would like us to accept; Behind the precision-functioning, Kafkaian machine are the restless Russian people. And this revelation is, I believe, the most valuable side of the Kravchenko book.
A word on Kravchenko, the author. Despite the fictionalized self-portrait of himself (alleged to have been drawn with the assistance of Eugene Lyons), Kravchenko is a true product of the new ruling, bureaucratic class of Stalinist Russia. His ideology is that of a benevolent bureaucrat repelled by the vile excesses of the regime. Knowing nothing of politics, Marxism or the international labor movement, his ideas are neither clear nor well expressed. But why should we expect him to be either a socialist or a bourgeois liberal? His portrait of Russia is, in this sense, a self-portrait. Kravchenko remains an ardent Russian nationalist, with no ties whatever to internationalism. When he discusses America, he does not even mention its labor movement. What impressed him in America is (a) the high material living standards; and (b) the freedom enjoyed by factory managers and engineers in the actual operation of their factories and plants. Kravchenko hates Stalin because The Boss’ Police-State does not operate in similar fashion – that is, permit the practice of Kravchenko’s humanitarian paternalism toward his workers. Kravchenko is a bureaucrat, a benevolent one to be sure, but workers’ democratic control of production is as foreign to him as it is to Stalin.
 
How Did It Happen?
Finally, a word on the review of this book by Ralph Graham, published in the August 1946, Fourth International. This reviewer, blithely ignoring the staring question that he must contemplate and reply to after reading the book – namely, how can one speak of Russia’s working class as a ruling class and Russia as a workers’ state – demands to know how theoretical “innovators” can “explain the unique phenomenon of a ‘ruling class’ which cowers in fear and terror before the political instrument of its own rule.”
Evidently, for Graham, the outstanding characteristic of a ruling class is its harmony, homogeneousness and stability. He has never heard of strata, layers, sections, splits, divisions, etc., within a ruling class; nor of intense and sometimes violent rivalry between its different divisions! Perhaps he has never heard of, for example, the Spanish Civil War where the division within the same ruling class proved so deep and impossible of resolution that a bloody civil war raged for two and a half years; or of the purges conducted by the German Gestapo within the ruling ranks of German capitalism. Kravchenko represents one section of the new ruling bureaucracy – the liberal “civilized” wing of engineers and managers whose main enemy is the GPU, the modern NKVD. It is the section most resentful of Stalin and his top political clique, symbol of the perpetually interfering State. Allowing for the historic and material differences, one can draw a legitimate analogy between Kravchenko and his friends, opposing the Stalinist state bureaucracy, and the important section of the American ruling class that opposed the Roosevelt “New Deal” bureaucracy and its intervention. Naturally, the conditions of Russia (isolation, poverty, low level of productivity and culture, etc.) have tempered the nature of the new ruling class and alone account for its extreme centralization, suspicion, brutality and general stupidity.
If Graham rejects our theory of the new Russian ruling class, from which has stemmed the dissident ruler-bureaucrat Kravchenko, then how can he explain the fact that Kravchenko proposes neither the restoration of capitalism in Russia, nor a social revolution of the proletariat to restore the original Workers’ State? Will Graham reply that Kravchenko is merely a disappointed member of the bureaucratic caste, as the Stalinists claim? In a word, how does he explain Kravchenko and his break with the regime?
HENRY JUDD

Footnote
1. I Chose Freedom, by Victor Kravchenko, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York. 1946; 496 pages.
 
Note by ETOL
1*. Henry Judd was a pseudonym of Sidney Plastrik.
 



Dear Comrade Editor:
I always enjoy reading Susan Green’s movie reviews in her To See or Not To See column, but I’m afraid she missed the boat in her piece on The Letter. Susan writes that the British lawyer risks his career in defending the murderess out of friendship for her husband, the Malayan planter. I’m afraid. Susan’s natural inclination to give everyone the benefit of the doubt has fooled her. The real motivation of the lawyer, who actually despises the woman he defends and is not at all touched by sympathy for her weakling husband, is simply one of defending his class, the British imperialists who rule Malay. It wouldn’t do, you see, to reveal to the natives just how immoral, decadent and utterly rotten their “superiors” are! (As if the natives don’t know).
This point is made much clearer in Somerset Maugham’s play, upon which this Hollywood version is based. Before becoming a routine defender of the British Empire, Somerset Maugham wrote some striking satires on the English colonials, particularly about those of Malay. Mention Maugham to a Britisher in Singapore now and he literally explodes in your face.
Despite its Will Hays distortions, The Letter is an effective piece in describing the treacherous and cynical lives of the Malayan planter class. While making for excellent melodrama, the shots of native Singapore are absolutely phoney. Orientals just don’t leer that way – particularly the Chinese who are about the most naive, friendly and good natured people there are.



 


Yours,
Sherman Stanley



 



The British Empire is going into hock, and your Uncle Sam is the pawnbroker. That’s the meaning of the diabolically clever scheme cooked up by President Roosevelt and his advisers in the current “All Out for England” campaign.
Suppose you were driving along in your automobile and it suddenly went off the side of the road into a deep and muddy ditch. You tried hard, but couldn’t get it out by yourself. To make things worse, a bunch of tough kids came around and starting throwing heavy rocks through your windows. Then, in the nick of time someone came along in a car and offered to help you get out of the jam you were in. Naturally you would accept the offer – even if a couple of catches were attached to it.
You wouldn’t mind having to pay cash for the job, but if you were asked to give a mortgage on your car for borrowing this fellow’s tow chain it wouldn’t be so pleasant. But there would be nothing you could do about it, especially if the tough kids were getting tougher by the minute. By the time you got out of the ditch and back onto the road you’d find yourself on debt, your car mortgaged and the other fellow halfway into it, about to shove you out of the driver’s seat.
 
What U.S. Gets
This, in essence, is what the American imperialism is about to do the British Empire and its center, England. Shortly before he was murdered. Lean Trotsky remarked that the first act of American militarism would be to take firm possession of the mortally wounded, dying British Empire. This prediction is being verified before our eyes as the utter dependence of England upon its cold, hard-bargaining “ally” increases from day to day. Let us examine the facts.
Already, the United States has accomplished the following:

Supplied huge amounts of food and material to Britain at cash prices that have yielded substantial profits to American industrialists.
 
Through these cash transactions, Britain has been forced to liquidate (that is, in effect, to sell to American bankers and stock brokers) over 50% of its holdings and securities here. An Englishman, let us say, is forced to give, up his stock in an American railway company for an American made tank. the tank produces nothing and may be destroyed in battle – but Uncle Sam has made a profit on the tank and now has the profit-yielding stock. The balance of British holdings here will follow the same liquidation process in rapid order.
 
The British, hampered by the war and shipping losses, have lost valuable commercial customers – particularly in South America. America, on the other hand, is gaining control of the Argentine market and taking ever larger proportions of British trade in its vessels – even to such remote markets as South Africa, Malaya and India.
 
America has gained invaluable naval and military bases in the Atlantic – steps preparatory to full political and economic control over the British West Indies, Virgin Islands, Bermuda, Bahamas etc.
 
American supremacy over Canada has been established and recognized by conclusion of the American-Canadian military alliance.
 

A New Phase
This much has been accomplished Up to now. The proposed plan of Roosevelt, to be presented before Congress at its forthcoming January session, by which the American government will “loan” or “lease” material war supplies to the British, marks a new phase in the bloodless conquest of the British Empire.
The plan in essence is based upon a realization by American imperialism of its own vastly superior position, and of the terrible weakness of the British in the fields of finance, shipping and war production. As a result of this superiority, the American government is determined not to see a repetition of 1914–1918, where the British gained most from the war – and then proceeded to liquidate their debts! This time there will be one victor – and each loan will be heavily mortgaged!
The proposed plan of FDR gives U.S. big business the following advantages

Not one cent of American capital, invested in war industry producing the goods that are to be loaned, will leave the country. Thus, American capitalists will make all the profit on these additional investments and American war industry will be further expanded by these new pump-primings. In terms of profit, British industrialists will not even reap a plugged nickle.
 
The increased flow of material to Britain will fall into line with the real objectives of American imperialism – namely, that Britain takes the heaviest buffetings from the German war machine, steadily wearing it down, while the United States keeps its powder dry and feverishly organizes its own blitzkrieg machine. Britain is the buffer, absorbing the heaviest shocks. America will step in when both adversaries begin to show signs of exhaustion.
 

Payment Guaranteed

Return payment on these loans is guaranteed – one way or the other:


The loans may be repaid in kind. That is, the British will return an equivalent number of tanks, guns, ships, etc. But this possibility is exceedingly remote – or rather impossible. If the British were unable to repay their loans in World War I, is it conceivable that they could in World War II? England is vastly weaker and has suffered infinitely more material loss during one year of this war. The economic fabric of its Empire is tearing into shreds – witness the increased dependence of the Motherland upon imports from abroad. England won the last war – but did not pay; England is losing this war to Germany and America – again it will not pay.
 
Then what return payment will there be? It will take the form of gathering in Britain’s mortgaged property. FDR has told the British to go ahead and order $3,000,000,000 worth of war material in America. This sum represents just about the net balance of British securities and investments in America, which U.S. bankers shall now proceed to take over. “Go right ahead, take everything you need – the house is yours”, says FDR, reminding us of the money lender opening up his vaults to the unsuspecting victim. “We’ll talk over the terms later, no hurry”. And most certainly, FDR is in no hurry. For what alternative do the British have? Where else can they go? They know in advance that FDR will fix the terms – mortgages on the British West Indies, naval bases (and more) in the Pacific, etc.

But more than real estate will be mortgaged. Professor Harris of Harvard University sums it up as follows: “It is conceivable that the United States may demand a mortgage on these (British) assets in exchange for credits ... Private British investors would give up their foreign investments, obtaining in return sterling that they would have to exchange for British securities or to keep idle. British companies all over the world would fall into the possession of the United States Government. The United States would not only become a gigantic trading organization, in rubber, tin, gold, diamonds, etc., but would have taken the longest step toward worldwide imperialism and domination that has ever been taken by any country.”


From an imperialist viewpoint the most beautiful part of the entire scheme is that the British ruling class must take this, swallow their medicine and pretend to love it. They are caught, in a neat trap. They pretend to be fighting for freedom, idealism, etc. – in a word, for things into which no “sordid profits motive” can enter. Good. Here they are getting precisely what they have been crying for – guns, munitions, etc. How can they complain of the financial stranglehold Uncle Sam is putting on their necks? The British rulers must take it and like it – or face the only other alternative from their viewpoint: surrender to Hitler in the French style. Only the British working class is capable of breaking up not only their own rulers’ schemes, but those of Roosevelt in addition.

American imperialism is striking out for World Empire and will attempt to smash everything in its path. Roosevelt aims at reaching this objective in a series of stages – culminating in direct war intervention. An important step is the economic and financial subjugation of the British Empire as America’s number one imperialist victim. The clever “lease and loan” scheme of the President fits neatly into the broad and general pattern of this program for world domination.
 



After a two and a half hour discussion with the British
Viceroy, Mahatma Gandhi was reluctantly forced to admit in a
statement on Feb. 6 that, “A peaceful solution to the problem
of India’s freedom is apparently impossible.”
The British authorities, rejecting completely even the
conservative demand of Gandhi for a promise of Dominion Status for
India after the war, have slammed the door in the face of the
Congress Party once more. Gandhi has admitted that resumption of the
long-drawn out negotiations is useless. Meanwhile, the left-wing
forces within the Nationalist Congress have openly stated that they
will split the Congress from top to bottom if Gandhi should sign any
agreement with the British, or attempt any sell-out of India’s
demand for freedom.
“England’s difficulty is India’s opportunity”
– this was the clamor of the 400,000,000 workers, peasants,
students and middle class people of India, when the war began. The
cry for drastic mass action was heard on all sides.
But the Gandhi crowd who hold the reins of the Congress movement
tightly in their hands trembled before the prospects of revolution.
Representing the native landowning class, merchants, money lenders
and mill owners who fear for their property at least as much as do
the British rulers, the Gandhi-Nehru reactionaries deliberately set
about quelling and dampening the spirit of the masses.
 
Beheading the Movement
For a time they were swept along and issued “radical”
slogans and demands for demagogic purposes (immediate independence, a
Constituent Assembly, etc.). But not for long. A period of aimless,
endless and demoralizing negotiations with the Viceroy began. No lead
was given the country, except continuous exhortations to refrain from
action and violence.
At the last meeting of the Executive Working Committee of the
Congress (December 1939), Gandhi was appointed Supreme Dictator,
with authority to make decisions, set aside previous decisions and
decide policy by himself. He was authorized to make an agreement with
the British. His weekly paper, Harijan, has become the weekly
instruction bulletin for Congress organizers and workers. Any effort
to institute a “Civil Disobedience” campaign was frowned
upon and opposed. Gandhi stated, “We cannot be unfair to the
British.”
 
Left Wing Purged
At the same time a fierce drive launched against the Congress
radical wing made up of left-wing nationalists (Bose), socialists and
Stalinists. They, who were demanding action, were considered the real
enemy by the Gandhi traitors. Subhas Bose, leading left-wing
Nationalist, neatly summed up the whole struggle when, after
denouncing Gandhi as a traitor to India, he wrote, “The essence
of Gandhism is to lick the foot which has kicked it in the face!”
But the country has not been silent during this period. It is
still absolutely correct to say that India is solidly against support
of the war and is proving this in action. The organized opposition is
led by the Congress left-wing: the unions of workers and peasants,
the Socialists, the Stalinists, and the supporters of Subhas Bose.
 
Stirrings of Revolt
To cite but a few instances: On October 2 there was a one-day
political strike against the war by 90,000 textile workers of Bombay.
In Madras, Bose addressed an anti-war demonstration of 100,000
people. At Nagpur on October 9 an anti-imperialist conference under
the presidency of Bose was attended by 30,000 delegates. Strikes of
jute workers in Calcutta are still going on, and rapid growth of the
peasant unions in Madras, Punjab and Bengal provinces is reported!
The British, in the meanwhile, have been conducting feverish
negotiations with Gandhi and Nehru. They brought Sir Stafford Cripps
to India for discussions with Gandhi, Nehru and Moslem leaders. But
Sir Stafford accomplished next to nothing and has already left the
country via China and is on his way to America.
 
Many Arrests
The authorities have begun a campaign of arrests against numerous
trade union and peasant leaders, with hundreds being sentenced. The
British well understand who their real enemy is. They realize that
Gandhi’s influence is on the wane and that little can be
expected even if they should sign an agreement with him. In the long
run they must depend upon military and police force to remain in
India.
 
Distrust of Stalinists
To summarize: the past three months has seen the deliberate and
wilful sabotage by Gandhi of the anti-war sentiment of the masses.
The fighting spirit of India’s workers and peasant has been
momentarily set back. The Indian people are justifiably hesitant
about falling for the pseudoradical and demagogic slogans flung at
them by the Indian Communist Party. The Indian C.P. – as all
sections of the Communist International – works solely in the
interests of the Moscow bureaucracy and in the interests of its
alliance with German imperialism. The “radical” slogans
of the Indian Stalinists are aimed at furthering the successes of the
Russo-German military war alliance and not at really freeing India
from imperialism.
Naturally, Indian revolutionists will support each and every
action directed against British imperialism – no matter if it
is led by the Stalinists, while at the same time pitilessly exposing
the motives of the Stalinists, which are clear to all.
 
Country Stripped for War
As the war progresses British exploitation in India heightens. The
country is being drained of its food products, its silver and gold,
its mineral ores, its jute and cotton – all for Britain’s
war needs. The determination of the workers and peasants to resist
this super-colonial exploitation will redouble. The growth of the
Congress left-wing is assured. Today India’s struggle centers
within the Congress – the struggle against Gandhist sell out.
 



COLUMBO, Ceylon – American tourists in great numbers used to call at this large island lying off the southernmost tip of India, while en route to Bombay. All this has hailed since the war – along with Ceylon’s vital international trade in rubber, copra and tea. Out here the effect of the war is not as direct as in Europe, but just as bad. trade, communications, almost all necessary supplies are cut off as the Axis snips, one by one, the threads of the British Empire. If Egypt falls, then Churchill’s warning that all imperial communications may cease will become a reality for Ceylon and India.
This amazingly beautiful tropical island has been called in tourist literature blurbs the “Pearl of India”, “The Garden of Eden”, an “Oriental Paradise”, etc. So far as its scenic beauty is concerned, for once the blurbs are true.
 
It’s Hell For Bosses
As for Ceylon being a “Paradise” that is true in another sense, with a slight modification. It is a “Paradise” for nationalists, revolutionists and colonial workers and peasants striving to rid themselves of Britain’s death grip. But for the English plantation owners and the British authorities it is far from a “Paradise”! It is a Hell on Earth!
All this is due to the famous (in Asiatic circles) Lanka Sama Samaj Party – the Ceylon Socialist Party. This Party, originating a bare 5 years back, has grown with great speed and assumed leadership over the island’s labor and peasant movement. Particularly strong is its influence among the hundreds of thousands of Tamil tea laborers who are the proletarians of Ceylon.
It is worth while mentioning the reasons that lie behind the success of the Sama Samajists. I would summarize them as two-fold.
First, over a period of years they steadily evolved their own revolutionary political program, clarifying its practical and immediate details. They learned the doctrines of revolutionary Marxism and faced the War with a clear program – against both imperialist war camps; for the colonial socialist revolution.
Secondly, these comrades – most of whom are from middle class backgrounds – deliberately set out to make themselves revolutionary leaders. By their energy, total devotion to the Sinhalese people and dynamic participation in the daily lives and struggles of the island’s workers and peasants they have succeeded. Today their leadership is unrivalled and recognized by all – including the clique of British planters who dominate Ceylon’s politics. Every labor strike, every peasant move, every anti-war action, every progressive political step is guided by the Ceylon Socialist Party! It has won the justified support and protection of the masses whom it serves.
Threats Fail
Since the war began the Party has been systematically attacked and threatened by the British authorities. Driven underground by repressive measures, it functions with almost as much effectiveness as previously. Here are several illustrations: When its two members in the Ceylon State Council were jailed for delivering anti-war speeches and demanding Ceylon’s independence, the Party organised a demonstration of many thousands of workers within 24 hours. The demonstrators defiantly marched to the jail where their leaders were being held, organized a mass meeting, sang revolutionary songs and listened to their leaders who spoke through the bars of their cells!
The island is plastered at regular intervals with posters expressing revolutionary demands and numerous leaflets containing stirring messages from Party leaders are broadcast. The illegal publications of the Party appear with a regularity most annoying to the British.
In the numerous strikes on Ceylon’s tea plantations these comrades have had a leading role. Some strikes have been bloody affairs, with the planters not hesitating to murder and employ all sorts of violence against the strikers. But the laborers’ union has stood firm and continues to press its demands.
 
Internationalists
In various court cases and trials the Sama Samajists have made it abundantly clear in their testimony that they are internationalists, having no interest in either of the warring camps. Accused of being “Fifth Columnists” their answer was that they oppose Hitler first of all by fighting the British authorities and plantation masters who have adopted all the methods of Hitler in this colony.
The British have given up any hope of winning the masses of Ceylon to their side in the war. Instead, they aim solely at suppressing the Party as much as possible, terrorizing its leaders, preventing the spread of its influence to India and adjacent sections of their Empire. Their objective is to hold on to power by sheer military force and weight. So far as destroying the Sama Samaj Party is concerned, they do not have the ghost of a chance because its roots have sunk far too deep.
In Ceylon we have a brilliant example of what can be achieved by a fighting party of genuine socialists. It is also an illustration of independent action on the part of the masses: of the Third Camp at work among the colonial people. Naturally – as in every other section of the world – a long, tough road is ahead for the Sama Samajists. If the totalitarian attack on the British Empire succeeds. Ceylon may fall under domination of one of the fascist powers. But from our knowledge of and experiences with this Party we know it will doggedly plug away, fighting against any and all imperialisms for the program of revolutionary internationalism. By one of those ironic developments of history, the small and relatively unimportant – from an economic standpoint – island of Ceylon has become a major revolutionary center on the Asiatic continent. On its shores there lives the most powerful colonial section of our world-wide movement.
 



SAIGON, Indo-China – With the collapse of France, the metropolitan center of the French imperialist Empire, and with the possible collapse of England, the problem of a redistribution of their respective colonial holdings becomes acute. The totalitarian imperialist powers, eagerly scenting the blood and cast-off limbs of their fallen opponents and with a total disregard of the national aspirations of the colonial peoples, prepare for the division of the spoils. The thieves begin to fall out!
 
A Rich Prize
French Indo-China, the rich and strategically located prize colony of French imperialism, furnishes a splendid example of the fate that awaits the colonial masses of the two old Empires if the fascist imperialisms have their way and succeed in forcing a world redivision. Rich in rubber, tin and raw materials, this colony straddles the South China Seas and the Indian Ocean. That is, by sea it commands the areas surrounding the Dutch East Indies and those sections of the Middle East (Burma, Malay) converging at the western entrance to the Indian Ocean. In addition, by land it guards the frontiers of South China. He who would have Singapore – the Gibraltar of the Far East – he who would have the invaluable Dutch East Indies and erect a Far Eastern Empire, must take Indo-China first!
 
Adapt Themselves
What has happened since the fall of France? Those phoney “optimists” of British imperialism who envisaged Indo-China and other French colonies as continuing the struggle of the Allies as though nothing had changed were soon disillusioned. The material interests of the French plantation owners, landlords and administrators soon overcame their “spiritual” and “ideological” sympathies. The bubble, was pricked in a week and the colonial administration began rapidly to adapt itself to changed circumstances.
The French rulers faced two clear alternatives – either to remain with England and keep up a pretense of continuing the Allied struggle, or to adapt themselves – a polite expression for capitulate – to Japanese imperialism. In the first instance they faced the dead certainty of Japanese invasion with quick defeat, for their forces were feeble and demoralized. The second alternative was their choice. It is today’s policy. Along this path lies at least the possibility of a temporary survival as property owners and masters of men, with the chance of a subordinate sharing in the administration at a later date.
 
Ruthless Oppression
There has existed all along a third alternative – independent of the desires of French imperialism. That was the possibility of colonial revolt on the part of the Indo-Chinese and Annamite masses who make up the population of the country. But the most ruthless oppression imaginable has temporarily halted this, the only progressive solution to the problem of Indo-China’s fate. In the first week of the Second World War no less than 25,000 Nationalists, Stalinists and Fourth Internationalists were forcibly lodged in the jails and concentration camps of the country! And now, in the interim period between the fall of France and the formal settling of Indo-China’s status, the French administration to prove its faithfulness to imperialist ideology no matter what the origin, is tracking down those few who may have escaped the first mass arrests.
The interim period exhibits imperialism in its starkest form. Not only the unprecedented police and military rule, but the hunger and the outside world. The frank objective of the French authorities is: Hold on at all costs, display our superior technique to tomorrow’s masters and we shall have our share – be it a minor one.
 
What Next?
In all likelihood Indo-China’s future will be decided without the participation or consultation of its masses. The most hounded Party of all – the Bolshevik-Leninists of Indo-China – are still in too weak a position to assert independent leadership. Already, even petty Thailand (Siam) blusters and threatens, demanding back certain small areas in the North. Even the National Chungking regime of Chiang kai-shek talks big about a counter-invasion if Indo-China submits unresistingly to the Japanese. But these are minor threats or bluffs when compared with the realities of Japanese policy.
Large units of the Japanese navy, based at the island of Hainan, hover off the northern coasts; expensive military units press against the north frontier; swaggering Japanese officials and military officers inspect cargoes; freight cars and bus communications, eager to halt the minutest trickle of goods to Nationalist China. Inexorably edging in and building the foundations of tomorrow’s formal rule come the vanguard forces of Japanese imperialism. And what of the Indo-Chinese masses? Today, they can do little but sit silent as yet another halter is placed around their neck. They have no illusions; they will lift no welcome voice to the Japanese. They remain in silence and bide their time.
It is generally assumed in Indo-Chinese circles that a secret understanding already exists between the French government of Petain, the Japanese and Hitler. The status quo is to be formally maintained until some sort of world re-division takes place. Then Indo-China is to be added to the Japanese Far-Eastern Empire. Without the independent revolutionary action of the colonial masses such will be its inevitable fate. Indo-China today serves best as both an example and a warning to the colonies of the world. It offers a preview of the problem each colony must face sooner or later. Either world re-division, with a simple exchange of imperialist masters; or the colonial socialist revolution.
*
Postscript
SHANGHAI – Shanghai is filled with rumors concerning Indo-China. According to one report which has an air of reality about it, an Italo-German Commission is rushing post haste to Indo-China with the object of making a survey of its raw material resources and trade possibilities. Hitler has no intention, if he can help it, of allowing the fruits of his war to be gathered up by others! Before the new Versailles Conference, before the new world re-division is even in sight the thieves begin to fall out over division of the loot. One war not yet completed; other wars already in sights – such is the meaning of imperialism.
 



“We want neither the rule of London or Berlin; nor the rule of Paris or Rome; nor that of Tokyo or Moscow.” – The Congress Socialist of India, Sept. 1939.
THE MOST SIGNIFICANT and hopeful aspect of this strange Second World War which, with the creation of a new front in the Scandinavian areas, is about to assume a greatly intensified military nature, has been the political and economic actions of the colonial peoples.
In the colonial empires of England and France there live hundreds of millions of native people whose lives and daily activities are molded solely by their foreign imperialist oppressors. These people now find themselves at war. Against their will and with no consultative voice in the matter, they have been drawn into the imperialist struggle in which they are the main bone of contention.
But they have not accepted their fate quietly this time! From the war’s inception, the Third Camp of the colonial people for national independence and peace has begun intense mobilization against both imperialist war camps. Headed by the people of the sub-continent of India, the colonial workers and peasants of French Indo-China, Burma, Ceylon, Cyprus, Rhodesia and the Union of South Africa, British West Indies, Syria, Palestine, etc., have displayed in one way or another their hostility to the war.
 
The Anti-War Struggle
It has been primarily the 400,000,000 workers and kisans of British and Native India who have led the forces of independent Third Camp action. The series of strikes and political actions that have swept over this country have typified the course of events in the colonies we have mentioned. That is why it is worth describing in more detail the development of the Third Camp in India.
When Chamberlain announced in September of last year that the British Empire was at war, India automatically became a belligerent power.
On that very day began the anti-war fight. A meeting of 100,000 workers in Madras assembled to hear Subhas Chandra Bose, left-wing nationalist leader of the All-India Nationalist Congress, plead for the launching of an immediate anti-war civil disobedience movement. This mass meeting was the signal for similar demonstrations in the provinces of Madras, Bengal and Punjab. The people of India had commenced their reply to the imperialists’ war plans.
Before many weeks went by it became clear how England intended to utilize the man-power and resources of the world’s greatest colony in its war aims. The promulgation of the Defense of India Act by the British viceroy created a military dictatorship over the country. A call for military volunteers was issued and recruiting officers went to work in India’s military areas (Punjab and Northwest Frontier). Large garrisons were rushed to the fortifications on the Northern front and troop transports carried tens of thousands of Moslem and Sikh soldiers to Egypt, Palestine, Aden, France and other areas of the Near East where they swelled the colonial forces of the Empire.
Among the population the effect of the war was instantly felt. Food prices, especially the price of grains and fruits which are the staple consumptions of the people, skyrocketed an average of 25%! The government, however, saw to it that the profit derived from these increased prices went solely to the merchants. The sale price of farm produce was standardized by governmental decree. The net effect was a sharp reduction in the living standards of the Indian workers and the already super-exploited Indian peasant.
Indian industry, which first began during the last war, soon received its war stimulus. An order for 500,000,000 sand bags was placed with the India Jute Mills Associations at Calcutta. The effect of this was a raising of the mill workers’ hours from 48 to 60 per week with no pay increase. In the Chota-Nagpur steel and iron area of Central India, British capitalists poured in millions of English pounds for plant expansion and extension. By December of 1939 the number of peace-time munition workers had trebled! Indian factories can now supply England with the following war products: munitions and airplanes, iron and steel finished goods, jute for sand bags, tents, etc., chemicals and explosives, railway rolling stock and numerous raw materials (rubber, cotton, oil seeds and fats, manganese, etc.). This is exactly the role designed for India by its slave masters – to supply an endless amount of its wealth and products for the imperialists. But the people have said otherwise!
 
Indian Labor on the March
Beginning with small, local strikes a strike movement has spread rapidly from one end of the country to the other. It has involved hundreds of thousands of industrial workers in the jute, steel, cotton, printing and transportation fields. Cities as far apart as Bombay and Calcutta have been affected. The demands of the strikers have been well summarized in a resolution drawn up at a general conference of 52 unions representing the Bombay Provincial Trade Union Congress. These demands were for (1) 40% war allowance to make up for the rise in food prices; (2) control of food prices; (3) opening up of cheap grain shops throughout the city of Bombay and the Province. A campaign launched by these unions has already forced the opening up of 19 grain shops.
At the present moment, the strikes are fanning out and assuming a more general and nation-wide character. There are general strikes of textile workers in progress in Bombay (185,000), Cawnpore and Allahabad. Steel mill workers in Calcutta and Patna, street cleaners in Calcutta, printers in Cawnpore, etc., are all engaged in strike activity. Although victory has as yet only been attained in the smaller strikes, the desperate Bombay general strike now in progress for 6 weeks is the center of the strike struggle. A victory here would be followed by a series of major strikes all over India.
While Indian industrial labor is on the march, a bitter struggle is under way in the sharply split Indian Nationalist Congress. There are, in reality, two Congress movements in India today. The Compromise wing led by Gandhi has completely capitulated to British imperialism and more openly than ever supports the war of the British. It has been this sabotaging action by Gandhi and his followers that has contributed most to dampening the militancy of the Third Camp. But around the dramatic figure of Subhas Bose, a radical bourgeois nationalist and former president of the Trade Union Congress, a new group of anti-compromise nationalists have rallied. At the recent All-India Congress sessions this group staged an anti-compromise demonstration with undoubtedly good results. Centering primarily in the radical province of Bengal, the Bose “Forward Bloc” is preparing intensified action for Indian independence at the moment. The economic and trade-union activity of the Third Camp is far in advance of its political action today, but it is clear that the Bose Anti-Compromise Congress must soon attempt to give political direction to the spontaneous strike struggles of the Indian workers.
This is India today – world center of the Third Camp, living symbol of independent action of the colonials against imperialism and for peace. The story of India is being duplicated to one degree or another in all the colonial countries of the world. It is these people whom the American forces of the Third Camp must constantly bear in mind and prepare to assist at every appropriate moment.
 



Last week, in London’s Westminster district, a young Sikh
student and engineer named Mahomed Sing Azad interrupted a meeting of
high. Indian officials and retired British civil servants to put two
bullets in the heart of Sir Michael O’Dwyer, former Governor
General of India’s province of the Punjab.
Azad, crying out that he was acting in the name of India’s
freedom, also wounded the Marquis of Zetland, Secretary of State for
India, and two others.
Readers of the Socialist Appeal know that our movement does
not support individual terrorist action which can never be a
substitute for action on the part of the people of India for their
independence. But if ever a man deserved the fate that was meted out
to him it was Sir Michael O’Dwyer. That is why we, opponents of
terrorism of this sort, must hasten to energetically condemn Mahatma
Gandhi and his associates in the leadership of the Indian Nationalist
Congress who instantly disowned Azad and threw his fate into the
hands of the British authorities.
Who was Sir Michael O’Dwyer?
It was he who, more than anyone else, bears responsibility for the
worst massacre in India’s history – the Amritsar
massacre, which takes its place in world history alongside the Bloody
Sunday of Czar Nicholas.
The Amritsar affair took place on April 13, 1919 – almost 21
years ago. The Caxton hall assassination of last week was a reminder
to British imperialism that the memory of April 13, 1919 can never be
wiped out until it has been fully avenged.
 
The Post-War Wave of Revolt in India
After the last World War a revolutionary wave, stirred up by the
actions of the Russian workers and peasants and by the total failure
of the British to keep their hypocritical promises made during the
war in exchange for support by India, held the country in its grip.
The Indian Nationalist movement was progressing rapidly. In the
historic Punjabi city of Amritsar some 5,000 Sikh peasants and
workers had gathered on April 13 to listen to Nationalist agitators.
They were a crowd of men, women and children – totally unarmed
– meeting in the city’s open square known as Jallianwala
Bagh.
Suddenly a contingent of British soldiers, with a few professional
Indian troops, under the command of Brigadier General Dyer appeared.
They had been sent by Sir Michael O’Dwyer to “restore
order.” These men were posted at the only exit to the walled-in
square. Without warning – as General Dyer later boasted –
they began to fire into the crowd. Before the slaughter was over 500
lay dead and 1,200 were wounded. Then the brave general withdrew.
The next day, as part of his admitted project of “striking
terror into the whole of the Punjab”, General Dyer issued his
famous “crawling order” compelling all Indians to crawl
on their hands and knees down the principal street of Amritsar. Such
was British imperialism in action in the summer of 1919!
Never since India’s first War of Independence of 1857 had
the country been roused to such a fury. Dyer and his boss, Sir
Michael O’Dwyer had to be withdrawn from India. Indian public
opinion forced the creation of a Royal committee to investigate the
horrible massacre. At the hearing both of these bloody imperialists
defended and boasted of their actions. O’Dwyer assumed full
responsibility and claimed that he had saved thereby British rule
over the 400,000,000 Indian people.
 
Murderers Whitewashed By British “Democracy”
After the trial had dragged on for years, the inevitable whitewash
and verdict of “not guilty” was given. Dyer retired on a
nice pension and died in 1928, doubtlessly untroubled by the screams
of his victims, for had not the Crown and Church of England given him
their blessings? As for Sir Michael, he met his fate last week.
No event has made such an impression upon the Indian people as the
massacre of Amritsar. A national memorial park has been created on
the site, to which hundreds of thousands of Indian fighters for
freedom come every year. Jallianwala Day – a day upon which the
memory of those who died in the cause is honored and a renewed pledge
to struggle for freedom is taken – is celebrated annually by
India.
The British will unquestionably try to place the hangman’s
noose around the neck of Mahomed Singh Azad, martyr in India’s
struggle. They have already hung three members of the Irish
Republican Army.
Action of the English working class can save Azad. Our comrades in
England, the British Fourth Internationalists, have already begun a
campaign in his behalf.
Defend Azad from the British hangmen!
 



At the end of last week’s session of the 5,000,000-strong
Indian Nationalist Congress one clear fact had emerged from the
deliberately confused reports appearing in the American press.
If not formally, then in reality, the Indian Nationalist movement
is split. It is split sharply between its conservative,
Gandhi-led right wing and its left-wing headed by ex-President of the
Congress, Subhas Bose.
Hundreds of thousands of Indian workers, peasants and Congress
organizers had travelled to Ramgarh from all parts of the Indian
sub-continent to attend these historic sessions. They found that the
sessions constituted one of the briefest Congress meetings ever held,
lasting apparently less than three days. All of the work of the
Congress was done prior to the full sessions by the Gandhi dominated
Subjects Committee and Executive Committee.
The resolution of the Subjects Committee, adopted by the Congress
delegates in great haste, called attention to Gandhi’s
unwillingness to begin an anti-war or independence campaign at this
time. It therefore follows that the Congress can do nothing –
until Gandhi chooses to be “willing.”
 
Action Voted Down
All amendments – demanding a complete break With England,
urging a revolutionary, mass action program and the launching of the
independence campaign now – were voted down by the
Gandhi followers. It was politely hinted that no action by Gandhi and
the Congress could be expected for at “least three months.”
The meaning of this is that no action can ever be expected from
Gandhi because if another three months drones by without anything
occurring, the Congress will fall into an even more demoralized state
than today and will lose all its support among the masses.
 
Emergence of Bose
Obviously, the most significant fact about the Ramgarh sessions
was the dramatic emergence of the left wing nationalist, Subhas Bose.
 
Rump Session Acts
Speaking at the rump Congress session he organized in an adjoining
field, Bose declared the aim of his Anti-Compromise Congress. “Before
parting we must establish permanent machinery for waging an
uncompromising war. The hope of this conference is that it will
prelude a nationwide struggle along an all-India front.”
As a first step in his program of action Bose organized a dramatic
demonstration of 5,000 men and women which marched through the Gandhi
Congress shouting, “Down with Compromise.” The impotent
supporters of Gandhi could only retort with “Long live Gandhi.”
The split in the Congress ranks at Ramgarh and the emergence of
an anti-compromise wing is a decisive event, to be welcomed and
supported as a major step forward in the struggle against British
imperialism.
 



Again displaying their position as the vanguard of the Indian
people, 185,000 textile workers of Bombay have declared a general
strike, demanding a 25 per cent wage increase to make up for rising
living costs since the beginning of the war.
These workers represent about 90 per cent of Bombay’s
textile mills and come from 45 different mills.
Meeting at Patna on March 1, the Executive Committee of the
All-India Nationalist Congress has decided to prepare for the
launching of a civil disobedience campaign against British
imperialism. In a strongly worded resolution, nationalist India has
openly disassociated itself from British rule and its war aims:
“Indian freedom cannot exist within the orbit of
British Imperialism, and dominion status or any other status within
the imperial structure is wholly inapplicable to India ...”
The preamble of the resolution states that Great Britain is
carrying on the war for imperialist purposes and that India cannot be
a party to the war. It opposes the sending of Indian troops to parts
of the British Empire for war purposes. The resolution concludes,
“Nothing short of complete independence will be accepted by the
Indians.”
 
Final Action Postponed
Overriding the opposition of left-wing members of the Executive
body, who demanded an immediate launching of the struggle for
freedom, Gandhi succeeded in postponing final action until the
plenary session of the Congress which is scheduled to convene at
Ramgarh on March 17. Gandhi has thus deliberately left the door wide
open for a last minute acceptance of any offer that the British might
make.
This was revealed by Maulana Abdul Kalan Azad, newly-elected
president of the Congress and a conservative follower of Gandhi who
stated that, “even one minute before the launching of any
movement Gandhi would be prepared to explore all avenues of peaceable
settlement with the British Viceroy.”
But the door seems to have been shut by the firm refusal of the
British rulers to make the slightest concession that would satisfy
the meagre demands of the Gandhi group.
 
Masses Push Gandhi
For six long months the Indian workers and peasants have been
clamoring for leadership and action in the struggle against
involvement in the war and for national independence. For six months
they have been told to be patient, to bide their time while Gandhi
was fruitlessly negotiating with the British Viceroy. Has the time
for struggle come now ? So far as the 400,000,000 masses are
concerned the answer is yes!
A driving force behind their revolutionary spirit is the rising
prices of all foods: that is, hunger and increased starvation. That
is what the war has meant for them so far.
 
Left-Wingers Boo Gandhi
As their anger against the rule of the British has increased, so
has their impatience with the dilatory and treacherous tactics of
Gandhi and Nehru. In a recent tour of Bengal Province – center
of left-wing nationalism and stronghold of Subhas Chandra Bose, the
leading left-wing nationalist of the Congress – Gandhi was
booed at various meetings, perhaps for the first time in his long
career. At one railroad station he was met by demonstrators carrying
black flags – a symbolic rebuke of the sharpest character in
India. It is to this anger that Gandhi has finally yielded – in
part.
 
What Will Gandhi Do?
How far is he prepared to go? That is difficult to judge at
present. Although he is still the dominant leader of the nationalist
movement, he cannot endlessly hold in check the social forces of mass
unemployment, hunger and unbelievable poverty. His latest move is
undoubtedly aimed at stealing the thunder of his left- wing
opponents, but such tactics have the dangerous habit of backfiring –
that is, getting out of hand.
Gandhi well knows this. If he sees that a struggle is unavoidable
at present, he will do all in his power to limit it, isolate it and
take advantage of the distrust and demoralization that has resulted
from six months of futile talks with the Viceroy.
Above all, Gandhi will endeavor to prevent a mass, revolutionary
struggle in which the peasants will begin to take revolutionary
measures by seizing and dividing up the land and the workers will
begin to set up their democratic workers’ control councils in
the cities.
But one thing is certain. The first open, mass revolt against
the World War and for peace is about to begin!
Hindu-Moslem unity can now be achieved on the battlefield of
common action and struggle. The rallying cry of the Indian people is,
“Forward to National Freedom”, and “Long live the
democratically-elected Constituent Assembly!”
 






BREAKING THROUGH THE ORIENTAL CENSORSHIP: – Sherman Stanley, Labor Action’s correspondent, has just returned from an extensive tour of the Far East. In this, the first of a series of articles he has written tor Labor Action, Stanley gives his daily impressions of Dai Nippon, Land of the Cherry Blossoms.



*
KOBE, Japan – Daily life in Japan today furnishes practical evidence of one axiom of modern politics: Imperialist war doesn’t pay!
Japan’s endless “incident” in China is two years ahead of the European war. That is, the living standards of the masses have had two years longer in which to decline as compared with their less unlucky brothers in Europe’s madhouse. The decline has now reached a stage where the existence of a Japanese worker, clerk or farmer is comparable to that of a primitive toad in a frog pond: eat, hop about at the long day’s work and sleep!
The masses are frankly puzzled by the “sacred incident” that was supposed to end after three months. The more they tighten their belts so that the final push may be made and all of China’s supposed riches fall into their laps, the more they are asked to tighten their belts! Even the belt of Asiatic fatalism has just so many notches. Where and when does this vicious cycle end?
 
Cleanliness
Japanese cities are about the cleanest one can find anywhere. But a good “economic” motivation lurks behind it all. No scrap material can go to waste! Everything except the cobblestones must be picked up, sorted and used. This goes for bits of scrap iron or metal, pieces of string not long enough to mend, a busted shoe lace, bits of odd paper (try to obtain toilet paper in Japan!), candy wrappers, etc. Everything goes into the totalitarian war machine the oh! so subtle Japanese politicians are trying to erect.
 
The Last Union
Japan’s last union- – the Japanese Seamen’s Union- – has just been “voluntarily” dissolved. The union bosses decided this was in the Nation’s interests and, without consulting a ship’s crew, wrote finis to Japan’s organized labor movement. Now, only secret unions can exist as in any fascist country. Such is “national unity” in the land of the Lotus Flower.
 
They Are Hungry
Walk along any Japanese street and watch the people carefully. (One sees few young men, mostly old people and children with their mothers.) These people are hungry – even the office workers in their badly-fitted suits. They are small in stature, with bad features and posture (the result of centuries of racial in-breeding); their appearance is that of lean meat, with few cheerful expressions.
An American worker on a Japanese diet of rice, fish and a few vegetables would soon reach the enfeebled, dull level these people seem to live on.
 
The Bottomless Yen
The Japanese Yen is worth about $0.25 to the American dollar officially. Unofficially – on the “Black Bourse” – one can obtain within Japan itself anywhere from 7 to 9 for $1.00! And outside the country, in Shanghai or Hongkong for example, 11 to 13 for the dollar is the normal rate. Three years of war have driven the Yen down to one of the world’s most depreciated currencies.
The burning economic necessity of obtaining foreign currency – particularly the American gold dollar – to bolster up the collapsible Yen lies behind Japan’s feverish attempts to increase its. exports. But the Yen just holds its own as the belt tightens.
For now everything possible is exported: even rice, although there is a shortage and for the first time in Japan’s history it was found necessary to import a cheap grade from North China. All silk, cotton and textile products, every toy and luxury article must be exported or the Yen folds up. Japan is a poor, third-rate capitalist power putting on the act of a big-shot imperialist bully.
 
Price and Value
It is estimated that the general cost of living has increased by 2 to 2½ times since the China war. Needless to say, wages, in keeping with usual capitalist practices, having remained practically stationary.
In inns, restaurants and eating houses, the prices listed alongside the food items are not printed, but written in pencil or ink. Thus they can be changed without waste of time or menu cards. Changes, of course, are unilaterally in the upward direction. The number of food items available, however, constantly descends. Even a foreigner with money in his pocket can go hungry unless he goes to one of the expensive European-style hotels!
One way of testing and examining mass living standards is to go through city department stores where commodity goods are displayed. Outstanding factor in Japan’s stores – aside from the unprecedentedly high prices – is the universal poor quality of the goods displayed. Made of flimsy, shoddy material; unattractive and drab; imitative and ill-fitting – these are the only suitable descriptions of the textile, clothing, furniture etc. stock that is on sale. Much of it comes from the widely prevalent “home industry” found ail over the country. Why the high prices for these cheap objects? Certainly not due to high wages being paid to the “home” workers! It is due to shortage of basic materials, plus manufacturers’ and contractors’ profits.
 
Shortages
FOODS: Rice, butter, eggs, fruits, sugar (½ pound per month is permitted the Japanese), coffee.
DRINKS: No foreign whiskies or wines are available (Japanese Asahi beer has a taste equivalent to that of skunk urine). Sake wine is the national drink. Henceforth, acorns (!) are to supplant rice in the manufacture of sake – a true taste of Oriental ersatz!
 
Luxuries
Beginning October 7, there is a ban on the sale of all luxury (that is, all but dire necessities) goods throughout the country.
This anti-luxury campaign will be handled by the National Spiritual Mobilization Committee (“Joy through Labor”) which will station its snoopers in hotels, cafes, beauty parlors and department stores to deliver lectures, on the evils of purchasing a jar of facial cream or after-shaving powder. The Committee will have a no doubt highly popular Women’s Auxiliary which “will send its members out to spot richly-bedecked woman and thrust into their hands slips of paper reading: “Let us stop wearing rings. Let us cease wearing expensive clothes.”
 
Production
Japan’s shortage of basic raw materials (iron, coal, etc.) is well known. In addition, restrictions have just been placed on the use of electricity by factories. Use of nickel for manufacture was prohibited on August 24, except in war industries. (This will just about kill the instrument, cutlery and bicycle manufacturers). Out of 1,006 machine-tool manufacturing plants, 600 are being eliminated and the rest will be organized as contractors for 16 major plants.
 
Morality and Immorality
All places of amusement (bare, restaurants, cafes, movies, dance halls, cabarets, etc.) must now close down no later than 10 p.m. After this hour a Japanese city bears an unhappy resemblance to one of your dirge-like English colonial towns after 8:30 p.m. when the colonial inhabitants have gone home to their slum areas and English society has gathered for whiskey-sodas at the Cricket Club!
The Home Ministry has ordered all dance-halls to close down not later than October 1. Simultaneously, jazz music has been banned throughout the country.
Provisions, however, have been made to exempt the Geisha houses and the charming Geisha girls from these harsh rules. Under your double moral codes, what is bad for the sinful masses is so very, very good for the upper middle class and business men.
Religion has put its foot forward. The Shrine Bureau of the Home Ministry (comparable to our American Department of Interior having an Altar Commission!) has launched a campaign urging each family to own its own shrine. As the China Weekly Review ironically remarks, “Before it, twice a day, the worshiper will be able to contemplate the indispensable qualities of the government which makes self-sacrifice a matter beyond voluntary action.” A shrine in each family is an awful lot of shrines!
 
Spies, Spies Everywhere
Every citizen is encouraged to have his ears wide open and listen to his neighbor’s and foreigners’ conversation in particular. On August 3. Mike Suzuki, head of the Foreign Affairs, section of the Metropolitan Police board complained of Japanese loquacity. He warned women not to talk too much, to beware of spies in social clubs and to watch out for that spy who utilizes ye olde love technique!
 
Movies
Paramount Newsreel and all other foreign news films have been banned from Japan’s public theatres. Henceforth, the crudely propagandistic Japan Newsreel Company will have exclusive rights. Importation of American and English full-length films has ceased and only 4-6 year old films are revived. Modern German and Italian movies, however, are widely distributed. As for the Japanese film, in technique, acting, lighting, story-plot etc. it belongs to the Middle Ages of Filmdom. Even India – with its infinitely more backward development – has far superior native films.
In Modern Japan, the only significant artistic and cultural achievements that can be pointed to. date back to the feudal period and the days of the Shogunate. There are no important contemporary writers, artists, or intellectuals. The soil of this regime is barren.
 
Young Manhood
There goes your Japanese young, man, with shaven head and dressed in the drab uniform of the Army or Naval Cadet. For the 17–18 years of his existence he has been taught the virtues of feudal self-sacrifice for the Throne.
 
Young Womanhood
Here are a group of young schoolgirls, aged about 17. They are dressed in black from toe to foot – cheap black canvas sneakers, coarse black stockings, black cotton bloomers, black middy-blouse and jet black hair all cut the same way, in a military bang with the nape of the neck shaven. Duty and discipline to Father, Church and Throne are written on their faces. In another year they will either be working in some Osaka mill, or will have been married off by the parents.
 
Away From It All
Despite recent restrictions on immigration to China, on July 1 the number of Japanese residing in China had increased 58,527 over the figure of April 1 – a grand total of 452,156 having left the country. In Shanghai there are 73,150 Japanese; Peking, 67,437; Tientsin, 51,374 etc., etc.
Why are so many anxious to leave the land of Cherry Blossoms and the Lotus Flower? And why, incidentally, does the government now restrict immigration? Isn’t the China affair necessary to provide for Japan’s overcrowded population?
There are two reasons. First, the desire of the petty bourgeoisie to reap some small profit from China’s ruin. Secondly, the desire of those who can – from educated and middle class layers – to escape the stifling atmosphere of this imperialist-capitalist-feudal-military-totalitarian regime. Incapable of launching even a democratic struggle against the ruling clique, they seek flight and fresh air in Shanghai.
 



SHANGHAI – The undeclared war between Japan and China is now wearily dragging its way through the early stages of its fourth year. An elementary taking of inventory reveals a sorry picture indeed so far as the position of Chinese nationalism, revolutionary potentialities and the fate of China’s masses are concerned. We must nevertheless recognize the bitter truth for what it is.
Any bridge that may have led to a possible settlement of the conflict between Japanese imperialism and the Chinese colonial bourgeois class now appears to have been blown up beyond possibility of reconstruction. Japan, tin the eve of “recognizing” its miserable caricature of a Puppet State headed by the pitiful Wang Ching-wei at Nanking, has pushed too far ahead to re-open negotiations with Chiang Kai-shek. The subtlety of these Nipponese agents slays one! Owning the Nanking regime lock, stock and barrel they have now prepared an elaborate “treaty” which no doubt will be signed with all that ornate ceremony of which only the Japanese are capable. The treaty will give them economic monopolies to exploit all of occupied-China – which exploitation can hardly begin to take place because of the simple fact that Japan doesn’t have the necessary initial capital to invest.
 
War Fronts Frozen
And Chiang kai-shek, always amenable to a favorable agreement, he too apparently has burned all his bridges behind him. Thus the long-existent military and political stalemate – there is barely any military action with the exception of a stupid and indiscriminate bombing of Chungking which only displays the hysterical anxiety of the Japanese to “do something” and make an end of the bloody mess they’ve gotten into – remains and probably can continue indefinitely.
On both sides, the war fronts are frozen stiff. The Japanese – told that the “holy incident” would end in three months – have gotten nothing out of the war except additional loads to bear and further melancholy reflections to store away in their warehouse of Oriental fatalisms. As for the Chinese, the reactionary Chinese Kuomintang having done everything possible to prevent a raising of the national consciousness they are yet more indifferent and tired of it all.
 
A Worried Man
What if China’s position today? While it is true that the country is not “conquered” and that 1¼ million Japanese soldiers as well as large naval forces are inextricably tangled up like a helpless new-born babe twisted in its umbilical cord, nevertheless the fact remains that Japanese imperialism can make something out of the situation, while the Chiang Kai-shek regime cannot. The stupidity of those liberal bourgeois folk who prate about China winning the war through sheer weight and attrition – particularly now with the practical abandonment of the Chungking regime by the “democratic” imperialist powers – is beyond contempt. No war was ever won by back-pedaling Generals and retreating armies, not even in China! Then why does Chiang Kai-shek continue? Partly because there is nothing else for him to do; partly because he hopes that a change in the international situation may revive his hopes of loyally serving his imperialist masters of France, England and America. But he is a very worried gentleman indeed! He sees himself dependent entirely upon Stalinist Russia for external supplies which, in turn, means a tighter squeeze from his dubious allies of the Eighth Route (Stalinist) Army.
In his final speech before the plenary session of the Kuomintang Executive Committee (July 8), Chiang sweated hard attempting to explain that the statement of Mr. Stephen Early to the effect that “There should be applications of the Monroe Doctrine in Europe and Asia ...” did not signify an extension of the glad-hand from Yankee imperialism to Japan. But many of China’s so-called nationalist leaders fear otherwise.
 
No Victories Here
Today huge and rich areas of China are occupied. The coast from tip to tip is Japanese controlled. Only the Russian supply route remains open. The industrial, commercial and modern cities of the coast are all in enemy hands. All that remains of Free China is the peasant hinterland. When the last Japanese “peace” offer was turned down the Nipponese responded with new offensives on land and in the air (these have since petered out), with a further intensification of their naval blockade of the coast and with successful isolation moves in the South.
Internally, China’s situation is still worse. With the exception of the Shanghai area practically all modern industry has been destroyed either by military action of the Japanese or “scorched earth” action of the Chinese. Free China has virtually no industry. Its food and land problems remain as before, with great famine and malarial districts, floods, epidemics etc. sweeping the land. Estimates of those who have died in the past 3 years range from 6 to 10 million, mostly from disease and famine. Rice prices are colossal, while the Chunking dollar goes
down and down and down. Descriptions of inland China, with its millions of refugees, make it appear as a land struck simultaneously by the Seven Plagues of the Old Testament! There are no “victories” to be read in all of this.
Upon whom must responsibility be fixed for this tragic state of affairs? What has caused this sharp dip in China’s national and revolutionary movements so that today one must frankly recognize that the labor movement of the country is in effect, temporarily dead, organizationally non-existent.
For the “democratic” capitalist powers {England, France and America) China’s struggle for national liberation was, from the beginning, only a convenient weapon in their campaign of imperialist rivalry against the Japanese. And, as is often the case, when New York scrap iron merchants and California oil men found it profitable to sell to Japan they did so without hesitation or thought of the “broader” aims of imperialist strategy.
 
“National Hero”
By far the greatest responsibility devolves upon the Chinese Kuomintang, political organization of the Chinese property class, and its allies of the Chinese Stalinist organizations. For three years, Chiang Kai-shek has done everything to prevent the war from broadening its base – he has catered to the most cynically corrupt Chinese generals and war lords; he has been blind to the most incredible profiteering on food, money exchange and war contracts (in front of his nose the wife of his Finance Minister sells Chunking money short on the Shanghai exchange!); he has permitted the most treacherous officers and commanders to continue; he has destroyed embryonic labor unions in his own territory and denied all democratic liberties; he has based his armies on the forced draft and and accomplished his labor through the forced levy; he has conducted the war on the military plane solely, leaving intact feudal and landlord China.
Chiang Kai-shek, man of the foreign imperialists, Chinese bankers, merchants and landlords, has accomplished his task well. Among the Chinese masses he is no more of a “National Hero” than Hoover is in America. As for his wife – puffed up to heroic proportions by American journalism and Pearl Buck – she proved so incompetent as Commander of the Chinese Air Force (which never takes to the air) that her husband was forced to remove her from the post.
 
Stalin’s Tool
Although there have been and still are numerous clashes between the Kuomintang forces and the Stalinist Red Army they are of a purely bureaucratic nature. The policy of confining themselves to a stipulated area, of abandoning their socialist program for the capitalist program of the Kuomintang has been consistently followed by the Chinese Stalinists. The clashes are not those of political principle, but are quite analogous to those between the Chungking government and rival, provincial war lords who have the annoying habit of raising their heads every so often. In addition, there is the fact that the Eighth Route Army is a useful pressure tool in the hands of the Moscow oligarchy – “now we threaten Japan, now we threaten Chiang Kai-shek!” That is the deep “strategy” of the so-called Red Army of China.
The laws of revolutionary history and revolutionary strategy in particular seem to be proven only in a negative – that is, reactionary and counter-revolutionary – fashion in our disastrous times. So it is with China and its war of national emancipation. Here we have definitive and classic evidence that the colonial, national bourgeois class is incapable not merely of leading a progressive struggle to a successful conclusion, but incapable of even partial successes! If the colonial masses remain quiescent of are duped, only disaster can result. The horror and tragedy of modern China is before us. Today, the men of property in Europe and America are capable only of destroying whatever remains of civilization; their lesser lights and pale shadows in the colonial world are proving themselves not one whit less destructive or pernicious to the interests of civilization.
 



SHANGHAI, September – In Shanghai, the local merchant and property-owning class has a special law unto itself that it puts into constant operation. “Never save for to-morrow what you can spend tonight!” Such is the economic base upon which the innumerable night clubs, gambling joints, brothels, opium dens, horse and dog race tracks, etc., operate.
Probably Shanghai reflects more than any other city the vicissitudes of the modern imperialist world. Nobody knows what will happen next – not the next day, but the next hour! Money (and every kind of money floats around Shanghai) therefore burns fiercely in the pockets of those speculators and compradores privileged to possess it. Nowhere in the world does the bourgeois class so proudly exhibit its inherent vice and corruption as in this city. Particularly now, with important changes shortly to be put into effect, are these people, pursuing the rule of “anything goes.”
 
Reign of Terror
For a double-edged campaign aiming at undermining the status of the famous International Settlement and the French Concession (Shanghai’s two old foreign imperialist areas) is now underway. The pressure is applied from two sources: the miserable puppet regime of Wang Ching-wei having its center in Nanking, the Japanese military authorities operating from Hongkew, the section of the city they have occupied. Everyone understands, of course, that the Japanese are really behind the whole business and are simply preparing to establish their full authority over the entire area. Already they dominate Shanghai militarily, control its communications
and access to the sea. Now they wish to complete the job by driving out. the remnants of the rival imperialists.
Thus a reign of threats, assassinations, intimidations and gangster rule has opened up. The British troops have made their inglorious departure for Southern points, the French Concession authorities each day yield more and more to the demands of the Japanese. Only American marines and 100-odd Italian soldiers remain in the International Settlement. The Japanese are now negotiating to take over police control in those areas abandoned by the British. The road ahead is clear, for who will stay their hand? It was all summed up by a spokesman for the Puppet Government who stated recently, “Only the submission of the local authorities to the National (i.e., Wang Ching-wei) Government at Nanking, and the assumption of direct authority over the entire Shanghai area by the National Government can restore the rule of law.”
But if the imperialists are settling (with much heart-break) the status of Shanghai among themselves, all is not so well among the Chinese masses. It must be borne in mind that even if you lump all of Shanghai’s foreigners together (Japanese Russian émigrés; German-Jewish refugees – who, by the way, live miserably in a Hongkew ghetto for the most part and have learned nothing from their Hitler experience; British, French and American agents, etc.) you still have considerably less than 5% of Shanghai’s total population! Walk two minutes’ distance off one of the main streets and a foreigner is rarely seen, only the Chines masses living in miserable slum sections.
Shanghai has experienced a real strike wave this year. Basically of an economic character its causes have been described as follows by the China Weekly Review (August 17, 1940),
“The basic reason for the current strike wave is the terrifically high cost of living. This, in turn is due to the fall in the exchange value of the Chinese national dollar; hoarding and manipulation by profiteers; political factors, such as the general deterioration in the European situation, and the disappearance of subsidiary coins, which dealt a severe blow to petty merchants and pedlars who were almost ruined.”
Strikes have been pulled by bus workers, utility men, dockyard laborers, textile workers, and have affected iron works, tobacco factories, newspaper offices, laundries, etc. In the first half of this year there have been 156 strikes, although the annual average for Shanghai since 1918 has been only 79. Examination of the Shanghai Municipal Council index prices quickly reveals the driving force behind these strikes. Taking 100 as the living cost of Shanghai workers in 1936 (before the Sino-Japanese war), the figure for June 1940 stands at 422.91! The purchasing power of the Chinese dollar is now 23.65% of its pre-war value! It is estimated that at the end of July it cost a Chinese worker 4.5 times as much to live as it did in 1936, while his wages in most cases have barely even doubled. As the China Weekly Review neatly puts it, “Strike or starve – that is the alternative facing them (the Shanghai workers).”
 
Can’t Be Settled
Unfortunately, the strike wave now shows signs of petering out. Brought about and organized through spontaneous labor action (there is no organized labor movement in all of China), these strikes succeeded in travelling a certain distance on the economic front but were incapable of tackling the dominant political front. Any strike in China today soon confronts the organized might of Japanese or foreign imperialism. The tragedy of the whole situation is the total lack of interest displayed by the Chunking (Chiang Kai-shek) regime in these workers who are, in reality, its only genuine allies.
But while the strike wave may temporarily die away and the rival imperialists may affect a temporary settlement by handing over all of Shanghai to the Japanese, the “strike or starve” alternative remains and the class struggle of China’s workers will continue.
 



SINGAPORE – Happy, oh happy indeed is the world of dreams and illusion! In this outpost of British imperialism the most popular current movie is that of our old friends, Bing Crosby, Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour in The Road To Singapore!
As you know, this picture has about as much to do with Singapore or the road leading to it as President F.D.R. has to do with the road leading to peace. But I suppose this is precisely why it is so popular with the population and has been indefinitely held over. For life in colonial Singapore – hot. dirty, squalid, overcrowded – would hardly be bearable without some make-believe touch to relieve the monotony of each day’s existence.
 
Military Base
The island of Singapore is today dotted with hastily constructed military and naval works. While an indifferent and largely hostile colonial population looks on. the British authorities are putting the last touches to their Gibraltar of the Far-East. For, far from expecting the early arrival of crooner Crosby or luscious Lamour on the next P&O boat, they nervously await the long-feared invasion of Japanese naval and military forces. Thus, Singapore has become Britain’s major military base in this area of the world, with large naval forces, several airfields and a minimum of 10,000 troops.
Occupation of Singapore would give the Japanese imperialists complete domination of the Southern Pacific, including the Dutch East Indies, British and French Borneo and would place the forces of Japan a bare 350 miles from Australia. Such is the strategic value of this Far Eastern rock! The road to Singapore is sown with the hard rock of bitter, inter-imperialist military conflict.
 
A Vital Possession
Britain has been staging an embarrassing retreat in the Far East. Before the overwhelmingly superior position of Japan one imperial barricade after the other has tumbled. The British gave up the ghost in the Tientsin dispute, then withdrew their naval forces from Hongkong, closed the Burma Road (until this week – Ed.), withdrew their total forces from Shanghai, etc., etc. But it will not surrender Singapore without a bloody last ditch fight. Far too much is at stake. Not only would surrender mean loss of the South Pacific, but the eastern portals guarding the entrance to Malay, Burma, Ceylon and India would be thrown open. It is for this reason that Singapore has become a concentration center and base of the Empire. All those troops, forces and equipment that were withdrawn from China, etc. have been drawn as if by a magnet to Singapore island. In addition, extra troops have been shipped from Australia, England and India. Anzacs from down under; swaggering English lads in R.A.F. uniforms; small, dark Malayans; powerfully-built Punjabis from Northern India – all these soldier types can be seen on Singapore’s streets. Come what may, the imperialists are determined to hold on to their plunders!
There is yet another objective behind these military preparations. As a part of the daily growing military and political accord between America and the remnants of the British Empire, there is a distinct possibility that Singapore may be “leased” to the United States for its own imperial purposes. I understand that imperialist surveyor Mr. Roy Howard is shortly expected here as part of a tour of the East Indian area. This notorious American journalist salesman no doubt intends to sample the goods before the purchasing price is fixed! American capital is extending its arms across the vast Pacific and preparing to reach for new, hitherto untouched areas.
But Singapore island has more value than that of military-strategic importance. It is the shipping and feeder-point for the peninsula of Malay – a colony rich- in two highly coveted raw materials, rubber and tin. Raw rubber and tin – how badly are these products needed by the hungry war machines of the imperialist powers!
 
Slavery For People
And this brings us right to the question of the colonial population who inhabit Singapore city and the adjacent peninsula. On Singapore island itself Chinese who migrated from Canton, Hongkong and Fukien Province in South China form about 85% (450,000) of the total population. The balance of the population (leaving aside the unwanted foreign imperialists) consists of the Malayans and Indian immigrants. As for Malay, there the bulk of the population consists of the native people who work the plantations.
In no sense do these people (95% of the population) participate in the decisions that supposedly are to decide their fate. They are the dark, exploited masses – slaving away on the rubber plantations, in the tin mines and smelter factories, on the quays and dockyards. Colonial rule in Malay is as harsh as any other place – sub-existence wages, union organizations forbidden, long prison terms for malcontents, etc. Since the war began, the collapse of the international market and shortage of shipping have thrown tens of thousands into indefinite unemployment. Singapore’s great harbor today handles two or three ships per week! And at the same time there looms that greatest danger of all – a shortage of rice, the food staple of the masses.
In the early months of this year Singapore labor responded nobly to the difficult problems facing it.
There were economic strikes among the rubber plantation workers, dock laborers and factory women. Most dramatic strike of all was that of 300 women working in the American owned Firestone rubber factory of Singapore city. These women pulled a sit-down strike and were only ousted after a physical clash with the police. So fierce did Malay and Singapore labor become that the authorities began to lose their heads and newspaper editors became hysterical. On May Day several Chinese workers were killed in a bloody clash with police during a Stalinist-led parade. The closing of the Burma Road hardly added to British popularity.
But these actions, unfortunately, were conducted mainly under Stalinist leadership. These gentlemen, far more concerned with conducting military defeatist propaganda in favor of the Hitler-Stalin accord, could give no lead or shape to the rising movement. Instead, they fell victim to the police and many of them were interned or deported. Now the movement has temporarily died down and all is tentatively quiet. What was lacking was revolutionary direction.
 
Indifferent To Attack
And what if Japan attacks? What will happen then? First of all, under the complex circumstances of today it would be wrong to assume that Japan is prepared to attack Singapore shortly. No doubt they are planning to do so ultimately and have long ago spied out the ground with their ubiquitous “fishermen”. But Japan, partly because of its own internal weakness which is far more than most people imagine and partly because of fear of incurring Hitler’s wrath, must play a waiting, cautious game. Japan cannot act boldly and swiftly.
But if and when they do attack there is no question that Singapore will fall. It can be largely isolated by naval and land forces, while the Japanese can bring up large forces. Far more important is the fact that the masses, seeing no distinction between British and Japanese imperialism, will remain passive and neutral, forming the silent mass of the Third Camp that is slowly being whipped into shape by revolutionary internationalists everywhere. Although they bum with hatred of the Japanese (Singapore’s Chinese colony has done more for Nationalist China than any other Chinese foreign community), they cannot distinguish sufficient difference between the British and Japanese to make it worth while dying for. For an independent Singapore and Malay, yes – for England’s colony, no. So they will fold their hands in silence while the rival brigands fight it out.
Even worse for the British is the fact that their large Punjabi (Indian) forces will quit the fight at the first opportunity. These Indian soldiers, brought to Singapore against their will, have no heart to fight for the British. Already there have been several cases of rebellion and “disobedience” in the Punjabi ranks. Let it be remembered, as Lenin pointed out in his writings on Ireland, that Indian regiments in Singapore were the first to rebel against the last World War – a full year before Ireland’s Easter Week uprising! And these soldiers, to whom I have talked, have not forgotten 1915. They want only to return to India, to fight for India’s freedom!
Such is Singapore today. Waiting nervously and expectantly for the outcome of the war. And in the background, more conscious than ever before of the purely mercenary and imperialist character of the conflict, hover the Chinese and Malayan masses. They too are waiting – waiting their first opportunity to smash all imperialisms be they white, yellow or brown. These are the people to whom the small group of Fourth Internationalists in Singapore direct their revolutionary propaganda.
 



Bluntly rejecting any talk or rumors that the big powers were about to patch up their differences. Roosevelt has made it clear that in his opinion anyone who talks “peace” is a Nazi agent or “stooge.” All talk of “peace,” according to FDR; emerges from Berlin and the sinister brain of Hitler.
To further emphasize his meaning the President has engaged in a series of acts and measures which serve only to rush America further and closer to OPEN (“shooting”) participation in the war. Most of these actions have taken place since his unofficial war declaration speech of a few weeks back, We list them below because they give a small idea of what is in store for the American people as they are unwillingly rushed into the war.

Brigadier General Somervell, testifying before a House military subcommittee, said he had received contracts for construction of army camps. He was authorized to award work valued at one billion dollars – or enough to construct 28 new cantonments. These camps (along with those now in use would accommodate an army of 3,000,000 soldiers. Chief of Staff Marshall told Congress in March that the, next increase of the army would be double its present size to about 3,000,000.
 
W.L. Batt, deputy director of the OPM. declared in a speech at Buffalo that the United States “will have to spend at least one hundred billion dollars to match the German war machine.” He said that at least 25 per cent of the national income must be spent annually on war production. This was immediately followed up by Roosevelt’s request for an additional appropriation of three billion dollars for the army.
 
Another – the third in a series of 35,000 ton battleships – has just been launched. The keel of yet another was immediately set in the place of the new South Dakota.
 
The military services have taken over, through purchase and charter since the war began, a total of 93 ships grossing 910,000 tons. Almost all of these have gone to the navy. In the last two weeks alone 28 ships were taken. Most of these ships are passenger-cargo vessels suitable for transport work and the moving of stores to bases. They are the largest, fastest and newest ships of the merchant marine. Most of them are being gathered in East Coast ports.
 
A steady stream of troops are being shipped out to America’s old bases (Hawaii, Philippines, etc.) and especially to the new bases (Newfoundland, Bermuda, etc.). A faint idea of the number going can be obtained from the official admission that one division (15,000 men) are being sent to Porto Rico alone! The plans call for a steady increase in the flow of men until hundreds of thousands of American youth occupy these imperialist bases.
 
To date the American people have been warned by the Priorities Board to expect shortages in gas and oil (no Sunday driving has now threatened to become no pleasure driving at all!), automobiles, radios, cooking utensils (no aluminum), all products utilizing rubber, etc. Not to talk about making ALL incomes taxable!

It would be possible to go on indefinitely listing the war plans of the Roosevelt regime. The total sum is enormous. If the imperialists and would-be world conquerors in Washington have their way it will mean the fastening of a colossal burden of death, taxation and economic strain upon the working class primarily, with the middle class also being hard hit. Roosevelt’s war plans mean

an endless flow of men and arms to all parts of the world;
the introduction of a war economy of scarcity and taxation at home;
the end of all normal pursuits and the regimentation of all life around the single purpose of war and still more war.

 



THE PUBLIC COMMISSION of hari-kari by the Independent Labor League of America (Lovestone group) furnished the revolutionary movement with an unpleasant glimpse of the inner organs of a typical centrist and sectarian organization. At the same time it has made it necessary and worthwhile to summarize the shameful fate of those parties and groups that, for the most part, were attached to the London Bureau, or “International Workers Front Against War.”
Many years prior to September 1939, Trotsky and the Fourth International had predicted what lay in store for centrism when struck by the thundering blows of world war. Just as the civil war in Spain was an advance school of rehearsal for the Second World War, so was it an advance warning – in the tragic downfall of the Spanish P.O.U.M. – of what would happen to those organizations whose anti-war policy rested upon clay feet.
 
What Was the “London Bureau”?
It is not our objective here to give a detailed account of the Bureau’s origin or history. In brief, it was a loosely organized, heterogeneous collection of small left-wing parties and isolated groupings bound together primarily by mutual confusion and opposition to Trotskyist “extremism.” Its leading sections were represented by the British Independent Labor Party, the French P.S.O.P. (Workers’ and Peasants Socialist Party) and, before its death, the Spanish P.O.U.M.
Hardly at any period in its brief career did it pass beyond the boundaries of Europe. On the continents of Africa, Australia and South America it never had any adherents. In Asia only the Congress Socialist Party of India could, although unofficially, be associated with the Bureau because of its political program. In North America the above-mentioned Lovestone group and the Norman Thomas Socialist Party (the first officially, the latter unofficially) were categorized under the general heading of the London Bureau. Thus we see that insofar as it represented anything serious, the Bureau was almost completely in Europe.
Needless to say, the center of the Bureau issued lengthy and eloquent denunciations of the war as its bloody hand approached closer. But September 1, 1939, marked the demise of its literary career. It was “transferred” to Mexico and has since been maintaining silence.
What of the various sections and groups that made up the Bureau? One can say without the slightest exaggeration that only the British Independent Labor Party remains! To the others one of two things has occurred: either complete dissolution and abandonment of the anti-war struggle under war conditions; or open social-patriotic treachery and acceptance of the war as a struggle between “democracy and fascism.”
Among those groups liquidating their anti-war protestations and openly supporting their own bourgeoisie were the India League of Radical Congressmen (the M.N. Roy group) and the Independent Labor League (Lovestone’s group, which also won the unique distinction of voluntarily disbanding itself). The German S.A.P., an émigré group, is also supporting His Majesty’s government. In addition, the Norman Thomas Socialist Party, or what remains of it after innumerable desertions, treads the path of near-appeasement in the absence of a fundamental anti-war program. Its “moral” support to England, its sterile pacifism, the open association of its leaders with bourgeois “appeasers” – all these actions warrant our predicting an early transfer in toto to the group we have listed above.
Under the second heading – those that have voluntarily dissolved, or been organizationally destroyed by the war – must be listed the following: the French P.S.O.P. (voluntarily disbanded), the Congress Socialist Party of India, the R.S.A.P. of Holland and the Spanish P.O.U.M. In addition, a number of small and unimportant groups (Switzerland, Italy, Norway, etc.) have been unheard of since the war and have probably ceased functioning.
A sad record indeed for the “non-sectarian, anti-war” adherents of the London Bureau. Only the British I.L.P. remains to be considered as a serious political force. This does not mean that centrism as a political force has disappeared. The existence of the I.L.P. disproves this. In the inevitable revolutionary resurgence that will come in a later stage of the war centrism, and centrist leaders of the type of Brockway, Gorkin, Pivert, etc., will unquestionably tend to have a brief revival. But the rôle of the centrist sections in the war’s earliest stages foredooms this to be a shadowy, short-lived revival.
 
The Independent Labor Party in England
In no sense is it permissible for one to describe the I.L.P. as a consistent, homogeneous organization. It consists roughly of no less than four distinct tendencies: (i) A small group of outright social patriots who wish the party to support the war; (2) the three-member Parliamentary clique, who, with their followers, are nothing but bourgeois pacifists and followers of the deceased Neville Chamberlain; (3) the bulk of the party, headed by Fenner Brockway and John McNear, who represent classic centrism and are deliberately responsible for the vague formulations and nebulous actions of the party as a whole; and (4) scattered groups of genuine revolutionary militants. It is clear that such a party must have a difficult time in balancing off its conflicting tendencies which tend to tear it to shreds. When one speaks of the British I.L.P. it is necessary to clarify which I.L.P. is meant: the appeasement program of James Maxton, M.P., the pro-war counsels of National Secretary C.A. Smith, the radical pacifism of Brockway. Before the British proletariat, the self-negating actions of this party in Parliament, in its press and in the unions must appear as utterly confusing.
The I.L.P. is now organizing its annual convention. If, as seems likely, this event concurs with the launching of a blitzkrieg offense against England, an internal crisis will grip the I.L.P., with a split-off of its pro-war section.
For the convention, the National Council of the party has published a discussion resolution on the war. It is not stated whether this unanimously represents the opinon of the N.C., but we doubt it. In addition, Brockway has published several articles in The New Leader – organ of his section of the party.
The resolution speaks the truth in many respects: “The government is a coalition between the most reactionary Tory imperialist elements and the Labour Party. The control of foreign policy, of India and the colonies, and of finance and industry remains in Tory hands, whilst the chief function of the Labour ministers is to discipline the working class.” “The supreme purpose for which the British government declared war on Germany was not the defense of democracy, as it alleged, but the maintenance of the Empire and of British capitalist interests.”
It states the war aims of British imperialism clearly: “... the establishment of a British hegemony over Europe, subordinate financially to the U.S.A. and masked by insincere professions of loyalty to some form of League of Nations, or European Federal Union ...”
The aims of the I.L.P. are stated as follows: “The I.L.P. stands on a third front, the front of the international working class, the victims alike of fascism in Europe, imperialism in the colonies and capitalism at home.” We “demand a peace representing neither capitulation to Nazism nor the domination of capitalist-imperialism, but the victory of the common peoples over both.”
All the above is good and commendable, particularly in view of the almost universal patriotic treachery that has submerged the labor movement. We heartily endorse it. But we cannot blind our eyes to three decisive factors: (1) Not one word is said about the Parliamentary clique whose every action flies in the face of these anti-war, revolutionary sentiments; (2) the only specific, practical proposal made in the resolution urges the calling of “an international conference to end the war ...” By whom, under what circumstances? This is, in effect, the same proposal made by the I.L.P. Parliamentary group of urging the warring imperialisms to end the war; and (3) most important of all, there are no practical proposals for revolutionary action, no program for activity in the armed forces, no objectives proposed. The resolution hangs in air and expresses throughout abstract socialist aims, without methods of realizing them. In this respect it fits into the classic forms of centrist politics and policies – to each members of the I.L.P. it can mean at least a little of that which he wants it to mean.
 
The Brockway Program
The same spirit, or rather lack of spirit, is found in the writings of the confirmed, hoary centrist, Brockway. “In the long run,” says he, “agreement about the need for a socialist change in Britain and the Empire and for the offer of a socialist peace to the peoples of Europe will over-ride in importance present disagreements about the prosecution of the war.” That is, our “disagreements” with the Labour Party will fade away because, after all, we’re all for socialism!
“But how can power be won” for our program, asks Brockway? The Parliamentary by-elections, he answers, will reveal the strength of this new movement. “A series of by-election victories would compel Parliament either to reconsider its view that the people are to have no opportunity of changing the government before the end of the war, or to reveal that Britain had indeed become a dictatorship in the process of fighting dictatorship.” “If Parliament really desired to take the opinion of the people it could do so effectively despite war circumstances.” If this makes any sense, Brockway is proposing the familiar social-democratic way of “overthrowing” the imperialist regime of Winston Churchill by electing a Parliamentary majority. Hidebound reformism is the closest Brockway comes to a concrete proposal. But the British workers, who today are reviving their long-sleeping class spirit by building works committees and reconstructing the shop steward system, cannot be attracted by such a social-democratic panacea. If these proletarians do not find the revolutionary path it will not be because of lack of desire, but lack of leadership.
Brockway goes still further. Seeking to discredit revolutionary policy he is guilty of a monstrous distortion of the meaning of revolutionary defeatism. “Revolutionary defeatism or a policy of sabotage aiming at miliary defeat.” “Revolutionary defeatism is the theory that in a capitalist war socialists should work for the defeat of their government, not only internally by the working class, but externally by the enemy government ...” (our emphasis) Brockway might be surprised to learn that he approximates the position of James P. Cannon in this utterly false and distorted definition of revolutionary defeatism. Without elaborating the matter, we can only reply that the historic Marxist meaning attached to revolutionary defeatism means neither “acts of sabotage aiming at military defeat,” nor working for defeat “by the enemy government.” Revolutionary socialists are neither common spies, nor terrorists. The genuine meaning of revolutionary defeatism, which implies precisely the sort of program the I.L.P. is incapable of organizing, is given in the program of the Fourth International: Continuation of the class struggle at home, regardless of its consequences on the military front.
The one remaining organization of centrism, and the London Bureau is equipped neither politically, morally nor organizationally to provide revolutionary leadership to the working class. We will not predict its soon-to-be collapse or disintegration as others have done prematurely. The absence of powerful revolutionary forces in England may “guarantee” a long existence for the bloc of the I.L.P. But it would be an illusion to expect anti-war leadership from this organization. Badly battered by the war, but firm in its principles, the Fourth International is still the only serious revolutionary gathering center and bright spot amid the chaos of world imperialism.
 



Two discussion articles, both advocating a defensist position with respect to the Soviet Union, have appeared to date in Labor Action. That of Jack Wilson is, in its essentials, a repetition of the traditional Trotskyite position and is based on two premises: (a) the character of the present war has changed; (b) defensism is a necessary revolutionary task due to the existence of a nationalized economy in the Soviet Union. As for the article of Comrade Lund, we fail to understand the reasoning for its publication since it consists SOLELY of assertions and prophesies of doom if the party retains its present position. It completely lacks any argumentation.
Both these articles contain an attack on the fundamental internationalist position of our party; both ignore our revolutionary strategy which is based on the creation of the Third Camp of independent workers’ action against the imperialist war. No comrade can ignore for a moment the seriousness of the situation thus created in the ranks of the party. I shall not repeat the arguments contained in the statement of our Political Committee or the further explanation given by Comrade Shachtman in his speech to the New York membership. Both can stand on their own merits. What has been done is to re-affirm our basic approach to World War II in the light of a sudden and admittedly unexpected change of events. But this has been no reaffirmation in the bureaucratic style of the Cannon group.
 
What Is Proved
The article of Comrade Wilson assumes that which it is necessary to prove, namely, that the character of the war HAS changed. The PC has given its explanation of why it believes this is not the case. The burden of proof rests upon those who believe otherwise and would therefore have us become defensists, To quote from Shachtman’s December article in The New International is totally irrelevant since the quotation starts by saying “SHOULD” the character of the present war change, etc.
Those who have suddenly become defensists must prove two things: (1) That the war has changed from inter-imperialist to “mixed” – that is, reactionary with respect to the struggle between imperialist camps, but progressive with respect to the Soviet Union’s participation. They must explain why, WHY! Because Stalin has changed his war camp? Obviously not, nor do we expect any comrade to suggest that. Because nationalized economy is in danger (which it clearly is)? But this can never be THE decisive factor in determining the character of the war. Was not that the most important lesson to be drawn from our struggle in the ranks of the SWP? Our attitude toward a given war can be determined by looking at it as a whole; by considering the various political and social factors involved and their possible consequences. Nationalized economy, which did not exist, had nothing to do with our defensism in Spain or Ethiopia. Contrary to Lund’s veiled implication, we are still defensists in China (although we certainly won’t be if the Anglo-American imperialists succeed in subordinating this nationalist war to their imperialist objectives; nor will the Chinese workers) – despite the fact that there is no nationalized economy.
Defensists must prove likewise the following: (2) That the international working class would gain by a victory of the Soviet Union in the present war. The purely negative answer that this would mean the defeat of Hitler does not suffice because then we must be defensists in the “democratic” capitalist nations for the same reason. So far we have read no efforts to prove this point.
 
What Kind of War?
Soviet Russia and the Stalinist bureaucracy at the moment are conducting an IMPERIALIST WAR. My reasons for this statement can be put under two headings.

The ruling bureaucracy is fighting to maintain itself in power so that it may continue its reactionary exploitation of (a) the Russian masses proper, (b) the oppressed nationalities and (c) the countries subjugated as a result of the former alliance with Hitler. Previously we called this STALINIST IMPERIALISM. Has this suddenly disappeared? Comrade Lund, one of the first to develop and explain this new phenomena to our movement, should at least know better than to deny this. Churchill clearly implied that Russian victory would mean definite IMPERIALIST advantages to the bureaucracy when the victorious bandits would sit down to the new Versailles table. I believe this STALINIST IMPERIALISM is the DOMINANT characteristic of Russia’s participation in the war today. Wilson speaks of Soviet “defense” in a purely bourgeois sense – Russia is defending itself. So is the glorious British Empire fighting a defensive war in a military sense. So what!
 
Russia’s participation is imperialistic in an even more fundamental sense. In four weeks of warfare the country has SUBORDINATED itself to the Anglo-American war camp. The formal military alliance between Russia and the British Empire is (or should be) sufficient evidence. The speeches, actions and war objectives of the bureaucratic leaders are further evidence. “But we support Russia IN SPITE OF the bureaucracy, not because of it,” object the defensists. Yes. yes – PROVIDED there are other, more compelling elements that enter into the situation. What are these elements? Again, the burden of proof rests with the defensists. We see no such elements or considerations present, only the dominant elements of Stalinist imperialism and partnership in one of the contending world imperialist war camps.
 

Revolutionary Potentialities
While rejecting any policy of defensism at present, we must nevertheless recognize the rich revolutionary potentialities inherent in the conflict. The Workers Party is one of the few revolutionary groups left that retains an optimistic view regarding the revolutionary potential. Perhaps the statements that have appeared so far in our press have given too little attention to the possibilities that exist in the Russo-German war. At any rate, that is my opinion.
In the first place, we must recognize the fact that there STILL exist strong elements within the British and American capitalist classes that are decidedly favorable to converting this war into an anti-Soviet crusade. We should not lightly dismiss their existence! In bourgeois politics it is ONLY this fascist-minded group that can come into power if the present ruling section of the bourgeois has to be turned out. Concretely, the VANGUARD expression of this tendency is to be found in the attitude of vulture Japanese imperialism which appears to be preparing an attack on the Far Eastern regions of Soviet Russia.
Secondly – and in line with our revolutionary perspectives – we must remember that the Russian working class is the most heroic, experienced and class conscious of any in the world. With its vast tradition and knowledge, accompanied by the earthquake that the war has let loose under the clay legs of the Stalin bureaucracy, is there not ample reason to look forward to a revolutionary revival of this working class – including the creation of mass, independent Soviets, etc.? I find it hard to believe that the workers of Leningrad and Moscow will abandon or refuse the struggle as, for example, did the workers of Paris last year. It is precisely, our position – for the Third Camp and independent workers’ action – that allows to, no – LOOKS FORWARD TO – such a development.
And finally, I hope that those who advocate defensism will at least be clearer than our friends of the Cannon group as to what they mean by it specifically; that they will not say (as did Editor Morrow of The Militant) that defensism means “now more than ever must the Stalin bureaucracy be overthrown.” Heaven forbid – that’s what we defeatists say!
 



IN OCTOBER OF 1940 the Socialist Workers Party (Cannon group) formally adopted what has since been termed a “military policy for the Second World War.” This policy – proclaimed as a new weapon in the storehouse of revolutionary Marxism advanced to meet the problems of our militaristic epoch – advocated military conscription and training of the workers under trade union auspices and control. The original impulsion for this policy came from Leon Trotsky,
although he was unable to elaborate or defend his new conception. In the words of Cannon – its chief exponent and sole elaborator to date – it is based upon the strategy of a “simultaneous” or “telescoped” war on two fronts – against fascist-Hitler imperialism and against the bourgeoisie in one’s homeland. In the nine months that have passed since adoption of this policy by the Cannon group it is perfectly clear to all but those who delight in self-deception that insofar as the workers’ movement in general and the revolutionary movement in particular are concerned, it has produced no positive effect and has met only with the most severe criticism. As a result, the “new policy” has remained an abstraction, stillborn, incapable of sinking a single root into the soil of class struggle politics. At the moment of writing it graces the pages of Socialist Workers Party propaganda only as a forlorn and pathetic remnant of something which – fortunately – died a-borning.
In The New International and Labor Action the Workers Party has stated and explained its categorical opposition to the proposed policy. It has elaborated its own “military policy” – the traditional policy of Leninism, modernized in accordance with the needs and experiences of the Second World War.
 
The Situation in England
From the standpoint of revolutionists, the most significant development that has occurred in England since the outbreak of the war is not, as stupid American correspondents and journalists put it, the ability of the English masses “to take it.” What an insult this is to the English proletarians – to compare them with some insensate shock absorber, brutally bombed, but ready to “take it some more”! Much more important and significant to us has been the awakening of the masses of the trade union front: the revival of the famous British shop stewards movement. This act signifies for us the instinctive desire on the part of Britain’s workers to act independently of their own ruling class in the war. Fourth Internationalists in England in concerned – and rightly so – to enhance the development of this movement so that it reaches a nation-wide, all-England level and, at the same time, to raise it to the level of independent political action. This is the main concern and task of revolutionary socialists in England today.
Based on absolutely authentic information, we must report a significant change in Fourth Internationalist fortunes in England. Whereas before there were three or four competing, mutually disunited groups, it now appears that one – and only one – Trotskyist group is of any importance. This group-known as the Workers International League (WIL) and publishing a paper known as Workers International News – has resulted from the merger of two of the former groups and has experienced considerable growth in recent times. It represents at the moment the most serious revolutionary organization on the English scene and the gathering center for Revolutionary Marxists. Its active and militant youth section publishes Youth for Socialism.
The WIL has formally endorsed the orthodox viewpoint held by Trotsky and the Cannon group on the so-called Russian question. It is in political agreement and sympathy with the Cannon group (SWP) and opposed to Workers Party policies. This agreement has included with it, in our opinion, a rigidly mechanical transplantation to the shores of England of the Cannonite “military policy.” It is this that we are most concerned about.
 
The Policy of the W.I.L.
As explained in the paper of its youth group, Youth for Socialism (February 1941), this policy has the following basis and application.

The British ruling class, precisely as was the French ruling class, is defeatist in the war. “The British bourgeoisie is sitting behind its Maginot Line” (the English Channel). It “is not fighting Hitler’s fascism.” Drawing still further its analogy with the French rulers, Youth for Socialism states that the British rulers are even now preparing a “betrayal” to Hitlerism rather than see the advance of socialism in England.
 
In view of the above the workers of England must prepare to take over the struggle against Nazism. The “feeble pacifism of the Stalinists and the British ILP” are worse than useless. Workers in England must demand officers’ training camps (they already have universal military training) controlled by the trade unions and “financed by the government.” There must be a universal arming of the workers so that an invasion attempt can be resisted by the people.
 
In order to put the above into practice, aside from political education of and agitational work among the masses, it is necessary that “control of the army must be taken out of the hands of the reactionary officers’ class and put into those of the workers.” Once this is accomplished then a genuine war against Hitlerism can be waged.

We must state candidly that it is our opinion that the above analysis and practical programmatic conclusions are marked by inept and false descriptions, plus major political blundering. These mistakes can be grouped under the following headings: (a) False political analysis of the general situation; (b) False analysis of the role of opposition workers’ parties; (c) false characterization of the nature of Britain’s war and (d) A false program for revolutionary work among Britain’s armed forces.
We said before that this policy and program can have disastrous consequences for the English Revolution. This is underscored by the fact that the WIL is the only English organization at present capable of revealing a revolutionary road to the proletarians of their country. The hopelessly pacifist and confusionist British ILP has no future before it. But what if – as we shall attempt to prove – the WIL policy leads only toward social-patriotism, toward a sharp diversion from the path of revolutionary anti-war opposition? But first it is necessary to examine what is wrong.
 
The French Experience
(a) The French bourgeoisie was defeatist, that is, it capitulated to Hitler rather than face the threat of social revolution in France. Generally speaking, true enough. But how absurd and nonsensical to say the same of the British bourgeoisie! If faced with a clear-cut alternative: a Hitler peace or English bolshevism, there is little doubt what the English bourgeoisie would do. But is that the situation today? This superficial analogy ignores (1) the bitter war waged between Britain and Germany for almost two years now and (2) the existence of Roosevelt and American imperialism which, having gained already a mighty grasp on British capital, would not and could not permit a capitulation to Hitler. The quick quelling of “appeasement” tendencies that arose with the Hess affair is surely sufficient evidence of British imperialism’s intention to fight on for its world empire (or at least as much of it as Roosevelt will permit it to retain). The world-wide resistance of Britain’s imperialists, their desperate efforts to reorganize their economy for totalitarian war purposes, their willingness (symbolized in the person of Churchill) to make sacrifices of capital – and even of profits – in the struggle against rival German imperialism, all these facts demonstrate how false it is to call the English rulers “defeatist.” From such a shallow analysis comes nothing but false strategy, for when the bourgeoisie is “defeatist” it is time for the proletariat to consider becoming “defensist.” [1] At the moment, British and German imperialism are locked in death battle with no serious signs of a compromise imperialist peace. Britain’s ruling class remains in firm control of every phase and aspect of the war it conducts.
(b) The WIL’s analysis of the opposition working class parties refers to the “feeble pacifism” of the Communist Party. We find it singularly inept and misleading to speak of Stalinist “pacifism.” What is meant by this? Does it mean that the Stalinists – as agents of the Moscow regime, which is, in turn, the ally of German imperialism – attempt to forward their military defeatist propaganda by means of demagogic and deceitful pacifist slogans? If so, then we share this analysis, but we must express our belief that it is far more vital in exposing Stalinism and its actions in the present war to explain before workers the demagogic and military defeatist character of its slogans. Surely the WIL does not mean that the British Communist Party – agency of what they still consider to be a “workers’ state” – is a bourgeois or petty-bourgeois pacifist organization! Stalinism cannot be effectively met by taking its program at face value any more than one can take the “pacifist” expressions of the Nazi Bund and its “Fifth Column” organizations at their face value.
(c) The WIL gives a confused and contradictory characterization of the war conducted by Britain – quite similar to that given by the pacifist British ILP. On the one hand, it calls it an “imperialist war,” then it speaks of “a genuine war against Hitler,” of the need for an “effective” war against fascism, etc. We believe this confusion results from two factors: (a) a mixing up of what the war is today with what it may become tomorrow under revolutionary leadership; (b) a failure to develop a practical program to bridge the gap between today’s imperialist war and the potential revolutionary war of tomorrow. Most significant of all is the fact that the WIL appears as a left-wing critic of the war – not disputing its fundamental premises, but criticizing its conduct! This, of course, is quite consistent with the Cannonite military policy which presupposes the possibility of critical support to an imperialist war (”simultaneous” war on two fronts). But it is a far cry from Leninist revolutionary opposition to the war.
 
What Should Be Done
(d) With respect to revolutionary work among the armed forces we have two criticisms to offer of the WIL program. This program demands (1) military training of officers under trade union control at government expense, and (2) removal of the officers’ reactionary caste and its replacement. Like their co-thinkers in America from whom they took point (1), the WIL has nowhere explained precisely what it means by this. Is it the same thing as workers’ and union defense guards? If not, what is its difference? Most important, what is its objective, how does it advance Britain’s revolutionary development? As for (2), here we must remind the WIL that they have adopted precisely the same slogan put forward by the Stalinists in Popular Front days, and developed most clearly by the French Communist Party – “Democratize and reform the army by removing its reactionary officers.” Trotsky, at that time, denounced the reformist conception behind this slogan and point out that the revolutionary objective in the bourgeois, imperialist army is not to “reform” it, but to disintegrate, break up and dissolve it, while creating the workers’ or people’s army in its place. This is no idle quibble over formulations, but is based upon a fundamental conception of the army as a military weapon of the imperialist state.
We cannot permit our revolutionary anti-war tactics and strategy to be diverted by the poisoned premises of the bourgeoisie. We cannot allow our practical program to revolve around any – or any share of – the fundamental “defensist” concepts of the bourgeoisie. Sections of Britain’s ruling class differ among themselves solely as to the best methods of preserving their empire. The WIL has allowed itself – in a small but dangerous measure – to be drawn into the quarrels of the English ruling class as how best to conduct the war. But revolutionists cannot argue on that level.
It will be objected that our criticism is negative in nature, that we propose no alternatives. It would, however, be presumptuous on our part to offer any detailed revolutionary anti-war program for British Marxists. Certain generalized concepts and tactics are, we believe, worth being considered.
In the first place, it is necessary for the WIL to reaffirm in blunt terms its understanding of the nature of this war. That this is an inter-imperialist war in each and every dominant respect; that under no circumstances can revolutionists support (no matter how “critically” in the manner of Harold Laski and the Tribune group) this war; that the main enemy of Britain’s workers is at home – the financial ruling oligarchy of The City symbolized by arch-Tory-imperialist Churchill; that – as revolutionary Fourth Internationalists – the broad strategy is Lenin’s, i.e., the establishment of workers’ power in England.
If the present British regime should begin to crumble and collapse, then we shall consider a strategic change in the above fundamentals. But – as the experience of France has shown – a collapse resulting from the internal corruption and division of the bourgeoisie, and not accompanied by independent revolutionary action can only end in the victorious intervention of Hitler as ruler and arbiter. But this independent revolutionary action can arise only under revolutionary leadership, the prerequisite for which is complete independence from one’s own ruling class. This is the first principle in wartime one well worth reaffirmation.
And what of work among the armed forces? We believe that the program of the American Workers Party, changed to meet specific English circumstances, answers this question. This program, using democratic demands of the soldiers as the transitional lever, aims primarily at the formation of soldiers’ collective bargaining agencies or councils. These democratically elected soldiers’ councils, thrown into opposition against the officers’ corps, will form the embryo for the people’s or workers’ army. As for the British labor movement in general, the answer has already been given by the revival of the shop steward movement – a movement that almost immediately clashes with the ruling class and its Labor Party and Trade Union Congress bureaucracy.
Finally, what does all this add up to? To repeat the sound words of Youth for Socialism, “in order to wage a genuine revolutionary war for the liberation of the peoples of Europe and for the defense of the rights of the British working class it is necessary that power should be in the hands of the workers.” Precisely the point. The WIL has allowed itself to be led off on a false tack. A serious and immediate re-study and re-evaluation of its course during the war is needed. This is what we urge and propose.

Footnote
1. We have an excellent illustration of this In the entirely correct policy of our French movement during the present war. When French resistance collapsed and the defeatist French bourgeoisie fled, along with its corrupt regime, our French comrades executed a strategic about-face and – dropping their revolutionary anti-war slogans – became revolutionary defensists, propagandizing among workers for independent resistance to the Nazis, re-creation of the Paris Commune, creation of a French workers’ power to replace the defeatist regime of Daladier & Co., etc. They based this reorientation on the fact that the character of the war – insofar as France was concerned – had changed. That is, ceasing to be an inter-imperialist war between Germany and the French Empire, it had become a war of Nazi imperialist conquest and subjugation of France. But the situation is entirely otherwise with respect to England today.
 



An American sailor recently returned from a trip to Singapore and Penang, British ports of the Federated Malay States, has given us the following picture of this imperialist colony – important as a source of rubber and tin deposits.
Within the past year the Singapore base has been greatly reinforced and its defenses have been extended. The island bristles with guns, air fields, planes, armored equipment, etc. Singapore city is filled with troops brought from England (mainly officers and arrogant RAF pilots), Australians, New Zealanders and Indians. There is much hostility between the English and Anzac soldiers because the latter resent the fact that they bore the brunt of the defeats in Greece and Crete – with the English being the first to scram out.
Far more important has been the extended and bitter rubber strike conducted by the native workers of Malaya. This strike assumed violent proportions and rapidly became a general strike of all rubber plantation workers during the month of May.
In the rubber districts of Singapore and the state of Johore there labor tens of thousands of workers – mainly Tamils brought over from South India and Ceylon. There are also many Malayan workers. Organized into a militant union, they struck for higher wages and shorter hours than the 11 per day they labor. They organized themselves into picket bands that roamed the plantations, driving off would-be strike-breakers (blacklegs). They fiercely battled the local constabulary, who soon found themselves overwhelmed by the strength of the workers.
Then armored cars and tanks (we thought they were there to be used against the Japanese aggressors!) were brought in from Singapore and other British imperialist army centers. Armed clashes took place. Before it was all over, two police had been killed, a dozen workers likewise and several hundred wounded. Many were arrested and the workers surrounded the jails in an effort to free them. At last word the strike was still on and the results are as yet unknown.
This is an up-to-date illustration of “democratic” imperialism in action against the enslaved colonial workers. This is why troops are sent overseas.
 



THE PROCESSES of revolutionary development and the working out of socialist programs of action are far more complex than is usually believed. Only the methods of long and stubborn analysis, patient checking and re-checking of accumulated experience can answer what is clearly the most difficult problem of our time – the building of the Marxian socialist party supported by the masses of people.
World War II has shown that, with respect to India and its approaching colonial revolution, there has been a lack of a serious class analysis of the problems laced by this most important section of the colonial world. The Workers Party has sketched, in broad terms, its position advocating the organization and triumph of the Third Camp – the camp of independent world labor opposed to the two existing imperialist camps. Naturally, this remains valid as a succinct summation of historic proletarian strategy. But the revolt of the colonial world against oppression – the mass base of the world movement to socialism, representing close to one and a half billion people, or two-thirds of humanity – is a highly difficult and complex process.
Thus, concretely, the question of the Indian Revolution is not simply a matter of 389,000,000 Hindus and Moslems rising up in wrath and driving out the two-century old British oppressor, under the banner of the Third Camp. Every petty bourgeois “liberal” and dilettante has, for years and years, gushed tons of watery emotionalism about the “sufferings and exploitation of the Indian masses.” It is (or was!) the stock argument in dealing with British propagandist and imperialist agents. “Why don’t you free India?” Whereupon, Mr. Englishman would give his stock reply, to which Mr. Liberal, entirely ignorant of anything but the most superficial aspects of the question, would generally have no retort.
However, India needs not sympathy, nor lengthy listings of the multitude of British crimes and techniques of exploitation. It needs what the primitive and elementary character of its revolutionary movement have long denied it:

A sharp posing of the various problems – internal and external – faced by the revolution;
 
An analysis of class forces and class relations within the country, particularly the relation between the worker and the petty bourgeoisie;
 
A balance sheet to be drawn of two decades of Gandhist and Indian National Congress experience, particularly in the light of the present war;
 
A revolutionary perspective to be drawn; a perspective having as its axis the specific application of the theory of the permanent revolution and the organization of the Indian revolutionary party.

It is not the writer’s intention to wrestle with or attempt to solve the above listed points. Although such efforts have been made easier for us by the lengthy Russian experience culminating in the Russian Revolution, the most difficult problems are those that lie hidden in the differences, not the similarities. Thus, India – as so many Marxists think – is not China. Trotsky wrote voluminously on the Chinese question and from the betrayal of its revolution drew many valuable lessons, including the brilliant summary in thesis form of his theory of the permanent revolution (The Permanent Revolution) . But he wrote little about India and then only in generalities. But India and China differ considerably, in important respects.
 
Problems of the Indian Struggle
For example, China is a semi-colonial country, with a recognized and recognizable bourgeoisie and a lengthy nationalist and revolutionary experience. India is a colonial country, however, with a sub-normal and barely discernible bourgeois class of compradores. Problems of the peasantry, of relations with the imperialist ruling power, of language, of national unification, etc., differ greatly in China and India.
Nor is it simply a matter of writing correct Marxist histories of India, with the correct social and economic descriptions. Some fine work has been done in this important field, not excluding the writings of the notorious Anglo-Indian Stalinist, R. Palme-Dutt! No, there is far more to its than that. For example, merely to list some of the problems that come under heading (1) – internal and external questions of the Indian Revolution – will give some idea of its complexity. India is ruled by a “bloc of imperialists with the feudal and national bourgeoisie” (Trotsky). What are the relations between, and the divisions within, these ruling groups? Are the rajahs, maharajahs and nizams feudal lords – to be overthrown by a repetition of the French Revolution of 1789? Is there a “general” peasant question? What do the broad divisions among the peasantry signify? What are the specific characteristics of the Indian proletariat? Of the new, war-created layers of workers? Why is Indian trade unionism completely different from trade unionism in advanced capitalist nations? Is there a language problem? What is the real Hindu-Moslem problem (one of the most grossly misunderstood things about modern India) ? What part do the so-called religions of India (Hinduism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism, etc.) play in the life of the masses? Is there a caste problem? What have been the special effects of the law of uneven development as manifested in India?
As we have already indicated, it is not the writer’s objective to deal at length with these questions. Most of them will have to be answered ultimately by the revolutionary regroupment now taking place in the Indian revolutionary vanguard – a vanguard significantly headed by the Indian adherents of a Fourth International. At present we wish to deal primarily with point (3), a balance sheet of 20 years of Nationalist experience in the light of the Second World War, with the specific aim of posing for discussion a new perspective and a new strategy for India’s revolutionary nationalists.
 
The Influence of Gandhi
In 1921, at the height of the post-war upsurge, Mohandas K. Gandhi took over leadership of the Indian National Congress. This organization which, until the war period, had been a fraternal association of ambitious Hindus and English imperialists, became the organized medium of Indian nationalism, dominated by the war-created native bourgeoisie and the textile mill owners of Bombay. Exactly two decades have passed since then. During this period the INC has, on the whole, controlled the political scene in India and Gandhi has remained at the helm.
The essential problems of 1941 are the same as those of 1921. Namely, the question of national liberation from the imperialist yoke and a solution of the agrarian question. Unlike most people believe, there is no serious problem of national unification if the relatively unimportant question of the “native” states is discounted. Linguistically and culturally, India is far more unified than most of its sympathizers know. The Moslem and Hindu masses long ago solved the artificially induced “national minority problem.” We must again repeat – India is not China – in many respects its revolutionary problems are simpler and less difficult of solution.
But 20 years of Gandhism has not advanced the nation a single step toward its goal. The imperialist fetters still bind it, all constitutional and parliamentary gains have been negated by the New Constitution and wartime dictatorial rule of the Viceroy; the agrarian question is as acute as ever; national poverty accompanied by huge unemployment, lack of education, social services, etc., remain just as before. Furthermore, in the political field, the only step forward has been (1) the birth and growth of the Trade Union Congress; (2) the development of various left-wing Marxist tendencies among the youth. Thus, only the Indian proletariat has made the slightest ideological or organizational advance in two decades!
What has been the historic objective of the Congress during this time? Trotsky describes his conception of proletarian and peasant unity as “an alliance of the proletariat and peasantry in struggle against the liberal bourgeoisie.” The situation in India has been the opposite – an alliance of the peasant and worker with the liberal bourgeois against the foreign imperialist. Naturally, as in the case of the Chinese Kuomintang, this “alliance” has meant the subordination of the peasant and worker to the limited objectives of the native capitalist and landlord.
What have been these objectives? Let us recall what Trotsky wrote about the Russian liberal bourgeoisie in 1905. “Our liberal bourgeoisie comes forward as counter-revolutionary even before the revolutionary climax. In every critical moment, our intellectual democracy only demonstrates its impotence.” (Natchalo) The liberal layers of Indian society are even more miserable; they aim primarily at preventing a revolutionary climax. Their greatest objective has been to share power with the British rulers (National Government at the Center), in exchange for the annihilation of internal peasant or labor movements. More important are the economic concessions it has always demanded: control of tariff boards, of internal revenue and taxation systems, of the India Reserve Bank. Thus, to it, the nationalist movement is a favored weapon in the struggle for its own profits and prestige. (We must never forget the sub-imperialist exploitation carried on by these gentlemen in the crown colony of Burma.)
 
Forestalling the Freedom of India
Did this liberal nationalist leadership ever seriously propose or work for the liberation of India? Absolutely not! The proof of this charge lies in the Gandhist methods employed for 20 years. Why these peculiar methods? Why these unique doctrines of ahimsa (non-violence), satyagraha (passive resistance); why all this emphasis on religion and ethics in a political movement? Not only does it reflect the pathetic and feeble character of the native bourgeoisie but – and this is most important – it constitutes an ideological disarming of the nationalist masses in advance of the struggle. For two decades the Gandhist doctrine has succeeded in solving the great dilemma of the Hindu capitalists: to organize a mass pressure movement that will be strong enough to win limited engagements with the imperialist master, but weak enough to be firmly yoked when the elemental forces at work within the movement threatened to precipitate revolutionary action (peasant and worker uprisings). The fact that the Indian capitalist class has succeeded in getting away with this deceitful act; this farce which is enacted on an unbelievably primitive plane (as anyone who has witnessed any official Congress session can testify) – only indicates the unfortunately low level of the labor movement in general and the left-wing movement in particular. “An insufficiently prepared proletariat unable to unite the peasantry behind it cannot bring the democratic revolution to its conclusion.” (Trotsky) This is the tragedy of India – “an insufficiently prepared proletariat.”
Over two years of the Second World War have destroyed remaining illusions among the most naive Congress radicals about the capitulatory character of the Gandhian leadership. It has displayed its own bankruptcy in the most shameful fashion to the world labor movement. But there is more than cowardice behind its policy.
The cynical manner in which British imperialism dragged India into the war found a violent response on the part of the working and peasant masses. The nation was swept by strikes in the great industrial centers (Bombay, Cawnpore, Calcutta); the peasants in various areas (Punjab, Orissa, etc.) rose in local revolts; the middle class intellectuals and students were aroused as never before. From a cocksure position that India would support the war, the British authorities hastily retreated to a position from which they hoped to win the neutrality of India. ]t was clear at once that 1914 could not be repeated; the alternative was (1) a turbulent and rebellious India or (2) a passive, quiescent India. On the basis of postwar promises, the imperialists set out to soothe the troubled waters. Automatically, they turned to the Congress bourgeois leadership, to Gandhi.
 
The Nationalist Leadership and the War
What was the response of the nationalist leadership? Precisely what the imperialists desired – steps and measures which have made it possible for them to fulfill their most optimistic variant: a calming of the atmosphere which enabled an important industrial growth (munitions field) and a limited military mobilization for overseas service. Congress steps and measures can be summed up as follows: (1) Assurance that no effort would be made to hamper any type of war efforts (collections, mobilizations, transportation to foreign territories, etc.); (2) Refusal to launch any sort of anti-war mass movement even along traditional Gandhian “non-violent” lines; (3) A concerted drive within the Congress against the general left-wing Congress bloc consisting of radical nationalists, socialists, Stalinists, etc., and (4) Proposal of various concrete plans establishing a modus vivendi for joint rule (Delhi resolution of the Congress committee, suggestions of Gandhi, etc.) in exchange for full support to the war. Despite the adamant position of the ruling powers the Congress, by abandoning all its slogans of independence, convening of a constituent assembly, withdrawal of the “New Constitution” and even abandoning its historic objection to defense of the country from external attack by violent methods, has done everything in its power to arrive at an agreeable bargain. The fact that no agreement has yet been reached is hardly due to their unwillingness!
But the imperialist masters, understanding the people with whom they were dealing a good deal better than many Congress “left-wingers,” would not yield a single inch. Therefore, in 1940, the Gandhian farce took a different form – a so-called overt action. The Congress high command organized a “limited civil disobedience” campaign in the course of which various Congress leaders, petty officials and professional satyagrahis offered themselves for arrest – a request which the British gladly fulfilled. It was made clear to the masses, of course, that they were forbidden to participate in this “campaign”; only the chosen of the Mahatma were worthy of occupying British cells! But today, after one year, even this ludicrous pretense at opposition to the war has been abandoned and the “martyrs” are slowly being released from the jails. The beginning of 1942 finds a return to the original policy of seeking a workable agreement with the British, based on deceptive promises. But Churchill’s announcement that the “Atlantic Charter” and the “Four Freedoms” do not apply to Empire has given the new campaign an inauspicious start. The Congress executive body is, at the moment, preparing a new offer for submission to the Viceroy and the authorities.
 
Destruction of the Congress Left Wing
The most substantial victory – the only victory – scored by the Congress has been the almost complete rout and destruction of the various left-wing forces within the Nationalist ranks. The most die-hard imperialist could not have hoped for more! The “Forward” bloc of Subhas Bose has been annihilated and its leader has sold himself to the Axis totalitarians; the radical peasant unions within the Congress have lost their leadership; the Congress Socialist Party, as a first-hand report expresses it, has been “scattered to the winds and is a hollow shell of its former self.” Naturally, the Stalinists have offered their services to the government. The “left-wing” is broken; politically and organizationally bankrupt; victim of its own subservience to Gandhian policy; refusal to grasp the backsliding and counter-revolutionary role of the native bourgeoisie and lack o£ faith in its own maturity and ability to present an independent program to the country. These are the hard facts – refusal to recognize them could only mean a continuation of the old dull game of “national front,” whereas a drastic break with the last 20 years is required.
This, in general, is the situation in India after two years of the war. Admittedly not conducive to optimistic prospects, nevertheless it is vital for a realization of the difficult problems of the colonial revolution. In the balance of the colonial world – particularly those sections of Asia and the Near East that have been directly affected by the military struggle – other optimistic expectations have not been lived up to. Instead, the colonial masses have remained passive pawns in the inter-imperialist struggle; refusing to support either imperialist camp, but thus far proving incapable of independent action against the imperialists. Unoccupied China has become a harassing and guerilla force at the service of the Anglo-American camp; the Malayan and Indonesian masses maintain a strict neutrality; in the Near Eastern areas the Egyptian, Arabian and North African colonials are similarly quiescent; the colonials of Indo-China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Syria, Iraq have accepted with indifference and passivity a change in the imperialist overlordship. Clearly what is here involved is an international phenomena, characteristic of the colonial world on a world scale.
 
The Basis of Nationalist Neutrality
In our opinion, there are three causes behind this policy of “unarmed neutrality.” First, the colonial masses understand that the imperialist rivals now joined in the Second World War have not yet reached the military crest of their struggles – the crest beyond which lies increasing exhaustion, decline in military strength and internal demoralization. The imperialist grip is still powerful. Secondly, if the rôle of the national bourgeoisie in the last World War was capitulatory and reactionary, it is infinitely more so today. That is, capitalist decline has proceeded so rapidly, class relations in the colonies have become so tense that the field of operations of the colonial bourgeois class has narrowed down close to non-existence. The native capitalists have little opportunity of independent growth; still less opportunity of gaining concessions; and a greater fear than ever of precipitating a struggle for the national democratic revolution. And finally, with the elimination of the Communist International from any progressive role in the colonial world, the problem of revolutionary leadership has had to be posed all over again.
These generalizations apply with special force to India. British imperialism has calculatingly organized an impressive mobilization in that country – native mercenary troops, English troops, soldiers of the white Dominions (New Zealand, South Africa, Australia, etc.). In addition, there remain as before the native princes, civil service bureaucracy, network of secret police and spies, etc. Most important has been the proven bankruptcy of the native bourgeoisie, represented by the Congress. To quote from the previously mentioned report: “It is impotent and lacks confidence. Faced with the question of power, it feels itself historically incapable of assuming any responsibility on its own. It is far too weak as a class and far too closely intertwined with pure British capital, especially with respect to the new war industries. [1] It dreads the very thought of power because it knows the impossibility of any bourgeois solution to the agrarian, labor or international problems which would immediately arise.” The war industry expansion that has taken place stems from British capital, aided and supplemented by native capital. Thus, its only progressive effect – and an important one – is to increase the specific weight of the Indian proletariat in the general population. It does not increase the nationalism or “will to resist” of the native capitalist class!
As for our third generalization, the Fourth International has only first begun its work on Indian soil – significantly, during the war – while the Stalinists have now completely sold themselves in the manner of their Malayan brothers to the British imperialists. The radical democrats of the “Forward” bloc have been eliminated from the scene, as well as the radical congressmen of M.N. Roy, who preceded the Stalinists in offering their services to the rulers. The left-wingers, in a word, have been cut loose from their traditional moorings.
The treacherous policy of the Congress has been accompanied by a symptomatic and rapid degeneration in the composition of its membership. “Congress influence has gone down considerably and its membership is more largely urban petty bourgeois than ever before. The growth of various reactionary communal, pro-Nazi and gangster groups further testifies to this decline in composition.” The Congress has never permitted unions, parties or organizations of workers and peasants to affiliate with it, while maintaining their structural independence. Its isolation from and spurning of these movements is more apparent today than ever before.
 
Conclusions and Proposals
What is to be drawn out of the situation we have outlined?

Congress history has proven the impossibility of organizing a genuine mass party of workers, peasants and radical-city petty bourgeois elements to achieve even the limited program of the democratic revolution.
 
The native capitalist class of India – more so than its Russian counterpart – is incapable of advancing even on the first stages of the democratic revolution, except under the most violent mass pressure – in which case its weight as an independent class would fall close to zero.
 
The leadership of India’s revolutionary nationalism is and remains in the hands of the proletariat; particularly its newly-born war layers. Only the proletariat, allied with the peasant mass, can win even the most elementary demands of the democratic revolution. The proletariat of India must prepare to come to power on the basis of the national democratic revolution which it should lead.
 
The Indian National Congress – having exhausted the sole progressive achievement granted to it by history; namely, the posing of the question of national liberation in its most abstract form – is a bankrupt organization, in capable of any additional progress and acting only as a reactionary brake in the hands of the foreign and colonial bourgeoisie.
 
The Marxists of India must draw the only possible conclusions of the twenty years experience – the need for a drastic reorientation outside of Congress ranks; all effort to be concentrated on (a) organization of the industrial workers into the unions; (b) organization of the poor peasants into the peasant unions; (c) regrouping of all the revolutionary forces – drawn from the numerous sources that exist – into the new revolutionary workers’ party that India is now forming.

And finally, to place the entire problem on its correct internationalist basis, the words of Trotsky are decidedly relevant. “If we take England and India as the opposite poles of capitalist types, we must state that the internationalism of the British and Indian proletariat does not at all rest on the similarity of conditions, tasks and methods, but on their inseparable interdependence. The successes of the liberation movement in India presuppose a revolutionary movement in England and the other way around.”

Footnote
1. Even the great Tata Iron & Steel Works, which has had a huge war expansion and which is supposedly a “native industry,” is controlled by British banks and a British dominated board of directors. Even the agrarian question points directly to the British bankers, who hold the great landlords and producers of raw materials in their clutches.
 



On the island kingdom of Dai Nippon (Japan) live 90,000,000 people of the Japanese race. Most of them are farmers, living in small country-side villages and eking out a meager living from tiny units of land. Many are workers, working in the shops and factories of the large cities and industrial centers of Tokyo, Osaka, Kobe, Nagasaki, Moji, etc.
For years, millions of the Japanese people have been forced by their government to spend their lives in the armies. These armies since 1935 have been conducting vast campaigns in the distant lands of Manchuria, North China, South China, Hainan Island, French Indo-China, etc. There are at least 2,000,000 men at present in the Japanese military forces. Many of them haven’t been home in 5 or 6 years; many more never came home except as ashes wrapped up in a small, neat urn. In addition, there are hundreds of thousands more involved in the air and naval work conducted by the Japanese military machine.
Japanese man-power has been so badly drained by the endless years of war sacrifice demanded by Japan’s war-mad militarists that today a majority of the Japanese working class consists of women and children. In the thousands, of small, handicraft factories scattered all over the country, in the huge cotton and textile factories of Osaka, in the shipyards of Yokohama and Kobe, in the steel and munitions’ factories of Tokyo women and children by the hundreds of thousands toil endless hours. They are not permitted to organize unions. The despotic and totalitarian government of Japan long ago outlawed workers’ organizations of all types and forms. Employers are permitted – by government sanction – to fix any hours, wages, sanitary conditions, etc. that suits their interests.
 
Living Standards Decline
For 5 years the living standards of the Japanese people have steadily gone downward. There are shortages of everything needed to keep alive: food (all food is rationed – even the main staples of the Japanese diet, rice and fish); clothing and textiles, shoes, furniture, sake and other drinks etc. Commodity prices have approximately doubled since the 1935 period. As a result of all the hardships which the Japanese have had to bear because of the military adventures forced upon them by the ruling class of the country, the people today live a miserable and colorless life. The average Japanese working man and woman is bound to the factory from sun-up to sun-down, after which he returns to his one-story, wooden home, eats his small plate of fish, boiled rice and vegetables and then retires to prepare himself for the next day’s sacrifice for the Japanese boss.
Just as in the United States only a small handful of bankers and Wall Street imperialists stands to gain by the war, so in Japan a similar clique of bankers, financiers and capitalists will be the only gainers.
For the 90,000,000 Japanese people the war will mean only further sacrifices induced by the blockade which the Allied imperialist powers will attempt to install around the island Kingdom; longer working hours; the horrors of bombing raids over their flimsy wooden fire-trap cities; more shiploads of urns containing the ashes of sons killed in far-off lands.
But the few members of Japan’s “Two Families” – the Mitsui and Minseito families which control the overwhelming bulk of Japan’s heavy industry, shipping and banking -- stand to benefit in the same sense that America’s “Sixty Families” – the DuPonts, Fords, Morgans, Rockefellers etc. – stand to benefit by this imperialist war. Out of the sacrifices of the people these Japanese super-industrialists and bankers will coin greater profits and greater wealth.
 
Have Subjugated People
For these Nipponese imperialists already have subjugated the people of Korea, the Chinese of Manchuria and the northern provinces of China, the Indo-Chinese, the people of Formosa.
In every territory they occupy, these militarists and imperialists turn the area into a hell of colonial exploitation. They set out to outstrip the cruel and barbarous means employed, for example, by the British in their conquests of India. There is no imperialist crime which has not been utilized by the Japanese bandits. Then, after they have destroyed all organized resistance, they systematically rob the territory of its raw materials (coal and iron in Manchuria, tea and rice in Formosa, rubber and tin in Indo-China, silk and cotton and rice in China etc.); organize a monopoly control over the territory’s trade and commerce; try to “Japanize” the local population; organize slave-labor gangs of women and men alike; rob the peasantry of its produce etc. Every criminal act carried out by the Nazis in occupied Europe has been emulated a thousand-fold by the, Japanese in occupied China.
Now these same imperialists, making use,of their military bureaucrats and officials, have plunged an unwilling Japan into the greatest adventure and the most disastrous war of its history. This time they seek even greater stakes; control and maintenance of their already-conquered territories; control of the Pacific Ocean shipping lanes; new lands and territories to exploit and colonize. To carry out this task they have installed in Japan a military dictatorship of the most rigid kind – the same sort of military dictatorship that Roosevelt will install in America if the American working class does not insist upon the maintenance of democratic liberties during the war. But these Japanese imperialists have, at the same moment, set into motion those forces that will bring their own destruction. The Japanese workers, sailors and soldiers! The impoverished farmers and peasantry of the country! Lied to and deceived for many years by their rulers, they will insist upon a day of reckoning when the meaning of the present war has become clearer, when they see that – like the American workers and farmers – this is war for imperialist plunder and boss profits.
 



Joseph Stalin, having invoked the name of God during the course of a toast blessing the efforts of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, is now awaiting the result of his invocation. Was it all “in vain,” or will the rocky Arsenal of Democracy open up and gush forth its supplies of tanks, planes and guns in an endless flow?
Certainly the preliminary results seem to have been propitious! The British, have opened up the long-hoped for “Second Front” in North Africa; transportation to Russia by way of Iran and India is working with smoother efficiency.
Perhaps there is something in this prayer business after all!
It is not surprising to witness the sudden “conversion” of Stalin. This criminal assassin of the Russian people, who has destroyed root and branch of the original workers’ democratic state established in Russia, has placed the destiny of the bureaucratic class which he leads entirely in the hands of the Anglo-American war camp. Just as Petain and Il Duce do the bidding of Hitler, so Stalin must do the bidding of Roosevelt-Churchill.
Professions of religious faith are minor aspects of the political obligations Stalin must assume. To a sinister and permanently corrupted individual such as himself, problems of sincerity have no reality. Stalin is sincerely “converted” to whatever may help perpetuate his crumbling regime. Tomorrow, if it would secure, him a few more tanks and some oil, he would join the Society of Jesus or don the robes of a Dominican monk!
American capitalism works hard to fulfill its part of this deceitful bargain.
Stalin has been handed over, to the beauty specialists of our “political Hollywood.” He is to be glamorized, re-built along approved American lines. None but experts can work, at this task.
His mustache must be trimmed, his face lifted, the cold mask replaced by one belonging to a kindly old gent (with graying hair), who only loves his country. The voice that once sentenced thousands of revolutionists to the execution squads now becomes strong and mellow, filled with patriotic overtones and gentle expressions in the manner of Charles Boyer. Trust our specialists – they are vastly experienced.
First come the officials and diplomats. Harry Hopkins, Joseph Davies and Averill Harriman return home with words of ecstatic praise for the man and his regime.
Not to be outdone, Messrs. Churchill and Berverbrook utter mouth-filling words of Victorian praise for the genial and unconquerable “Defender of the Faith,” the doughty warrior and “Defender of the Realm.”
The assassin of the Old Bolshevik Guard – specially skilled in the arts of frame-up and mass terror – becomes, in the words of an American diplomatic representative at Kuibshev “a kindly old gentleman with graying hair”!
To add finishing touches and a more polished air to the new portrait, hoards of ex-Stalinist liberals, journalists and fellow travelers set to work. No longer “disillusioned” (for Stalin has finally joined up with a world-wide Popular Front) they forget the crimes which they (or some of them) exposed a few brief months ago and revert to yesterday’s hypocritical game – apologists for the totalitarian regime of Moscow-Kuibishev. Duranty, Sheehan, Fischer, Ralph (“I Came, I Saw, I Interviewed”) Ingersoll, Hindus, etc. A collection of journalistic hacks worshipping at the same shrine of World War II.
Washington society vies for admission tickets to Russian Embassy balls; New York debutantes make their debuts at affairs for “Russian Medical Aid”; Russian films of the Stalin vintage are revived wholesale; a hundred radio stations play folk music (Cossack music is most popular); Tschaikowsky is played, swung, recorded and canned; the Stalinist intelligentsia is dizzy with success.
 



NO COUNTRY in the modern imperialist world is beset by so many difficulties and dilemmas as Dai Nippon, the Japanese Empire of the Far East. No imperialist power is driven to so many deceitful extremes; no bourgeoisie is so tormented and tortured as that of Japan. Things that came with relative ease to young, ambitious imperialisms in bygone days are either denied to the Japanese, or are obtained only after back-breaking efforts. Furthermore, the broad horizon of the empire – represented at its extreme by the Tanaka program – constantly narrows as immediate aims and objectives become slimmer and fewer. The Japanese Empire is decidedly an empire that remains on the defense when confronted by its rivals.
On September 27, 1940, Japan formally joined the Axis partnership, thus creating a new “Triple Alliance.” This was barely a year ago. With boastful flourishes, the signatories to the Triple Pact proclaimed that this union of the principal “have-nut, proletarian” powers sounded the death knell of the “plutocratic imperialisms”; that theirs was an aggressive, militant alliance aiming at a redivision of the earth – Europe, Africa and Asia.
But one year later, as the press of Dai Nippon prepared the world tor a special session of the Diet (held on November 15) we find major emphasis laid on the following two characteristics of the pact: (1) That it contained an oral “escape” clause, applying to the Pacific area, which meant that Japan was not obliged to assume any responsibilities or obligations for events occurring in the Pacific that involved the other Axis partners; and (2) Clause III of the pact – obligating Japan to give military aid to Germany if the latter was “aggressed” – could be interpreted broadly to suit the national needs of Japan. In a word, the Triple Alliance was a scrap of paper!
It is our objective in this article to review briefly some of the important events that have occurred in Japanese history during the first year of the “Triple Alliance” – events that have largely nullified this branch o£ the Axis and have brought Japan to the most crucial stage of its permanent dilemma.
* * *
Premier Tojo, current leader of Japan’s military ruling circles, has given an excellent formulation and description of the generalized dilemma that constantly eats away at the core of the empire. In a speech he stated, “Japan must either fulfill its mission of organizing a co-Asiatic prosperity sphere or become a second rate power.” This is simply the Nipponese translation of the famous dictum uttered by Mussolini with respect to Italy: “Expand or die.”
In more concrete forms, this dilemma is expressed by (a) the constant drive to get raw materials which brings Japan smack up against its imperialist rivals (England and America) ; (b) the constant drive to get foreign currencies, through export trade, to bolster the yen or else submit to still further inflation at home; (c) the constant drive to supply and replenish the armies in the field and the navy or else automatically lose every territorial gain since the war of 1905 and (d) the constant drive to find surplus exportable capital so that some profit may result from exploiting the conquered territories.
The net effect of these dilemmas and contradictions is to keep Japanese imperialism in a state of turmoil bordering on panic, in which political crisis and cabinet crisis follow on the heels of one another. The current crisis of Dai Nippon is expressed more specifically in the negotiations and discussions with the United States which have gone on for almost a year – that is, since Japan joined the supposedly all-powerful Axis.
To say that Japan is “stalling for time” in these negotiations is to say a half-truth. It does not explain two essential points: (1) Why the Japanese are stalling; (2) Beyond the most successful “stalling period” lies nothing but the same dilemmas and insoluble problems. What reason is there to believe that a long drawn-out “stall” will better the empire’s position vis-à-vis America and its allies?
Japan stalls because it dares not face the possibility of a war with America; a war which every sane Japanese imperialist knows can only end in defeat and disaster; a war in which Japan is doomed from the first shot. Herein is expressed the historic dilemma of the empire in its most acute form. Shall it be reduced to a miniature imperial power by the strangulation process of the ABCD powers (American, British, Chinese and Dutch), or shall it attempt to burst out of its steel encirclement by major military action?
In the current negotiations – the “successful” or “unsuccessful” conclusion of which will solve nothing for the Japanese ruling clique – Japan seeks (a) To gain time in which to breathe and further explore its situation in the world; (b) To lift the freezing order clamped down by the United States and the British and Dutch empires; (c) To make further preparations if a major war becomes unavoidable; (d) To regain some foreign trade concessions and (e) To salvage something from the wrecks of the Manchurian and Chinese adventures. Naturally, a further stiffening of the home front by new autarchic and militarist measures is being attempted in preparation for the worst possibilities. Indeed, there is little genuine confidence or hope in any strata of the Japanese ruling class!
 
On the Home Front
(1) Politics – Blunder After Blunder: As Japan’s position worsens her ridiculous bourgeois politicians grow more boastful and pretentious. They announce the projection of a railroad running from Berlin to Tokyo! They urge a bond issue to float its initial capital! Theoretically, bourgeois parliamentary parties have been disbanded and their functions replaced by Shintaisei – the “New Structure” organized by ex-Premier Konoye. But this new structure has as much reality as Hitler’s “New Order.” Divisions, confusions and conflicts within the ruling class have simply been transferred to wrangling cliques and intriguing groups that revolve around the Emperor’s palace in Tokyo.
One of the important “New Structure” creations – the Throne Aid League – openly criticizes the entire Konoye program as a failure and went so far as to advocate its own disbanding! The Japanese Diet serves no function beyond that of supplying a battleground for the warring factions of the military, naval and capitalist cliques. Thus, it meets for three days, adopts ready-made tax bills and adjourns! As cabinet succeeds cabinet it is frankly acknowledged that each fresh successor is but a “temporary” expedient.
(2) Social and Economic Conditions. These may be considered under two separate headings: (1) Situation of the general population; (2) Situation with regard to preparations for waging a major war against the “democratic” war camp.
Naturally, Japan’s imperialists place the burden of the crisis they have brought about on the shoulders of the long-suffering masses. The living standards decline toward a dead level of semi-starvation. Finance Minister Koya announces, “to lower the standard of living of the people as much as possible so as to divert surplus capital to industrial (war) production” – that is the aim of his department. These gentlemen are amazingly candid.
Today the Japanese people lack adequate rice rations, sugar, cooking-oil, fish, matches and a dozen and one daily commodities. In truest totalitarian fashion, each individual has been mobilized into one or more of the various national “fronts.” Little recreation is permitted – not even the pleasure of a cigarette or smoking tobacco (there is none), or a moving picture after 9 p.m. Of course, the food situation is most crucial of all. Premier Tojo admits that Japan will have sufficient rice only if the exports from Thailand, Indo-China, China and Korea continue – a dubious if when placed against the background of the current situation. A makeshift plan introduced by his cabinet to plant cereal crops to replace the mulberry groves of the silk industry will not suffice to make up for shortages. Japan fears starvation in naval warfare far more than Britain does because Japan has no American Navy to convoy for it.
The recent session of the Diet imposed new taxes, ordered by the new cabinet of Premier Tojo. These include:

Increases ranging from a 40 per cent minimum to 100 per cent maximum on native-grown tobaccos, movies, drinks, sugar, luxuries of all types, mahjong games and hundreds of other articles.
 
A net increase of two billion yen ($500,000,000) in the total direct and indirect tax burden.

These additional taxes – like all taxes promulgated by the reactionary capitalist regimes – affect the Japanese workers, peasants and middle class professionals.
Japan, perhaps more than any other important power in the world, depends on its export trade and commerce. The economic blockades of the ABCD powers have been almost fatal blows to the two principal export industries, silks and textiles. No figures on unemployment have been released, but it is known that approximately 6,000,000 Japanese families (peasants and workers) were engaged in 6ne or another aspect of the silk industry. America bought 90 per cent of Japan’s raw silk in 1940! In addition, America bought huge quantities of printed textiles and fabrics. It is not difficult to imagine the dislocation that a brusque cutting off of this trade has had upon Japanese economy. In the city of Osaka (3,500,000 population), hundreds of thousands of women and children labor in the textile mills. What has happened to them since the wiping out of Japan’s export trade?
As for the war economy of Dai Nippon and preparations for major warfare, the situation is simple and precise. Japan is living on accumulated stocks and reserves.
“Planning fresh adventures ... (Japan) must store up huge supplies of basic materials (coal, iron ore, oil, gasoline, armaments).” (The New International, January 1941.) Has Japan succeeded in this task? Absolutely not! She has been cut off from access to all raw materials and metal ores with the exception of those flowing in from Korea and Manchukuo. Take, for example, the question of oil – a material without which the Japanese Navy cannot budge. The empire itself produces (northern Sakhalin island) in one year the amount of oil it uses up in one month. The balance (92 per cent) has to come from outside sources. No oil has been exported from the United States or the Dutch East Indies (previous principal sources) for the past four months. The same crisis with regard to dwindling reserves holds true for every basic material utilized in modern warfare.
Yet we find Nichi Nichi – a leading organ of the imperialists – offering the following statement – half bluff, half threat. “If the United States means to avoid war in the Pacific and maintain her supply of rubber, tin, etc., now is the time for the United States to give serious consideration to Japan’s determination.” Naval warfare in the Pacific would have a far more serious effect upon Japanese supply lines than upon American.
 
On the International Front
With one exception, mentioned below, Japan has had a series of unbroken defeats in the field of political and economic maneuvering on the international front.

The military offensive in China launched against Changsha resulted in a miserable withdrawal and abandonment of the campaign. In the past year no serious advance or dent has been made on the “frozen” military fronts in China. The Burma Road remains untouched.
 
As already explained, formal membership in the Axis has had no concrete benefit upon Japan’s position.
 
A “basic treaty” has been signed with the Wang Ching-wei puppet government of Nanking, granting Japan full economic rights over its own creation. But the Nanking “government” is an international scandal and farce – even failing to attain the stature of the Vichy-Petain regime. At the moment, according to the reliable China Weekly Review, it is paralyzed by an internal clique struggle over funds and revenues accruing from gambling houses maintained by this “government.” Even the Japanese press now largely ignores this chimera of the Japanese imagination. The “basic treaty” has failed to erect any stable regime in the occupied areas of China.
 
The New International previously listed five territorial points that constituted concrete objectives in various “imperialist adventures planned by the high command” in its southward expansion drive. What has happened to this plan during the course of the last year? (a) The situation in Shanghai remains basically the same. A simple “mopping-up” operation and the city becomes a complete Japanese possession – yet caution is still exercised, (b) In Hongkong – British gateway to its sphere of influence – the status quo has been maintained, (c) Only in French Indo-China can the Japanese imperialists record a limited success. This former French colony has been large occupied and its economy has been fitted – in the form of economic treaties – into the war machine of the empire. The foothold in Indo-China is still tenuous and shaky, but it represents the one solid success of the past year, (d) Singapore-Malaya still remains as a formidable obstacle to the Japanese and it is decidedly stronger today than last year, thanks to American material aid. (e) The Dutch East Indies are as desirable – and remote – as they were one year ago. The sole difference is that today no supplies, not even those exchanged under more normal conditions (oil, rubber, rice, quinine, etc.) come from these islands, (f) With regard to Thailand (Siam), this prolongation of French Indo-China has passed out of Japanese influence and fallen into the Anglo-American-Malayan orbit, where – in the manner of the small nations of Europe – it will be torn to bits if a general Pacific war comes about.

* * *
This, in brief, is the unfavorable position of Dai Nippon on the home and international front. In ordinary, “normal” circumstances it would dictate the pursuit of a slow, hesitant policy of skillful caution – one at which the diplomats and politicos of Japan are adept. But the Second World War for world re-division and world re-mastery do not encourage policies of hesitancy and retreat. Encircled by the steel arms of its rivals, Japanese imperialism may shortly be forced to strike out in sheer desperation. Certainly the capitalist-militarist cliques which control the nation will not hesitate about such a step – even though they understand what its sole result can be – if the only other alternative is Japan’s reduction to a second-rate power, while the empire decomposes at a rapid pace. And this other alternative is all that is “offered” to them by the Anglo-American imperialists.
Under present circumstances, a major struggle in the Pacific is inevitable – and that in the near future! It will be a clear struggle for imperialist hegemony over the waters of the vast Pacific, China, the raw materials of the South Pacific and control of the China Seas. The defeat of Japan in such a war would, regardless of and despite the will of the “victorious” imperialisms, set loose elementary revolutionary forces within Japan itself. In a war between the Empire of Japan and the Anglo-American powers, the final word would belong to the defeated soldiers, the farmers and the working masses of Dai Nippon.
December 1, 1941
 






Editor’s Note: Continuing its policy of publishing exclusive news dealing with the effects of the war, Labor Action presents this interview describing real conditions in Hitler Germany. This interview is based upon information supplied by refugees from Nazi terror who left Germany as recently as October 1941.



*
What are the German people thinking about the war?
Answer: There is absolutely no enthusiasm for the war! This is particularly true among the workers who detest the war and wish only that it would end. Since the beginning of the war against Russia they dislike the war more than ever before. This is because they have great sympathy for the sufferings of the Russian people and also because of the fact that every single family is mourning at least one dead or wounded man.
What has happened to those Jews who remain inside Germany?
Answer: Since the beginning of the war against Russia the persecutions of the Jews have been worse than ever before. These Nazi acts are directed particularly against the 70,000 Jews who still live in Berlin.
They are sent by the hundreds in freight trains to Poland, to distant towns and villages. They are not allowed to take along more than a suitcase. Those who still live in Berlin have to be home each night at 8 o’clock. For a long time, this order was not strictly enforced but one evening recently the Nazis visited all Jewish homes at 8 o’clock and sent to a concentration camp all those whom they did not find at home at this time.
The Jews are forbidden to eat any fruits. The remains of an apple found in the home of a Jew are sufficient cause for his arrest. All Jews able to do any kind of work are obliged to carry out forced labor for 12 hours a day. If they still have a little money left, they are not paid. If they are paid, the wages are far below the lowest standard of living.
How do the German people behave toward the Jewish people?
Answer: Most of the people – workers especially – are not anti-semitic! On the contrary, they attempt to help the Jews whenever they can do so. The grocers, for instance, often sell; the Jews more than the rations that are prescribed to them. My grocer in Berlin, for example, would secretly put aside good vegetables and fruits for his Jewish customers. One day he was ordered to come to the Gestapo office and was threatened and warned that he would be sent into a concentration camp unless he discontinued helping his Jewish customers.
A friend of mine remembers once when his butcher secretly slipped him a sausage as he was leaving the store and would not take any money for it. This butcher always sold him more meat than he was entitled to buy. These merchants do these things in order to show their dislike of the Gestapo and its regime.
Has the general behavior toward the Jews changed since all Jews have been forced to wear a yellow star of identification on their clothing?
Answer: This order has made the task of helping the Jews more difficult, but the sentiment of the German people as a whole has not changed. For instance, in all the means of transportation the Jews are supposed to remain standing until all the “Aryans’ are seated. But very often “Aryans” give up their seats to Jews.
What is the behavior of workers toward those Jews who are sent into the factories?
Answer: The workers are forbidden to talk with the Jewish workers. The Jews are forced to work in separate rooms which have their own special entrance. However, many workers seek an opportunity to talk with them and attempt to help them at their work. Those workers who do not do this really have nothing against the Jews, but they are afraid of being punished by the Nazis.
Frequently, workers are sent for weeks into a concentration camp for some little offense such as being late to work, or absent without permission haying been granted.
Why is there no rebellion and revolution against Hitler’s dictatorship if the majority of the German people do not want it?
Answer: The Gestapo is too watchful. As a result every man is afraid and distrusts his neighbor out of fear that he may be an agent of the Gestapo. Therefore, at present, it is very difficult to form any organization to fight the Nazis.
Here and there, on the walls of a factory, you can read slogans like “Nieder mit Hitler, Nieder mit dem Krieg” (Down with Hitler! Down with the war!). If there is an air raid warning during the night and people are forced to descend into cellars, you can hear them grumble and denounce this hated war.
However, there is something else which restrains the people in their opposition to the war. That is the terrible fear of the consequences of a German defeat – the fear of a new “Versailles” that will be a thousand times worse and will crush the German people once more. While the middle classes are afraid of losing the money they were forced to invest in state loans, the workers feel very uneasy about their belief that Germany will obtain a peace worse than the former peace and that they will be once more forced to bear all the burdens of such a “treaty.”
When the German workers understand that they haye friends among, the workers of England and America who are against imposing a new Versailles by the capitalist democracies on a defeated Germany, then they will have a different attitude toward opposing their own government. That is why I am glad to learn that the Workers Party, through its publication, Labor Action, has a socialist viewpoint on the war.
 



Japan is a country completely lacking in the most elementary democratic and civil liberties.
In the last century Japan emerged from its Middle Ages and took – as its first “democratic” step – the restoration to full authority of the Emperor Meijii. Since that time the ruling imperialists of Japan have found it to their convenience to build up the myth and popular fairy-tale that the emperor represents – no, IS – God, and that all must obey him with blind obedience. The Emperor – Hirohito – is the symbol around which the Japanese rulers have attempted to build up public support for their adventures of conquest and expansion.
In such an atmosphere it is hardly likely that many of those democratic liberties which the workers have won for themselves in the capitalist democracies – such as the United States – could flourish.
Instead, by combining the traditional religion of the people – Buddhism; by playing up a special section of that religion which never existed at the time of its origin – Bushido, or the code of the warrior; by inculcating the doctrine of Emperor worship and ancestral worship among the masses; the Japanese imperialists have attempted to teach the people that oligarchy, autarchy, blind obedience, totalitarianism, sacrifice, etc., are the best virtues.
The masses are taught that hard work, long hours, patience (no matter how bad the conditions), no complaints, etc., was the mark of a real member of the Japanese race. The imperialists never stopped promising that when half of Asia was conquered and the people of these areas subjected to the rule of the superior “Japanese” race – then they would receive rewards and blessings and Japan would become the Land of Cherry Blossoms. But all this was a lie – years of war in China and Manchuria passed and the people as a whole became poorer and poorer.
 
Reality Is Different
Instead, the reality of Japan is far different.
There is no such thing as free speech or free press. There are no labor or socialist publications – even those from foreign countries are not permitted entry.
Even the legal rights of Japanese citizens are doubtful. A Japanese woman has no recourse or standing under the law; not even the right to vote or the right to get a divorce. As for the workers, they may be arrested at any time by the special secret police and held without trial or charge. Under the notorious “Thought Laws” Japanese may be arrested on the grounds of harboring “dangerous” thoughts – for thinking! (Even Hitler’s Germany never went that far.) The policeman’s word is all that is required to convict them before one of the special “Think” courts, and then they are placed in one of the dungeons that are a part of the numerous feudal castles in Tokyo. They never emerge from them.
Japanese labor has not the right to organize into free trade unions. That right was abolished by government decree during the war in China. The last Japanese trade union – the sailors’ union – was dissolved in 1940. Workers are organized into government unions which have no contracts but act simply as government propaganda associations. Workers cannot negotiate or complain to their bosses. They are supposed to look upon the boss as a paternal friend of the family!
Naturally, under these conditions factory laws mean nothing, as is proved by the enormous number of children and women who toil in Japan’s cotton, textile and manufacturing plants ...
 
Political Structure
The political structure of the country is entirely totalitarian. The two old capitalist democratic parties went out of existence last year at the “request” of the Emperor. What actually exists now is a military dictatorship of the Army and Navy, doing the dirty work of Japan’s leading industrialists and bankers.
Despite all this, the Japanese workers have consistently tried to break out of this fascist-like hold and tried to organize genuine democratic and even radical movements. For a period they had trade unions which achieved an enormous strength and popularity. There was formerly a Communist Party organization, created by and after the Russian Revolution; there were various socialist and left-wing political organizations. Anti-imperialist and anti-capitalist ideas are not unknown to the Japanese people!
This is why the Workers Party denies the idea now being spread about that “democracy” can be brought to Japan at the point of American bayonets and guns. This is no more true than Hitler’s claim that he brought “a new order” to those countries he occupied. The Japanese people know what their rulers brought to the territories they conquered (China, Manchuria, etc.). They brought not “democracy” but slavery and destruction; subjugation of a foreign people. The guns of the American imperialists cannot bring liberation to the Japanese people, but only conquest and military rule from abroad. The REAL job of overthrowing the Japanese militarists and imperialists must be done by the Japanese workers and farmers themselves if true democracy – workers’ and farmers’ democracy – is to come about in Japan.
 



As the war in the Pacific grows and spreads, the number of its innocent victims increases day by day. These victims – the colonial peoples of the areas involved – live in those lands over which the Japanese imperialists and the Anglo-American imperialists are fighting – Indo-China, Philippines, Hong Kong, Burma, Malaya, Timor, Borneo, Dutch East Indies, etc.
Compared to these native people (Chinese, Indo-Chinese, Filipinos, Burmese, etc.) the Japanese soldiers and the “democratic” soldiers are an infinitesimal minority – probably less than 1 per cent. Yet, unarmed and unconsulted, kept down by one or another imperialist gang for centuries, these people are the real victims of the war between the rival capitalist armies and navies. Here are some facts about some of these places that have been unwillingly dragged into the mess.
*
BURMA: Already invaded from Thailand by the Japanese militarists. A crown colony of the British Empire furnishing the “mother” country with teakwood, tin, tungsten, silver, oil and rice. Rangoon, its major seaport, serves as the water port of entrance for supplies that go over the Burma Road. Its population of 15,000,000 people has no democracy and is ruled in exactly the same way that India is ruled.
*
HONG KONG: Already partly destroyed and captured by the Japanese imperialists. It had been British ruled for exactly 100 years. It was seized during the Opium War of 1839–42 when the Chinese government fought England because English merchants, were bringing “civilization” to China by way of this port, in the form of opium! Hong Kong (1,500,000 population) was a great commercial and trading center for the British. A good half of its population consists of coolies who slaved for the British and now must slave for the new exploiters, the Japanese.
*
MALAYA: Now under Japanese attack from land and sea. A British colony for close to 100 years – rich in rubber and tin, with great strategic and commercial ports. A major plum for the imperialists! Its total population of 6,000,000 (Chinese, Indians and Malayans) have worked on rubber plantations, tin mines and docks for long years – to the great profit of their English masters. America’s rulers would give anything to replace the British, provided the Japanese imperialists don’t get there first.
*
DUTCH EAST INDIES: A great network of islands, including Java, Sumatra, Borneo, Papua, etc. Enormously rich in rubber, tin, foods, oil silver and gold. Great stretches of unexplored and undeveloped lands. The Dutch Shell Company – aided by Standard Oil and British companies – which rules over these territories, has earned a deadly reputation as slave drivers of the East Indian people. We predict particularly heavy fighting in these lands because the imperialists are really set on seizing the riches of the islands.
*
The same story – with slight variations – holds true for every island and bit of land that enters the war of the Pacific. Timor, Mindanao, Thailand, Sarawak, etc. – all are fought over for the riches and profits they might bring to the foreign imperialists.
When the Japanese drop leaflets over Hong Kong and Malaya saying: “Fellow Asiatics: Drive out the foreign white devils,” the people answer: “Yes, and you too.”
 



In October and November of last year a little announced, but highly important, conference of representative authorities of the British Empire was held in New Delhi, capital of British India.
At this imperialist gathering there sat representatives of India, Burma, Ceylon, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Malaya, Hong Kong, Palestine, Southern Rhodesia and the East African colonies. Although coming from countries of the brown, yellow and black races only whites – that is, English – were present. A lone Dutchman “representing” the Javanese and Sumatrians was present from the Dutch East Indies which is now, for all practical purposes, a part of the British Eastern Colonial Group.
What was the objective of the Conference? In the words of Mr. Amery, Secretary of State for India,
“It is to see how, in cooperation, they (the colonies represented) can contribute, for their own defense and for the common cause, the very maximum of those elements of supply and equipment upon which the expansion of the Empire’s armies must depend ... It may well be that Delhi is laying the foundations of that Army of Empire whose first contingents are defending the Middle East today, but which is destined in its ultimate plenitude of power to march in the van of a liberated Europe.”
 
Economic Objective
Herein is stated the economic objective of the Conference. To develop the war potential of the Empire forces by mobilizing colonial industry, raw material supplies (wool, lead, zinc, meat, jute, cotton, rubber, tin, manganese, grains, etc., etc.) That this will mean a heightened imperialist exploitation of the colonial slaves “represented” at New Delhi is candidly admitted by the cynical British. The London Economist writes that war economy for the Empire “will involve sacrifice, it will mean inroads into that high (?) standard of living which gives the British Dominions their special qualities.” Those acquainted with the “high” living standards in Britain’s Empire can only wonder at the colossal brass of these imperialist gentlemen. Lowering the standards of Indians paupered 400,000,000 people means, concretely a wave of pestilence and famine, while the country’s steel and munitions industries expand.
Out of the meagre reports on the Conference, other economic objectives emerge:

India is to “equip and supply the forces of England in the Middle East and those east of Suez.” This includes every possible war material.
 
Expansion of industry and factories in India and other backward colonies will be pushed forward. Attempts will be made to draw in more colonial native capital and thus bind the darker-hued capitalists closer to their white-skinned brothers of Mother England.
 
Increased quantities of raw materials will be demanded for convoy shipment to England.
 
In conjunction with growing dependence upon America, the utilization of American capital will be encouraged. More precisely, attempts will be made to draw in this capital. In India, the Indian Aircraft Co. (the nation’s first airplane plant) will be organized and run by American technicians, the General Motors and Ford assembly plants in Bombay are being greatly expanded. Recognizing the inevitable ascendency of Yankee capital – of which this is another small, but significant example – the London Economist of October 19 comments,

“The question of leadership (between England and America) need hardly arise. If any permanent closer association of the two nations is achieved, an island people of 50,000,000 cannot expect to be the senior partner ... The center of gravity and the ultimate decision must increasingly lie in America. We cannot resent this historical development.”
In addition to its economic motivation, the Conference had a twofold, serious political character. First, it was a mobilization, of all the important “White Dominions” with the, exception of Canada, Recognizing the disintegrating tendencies within the Empire, the dangers of colonial native revolt – particularly in India – the British believe in advance preparations. This means lining up the “White Dominions” of New Zealand, Australia and South Africa against the other colonies.
Secondly, the gathering was necessary from a political standpoint to bolster up the Empire morale and draw the ruling authorities closer together. If England should fall to Hitler, the British will continue their part in the inter-imperialist struggle from Canada and the Near and Middle East. In the last analysis, the Delhi Conference had the sinister purpose of forcing India to become a new center in a continued war.
 



Reaction dies hard; especially in British Tory circles!
The question of India arose again to haunt the imperialist members of Britain’s Parliament at last week’s session. Churchill and his supporters took the opportunity to reaffirm once more their intention of continuing their current policy toward India – with not the slightest change being indicated. Government spokesmen in both Houses stated unequivocally that India’s status quo must remain for the duration.
What brought the Indian question before Parliament last week? There are three reasons:

The success of the Nazi Balkan campaign, coupled with the drive on Suez, raises once more the distinct danger of a totalitarian attack upon India. To this must be added the dangerous implications of the Soviet-Japanese Pact.
 
The continuation and broadening of the Gandhi limited-resistance campaign which has already resulted in the arrest of 15,000 Indian Nationalists.
 
The spread throughout India of a wave of Hindu-Moslem rioting – the sure sign of tremendous unrest and mass discontent.

Through the strict censorship we have already learned of serious Hindu-Moslem clashes in such distant sections of India as Bombay Presidency (west coast), Dacca (eastern area) and Lahore (northern section). Apparently these struggles ore spreading on a nation-wide scale.
It is impossible to state what portion of these “riots” are, in reality, clashes between imperialist police forces and the peasant-work ing class masses. And; it is also certain (from previous history) that many a Hindu-Moslem riot is deliberately instigated by the British in the traditional divide-and-rule method.
Two additional facts are certain. First, Churchill and his Tory government are totally incapable of handling the tense situation in India except by resorting to police measures. Second, the mass opposition of India’s 400,000,000 workers and peasants to the war – which dates from September 1, 1939 – is growing and gathering in mighty momentum. Here is one section of the anti-war camp that shows no signs of lying down on the job.
 



The battle for control of the riches of the Near East is on in full force. The completion of the Balkan conquest by the blitz armies of Germany was the preliminary step. Now comes the “Drive to the East” – toward the oil fields, toward Suez, toward the cotton of the Nile valley. German imperialism sticks with mechanical rigidity to its imperialist aims of 100 years – the famous “Drang nach Osten.”
Britain, on the other hand, is fighting a “defensive” imperialist, struggle. It has sewed up these regions ever since the last World War – now it stands in great danger of losing them to its mighty rival, Germany. Because of its tremendous weakness – an overwhelming proof of the hatred in which it is held by the masses of these countries – Britain will probably lose the battle for the Near East in short order. All it has to rely upon are its relatively small English and Australian forces (backed by a small group of professional soldiers from India), plus whatever limited aid Roosevelt may send. Of material or moral support from the population, it has literally none. These people have lived under British domination too long to be whipped up into sacrificing their lives or possessions for the continuation of British rule.
 
Tempting Prizes
What countries are involved? First there is Turkey (15,000,000 population), Egypt (16,000,000), Syria (3,000,000), Palestine (2,000,008), Saudi Arabia (3,000,000), Transjordania (400,000) and Iraq (3,500,000). These nations (total population 33,000,000) are involved directly and immediately. At a more remote distance lie even greater stakes – perhaps the greatest of the war: Iran (Persia), Afghanistan, Ceylon and India – the most magnificent of all imperialist prizes.
The rewards offered by a successful conquest of the Near and Middle East by Hitler are rich and tempting. If they were not the British would not be prepared to battle so hard for them. They are both strategic and economic in nature. Control of the eastern Mediterranean and its water routes, domination of the Arabian colonial world, the great oil wells of Iran, Iraq and Arabia, the food crops of wheat, rice, barley, fruits and dates. The important thing to note is that this is the first major effort on Hitler’s part to break out of the confines of Europe and seize a substantial portion of the genuine colonial world for imperialist exploitation.
The real character of this conflict has already been clearly shown in the fighting in Egypt. Here Axis (German-Italian) and British forces have fought for months, but the ENTIRE native population of 16,000,000 Egyptian peasants and workers remain totally indifferent to and non-participants in the struggle. To them it is a fight for control of the Suez Canal, Egyptian cotton, and commerce, ports and harbors to protect Britain’s Far Eastern life-line, etc. It concerns them in no way, except insofar as they can express their hostility to BOTH sides.
 
The Iraq “Uprising”
The same thing holds true for Iraq, which has now been dragged into the war. Since 1925 the British have dominated, through their puppet government, this miserably poor and thinly populated country of 3,500,000 people. They have no interest in the country itself. Lying in the extensive semi-arid plateau area of the Near East it is a poor country with wandering Bedouin tribesmen and semi-feudal “felaheen” peasants. It has always been ruled by a clique of big landlords, merchants and western-educated army officers. This clique has always been ready to itself up to the highest paying imperialist power. Heretofore that has been Britain.
The current “uprising” against the British, led by Rashid Ali, a big landowner, in no way stems from the nationalist desires of the poor people. It simply means that a section of the ruling clique – principally the pro-Nazi army officers – have been bought off by the Germans and are now playing their game. It is a clique battle pure and simple. The stake is obvious: the Mosul oil fields and the pipe lines running through the country from Mosul and Iran to Palestine and French Syria. So far as the imperialists are concerned that is all Iraq amounts to – a country with invaluable oil fields that will aid the continuation of the world slaughter.
 
Lack Leadership
To gain support among the Arabs – and it is clear that support is desired only from the Arabian chieftains and feudal ruling cliques – Hitler must indulge in widespread “anti-British imperialist” demagogy. He must pose as the great liberator, come to free the Arab colonials from long and harsh British rule. This, naturally, is a 100 per cent lie and we understand that Hitler will replace British rule with the just as exploitative rule of the Nazis. The events of the fast-approaching struggle will undoubtedly revive much genuine Arabian and anti-imperialist nationalist sentiment. But because of the lack of any strong revolutionary Marxist forces or of movements with a serious socialist background and tradition in this section of the world it is highly improbable that much will be accomplished. The masses involved realize full well what is the issue and resent being driven into another, but they lack the organizational weapons and leadership with which to express themselves.
 






Armed with a special assignment, from the editor of Labor Action, your reporter had traveled to Washington, the nation’s capital. His task as to interview a young Austrian girl, a refugee resident of France for many years. X――, living obscurely in one of the poorer boarding-house districts of Washington, had lately arrived from prolonged stays in both occupied and unoccupied France and was familiar with conditions in both, territories.
Labor Action is happy to publish this eyewitness account of France under the combined terror of Nazi Germany and its inspired regime at Vichy.



*
Question: What sections of France were you in touch with and able to observe?
Answer: Until September I was in Marseille. I received much information from friends in Paris and occupied France. Before arriving at Marseille, as an Austrian refugee, I had been confined to various concentration camps scattered all over the country, until late last year. I saw the collapse and fall of France during the earlier stages of the war and was constantly on the move since that time.
Question: Did you have much opportunity to observe the population of France and the effect of various events upon the people?
Answer: Yes. I had many opportunities to watch and speak to workers, middle class people, soldiers, officials, etc.
 
Food Situation Getting Worse
Question: When you left France in September how did matters stand with regard to problems of food, unemployment, shelter, etc.?
Answer: Although things are not yet nearly as bad as they are in Spain (where the whole population is bordering on starvation), nevertheless there is a constant deterioration.
The food situation is getting worse and worse. It is the most constant – almost the only – subject of conversation in the buses, subways, streets, etc. Since June of this year rations have been steadily cut; ration tickets are not honored at all, or less is given than the ticket calls for.
For example, a restaurant in Marseille for dock workers, sailors and longshoremen (typical of the poorer class restaurants) serves a cheap grade of meat ONCE A WEEK ONLY. Its daily menu, never varying, consists of tomatoes, cucumbers and coffee (that is, 33 per cent coffee plus a balance of ground acorns!). There is no milk available.
Bread is still available and obtainable through ration cards. An enormous number of counterfeit cards are printed and sold freely on the secret Black Market at scandalous prices. So many of these tickets have been printed that the government has no choice but to accept them! While France is not yet undergoing mass starvation, nevertheless it will be a terrible winter with the specter of starvation always present.
So far as housing is concerned, there is no real problem, here. Rents have been fixed and there is no shortage of rooms. However, the heating problem is extremely severe. Little or no coal for heating purposes is available and most of the available wood supply was used up last winter! It will be a cold winter with much suffering for the masses of people.
It is important to understand that the Black Market is very important and useful to those who have money. While official prices have gone up only 30 per cent since the war, prices on the Black Market are three and four times those of the official market! This means that only wealthy bourgeois and middle class people can obtain stocks that are secretly sold. In Vichy-Petain territory there is little unemployment as we understand the word. This is because that region is the agricultural heart of France – the region of the small peasant farms.
However, it is otherwise in Paris and the northern industrial territories where textile manufacture and mining were the main industries. Last year 60 to 70 per cent of the workers were unemployed. The Nazis realized this state of affairs could not continue and took measures to set the mines and factories in motion once more. They abandoned their first efforts to move the machinery and plants out of industrial France and into Germany. Their original intention of stripping France of its industry and reducing the country to an agricultural territory has failed completely – another indication of Nazi inability to organize a “new order” European economy! Now unemployment in capitalist-industrial France has been reduced to about 25 per cent of the workers. The big factories in Paris, Lille, etc., are working and producing trucks, munitions and airplane parts for the Nazis. French bosses still run them and get good profits, but the Germans generally supervise production.
Question: Is there any basis for the claims of pro-British and DeGaulle sentiment among the French people?
Answer: It is necessary to distinguish the attitude of various classes and, sections of the population. The middle classes are about 80 per cent pro-British and De Gaullist, but not in any active sense. They only “sympathize.” De Gaulle’s organization exists mainly among the intellectuals and ranges through all political tendencies. In its ranks there are former Socialist Party leaders, Catholic Youth members, officers of the old army, various bourgeois patriots.
It is not well organized nor active in an illegal manner. I never saw any illegal DeGaulle paper or leaflet! As for the workers, they sympathize with Britain in a vague sense – that is, anyone who strikes back at the Nazis gets their approval – but they are not active in Britain’s cause. THERE IS LITTLE DeGAULLE INFLUENCE AMONG THE WORKING CLASS OF FRANCE.
 
Petain Fails to Get Mass Support
Question: What do you have to say about the Petain government? Has it achieved any stability, any support?
Answer: A growing section of the French capitalist class has come to hold the opinion that, under the present circumstances, it is best for them to work with, to “collaborate” with the Germans. This has given the Petain regime some signs of stability as the “normal” government of French capitalism and what remains of the French Empire.
But the Petain regime has no mass support. It stands today because of German support. That is all. It has no stable base, but is only supported by the police and army officers of the old regime.
Every effort to organize some mass support has failed. Petain created a veterans’ organization which was to become the sole political party of the state. But soldiers join it so that they can get pensions, benefits, etc. Likewise, the attempt to create a “Labor Front” on the Nazi model has failed. The genuine trade unions of the workers still exist and carry on, while this decrepit regime doesn’t have the strength to drive the workers into the “Labor Front.”
As for Petain personally, he has more prestige among the masses than his government! People feel sorry for this senile old fopl who is some sort of a symbolic figure of the France that was.
Question: What can you say about the recent acts of terrorism and assassinations? What is their effect upon the masses?
Answer: These acts are the work either of individuals responsible to no one but themselves, or else provoked by the Stalinists. Since the Russo-German war began there has been a good deal of factory and industrial sabotage, particularly in the railroad system. There are slow-ups, destruction of machinery, etc.
Workers naturally express sympathy with the terrorists and indignation at the criminal executions by the Nazis, but they go no further than that. The French Fourth Internationalists do not consider these actions as being of real value to the anti-Nazi struggle.
Question: Is there any relation or fraternization between the French workers and the German occupation troops?
Answer: First of all, we must note that there are less German soldiers in the occupied territory than before. No figures are known, but a tremendous number have been withdrawn and sent to the Russian and eastern fronts. My latest information from Paris was that few soldiers could be seen in the streets of that city.
In the streets, restaurants and other public places there is no contact between the Germans and the French. Only when they work together in the same factory is there any fraternity or relationship. There, German soldier, foremen, guards, etc., mingle with the French industrial workers. The attitude of the German soldiers is a contradictory and confused one. On the one hand, they are weary of the war, have had enough of it, want only to go home, etc. Then they say they cannot afford to lose the war because a new “Versailles” would be a disaster and catastrophe for their country. It is this fear that keeps them in line for their Nazi rulers. This is what must be broken down if the German workers and soldiers are to be won over for revolutionary action.
Question: What signs are there of independent workers’ action, trade union activity, etc.?
Answer: The union situation differs greatly from union to union. Many unions are openly collaborating with the Germans, but these have no membership. Only appointed bureaucrats and hirelings “collaborate.” Many unions retain a membership almost as large as during the pre-war days. The railway unions are particularly strong. As I remarked before, neither Vichy nor the Nazis have been able to replace the old trade unions.
The most important workers’ action – by far – was a spontaneous strike of from 40,000 to 50,000 coal miners in the North of France, around Lille. This has been the only really important workers’ action since the fall of France. It lasted for three weeks and the major demand of the workers, was for better food.
There have been no independent political demonstrations of the workers as yet.
 
What Has Become of the Parties
Question: What of the various political parties and groups? What has become of them?
Answer: Here the most profound changes have taken place. All the old parliamentary and bourgeois parties (Radical-Socialists, Republicans, Neo-Socialists, etc.) have gone, completely out of business – in both parts of France.
The SFIO (Social Democrats headed by Leon Blum) has had various splits. Some leaders went over to the Nazis and became collaborationists; some are supporters of Petain; some are with DeGaulle and Britain. As a party, the SFIO doesn’t exist and is only a sad memory of a bygone day. It has no hearing among the masses.
The PSOP (former left-wing pf the SFIO) has likewise gone out of business and ceased to exist.
The French Fourth Internationalists and Trotskyists are active in Paris and other principal centers of the country. No details can be given about their work since it might be used by their enemies.
The Communist Party (Stalinists), it must be recognized, is by far the strongest and most influential political movement among the workers. This is unfortunate for the French revolution, but true. It has had a large growth in activity and influence, particularly since the Russo-German war, when it came back to life with a vengeance.
It has a well organized controlling center, plenty of money. Its slogans are naturally the same as those of the Stalinists in America – defend the Soviet Union; against Petain; for Britain and the “democracies,” etc. It is especially strong in Paris, where it has many workers and young people in its ranks. It publishes its old paper, L’Humanité, in printed and mimeographed form; possesses district and factory papers and has even organized pro-Soviet demonstrations openly attended by many thousands of workers in the streets of Paris.
Its policy – no longer pro-German since the turn in the war – is to do anything and everything that will militarily help the bureaucrats of Russia retain power. Thus, it favors sabotage in transportation and railways and factories. The Russo-German war provided an excellent situation for them and they are taking every advantage of it.
 
Workers Are Beginning to Stir
Conclusion: In my opinion, the most important thing that has happened in France was the strike of the coal miners in the northern areas. This was the first real demonstration of the only solution to the terrible crisis in France – independent action on the part of the workers; ACTION NOT DICTATED BY THE MILITARY NEEDS OF LONDON OR MOSCOW, BUT BY THE DESIRE OF THE FRENCH WORKERS TO FREE THEMSELVES FROM THE NAZI HEEL.
The demoralization and apathy that hung over France and its working class for almost a year after the defeat have now definitely lifted and begun to disappear. New political movements are beginning; the workers as an independent force are starting in once more to think about their problems and possible solutions to them. I assure you that the Fourth Internationalists are participating as actively as their strength permits in these new movements and new trends. France is recovering steadily but surely from the blows it has received. The French proletariat has touched bottom and is on the way up again!
 



THE Autobiography of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, internationally known leader of India’s nationalist movement, has appeared in a special American edition. Already well publicized in the liberal press, it would be surprising if this volume did not enjoy a wide circulation among middle class and petty bourgeois reading audiences. For next to the Mahatma himself, Nehru has been the most popular figure to emerge from the turbulent Indian scene. His aristocratic bearing; his sweeping literary and oratorical style, heavily tinged with “romantic idealism”; his lofty Brahmanical descent; his unquestionable personal sacrifices for Indian nationalism – all these characteristics have endeared him to the petty bourgeois radicals of the world.
It is false to describe Nehru as a leader of the radical petty bourgeoisie of India – akin, for example, to Haya de la Torre in Peru, or Wang Chin-wei in those by-gone days when he played with the Comintern. Rather, he is a deliberate spokesman for and exponent of the feeble Indian merchant and trading bourgeoisie. In the backward, semi-feudal atmosphere of India all images tend to become distorted and shifted “leftward” on the political spectroscope. A native bourgeois, relegated to a decidedly inferior position by his rival British fellow-exploiters, speaks the language of a radical democrat; a genuine member of the petty bourgeoisie indulges in the most “revolutionary” phrase-mongering. It is to the former category that Nehru belongs.
My first (and last) meeting with Nehru took place at the home of one of his sisters, shortly before his arrest. At that time the Congress had been pushed to the wall by the iron stand of British imperialism. The issue was clear: To yield or launch a nationwide mass struggle. A special session of the All-India Congress Committee was to be held at Poona with the objective of making definitive decisions. In visiting Nehru, I wished to learn from him – a member of the Congress – Working (Political) Committee – what could be expected at the Poona session.
His grande entree into the room from a nearby balcony, along with his obvious patronizing air (in sharp contrast to the more welcome and sincere humble mannerisms of Gandhi) made a most unpleasant impression. In the course of a four-hour discussion his personal characteristics became more marked. Nehru is both pompous and pretentious; arrogant and self-conscious when one touches his own weaknesses and constant vacillations. That “sensitiveness of character,” so often eulogized in the works of modern Indian poets and writers whose ideal he is, merely reflects his self-embarrassment before his own incompetence, inability to rise to the capacity of revolutionary leadership, ineffectiveness in grasping the complexities of modern politics. The constantly reiterated theme of his talks and speeches is, “I do not know what will happen. The sands of time are running out. All is chaos.” The Brahman of Eton has been well dubbed “India’s High Priest of Confusion.”
It is impossible in this review to give a detailed description of his lengthy political life. Those desiring that can easily obtain it from either the English or American editions of his Autobiography, which is sufficiently self-revealing. Instead we shall list the essential characteristics that have highlighted his career – characteristics that have determined till now his political career. There is no reason to foresee any change.

Above all, Nehru has been the “youth adjutant” of Mahatma Gandhi, both as practical organizer and exponent of his philosophy. At times of severe crises in Gandhi’s movement (for example, in 1933) Nehru has wandered slightly afield, but invariably returns to the oracle of ahimsa and satyagraha. Attempts to adapt trade union and peasant union policy to Gandhism are special assignments laid at the door of Nehru.
 
“Nehru symbolizes India. He is above Congress factions.” This is the typical petty bourgeois appreciation of the man. It does accurately describe the particular historic part he has attempted to fulfill. As is always the case, his “non-factional” attitude toward internal struggles of the Congress has meant support to Gandhi and the die-hard ideologists of the Indian colonial bourgeoisie. Not a single illustration can be cited wherein Nehru has opposed Gandhi and his “High Command” on an important issue and sided with left-wing Congress elements. At the Tripuri Congress sessions during the Popular Front period, the Stalinists proclaimed the slogan of a “united march to Gandhi’s little hut.” Nehru has always been the doormat of welcome that lies at the entrance to the Mahatma’s dak bungalow.
 
As a popular journalist and lecturer, Nehru is distinguished for his superficial judgments and shallow analyses. His World History, autobiography and popular pamphlets and lectures belong to the H.G. Wells school of writing. With the exception of some writings on Indian language problems, not a single serious work can be accredited to him. The same frothy sentimentalizing and woolly thinking that characterize his political life are shown in his writings.
 
During the days of the Popular Front, Nehru donned the armor of the Hindu St. George and became the champion of the “anti-imperialist united front of all classes.” Thus, his closest approach to “revolutionary Marxism” found him pulled in tow by the Stalinists. Probably this period marked the height of his public career. Already idealized by the colonial bourgeoisie and its wing of professional intelligentsia, Jawaharlal Nehru was paraded before the proletarian and peasant masses of India by the Communist and Congress Socialist Parties. His preceeding history enabled him to fit the part perfectly. [1]
 
In India’s bourgeois nationalist politics, all roads lead to Gandhi. Today, Nehru is the prisoner of the Congress Working Committee (High Command) which has, in turn, delegated all its powers to the Mahatma for the duration of the current “Limited Civil Disobedience Campaign.” In the swift maneuvers and sudden shifts that have occurred in Congress policy and inner organization since the end of the Popular Front period – all aimed at destroying the authority of the general left-wing forces within the Congress – Nehru has been a reluctant, embarrassed but acquiescent participant. In the purging of Stalinist elements, in the smashing of Subhas Bose’s “Forward Bloc,” in the drive against Congress labor and peasant leaders, in the treacherous Gandhi-Viceroy negotiations, in the deliberate Gandhi policy of preventing a mass struggle under war conditions – in all these sustained actions of the Indian bourgeoisie the High Priest of U.P. has tendered his support to his fellow members of the Working Committee. His war record is as black and cowardly as that of every other aged, doddering and religious devotee of the High Command.

The Second World War aroused violent indignation among India’s masses. This opposition forced a hasty retreat on the part of British imperialism. The authorities attempted to cajole and bargain with the Congress, on the basis of vague, post-war promises. Despite Gandhi’s willingness to reach an agreement it proved impossible because tens of millions had learned the lesson of 1914–1918.
Where has Nehru been during these critical days – days that will obviously determine the fate of the Congress movement. “But sometimes there is an escape for a while at least from this world. Last month I went back to Kashmir after an absence of twenty-three years ... I wandered about the valley and the mountains, and climbed a glacier ...” In the field of politics, this “escapism” and unwillingness to measure up to his responsibilities is expressed in the following way: “... for we could not wholly forget the old lesson which Gandhi had taught us, that our objective should not be to embarrass the opponent in his hour of need.” (Our emphasis.)
And therein is expressed in its totality the abysmal capitulation of Nehru before British imperialism! Understanding that only a nationwide mass struggle can seriously disturb the British, the Etonian Brahman hides his political treachery under the Marquis of Queensbury rules, as though one could reduce the struggle of India against Britain to the level of a prize fight. Since the war began Nehru has dragged himself along behind Gandhi, barked sharply at all left-wing Congress elements and breathed the enfeebling air of compromise.
We have already mentioned the historic Poona session of the Congress Executive Committee. Nothing could be more revealing with respect to the bourgeois, reactionary character of Nehru than the part he played at this meeting.
The Congress Working Committee, striving in despair to negotiate a last-minute bargain with the imperialists, had offered – in the so-called Delhi resolution – to form a united partnership with the British and support the war cooperatively. They were prepared to drop the traditional Congress doctrine of “non-violence.” (Of course, nothing ever came of this shameful proposition.) Nehru, an uncomfortable member of the Working Committee, was supposed to lead the fight against the Delhi resolution when it came up for approval by the Congress Executive at Poona.
After the Congress left-wing forces (Congress Socialists and Stalinists, primarily) had denounced the resolution as an abandonment of the anti-war struggle, Nehru rose to speak. In the turgid, confused language peculiar to the man he proceeded to state his “position.” 1) “As a member of the Working Committee I assume full responsibility for this resolution.” (Applause from the majority right-wing section.) 2) “As you know, I do not feel very sure with respect to this proposal.” (Applause from the left-wing minority.) And then, in the voting, to prove himself a man of steadfast principle Nehru proceeded to abstain! In a word, this three-dimensional politician was “for,” “against” and “neutral” on the self-same measure!
Yet more revealing was his personal defense against the charge launched by the Stalinists that he had completely lost contact with the peasant and working masses. After making an undignified and demagogic red-baiting attack upon the Left, Nehru proclaimed, “I represent the dignity of India in the world of international affairs. I do not speak the language of the market place!”
True indeed. It is in the village market place that the kisans gather and find themselves victimized and exploited by landlord, money-lender and imperialist official. The economic struggles of the peasantry are centered about the crass, materialist “market place” that Nehru despises. And in the cities it is the same. The market place or bazaar is the gathering spot for the textile, jute and steel mill workers. It is the organizing ground for the trade unions. Nehru never did nor ever will speak this language. His is the language of bourgeois diplomacy and self-deceit which – against the background of downtrodden, colonial India – can only be a language of compromise and capitulation.
When Nehru was recently arrested for violating the Defense of India Act he refused to defend himself in the imperialist courtroom. “From your point of view,” he said, “you are perfectly right in sentencing me.” Disappointed in the stubborn and adamant attitude of the British who refuse to bargain with such men as himself, the Pandit is sunk in despair, resignation and self-abnegation. In this he is typical of the Indian bourgeoisie.
The lesson of Nehru’s career is clear. The Indian native capitalist class – infinitely more than its Russian counterpart of the Kerensky period – is incapable of advancing even on the first stages of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, except under the most violent mass pressure. If the colonial bourgeois leadership was a reactionary brake in Lenin’s time, in 1941 its progressive capacities are close to exhaustion and extinction. The leadership of India’s revolutionary nationalism is and remains in the hands of the workers. While a politically and spiritually bankrupt Nehru rots in an imperialist cell the newly-created section of the Fourth International conducts its work among the peasant and proletarian masses of India.

Footnote
1. The shameless American Stalinists continue to play up Nehru as a national revolutionary leader and a sympathizer of Stalinist policy. Considering the denunciations – violent to the point of red-baiting – which Nehru has unleashed against their Indian comrades, one might expect Stalinist recognition that this honeymoon – like so many others – has gone over Niagara.
 



NEW YORK – Last week end – April 5 and 6, to be exact – there took place in this city a gathering of the Stalinist clan and tribesmen from various sections of the United States.
The first day of the conference was completely and literally a washout! A public meeting, scheduled to be held in the huge open-air auditorium of Randall’s Island, was called off on account of a substantial rain. The committee in charge of the affair hastily transferred the sessions of the American People’s Meeting to Mecca Temple in the city proper.
The time consumed by the convention was Saturday evening – devoted entirely to speech-making and to song-singing by the International Workers Order chorus – and all day Sunday. On Sunday the APM split up into various panel discussions which adopted resolutions. These resolutions, in turn, were presented to the body as a whole on Sunday evening.
 
Openly Stalinist
Strange to say, nobody offered a single amendment to any resolution – either at the panel discussions or at the convention meeting as a whole. Every resolution – big, small and medium-sized – was unanimously adopted. At the Sunday evening session (after James P. Davis of the National Negro Congress and Stalinist vice-presidential candidate at the last election had spent a good deal of time in a money-raising speech) the panel resolutions were adopted. The resolution was read, or reported on, in five minutes and ONE MINUTE discussion per speaker was permitted from the floor!
It is really unnecessary to prove that the APM was a completely Stalinist-dominated affair. No bones were made about it! The Daily Worker and the Dean of Canterbury’s collection of Jesuitical lies called Soviet Power were sold openly everywhere. The entire proceeding from a practical standpoint (ushering, maintaining order, etc.) were handled by hundreds of New York members of the Young Communist League; every Stalinist publication, song sheet, record, art magazine, photograph, moving picture, etc., was represented in one way or another in the decorative lobby devoted – so it was said – to illustrating the activities of the APM. And finally, speaker after speaker mentioned the Communist Party in one way or another – in a laudatory fashion, we need hardly add. James P. Davis modestly admitted that he had written the major resolution adopted at the convention.
Who was there? According to the Daily Worker there were over 4,000 delegates, representing the Lord only knows how many tens of thousands. They were elected – according to the same source – by local APM councils, trade unions, fraternal groups, general social and welfare movements, etc.
This is stuff and nonsense or, more accurately, “twaddle.” The overwhelming bulk of those present came first from New York City itself and, second, were probably for the most part outright Communist Party members elected from the dozen and one innocent and “stooge” outfits set up by the CP.
There were present, undoubtedly, a substantial group of genuine working class delegates and militants. Many of them – when they got a chance to talk – made fighting speeches about local strike or civil liberty conditions. But these genuine delegates were completely swamped in the stereotyped procedures of the Stalinist machine.
 
What’s Wrong with the APM?
What was accomplished? What was the upshot of the whole thing? Well, a bunch of resolutions were adopted and a manifesto, ringing with indignant anti-war phrases and promises of action, was ordered to be circulated in a million copies.
But from a serious standpoint, from the standpoint of a genuine anti-war movement, it was all cut-and-dried. How easy it was to imagine the same group of people shouting the exact opposite slogans and passing the exact opposite resolutions if Stalin should jump over to the camp of the democratic-capitalist powers. The pacifist and anti-war protestations of the APM are fake and will change tomorrow with a change in Moscow’s policy. This is proved by the fact that no one dared offer a resolution which would explicitly state that the APM would refuse to support the United States in ANY war – no matter who its ally.
No, the trouble with the APM is NOT merely that it is a pacifist organization – which it is not! The trouble with it is that it is run by one of the partners of the Hitler-Stalin war alliance, and you can make a good guess which is the partner.
 



Every correspondent and, observer agrees that 18 months of World War II has left in its wake greater hunger, pestilence and outright starvation than 48 months of World War I. This may appear as a surprising fact because, in terms of material and physical destruction, there has been much less damage done on the European continent proper than occurred in the last war. Yet the cruel fact remains: Europe as a whole is hungrier now – in one-third the time! The basic explanation for this fact is that European capitalism of 1941 is infinitely more corroded, decayed and malignant than it was in, let us say, 1917. The productive capacities of Europe are more given over to war production, while naked plunder is the dominant motive of German imperialism as it erects its European “New Order.”
John Cudahy, former American minister to Ireland and ambassador to Belgium, who is now an American news correspondent in Berlin, has written a moving picture of the ghastly shadow of famine now haunting the countries of Europe. Spain is clearly the worst off. According to Cudahy, bread and oranges are practically all that is left to eat – with the former staple strictly rationed. Eggs, meat, sugar, butter, cheese and milk have disappeared from the standard diet. Even potatoes are hard to find. Dr. Alexis Carrel, studying malnutrition effects in European war sections, reports that most Spaniards are getting one-fourth of what doctors consider a life-sustaining minimum diet. “Many of them show advanced symptoms of anemia, pellagra and tuberculosis.” He described the people as “moribund, hopeless, listless, nerveless, wan, without will” – half dead, yet living on.
 
Story Repeats Itself
But the same tragic story – indubitably the most striking indictment and condemnation of our barbaric capitalist civilization – comes from every section of the war-torn European continent. Belgians claim food conditions in their country equal to those of Spain, and ALREADY are worse than those of post-war Belgium. Poland – jointly plundered by the macabre Hitler-Stalin alliance – is as bad; in unoccupied France it is reckoned that 10,000,000 face starvation and even now go to bed hungry. Denmark, Norway and Holland are all badly hit by Nazi thievery. If conditions in Germany have improved it is only at the expense of the occupied nations; while England adds more restrictions and rations more staples with each passing week.
Thus we see the major objective result of the inter-imperialist war so far as the proletarian and middle classes are concerned – FAMINE. The nationalist and class struggle in Europe today finds its sharpest expression in the STRUGGLE FOR FOOD. Who shall eat? It is a life and death matter for the European masses.
Who is responsible for this unparalleled situation? Is it Hitler and his imperialists who smash through country after country and then systematically drain their wealth and resources? The hungry workers of Europe cry out with one voice: Guilty! Is it Churchill and his imperialists who, seeking to destroy a mighty rival, have terrorized Europe with a death-like naval blockade? The same hungry voices cry out: Guilty too!
Yes, it is IMPERIALISM – fascist and democratic alike – that has brought Europe to the abyss where child, combatant or non-combatant, is at stake. Hitler and Churchill; Mussolini and Stalin – all four ride astride the horses of famine.
 
Roosevelt’s Game
And what of our own United States? What has been the relation of Roosevelt to famine stricken Europe? We can rest assured that his ambassadors and representatives have kept him well informed on the horror conditions that prevail. His attitude may be summed up under two headings:

Not one ounce of food, not one vitamin tablet, not one pint of milk goes to any spot in Europe where it may help – directly or indirectly – to American imperialism’s great rival for world rule, German imperialism.
 
We will, however, send limited supplies to those areas (Vichy, France, for example) where passive or overt resistance to Germany might conceivably be stimulated by such action.

In a word, before a crumb is yielded up Roosevelt first asks – Will this bring a return to my government and its war plans? Food has become a military weapon in the imperialist struggle. Its role is just beginning, as is proved by the fact that but a few shiploads have left American shores to pass the British blockade. The arch-hypocrite Roosevelt desires to let Europe starve a while longer, hoping to win greater returns tor his generosity. First we shall permit Europe to feel hunger’s deepest pangs, then we shall put her on rations – such is the cynical plan of American imperialism.
The Hoover Food Relief Committee and sundry organizations do not speak the truth – either about Europe’s desperate needs, or why Roosevelt objects to their activities. Such organizations (from which we exclude the term pacifist and humanitarian societies) simply represent that section of the American imperialist class which believes that Roosevelt is going too far, and therefore demands a relaxation of his totalitarian restrictions on food shipments.
The Workers Party has already indicated its answer to this diabolical the rival powers. Independent trade union and working class action to get food through to the starving peoples of every European country! Against the German plunderers, against the British blockade, against the American hunger rationing. We must feed our brothers in Europe. They still face the job of ending the imperialist war and creating the United Socialist States of Europe.
 







Some weeks ago Labor Action published a number of articles on the developing shop steward movement in Britain and pointed out its great importance. This movement is growing and strengthening. We print below an article on the latest developments among the British shop stewards and their meaning ...



One of the major contributions of the British working class to the international labor movement was the creation and development of what has come to be known as the shop steward system and its corollary, the works committees. These class struggle instruments of the workers reached their greatest development in England during the World War – when they served effectively in mobilizing the workers of England against the imperialist intervention schemes of the Tory government – and later during the famous general strike of 1926.
Since that time the shop steward movement has suffered an eclipse, as part of the general decline of British trade union militancy. Nowhere in the world is a working class so held in check by a hidebound, reactionary bureaucracy as is the British worker. But the first year and a half of the war has seen an impurtant revival – if not along the political front, where reformist domination of the labor movement is still all-powerful – then along the economic front. What could be more natural than to find the British workers reasserting themselves by means of their familiar institutions – the shop steward system and the works committees?
What are these institutions? A shop steward is a rank-and-file worker – a trade union member – who is directly elected by the fellow workers in their particular department, unit or shop of the factory. His job is to deal DIRECTLY, from day to day or hour to hour if necessary, with the shop foreman or the management. He brings the complaints, demands and grievances of his shopmates directly to the boss or manager who, in turn, must deal with him because he knows that every man in his shop stands behind the shop steward. As the English put it, the shop steward is the man who holds debates with the foreman! He expressesmost simply, directly and DEMOCRATICALLY the struggle within the industrial plant.
What is the works committee? This committee consists of all the shop stewards in a particular factory or industrial unit, it holds weekly meetings and each steward from the various departments brings his report to this body. It takes up matters affecting the factory as a whole, coordinates grievances in sections of the plant and espresses the higher unity of the indsutrial workers. On all serious matters the works committee (or factory council) deals with the boss in the name of all the factory workers. In addition, there are two further duties of the shop steward. Special stewards – known as trade union card stewards – keep tab on dues, see that union work cards are in order, that no non-union men are sneaked in, etc. Stewards also must take note of various complaints made by the workers during the day’s work which are to be called to the attention of the works committee.
 
Why the Bosses Fear the Shop Steward
The great fear of the shop steward system that exists in the mind of Britain’s boss is easy to understand. First, let it be noted that this system represents an independent workers’ policing of the factory from the inside. Under this system the contract must be enforced and all new grievances must be acted on instantly. Very unpleasant for Mr. Boss. Secondly, it represents in simple but powerful form an embryonic workers’ control of the factory.
It says, in effect, that Mr. Boss is not lord and master of his plant, that another rival authority exists. Arid Mr. Boss knows well where such steps lead – to revolution and expropriation of the plant! so he mobilizes his whole authority and his closest allies – the trade union bureaucrat and the government – against the shop steward system!
Shop stewardism reached its strongest point during the last war among the Scottish shipyard workers in the Clyde area. There were 50,000 of them and they held real power in their hands. This time the movement was apparently revived by aircraft factory workers in and around the London area. The immediate cause for this revival was the heavy bombings of August and September last year.
The Tory government, with its Labor Party prisoners, demanded that workers remain at their work during air raids! This was shortly modified to request that workers remain at work until roof-spotters should inform them that the bombing situation was becoming dangerous. Ernest Bevin presented this request to the workers, and then the opposition began.
 
Reprisals Fail To Halt Movement
Aircraft factory workers elected their shop stewards (since they knew they could obtain no satisfaction from their business and walking delegates) and presented their own demands to the government. First, they insisted that bomb-proof ARP shelters should be constructed by the government right on the job. Secondly, they demanded working class control of roof-spotting activity; that is, they should have the right to appoint their own spotters. Thirdly, no docking of pay during air-raid alarms. These demands were met by the government in a way that depended upon the strength of the stewards and their backing. In many places all demands were won; in other factories to a limited extent. The government immediately began reprisals against the shop stewards, attempting to nip the system in the bud. Union bureaucrats – having nothing else to do since they had given up their powers during the imperialist war – threatened to expel shop stewards from the unions. This threat was particularly vicious in the Amalgamated Engines Union, controlling munitions workers, but it did not materialize. A reign of transfers and dismissals of stewards swept Britain’s factories. In one Scottish factory military police entered to break up a meeting of a works committee and arrest several stewards. In the month of October, 1940, fifty stewards were dismissed from the factories.
The answer of the workers was to renew their efforts and and another demand – compensation for all workers hurt during an air raid.
 
“Take Up Fight Where Bureaucrats Leave Off”
And then in October of last year the Clyde shipyard workers came back to life and turned automatically to the shop steward system. A meeting of stewards, representing all the Scottish shipyards, was held. It is natural that they, being the most advanced and militant workers in all England, should formulate the most complete and serious set of demands. To those we have already listed they added the following:

An active drive against “non-unionism” – only union workers in the shops;
 
Shop stewards and works committees in every factory;
 
Fighting protection of all shop stewards and
 
Key men in plants who must remain during air raids to be supplied with helmets.

Said the Scottish shop stewards: “We take up the fight where the union bureaucrats leave off!” At present, the major issues before the shop stewards consist in attempting to win higher wages to combat the daily rising living costs and settling issues that directly arise from the war itself (air raids, compensation, transport disruption, etc.).
The industrial conscription powers now possessed by Bevin form a basis for serious strike struggle issues in the immediate future. Bevin now has authority to

Register all essential factories, industries and industrial workers;
 
Dismiss workers for “willful misconduct”;
 
Force all workers to stay on the job unless permission to leave is granted by the “national service officer.” (This is, let it be noted, precisely the same as in Nazi Germany.)

The shop steward system and works committees are slowly but steadily expanding. Against them stand the government, the labor bureaucrats and the bosses. The future of the British working class lies in this struggle between the embryonic workers’ power and the organized might of the English capitalist class. Here is the field of the “war within the war.”
 



British imperialism has just added another name to its lengthy list of victims. Labor Action has received word of the death, while imprisoned in a Calcutta cell, of Swami Sahajanandu, one of the finest and most militant leaders ever to spring from the great peasant masses of India.
Comrade Sahajanandu, the recognized and feared leader of the All-India Kisan Sablia (peasants’ union) was a young man, in the prime of life. His everyday actions – organizing the peasant unions, leading huge marches and demonstrations, conducting hunger strikes in his frequent sojourns in British jails, etc. – expressed the deepest strivings of the peasants and agrarian laborers of Bengal, Orissa and Bihar Provinces. He was their leader against British and feudal tyranny, in every sense.
Sahajananda, who began as an orthodox follower of Gandhi, rapidly progressed beyond that stage. By turn he became a member of the moderate Congress Socialist Party, and then came under Stalinist influence. But his disillusionment with the conservatism of the Socialists of India and with the treachery of the Stalinists did not destroy his faith in revolutionary Marxism. Shortly after breaking with the Indian Communist Party as a result of the Hitler-Stalin alliance, he was sentenced to a long jail term for his anti-war speeches. It was in these circumstances – undoubtedly due to harsh prison conditions – that he died. But he had met new friends and had expressed great sympathy with their ideas. These friends were members of the Indian section of the Fourth International.
India has lost a splendid leader and comrade; a man who could have played a great part in its approaching revolution. He shall be remembered; likewise those who murdered him.
 



American export figures for 1940 reveal two basic tendencies of our economy – tendencies which will reach full maturity during 1941 and which mark the precipitous rush of American imperialism toward worldwide domination.
These two basic tendencies are: (1) The rapid gearing of American national economy to total war production; (2) The successful maneuvering to place America in a position from which she can organize, control and regulate the commerce of the world.
Under the first category the export figures show the following:

Aircraft, iron and steel in finished or semi-finished form, and industrial machinery for war purposes (tools, etc.) led our export list in the order named. They comprised 40% of the total exports – as compared with 17% in 1938.
 
There was a 25% export increase over the 1939 total. The total figure was slightly over $4,000,000,000 and approached the level of 1929. This increase was entirely due to increases in exports listed under (a); that is, entirely due to the war.
 
Export of farm products and manufactured consumers’ goods showed a severe drop below figures of 1939. In the last 3 months of 1940, exports to Europe proper (excluding England) totalled a miserable $39,000,000 thus signifying the end of all European trade for the time being. Again we see the purely warlike character of our trade increases. The “normal” American trade of peacetime (foods and grains, consumers’ manufactured products, industrial machinery) has been replaced by guns and tanks, planes and cannon, shot and shell.
 

An Imperialist “Superman”
The second important tendency is the emergence of America as the “Superman”, confronting exhausted or semi-exhausted rival imperialisms (England, Germany, France, Japan, Italy, etc.) The United States is fresh on the scene: the hot blood of war productivity has just begun to flush our cheeks, and already the other powers sag wearily.

Subtracting our total imports from our total exports gives a favorable trade balance of $1,400,000,000 for the year 1940 – the largest since 1921. This balance had to be paid for in cash by our foreign customers. It was paid for by gold imports and by the liquidation of American securities held by foreign investors and rentiers. American interests wax richer at the expense of their European “friends” and “enemies” alike.
 
To the British Empire (England, her dominions and colonies) went 63% of our total 1940 exports! Mother England herself took 34% alone, or more than double that of the previous year! This utter dependence of England and her Empire upon the United States for its continued existence expresses – as we have previously written – the bloodless conquest of the British Empire by America. F.D.R. is heir apparent to the Crown of King George! Let us realize that this export dependency will steadily increase, not contrariwise.
 
The drop in exports to Latin America is due not to a decline in demand for our products, but the inability of these countries involved to pay for anything. They themselves have lost their European – and to some extent – world markets. Only by borrowing money can they pay. And to whom can they turn for loans? The American Export-Import Bank, financed by the American Government. Each Loan, naturally, will tighten the grip that “Yankee imperialism” already has their throats.
 
The decline in export of food products and consumption articles means that we are storing up great surpluses of these life necessities. Trotsky once spoke of America’s goal of “putting the world on rations.” When F.D.R. at the judicious moment holds out the surplus stocks of American economy to war-exhausted Europe – at what a terrible price! – we shall see the fulfillment of this objective.

These are the two tendencies in the American “arsenal of Democracy” as shown in the export figures of 1940.
 



Dear comrade Editor:
The other night I happened to hear over Station WEVD an interview between Dr. William Bohn and that erstwhile revolutionist, Max Eastman.
We are all familiar with examples of cynical renegacy, but Eastman touched new depths – sufficient to arouse even the oldest of participants in the revolutionary movement.
During the course of his interview Eastman endorsed Roosevelt and Winston Churchill; approved of the Dies Committee; recommended the ousting of all “Communist” teachers from the school system; declared for full support to Britain – including a war declaration if necessary; approved of the necessity for a military dictatorship in America during war time; etc. Talk about going over “whole-hog” to the extreme patriotic camp! Eastman has done this and is eating the hog whole, in addition!



 


Yours,
Sherman Stanley



 



On April 5 and 6 there will be held in New York City a “People’s Meeting.” arranged for and convened by the American Peace Mobilization (APM). According to Miss Marian Briggs, national administrative secretary of the APM, this nation-wide meeting in New York heralds the rapid growth of a people’s “anti-war, peace movement in the United States.” “The cry for peace.” says Miss Briggs, “is rising from every state in the country and the promise of delegations from the farthermost parts of the U.S. makes it apparent that the April 5–6 demonstration will be the biggest, most important action yet taken by the American people.” (Daily Worker, March 13.) The APM has sent out 400,000 calls to various organizations.
 
What Is the APM?
On the day the Hitler-Stalin pact was signed in the year 1939 an organization known as The American League for Peace and Democracy, formerly the American League Against War and Fascism, was declared dead by its leader. Dr. Harry Ward. The American Peace Mobilization is the modern-day successor to the old American League. Why was it necessary to bury the old organization and re-create a new one? The answer is simple. Because the political line and policy of the American Communist Party, which had dominated and controlled the old outfit, had done a flip-flop overnight. From being the ally – or rather, desiring to be the ally – of the British and French “democracies,” Joseph Stalin had become the outright aide and ally of Hitler and imperialist Germany.
It was necessary to kill off the American League, which for years and years had advocated the People’s Front policy of collective security and war action by the “democracies” against Hitler. In the minds of those people who knew the League, it stood, for “all-out” aid to to any democratic capitalist country. This would not do, and so it was killed.
The old dies, but the new must be born. And thus there came into existence the American Peace Mobilization with the exact opposite program of the old organization, but with the same people – the American Stalinists – in firm control from top to bottom.
 
The More It Changes, The More It’s the Same
But as the old French proverb reminds us, “appearances are often deceiving.” Is it true that the APM and its People’s Meeting really represent an anti-war movement? If not, what does it really aim at? . We are not objecting to the APM merely because it is a Stalinist-controlled organization. That’s enough to make us suspicious, and to examine it closely. We say it is a FAKE, not a genuine anti-war movement, because its policy is set by Stalinists in conjunction with the war interests of the Hitler-Stalin imperialist alliance. As a partner in this active alliance, Stalin tries to help Hitler by embarrassing and annoying his enemies in the democratic imperialist countries. Hitler, above all, is interested in keeping Roosevelt and American imperialism out of the war as long as possible. The Stalinists, as allies of Hitler, try with might and main to aid this effort. So, while one hears of no Stalinist anti-war activity in Germany or those countries dominated by the Axis, one hears of it in the Allied countries.
The Communist Party, taking advantage of the genuine haired of the American workers for imperialist war, has created an organization like the APM for the deliberate purpose of demagogically utilizing these anti-war sentiments in the interests of the Stalin-Hitler alliance.
 
Where Is the Evidence?
Proof of this is simple and easy to obtain. The APM is not – as is the case with the Workers Party – against this war because it is an imperialist war on both sides. It is only against ONE side, because the Soviet Union happens to be on the other side! But suppose that Stalin jumps to the other side? (And Roosevelt is trying hard enough to convince him that he should do this.) Then the APM would likewise die overnight, and probably the old American League would be “re-born” in its place – shouting for “collective security,” “democracy” and all the current slogans of the American war-mongers. The Stalinists must have a “popular,” non-party organization for presentation to the skeptical American public and working class no matter what their program is. Today it is the APM and its People’s Meeting – tomorrow it will be something else. But it is always the same – a fake organization having as its objective the aiding of Stalin’s foreign policy.
In our next issue we shall describe the meeting itself. For the past month the Daily Worker has been singing the praises of the APM and boasting of its growing strength. Undoubtedly many delegates will attend its meetings – many only representing themselves, many from middle class organizations and some from Stalinist-controlled unions and locals of the CIO. But we have little confidence in its ability to advance the genuine cause of anti-war action. It lacks the elementary basis for such a thing – namely, complete freedom from the poisonous taint of both warring camps in the present World War.
 



The question of leadership (between England and America) need hardly arise. If any permanent closer association of the two nations is achieved, an island people of 50,000,000 cannot expect to be the senior partner ... The center of gravity and the ultimate decision must increasingly lie in America. We cannot resent this historical development. – London Economist
ALL OF US are familiar with the fable of La Fontaine in which the wounded lion, trapped in jungle underbrush by heavy ropes, is rescued by a friendly mouse that gnaws through the ropes and sets him free. Then, friends forever, they stalk off into the forest, paw in paw.
This idyllic tale of friendship might well be used to depict some of the descriptions of Anglo-American relations now employed by professional journalists of both countries, chauvinists of the so-called “radical-liberal” type (Hook, Eastman & Co. in America; Laski, Spender and colleagues in England) and Anglo-Saxon fanatics of the Dorothy Thompson school of propagandists. However, things are not so simple in this complex world – particularly the relations between two great economic and imperialist powers.
An English worker drinking ale in a pub was asked by a reporter what he thought of the Roosevelt-Churchill eight-point world program. “I’d like to know what they really talked about,” he replied. What healthy contempt is here displayed for the game of diplomatic deceit and cynical double-talk that went on aboard the English and American men-of-war off the coast of Maine! Everything – literally everything – that took place at the conference has been concealed from the world. The military strategy planned, the program with respect to Russia, the concrete world re-organization planned after the defeat of the Axis Powers – all these problems that were on the real agenda – have remained hidden in the sealed diplomatic pouches, to be revealed only by actual events over which the people have no control. Beyond the simple reiteration of what has been obvious for a long time – that American imperialism intends to supply Britain to the full – not a line was revealed about Anglo-American relations during the war or in the post-war period. Basing ourselves on the limited material and information that is available it is our intention to describe these relations and their possible effects upon the international revolutionary movement and the colonial nationalist tendencies.
 
Between Two World Wars
The bourgeois isolationist element in America that has thrust Charles Lindbergh into the spotlight as its spokesman has based itself largely on the popular belief that, after winning World War I for England and her allies, America was taken for a sucker’s sleighride at the peace conference. Idealist Wilson was outsmarted at Versailles by Europe’s slick politicians. The America First Committeemen harp constantly on the fact that “England obtained the greatest territorial and economic advantages; that England did not pay her debts to us while she was taking Germany’s last nickel; that England dominated the continents of Europe, Africa and Asia, etc.”
All this may be true, but it is historically irrelevant since it ignores the fact that American imperialism at that time was totally unprepared to assume world leadership and challenge the mighty British Empire. America, prior to World War I, had barely completed its internal consolidation and was only first feeling the necessity for world imperialist expansion. Its participation in the World War, in comparison to its present participation in the present World War, was amazingly slight in terms of manpower, resources, wealth and militarization of its economy. As a colonial power and organizer, America was a novice alongside the imperialists of London with their 300 or more years of experience. True, one could already discern the forces of disintegration at work within the British Empire (China’s nationalist upsurge; India’s Gandhi-led civil disobedience movement of 1919–1921; the Communist insurrection in Java; bourgeois-led independence movements in Canada and the Dominions), but the Empire itself still moved forward even if at a relatively slower speed and with two new rivals (America and Japan) to worry about. London wrote Versailles No. 1; Britannia still ruled the waves.
 
The Clash That Did Not Come
By the 1920s American imperialism had militantly come to life and begun to challenge British imperialism in field after field, area after area. The first disagreements were at Versailles and the Senate refusal to ratify the treaty produced by that conference was the first open demonstration of American dissatisfaction. Year after year the rivalry grew as America became more challenging to the Empire. There were dashes over German reparations, redivision and mandating of African colonies, oil and mines in Mexico and Venezuela, oil fields in what are now Iran and Iraq, spheres in South and Central China, war in the Chaco, trade and commerce with the Latin-American countries, etc. English and American diplomats even clashed over mutual claims in the Arctic and Antarctic regions! In those days every American was taught that every Englishman was a snob and a “gentleman”; a lean, cold-blooded aristocrat who thought that his very “nightsoil” had a perfumed fragrance. English opinion of the “vulgar Yankee cousin” was even less laudatory. In bourgeois journalist and intellectual circles talk of “Anglo-American blood brotherhood” was unheard of.
America’s expansionist needs were brought to the point of desperate need by the internal capitalist crisis of 1929. The world and its commerce belonged predominantly to the British and French Empires. To seize a share of that world and its markets meant, ultimately, a war between Britain and America. In the 1930s, America’s ruling class was pointed toward such a conflict; economists and journalists freely predicted it.
 
United Front Against the Greater Danger!
That this inter-imperialist clash did not come obviously does not mean that Anglo-American rivalry has been resolved in some harmonious and mysterious fashion. On the contrary, it is today sharper than ever – particularly from the standpoint of the British rulers. But it has been momentarily superseded and overwhelmed by a fiercer, more bitter conflict that has challenged the basis of both imperialisms. This, naturally, has been the breath-taking and awe-shaking emergence of German military imperialism. Voila l’ennemi! There is the main enemy, Churchill cried out, pointing a trembling finger at the would-be Führer of the British Empire. Roosevelt, inspired leader of Wall Street imperialsm, nodded agreement because the Führer had his eye on those self-same delicious fruits that he was preparing to pluck.
Thus, Anglo-American partnership is a partnership of necessity, face to face with Hitler. But the needs, the interde-pendency and independence, the aspirations of the two partners, differ considerably. One is an imperialism whose destiny is setting and which seeks to retain only something for a secure but quiet old age; the other imperialism is still vital and powerful and seeks world mastery. For Roosevelt, this is a struggle of Germany against America, Wall Street versus Wilhelmstrasse. As for Britain, in terms of analogy, she is a subordinate partner of the Anglo-American war camp. Hitler and Il Duce, symbolizing land power, meet in an armored train at Brenner Pass; Roosevelt and Churchill, symbolizing sea power, meet in an armored ship off the coast of Maine. But, in reality, it is Roosevelt and Hitler who face one another – every other element in this world struggle (allies, diplomatic maneuvers, military feints, thrusts, etc.) is subordinated to Wall Street versus Wilhelmstrasse.
In this article, however, we are concerned only with existing relations within one camp, the “democratic” imperialist camp. What are the social and economic forces that determine the dominant position of the United States; how have these relations developed since the war began; what will the future bring to the Anglo-American imperialisms?
For Britain, its orientation toward an alliance with the United States was a sign of organic weakness. The extent of its dependency upon America varies directly with the rapidity of the inner decline of the British Empire. The more powerful become the internal forces of disintegration that are today shaking apart the “British Commonwealth of Nations,” the more essential it is for the imperialists and bankers of “The City” to turn toward America.
In its turn, the inner decline of the British Empire is determined by two factors: (1) The growth of independent capitalism and competitive industrialization of the Dominions (Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa). These so-called “white” Dominions have reached fairly advanced stages of capitalist development and can only tend to strain against the remnants of imperialist domination from the metropolitan center. Their products compete; their merchant fleets vie for trade with the “motherland”; their native bourgeoisies organize a “sub-imperialism” of their own against the British (e.g., the Australians in the surrounding islands of the South Seas; the South Africans in the southern portions of the African continent); they struggle against preferential tariffs that favor the isles of Great Britain, etc.
Furthermore, these capitalist dominions are visited by all the economic ravages and cyclical crises that are a part of modern capitalism. Their weakness and backwardness force them to seek out a stronger imperialism for protection and support. Where else to turn to but the United States? Like growing but immature children they cannot stand on their own, but must seek a protector. The inability of Great Britain to play this rôle means that Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa must henceforth turn to America. Naturally, this fact contributes still further to the decline of the former metropolitan center. But there is nothing it can do to halt this process, for it faces the Devil’s dilemma: either acceptance of a position subordinate to American imperialism, or almost total liquidation (in the manner of the French bourgeoisie) at the hands of Nazi Germany.
The second factor determining the inner decline of the empire and its consequent dependence upon America is the stormy revolutionary upsurge of the colonial masses within the empire. These nationalist uprisings have contributed more than any other factor to the organic break-up now proceeding. They have affected Malaya, Burma, Ceylon, China, British West Indies, etc. Most important has been the intense and unconquerable nationalism of India’s 400,000,000 people – a nationalism that burns most brightly precisely during England’s greatest crisis – the present war crisis. From its colonial arena, “The City” can expect only nationalist uprisings, bourgeois-led or organized by the colonial proletariat, but all alike contributing to the inner decline of the empire. Enlistment of the colonial masses in the “democratic” imperialist camp is excluded as is shown by the relatively small number of colonial troops employed in the war. More than any other section of world society, the colonial people have understood the hypocritical fraud of the supposed war of “democracy versus fascism.” At best, from the British standpoint, they maintain a sullen silence and passive resistance; at worst, from the British standpoint, they will revolt at every opportunity. But they will not support Britain! Two years of war have shown this.
But if Britain leans heavily upon America out of an organic weakness induced by a loss of blood and a growing pernicious anemia, the position of America in the entente is determined by growing organic needs. These needs are not to be confused with strength, or signs of strength. The imperialist needs of the American bourgeoisie have been described in various New International articles. With every other imperialism it has in common the desire for access to raw material sources, export and import trade, overseas utilization of capital and credit, etc. The sole difference lies in the greater urgency of these needs. The most powerful imperialism in the world today is America. Therefore, its demands are the most powerful and urgent. Nothing less than control of the earth and its riches, conquest of the world market, a World Versailles, will satisfy the financiers of Wall Street and their international monopolies. A necessary stage in this process is subjugation (by economic measures) of Britain and its Empire. Britain is the first, the nearest-to-hand victim of American imperialism. Its assimilation and digestion, of course, is no simple or easy task. One does not just “take over” a gigantic empire, highly complex in character itself. Thus, the relations between America and Britain are extremely intricate and must pass through many turns and twists, ups and downs before there is even the remote possibility of a definite, stabilized set of relations. The imperialist requirements of both powers; the political “coming to age” of the working classes of the many countries involved; the victory or defeat of the Axis imperialist camp; the actions of the colonial peoples; the centrifugal tendencies of the independent “dominions” – all these factors bend and mold Anglo-American relationship, determine its direction and speed.
 
Elder Statesman to Junior Partner in Two Years
The swift events toward the end of the first year of war threw the British ruling circles into total panic. Until that time British policy was summed up in the export trade program advocated by Neville Chamberlain. Every effort was to be made to keep exports going at the pre-war rate and to keep overseas trade functioning as in peace times. But the first successes of the Blitzkrieg removed the illusion of a “normally conducted, democratically run” war and began the complex shift toward complete subservience of British imperialism to American imperialism.
This set of relationships has developed on the economic, military, political and social fronts. Military and economic relationships have developed most deeply at present.
(a) Anglo-American Military Alliance: The military systems of America and the British Empire are now allied. This process has gone further in the naval branch of warfare, where the United States is actually at war with England’s opponents and where a joint command exists. In the Atlantic and Pacific oceans a joint patrol and convoy system (minutely worked out) prevails. Naturally, a division of labor exists since the British must be strongest around the isles of England and in the Mediterranean. The Pacific and South Seas areas have been specifically assigned to the United States.
But, again, this relationship is not one inter pares – among equals. Britannia no longer rules the waves – its navy has done all the fighting (and sinking) till now; its merchant marine has done all the target work for Nazi submarines. The speed of American naval production grows; that of England declines. The goal of a “two-ocean navy” set by Roosevelt will far outdistance the British Navy and mean that America shall rule the waves. In six months of 1941 American shipyards have launched three 35,000 to 50,000 ton battleships while the British launched none during the same period!
In the army and air forces the same situation exists. Captain Liddell Hart, writing in the British New Leader, flatly declares that the British Army cannot take the offensive or invade Europe. According to this authority, this army has “a mere tincture of mechanization.” But, obviously, the imperialist conquest and defeat of Germany can come only through the military defeat of Hitler and the Wehrmacht. Britain alone is incapable of such a task. Its failure to reorganize its chaotic economy along military, totalitarian lines has meant, concretely, failure to mechanize its army! For this the British Tory class must again turn to America and request the tools of mechanization (tanks, trucks, landing boats, etc.), in addition to a flow of planes and bombers. America is engaged in producing these – but not as a gift; rather, as a condition for survival in the status of a junior partner. From the standpoint of supplies and war material, the British Army already depends largely upon the United States. This is particularly true for the Dominion forces (Canada, Australia, etc.) and the empire forces in Egypt, Iran, Syria, Iraq and India. That this dependence has not proceeded further is due solely to the fact that the American Army is in such a backward state – as compared to the armies of Germany. But Roosevelt, mapping out the future fields of broad military and naval strategy, proceeds steadily toward his goal: the integration of American and British military forces, with the supreme command resting upon the Americans.
(b) Anglo-American Economic Alliance: American imperialism has made its most successful marauding expeditions into British economy. The blows dealt at the imperial worldwide financial and trading structure have been far heavier than the military blows of Hitler. Here the game has been all one-sided with the British incapable of even the most feeble self-defense.
What have been some of these inroads?
(1) The re-tooling and militarization of American industry have been partly financed by profits accruing from British cash purchases in this country. Approximately $1,000,000,000 worth of supplies was sold in 1940 at substantial profits to American business men and exporters.
(2) American war industry – financed by government contracts and loans – is producing lease-lend material for Britain. This scheme works out trebly to the general advantage of American imperialism: war industry is nourished and expanded at a dizzy pace; sales to England and her allies reap excellent profits (no matter who pays); England must prepare to pay heavily for the colossal bill of credit it is running up. This, of course, belongs to the future. Since it can never be repaid in cash or in kind it must be repaid in the sole possession that British imperialism still retains – colonies.
(3) Traditional British sources of raw materials are falling under American control. As the “arsenal” of the democratic war camp, the raw materials of war must pour into the American hopper. Rubber, jute, tin, manganese, grains, oils and fats, wool, lead, zinc, – virtually everything that is produced by the colonial empire of Britain is being diverted to American ports. In July, 1941, the port of Singapore had the greatest export volume in its history. Approximately 75 per cent of this went to the United States. Oil, the motive force of modern war, is doled out to the British under the strictest supervision.
 
How the Lease-Lend Bill Operates
The workings and procedure of the Lease-Lend Act now mean the following concrete things to the British: (a) Replacement of numerous export industries and business by the United States. British firms that produced non-war essentials are unable to continue any export trade under the Lease-Lend Act. London reports the closing of one firm after another due either to government command to cease exporting, inability to obtain needed raw materials, or the fact that the same product is produced competitively in America. The Economist of London writes: “There now is very considerable disquiet among British exporters lest the export drive which they have been urged to organize is, owing to lease-lend changes, to be allowed to lapse.” Government policy is now to permit only those exports useful in obtaining American dollar exchange (which immediately finds its way back to the United States for payment of bills still due).
The Lease-Lend Act also means (b) Britain agrees to abandon, by open agreement, virtually all of its trade with South America. No goods that compete with anything American exporters are anxious to sell to any South American nation is permitted. In addition, any business that the United Kingdom conducts with South America (that is, necessary for continuation of the war) can only be done with American dollars. Thus, on the South American continent the dollar has replaced the pound sterling. (c) The Lease-Lend Act places British economy on a rationing system that ranges from food to ships. This gives American imperialism a growing indirect control over British industry. America can (and is) earmarking the quantity of steel, cotton, food; the number of ships, etc., that shall be turned over to England. All this, naturally, is regulated on the principle of how much is needed for pursuit of the war. Anything over and above is impermissible! (d) Traders and exporters of the English isles are forbidden to engage in business in any section of the world where their American rivals and competitors are able to fulfill the needs and demands of the population. This can only facilitate the driving out of the British from the world market – the open aim of Roosevelt.
(4) British exports in 1941 are to be curbed by $400,000,000 – a third off their total yearly trade for 1940. This is the first concrete statement of what the alliance with America means in terms of dollars and cents. The $400,000,000 hacked off will affect primarily exports of iron and steel manufactures, electrical equipment, machinery, cotton goods, ships and aircraft. This British loss automatically becomes America’s gain.
(5) America has reaped great benefits in the field of credit and finance. In the United States, the liquidation of British-owned American securities and stocks is proceeding rapidly. With the exception of the Dominions and India, we have drained all the gold out of the banks of England. In the first six months of 1941, 2,000,000 shares of American stocks owned by English banks and investors were sold on the New York Stock Exchange. The RFC has demanded further and more rapid liquidation of these securities as collateral for the $425,000,000 loan it has advanced to England so that it can make further cash payments. These “off the floor” sales – organized by American banking syndicates at pleasant profits – are a virtual skinning alive of British imperialism. Prices, values, terms are all fixed by the American purchasers.
Furthermore, American imperialism demands of Britain that the self-same process of liquidation being carried on in America must be organized in South America, China and other countries outside the British Empire proper. To its American rival British imperialism must disgorge everything it has built up in the past 300 years of its existence. So exacting is the demand that the New York Times reports that in England family heirlooms (antique furniture, candlesticks, dinnerware, tapestries, china, etc.) are being sold in an effort to build up dollar credit balances. American heirloom importers are breaking up the big estates of the British aristocracy and nobility! Ultimately, perhaps, America’s Sixty Families and their favorite daughters will be demanding lords and barons in exchange for boatloads of lease-lend goods!
(6) The American merchant marine (aided by its substantial plunderings from the fleets of Denmark, Norway, Holland, Germany and Italy) is replacing the British fleets of freighters. Route after route, sea lane after sea lane is taken over by the United States. The British have suffered enormous losses through ship sinkings; their yards for replacement have reached their full war capacity while the specific weight of American ship production grows daily in relation to that of England.
American ships, loaded with munitions, ply the seas to the Middle East, the East Indies, African ports, South America, Asia, etc. They return – their holds loaded with the raw materials of the countries. But the British fleets are ordered, from Washington, to engage in nothing but necessary war transportation (troop transports, supplying of overseas armies with food, oil, etc.). There is no gain or profit in this – only the threat of a torpedo through the hull. The famous P.&O. line that ran from England to the Orient and India has been almost completely sunk! But the reinforced American fleets travel the ocean lanes, guarded closely by the American and British navies!
*
A vast amount of additional material can be cited to illustrate the main theme of this article, but I have already gone beyond the space allotted. In forthcoming issues of this magazine I shall continue the theme of the foregoing in an endeavor to predict possible results of the specific current Anglo-American relations.
 



British capitalists, bankers, importers and exporters are spending sleepless nights. Nor is it the sound of falling bombs or ack-ack fire that is keeping them awake. It is the muscling-in job that is being performed on them by their American rivals and competitors. British exporters are facing the almost total loss and collapse of their foreign trade markets.
The new Anglo-American trade agreement which was signed last week means that the British will not attempt to sell any materials they produce – and which they are also obtaining from America under the terms of the Lease-Lend Act – on the world market in competition with America. The goods which Britain receives from America will be used only according to American instructions!
The longer the war continues the more dependent does England become on American supplies. This means that in a year or two – at the present rate – the United States ruling class will be in a position to dictate to Britain how she shall run her economic and commercial life; with whom she shall trade; what she shall charge for goods, etc. American capitalists and imperialists will be able to order their British rivals out of any part of the world where competition is not wanted (and where is it wanted?). If the British protest, Roosevelt can threaten to cut off supplies!
Naturally, the American government will not apply this agreement too rigidly or rapidly. To do so would force a large section of the British ruling class into seriously considering a capitulation to Hitler as a “lesser evil.” Britain must be kept alive – so that the Americans can inherit their Empire rather than the German rivals.
The British Board of Trade has been besieged by protests and complaints from English businessmen. Its answer has been to warn that the worst is yet to come! The question of tariffs, import duties, replacement of the sterling standard by the gold dollar standard, etc., has yet to be settled. The demands of the American capitalist class have only begun.
One British journalist has proposed that an Anglo-American committee of business men be set up to explain to both groups of business men what is going on. Labor Action hereby formally offers to explain what is going on – free of charge and without a committee, either.
One set of imperialists and capitalists is moving in on the territory of another set which has its back to the wall. Sentiment and morality have nothing to do with it. It is a struggle for trade, markets, colonies and the like. The Americans are away out in front at the moment and are threatening to give their British blood-brothers and “allies” a royal gypping, the like of which the world has never seen!
 



The invasion of Iran by joint British and Russian action is now all but completed. The British imperialists have safeguarded their oil fields, another obstacle has been placed in Hitler’s road to India and another route for supplying Russia has been opened up.
All that remains is for the pitiful Iranian government to sign the terms imposed upon it by the British-Russian troops ... and the 15,000,000 colonial workers and peasants of that nation – who once enjoyed a slight vestige of independence – will “enjoy” the combined blessings of British and Russian rule.
But this cynical victimization of a colonial people by one of the imperialist war camps has pot passed unnoticed. Barrister Albert Goldman, leading spokesman for the Socialist Workers Party (Cannon group), devoted a lengthy column to Iran in The Militant of September 6. He waxes morally indignant – at those who condemn the invasion as imperialist and reactionary? Heaven forbid! No, Goldman is indignant at those who CONDEMN the invasion. They are “petty bourgeois moralists” Who, as the Daily Worker tells us each day, cannot see that it is all for the good of “defending the Soviet Union!”
 
What Is Goldman’s Argument?
Here runs Goldman’s argument: Russia is a “degenerated workers’ state”; it is fighting for its existence against German imperialism; it must take “every measure necessary for its defense provided it does not conflict with the interests of the world revolution.” The fact that Iran is invaded “at the same time” by British imperialism (notice how Attorney Goldman makes it appear that the joint invasion is merely coincidental in time, whereas BOTH governments announced they undertook it as a JOINT, deliberately planned action) is not of “the slightest importance.” Conclusion: All class-conscious workers and peasants (including those of Iran naturally) “will not permit anything to interfere with the defense of the Soviet Union.” That is, the people of Iran should welcome their invaders and join with them, (or is it only the Russian invaders who should be welcomed, Comrade Goldman?).
What does this position mean? It is nothing but a total whitewash for Stalinism and its action in the war! Is this a harsh judgment? Consider for a moment. Goldman is telling the people of Iran that they must subordinate themselves, their interests as colonial slaves, their interests as people who seek national freedom – to the military needs of Stalinist Russia AND, by indirection, to the military needs of the British Empire. For the British Empire is ALLIED WITH Stalinist Russia in the war; it conducts joint military action with Russia. Any step taken by the people of Iran (or any other colonial country, for that matter) cannot but have an effect upon both Russia and Britain.
If this is true for Iran, is it not also true for every other country that Germany threatens to drag into the war against Russia? Turkey, Iraq, India, etc.?
Does Goldman contend that the 3,000 Germans in Iran were “threatening the defense of the Soviet Union?” Obviously, he must, or else there is no justification tor Russia’s Iranian invasion. But this is precisely the cynical excuse given by British imperialism for its share in the invasion. An excuse to cover up its REAL motives – namely, to secure its oil fields, to protect the road to its Indian colony, to establish air and naval bases, etc. Goldman would like to ignore the unpleasant fact – but Russia is NOT fighting its war in a vacuum; it is already up to its ears in the mud and filth of British imperialism.
Nor is Goldman untainted by that Stalinist cynicism he now apologizes for. He refers to the treaty between the Soviet government and Iran in 1921. This treaty gives Russia the right to march troops into Iran if the Iranian government is unable to prevent an attack or a threatened attack upon the Soviet Union through Iran. Such is Article VI of the Constitution.
 
But Article II Says:
But our barrister forgets Article II which (1) unqualifiedly rejects as a “criminal policy” the policy of the Czarist government toward Iran which consisted of concluding treaties with European powers “whose objective was a gradual annexation.” Furthermore, (2) “The Russian Soviet government declares its renunciation of participation in any measures which aim at a weakening or violation of the sovereignty of Persia (Iran) and declares that all conventions and agreements between the former government of Russia and third states injurious and relating to Persia (Iran) are abolished and nullified.”
To what disgraceful depths has Goldman stooped! Stalin in 1941 JOINTLY CARVES UP Iran with Churchill; Lenin in 1921 would have marched into Iran to stand by the side of the Iranian people AGAINST a British invasion. Stalin marches to meet Churchill in comradely embrace; Lenin would have marched to met him in mortal revolutionary combat. And Goldman says these are one and the same thing
 
Conclusions:

The Cannon group and its spokesmen here, as in other instances, act as shamefaced apologists for the crimes of Stalinism.
 
This apologism is being extended to include the momentary “allies” of Stalinist Russia – beginning with Great Britain.
 
The enslaved colonial peoples – victimized by both warring camps – are looked upon by the SWP as abject pawns in the World War. The colonial movement for independence, an essential part of the world revolution, is subordinated to “defense of the Soviet Union.”
 
The logic of defensism in the present war appears to lead inescapably from “critical support pf the Stalinist bureaucracy” to critical support (or should) we say, CRITICAL support?) of the “democratic” imperialist war camp.

Goldman’s paper appeared too early for him to answer the questions raised in the article on Iran in last week’s issue of Labor Action. We trust he will take them up in his next article ... unless he is too busily occupied replying to the terrific anti-Soviet pressure of the “democratic bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie” which – as we all know so well – so harshly condemned the Stalinist invasion of Iran!
 



Incident after incident, event after event continue to pile up in the people’s revolt against the Nazis in the conquered and occupied countries of Europe. Der Fuehrer is sitting on the hottest and most explosive seat in his life!
The German imperialists have abandoned all pretense. Talk of “collaboration,” “new order,” “peace without the Anglo-Saxons and English plutocrats,” etc., has given way to the muted drums of the courts martial and the thud of the firing squad’s rifles.
For it is now clear that the masses of Europe will not submit quietly and peacefully to dictatorial rule.
In France the popular demonstrations in Paris and the occupied cities of the north continue. Thousands of hostages are rounded up, but this only odds fuel to the anti-Nazi flames.
In Norway the entire country exists under a state of rule by military decree and curfews ordered by martial law. Ten thousand workers with their families have been removed from Oslo and its suburbs and sent to other jobs in more remote parts of the country. The anti-Nazi agitation in the factories continues.
In Yugoslavia, the actions of peasants and saboteurs have resulted in 50 executions in the past week. Peasant and city guerilla bands roam the country and force the Nazis to send in thousands of troops in an effort to curb them. Italy has been forced to occupy a section of this cut-up country in order to quell uprisings of nationalist Serbs.
Large sections of former Czechoslovakia – the latest area to rebel against the Nazi masters – have likewise been placed under military occupation and the firing squads are actively at work. Fifty-eight Czechs were executed in one day by Nazi firing squads.
In Italy, a semi-occupied country, bread lines have appeared in the industrial cities and bread has been rationed for the first time since the last war. Disturbances in the northern workers’ cities of Milan and Turin are reported. Articles of clothing, hats, shoes, etc., are about to be subjected to rationing.
In the other occupied territories of Greece, Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Poland and the newly conquered lands of Soviet Russia similar details and actions are reported from numerous sources.
 
Why The Revolts?
These movements and actions are based upon intense hatred and opposition to the imperialistic activities of the German plunderers. Because the war will continue and there will be a winter campaign in Russia and Africa, the Nazis have increased their thievery and robbery. They are draining the occupied territories of their foods, their winter garments and accessories (furs, heavy coats, skis, snowshoes, etc.) – any object that will help them continue their campaigns of conquest. Above all, the problem of food and heat for the winter weather have become especially acute. Every worker and peasant in occupied Europe faces a bitter winter struggle for survival against hunger and cold.
The Nazi imperialist gangsters have already given their answer to the needs of the European people. They have ordered cessation of all exports to Norway, for example. This means a rapid end to any possibility of continued economic life in that country. They have stated they will not feed the peasants and city dwellers in those vast lands they have already conquered from the Soviet Union. And finally the fact that over 300 hostages have been executed in the last month is the most eloquent of all. Clearly, they intend to continue and increase the rate of executions of those who protest against their rule.
 
Varied Character
These revolts against Nazi occupation take on many and varied forms. In Norway and Belgium there are militantly organized strike actions by industrial workers from factories and mines; in the Balkan states there are organized guerilla campaigns conducted by bands of nationalistic peasants and disappointed middle class elements from the cities; in France there are individualistic acts of terror and assassination; in practically every country there are spontaneous movements of the masses of people as a whole who demonstrate their hatred of Hitler and his gangsters by any possible means from beating up German soldiers to chalking “Vs” on the sidewalk.
As yet, the movement as a whole is shapeless and formless. It is an ELEMENTAL MOVEMENT, a blind upsurge against an endless and omnipresent terror. Mass actions, terroristic acts, guerilla fighting – all these methods of fighting characterize it. In many place, the movement is led by remnants of Stalinist groups and “cells” that still exist. These Stalinists – as always – work only for the purposes they are ordered to by the Russian bureaucracy. At the moment, the Stalinist high command has ordered the use of any methods that will discomfort the Nazis. Terrorism, provocation, assassination, sabotage of transport and machinery – this is what the Stalinists urge upon the occupied territories.
The Stalinists do not desire to organize a mass movement, based upon the workers, which will seek to bring about the socialist revolution during the course of which the Nazi imperialists will be driven out. They act solely as MILITARY defeatists, working for the camp of the “democratic” and Stalinist armies.
Side by side with the Stalinists are the discredited capitalist politicians who were driven out by Hitler’s occupation – the organizers of the so-called “V” campaign. De Gaulle, the French monarchist; Benes, the discredited Czech politician, Haakon, the senile Norwegian king; Wilhelmina, the fat and frowsy queen of Holland; Peter, the boy imbecile from Yugoslavia; George, king of the Greeks, etc. – their interest in the revolt of “their” people is a simple one: it seems a splendid way of being restored to power, with the backing of British bayonets.
Those who risk their lives, the workers who go on strike against the Nazis, do not do so in order to restore De Gaulle, or Benes, or King Haakon, or King George. They do so (1) in order to live – to eat and keep warm; (2) to drive out the foreign oppressors and (3) to gain a better world in which to live. They are not concerned about restoring the rotten regime of “liberal capitalism.”
Revolutionists who take part in these movements do so with the idea of organizing the workers of the occupied countries on an INDEPENDENT platform, the platform of revolutionary socialism. Middle class politicians and Stalinist agents may head these movements today, but tomorrow it will be the invincible European proletarians, led by the Fourth Internationalists.
 



THE SPECIFIC imperialist gains of America since 1939 form an impressive list. Most important of all, it goes without saying, is the indisputable fact that the American bourgeoisie is master of the “democratic” war house without, so to speak, having fired a shot. In addition, there have been the following gains:

Canada, by virtue of military alliance and subjugation of its economic system, has been broken away from the British Empire and is utterly dependent upon American capitalism. Canada is dependent upon America for supplies needed by its war production machine; its eastern outposts serve as naval and air concentration points for American militarism. Canada is already a part of the super-world American Empire (”The American Century”) envisaged by Henry R. Luce of publishing fame.
 
Acquisition of British island and naval bases has placed America in a position from which the Asiatic and European continents can be straddled in the future years when American imperialism openly strives for world mastery. Today, these bases in the Atlantic and those in the Pacific (Hong Kong and Singapore are included) are powerful defensive fortifications while America prepares. Tomorrow they will be concentration and transitional points; jumping-off locations for naval and military actions against Japan, Africa and the European continent. Their price was dirt cheap – 50 overage destroyers. To the American Empire was added strategic centers, always necessary for continued expansion.
 
The flood of military and political commissions, Dominion and colonial envoys, trade and economic observers, etc., that still continues from all corners and sections of the British Empire has greatly enriched the knowledge needed by youthful American imperialism for the working out of its future plans. Britain has turned over its experiences of two years of warfare – with all its lessons, its latest naval and military secrets, the most genuine information regarding the Empire’s strength and resources, its methods and techniques of colonial administration. In addition, the Dominion envoys from Canada, New Zealand and Australia have clarified world opinion as to whom, in reality, they turn when they seek out the “motherland.”
 
The Churchill-Roosevelt sea conference summed up the new set of relations. It was Winston Churchill who undertook the hazardous sea journey across the Atlantic, while Roosevelt cruised by the coast to the meeting spot. The pathetic and reactionary document that emerged from this gathering was clearly the work of the American President. It signified that not only would America attend the new Versailles Conference, but that she would dictate the terms. The war aims implicit in the eight-point program contain – among other things – the strong hint that Britain’s specific rôle will be to patrol and police the post-war Europe. That is, Britain will be the policeman for American capitalism!
 

Political Federation – America’s Union Now!
Anglo-American fanatics of both sexes have been notoriously vague and abstract on the subject of political forms suitable to their Anglo-American world goal. They speak of “Federation,” “Union Now,” “Commonwealth of the White World,” etc., but these phrases lack political roots and concrete formulations. Only Robert Sherwood, the playwright, has presented a specific Anglo-America federation scheme – a scheme which frankly gave political control to the United States and its colonies. But this plan fell upon deaf ears – particularly those of the British, who were hardly pleased at the place granted them in Sherwood’s “Federation.”
The bourgeoisie of America and England recognize the futility of discussing political forms, especially those of an international character, at the moment. International political institutions are rigidly shaped to suit the convenience of the victorious imperialist power or group of powers and it is not yet by any means clear which imperialism, if any, will win the war. This is precisely why Roosevelt and Churchill refuse to specify their peace aims and their plans for the post-war world. They want to wait and see (a) who will be the victor and (b) what will be his strength in relation to his “allies” seated about the victor’s table.
But certain definite trends and tendencies are already visible. American imperialism exerts its heaviest political pressure at the moment on the “White Dominions” of the British Empire. Talk of Anglo-American federation – when it assumes any concrete meaning – generally means a federation with America at the center and the Dominions of Canada, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand grouped about her. The United Kingdom is in the federation, but located in an orbit at a greater distance from the center! The weight of the Dominions clearly will be called into play during the post-war period when British imperialism begins its inevitable struggle to squirm out of the clutches of its American master. Here tariff walls and commercial duties will be the weapons of battle, with Britain already in an unequal and handicapped position. Thus, if a federation comes to pass it can only be a modernized version of the former League of Nations – symbolizing the new imperialist mastery of the world: a union of the British Dominions with America against England proper, and a formal, juridical representation of American imperialist supremacy and British inferiority.
It is important to note that long in advance of any federation scheme the British have been defeated in every clash they have had with the American bourgeoisie, (1) In the clash over utilization of American-owned oil tankers loaned to the British government the latter was forced to sign the Lease-Lend Agreement described above. (N.B. These oil tankers – like every atom of material aid that has gone to England – were loaned, not given. They are under Panamanian registry. Nothing has been given to England by American capitalism, aside from objects made by dowagers who engage their time “knittin’ for Britain:”) (2) Similarly have the British retreated in clashes concerning various items of trade (steel goods, airplanes, etc.) with the South American countries. Each time they have withdrawn as gracefully as a British exporter is able to – but always withdrawn! These and other episodes indicate a priori the rôle Britain will occupy when and if federation comes.
 
The Perspective of Anglo-American Relations
Bearing in mind the essential conflict of World War II (Wall Street vs. Wilhelmstrasse), it is safe to assume that Anglo-American relationship will not only continue to exist, but that current trends will mature and harden. Sectarians, who base themselves on historically discarded precepts, consider that the present war revolves around the issue of who shall possess the Soviet Union. To them, Anglo-American activities proceed on an even keel and are of secondary import, at best. However, it is easy to foresee that all the elements of a future imperialist struggle – a Third World War in the contemporary cycle of world-wide wars – is present in and grows with each forward step of American imperialism.
On the military plane, the objective of the American general staff is to transform England into a huge air base outpost, a concentration point tor air-fortress bombers conducting raids on Nazi industrial centers. Development of the American-Canadian-British bomber ferry service, added to American emphasis on construction of heavy bombers are a part of this scheme. England, with its war industry and army of 3,000,000 men, becomes a major base of operations – absorbing the heaviest punishment of the enemy but constantly able to return a growing load of steel and destruction because of American armament production. The attention of the British bourgeoisie is to be riveted upon the needs and protection of this “island fortress” while American imperialism supplies, manages and organizes the imperial forces overseas in Africa and Asia. In the interim, the American Army prepares for the eventual attempted invasion of Europe and African points. Invasion – if it is to come – must be on a gigantic scale or not at all. England, by itself, cannot do this. Therefore, any future invasion will find the American troops as the vanguard military force – with the British occupying a place corresponding to that of the Italians in the camp of the Axis imperialisms.
On the economic and political front we have already indicated the apparent goal of present trends, so far as American imperialism is concerned. To summarize:

American capitalism will have a clear-cut, effective upper hand over its ally and partner;
 
It will be able to launch a vicious post-war economic drive against existing and potential competition through its control of finance, raw materials and shipping;
 
America – assuming an ultimate “democratic” victory – will write the new-world Versailles Treaty;
 
America will endeavor to place Europe on food rations as a means of dictating to Europe;
 
America will assume leadership over the “White Dominions” and will become master of the British Colonial Empire.

Points (4) and (5) of the above summation are worthy of some elaboration. On the subject of food, Secretary of Agriculture Wickard has coined a slogan that cleverly embodies the sinister aims of American imperialism. “Food will win the war and write the peace.” That is, in the long run, America will dictate “peace” to Europe by placing against the latter’s head a 16-inch cannon loaded with the threat of starvation! England proper is already the first victim of American food rationing. Within the next period one billion dollars of American food is being shipped to Britain under Lend-Lease provisions. Generosity unexcelled! But what shall be the final price paid? Secretary Wickard, in an address to an American farming community, hinted at the answer. “We shall provide for a stock pile reserve that can be used by the United States to dictate the kind of peace it wants when the fighting ceases.”
With regard to point (5) it is important to note that American control of the “White Dominions” and the colonies proper does not necessarily mean the forceful and military occupation of these territories by troops. Nor does it mean that America must establish an administrative and formal control over these territories. Imperialism in the epoch of monopoly capitalism proceeds far differently, at times, from the familiar British method of plunder and conquest by the sword. For example, the actual British forces of occupation in India number .0003 per cent of the total population! Yet Britain – through a thousand financial, commercial, economic and administrative methods – exploits the 400,000,000 people of this sub-continent. In the province of Bengal, 50,000,000 peasants live and depend for their existence upon the jute crop. The price they shall obtain for then: raw jute before it is milled in the Calcutta jute mills is determined by a British-dominated price fixing board. That is, the income and life conditions of 50,000,000 people is settled each year by a handful of British exporters and financiers. This is the imperialist exploitation of a colonial people.
But America – leaving intact the British administrative machine with its 200 years of vast experience – will become, on a world scale, the real exploiter of the colonial peoples. Wall Street – not London – will fix the price of jute on the Calcutta market. (When Calcutta recently raised the export price of finished jute and burlap products, the American government, through the British Embassy at Washington, protested and put pressure on London to retain the former price. The matter still pends, but is a fine illustration of the form American colonial rule will take.) Tariffs (preferential and otherwise), shipping and insurance rates, credit facilities and capital export to the colonies, allotments of raw materials to the “Dominions” – all these are items yet to be posed for discussion at future Anglo-American discussions. Aiming at control of the world market, American imperialism thereby seeks to dominate the various national domestic markets and their foreign exports.
 
British Imperialism – Back Seat Driver
The clique of monopolist Tories who regulate the Churchill government understand the bitter choice before them: to accept a subordinate place as high-paid administrators for the American World Empire or face extinction at Germany’s hands. Reluctantly and grudgingly they accept the “lesser evil.” But they do not intend to pass from the imperialist scene without opposition, without planning a future comeback. Understanding does not mean acceptance, and British imperialism is laying its plans for a post-war struggle to recoup its losses to American imperialism.
But this post-war trade and commercial struggle must be based on more concrete foundations than simply the desire to seek revenge against America. Britain, in turn, must effect an internal economic recovery and resume a prominent position as a world industrial and commercial center. Then the driving dynamics of monopoly capitalism will have their say and the bloody game can begin all over again.
It is precisely this point that must be understood by the British proletariat if it is to be prepared for the fierce class struggle that will shake Britain during the post-war crisis. For British imperialism can challenge America and regain at least an important part of what it has lost in the world by carrying out the following tasks with a minimum of success: (1) Batter down and destroy the British trade union and labor movement, particularly its potentially revolutionary development – the independent shop stewards’ system. Workers in postwar England must – if the bourgeoisie of that country is to stand any change of recovering – work longer and for less. They must be forced to accept their present living standards as a natural state of affairs. In essence, the British labor movement must be wiped out, the nation’s economy centralized under fascist state control. This is the Number One task of the British Tory class. (2) Reconquered and occupied Europe must be subjected to a ruthless exploitation – primarily through a gigantic reparations scheme. Not only Germany, but France and the central European countries must pay the costs of the war time time. British imperialism offers nothing to Europe but military occupation, reparations, hunger rationing, division and slicing of territory in a super-Versailles manner, endless disruption and political bickering. This is why Churchill remains totally silent on the subject of his plans for the new European order. (3) In those colonies that Britain manages to retain control of (or to remain as administrative head), an intensified squeeze and exploitation must be planned. The colonial Empire has always been the source of Britain’s wealth and capital. In the chaotic post-war world, Britain, battling uphill against the American odds, will turn as a matter of course toward a greater looting and plundering of the colonial peoples of Asia and Africa.
To summarize: the subordination of British imperialism to that of the United States will have its harshest effects upon the British working class, the peoples of Europe and the colonial peoples as English capitalism begins its inevitable struggle for survival.
 
Anglo-American War?
Clearly, all the elements for another World War exist in this relationship. The American National Planning Association, in a pamphlet entitled “United States Cooperation with British Nations,” has envisaged such a possibility. England, says the Association, will be forced to trade with Europe and the Americas as well as the rest of the world in the post-war economic set-up. But it might be compelled, suggest the authors, to follow a “militant bilateralism to obtain markets and raw materials.” In that case England might be compelled to follow the example of Germany! An excellent statement of the case! In a word, these bourgeois economists (the chairman of the Association is William M. Batt, deputy director of the Office of Production Management) are warning that England will be forced to take the path of fascism and militarism by the policies of American imperialism. Germany today follows a “militant bilateralism” – that is, economic autarchy at home; imperialism abroad. A “victorious” England, victimized by American capitalism, will underscore the victory of “democracy” by becoming a militant fascist state.
The National Planning Association, in its report, speaks of the necessity for international cooperation and proposes an international coordinating committee for economic planning on a world scale. But, by their very vagueness, they recognize the impossibility for such measures under modern capitalism which has divided the world into national spheres of rivalry and imperial competition.
 
Conclusions
We have traced the current trends of Anglo-American relations. Each tendency is far more complex and intricate than we have indicated in this outline. But all the possible results and goals we have suggested have one thing in common: all are equally reactionary blows to the aspirations of the American workers, the British working class, the oppressed peoples of Europe and the colonial world.
The effects of an Axis victory on an international scale are too notorious and well known to bear repetition. The effects of an Anglo-American world victory are not so well known, or the forces of the “Third Camp” of independent revolutionary action would be much greater than they are. Nevertheless, in our opinion, the results would be substantially – if not exactly – the same. Certainly the difference, or the intensity of difference, would not bear the remotest justification for the agonizing years of sacrifice and suffering through which the workers of America and Britain are asked to pass. Attempts to install fascism in Britain and America; military occupation of Europe; intensified exploitation of the colonial world by the Anglo-American victors; preparations for a future World War between the ex-Allies. This is our summation of what Anglo-American victory would mean.
Anglo-American imperialism and Axis imperialism are the common enemy of all mankind. Counterposed to both is the the socialist revolution through independent action to the workers of Britain and America; the free United Socialist States of Europe to the peoples of Europe threatened with indefinite occupation by the military forces of the Axis and Anglo-American camps; and national independence to the colonial peoples of the Latin-American, African and Asiatic continents.
 



LONDON, Oct. 2 (AP) – “The Conservative Party today approved unanimously a vote of confidence in the government based on the Prime Minister’s decision ‘to welcome the Russian nation as an ally in the struggle against aggressive barbarism and to fortify its resistance by every possible means’.” (New York Post, October 2)
According to the same dispatch Sir Cuthbert Headlam, maker of the motion, said: “We should realize that the Russians are fighting in a most heroic manner for their country, for the defense of Holy Russia, and not in defense of Marxian doctrines. We should be very foolish if we. did not realize that at present our interests and those of Russia are identical.”
*
In his latest speech – in the section devoted to aid to Russia – Churchill said: “Sacrifices of the most serious kind and the most extreme efforts will have to be made by the British people and enormous new installations or conversions from existing plants will have to be set up in the United States.”
*
(Churchill and Roosevelt) “look upon the Soviet Union, not as an ordinary imperialist ally, but as a WORKERS’ STATE, and they would not dream of doing for that workers’ state what they would do for the Czarist Empire.” (their emphasis) – The Militant, September 27)
*
When Hitler launched his murderous assault upon Soviet Russia a bare three months back, the Workers’ Party, while denouncing the criminal assault of German imperialism, took the stand that it was not in the interests of the world working class to defend the Soviet Union. We declared that this new stage in the war was not only a continuation of the same, world-wide imperialist.war between two rival camps up to that time, but also that the Stalin regime would become a subordinate (junior) and integral partner in one of the imperialist war camps – the so-called democratic camp.
 
Our Predictions Are Verified
Three months have verified our predictions and, more important, verified the correctness of our warning that support (critical or otherwise) would lead to patriotic support of “democratic” imperialism.
Let us cite the more important facts relating to Russian participation as an imperialist ally in this war:

The propaganda and appeals for aid of the Russian government have been EXACTLY the same as those employed by any capitalist regime under attack. Not a single mention of socialism, independent revolutionary action, etc., has sullied the record of Stalin’s government. Even the die-hard defensists of the Socialist Workers Party (Cannon group) who alone of all the labor movement “claimed” that Stalin was employing, through necessity, revolutionary slogans – even they have dropped this astounding “claim” and retreated to a more becoming silence.
 
The world diplomacy of the Stalin regime – agreements with Polish and Czech governments in exile, signing of the Churchill-Roosevelt eight-point program, relations with Iran, Turkey, etc. – has been determined and organized from London and Washington. It has helped only to advance the interests of Anglo-American diplomacy.
 
The carving up of Iran by joint action found the Stalin government and British imperialism engaged in a common act of criminal aggression against a colonial people. The SOLE result of this action was only to give greater military strength to the defense bulwark Britain is attempting to organize around India.

General Wavell now plans to send a force into the Russian Caucasus. There, side by side with the Red Army of the “workers’ state” it will defend the Baku oil fields. Why? Because for Hitler to gain those oil fields will be a heavy blow to the war strategy and plans of the British – that is, the reason. Or perhaps we shall be told by the Cannon group, that the reason is because Russia, is a “workers’ state”!
 
As Russia is forced back by the superior power of the Nazi armies it loses, one after the ‘other, its important bases and fields of operation. Its naval bases in the Baltic and Black Sea are almost all gone, the Ukraine is lost, the centers of heavy industry are either already lost or in the process of being lost. This only forces the Stalin regime to lean more heavily upon American and British support. It cannot conduct an independent war in terms of military strength – as for conducting a revolutionary working class war against Hitler – only the Cannon group has endowed them with that power or desire! No, the events of three months have proved that Russia conducts its war (on the military, political and propaganda plane) ONLY, SOLELY as British and American imperialism wish it to.
 

Cannonite Ideas Tested Too
The Russo-German war has likewise tested the political ideas and conceptions of the Socialist Workers Party (Cannon group). Sad and pathetic indeed has been the result – from the standpoint of their analyses, predictions and political proposals.
Felix Morrow, editor of The Militant, is the author of the fantastic statement quoted above to the effect that Churchill and Roosevelt REALLY don’t want to aid Russia because, you see, unlike the members of the Workers Party, THEY know that Russia is a workers’ state! What monstrous nonsense! It is to EVERY INTEREST of the American and British capitalist class to keep Russia in the war – that is, to aid Russia to the best of their capabilities. THEIR main enemy is rival Hitler-German imperialism, not the collapsing “workers’ state.” If Hitler succeeds in destroying Russia he emerges infinitely strengthened and ready to assault the British in Africa and AT HOME. He has declared this to be his objective in his recent speech.
Have not the leading spokesmen of Anglo-American imperialism OPENLY proclaimed that the urgent need to supply Russia is made doubly so by their fear that if this is not done – AND IN A HURRY – Stalin may capitulate to Hitler? They mean this, and how!
The fact that Russia has not received sufficient aid (although it is by no means small, including planes, tanks, fliers, Lease-Lend loans, etc.) is due – not to unwillingness – but to lack of supplies and especially to transportation difficulties. England failed to help Poland when the war began. Not an ounce of material went there. Because Poland was a “workers’ state,” Comrade Morrow? Were Norway, Holland and Belgium also “workers’ states,” and France and Greece “semi-workers’ states,” Comrade Morrow? We must request that you stop kidding us – something more serious is needed.
The Cannon group has endorsed the joint invasion of Iran (as pointed out in a previous article). Undoubtedly, they will give their blessing to any joint action undertaken by Stalin and General Wavell to defend the Caucasus.
Furthermore, in his September 27 article, Morrow has advanced further (and not so timidly this time) toward more coherent, logical implications of his defensist position. Wishing to prove his thesis that the English imperialists do not REALLY want to help Russia (are sabotaging this help) Morrow points to the fact that the British refuse to open up a new front although, so he insists, they COULD.
“Under infinitely less favorable conditions the British landed an expeditionary force in Greece. Why, then, couldn’t they land an expeditionary force now which will, at the very least, draw off a considerable section of the Nazi forces from the eastern front and thus ease the situation of the hard-pressed Red Army?”
Because, says Morrow, Russia is a workers’ state. But this refusal to open up a western front – if for the moment we grant what Morrow says to be true – means that English Tory circles REALLY want Russia licked in the war; not merely that they don’t want to help Russia. And if your statement is to have any serious meaning, and if you want to prevent Russia’s defeat (defend the Soviet Union), isn’t it your duty to demand in England and America that this new front be opened up against the sabotage of the Tories and capitalists? Don’t you wish to set the workers of England and America into motion against their rulers who betray aid to Russia?
But Morrow shrinks from this logical and intelligible consequence of his defensist position. He says, “It is not the task of revolutionists to ‘demand’ that the imperialists open a western front.” But if everything you say is true (which we deny) WHY NOT? What more effective, elementary, simple way to arouse the workers of England and America (who want to help Russia, you say) against their rulers (who don’t want to help Russia, you say)? When Tory England clamped an embargo against Loyalist Spain we demanded that it be lifted. Well, according to you, Tory England has an embargo against “workers” Russia. Why not demand that that be lifted also?
 
For an Internationalist Policy
In this world war between two rival imperialist camps, Stalinist Russia has reached such a stage of internal decline and degeneration that it falls victim to one or the other of the warring camps. It cannot, conduct an independent war as did the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky, but must become – has become – the stooge-power of one of the two reactionary camps.
The same hold true for working class groups and political parties that demand of the workers that they “defend the Soviet Union.” The fantastic analyses of the Socialist Workers Party, their equally amazing claims for the Stalin regime, the openly patriotic conclusions which they hint at and then shy away from – all these illustrate what happens to the “defensists.”
Holding to its historic line of opposing all governments that participate in the Second World War the Workers Party retains its policy of INTERNATIONALISM.
 



In the days of feudal England the king would now and then invite his subjects to visit the court and present their grievances. This custom has lapsed for centuries.
Let us assume that George IV would hold a court of grievances when he visits the World’s Fair. His Majesty invites representative people from among his vast colonial holdings.
Each one, of course, has only a brief moment in which to speak, for His Majesty tires easily. Let us listen to some of them:
A Ceylon Tea Plantation Worker: Your Majesty, your English soldiers and officials have kept my island sealed for months against the outside world. I work on a British plantation from dawn to night for a few English pence per day. Your hired thugs are trying to smash my agricultural laborer’s union. And you are trying to smash my party, the Ceylon Samka Langh (Socialist Party). The four million Ceylonese workers and peasants are united in their determination to oust your bloody imperialist agents. Wait till you go to war! Then our opportunity will come.
An Irish Nationalist of the Irish Republican Army: I was objecting to the hold your vampire landlords and merchants have kept on Ireland for hundreds of years, your method of dividing Ireland in half and giving the six counties of Ulster to your agents, your hated army of occupation in the North. So I planted a noise bomb to draw the attention of the English workers to what was going on in my Ireland. Your judges with the false wigs sentenced me to 20 years. What was I guilty of? Agitating for the freedom of my people!
A Peasant in Egypt: Your Highness, my comrades and I are called fellaheens. We till the land in the famous Nile Delta areas. Since your troops took over our country and marched further south to conquer the Anglo-Sudan area we’ve had a pretty hard time of it. You say that your treaty of a few years back granted us independence. We don’t think so! Your troops are stationed in Egypt, along the shores of the Suez Canal, and you’ve built a fort at Laka Tana, the headwaters of the Nile, our life-blood. And you’re trying to convert our country into a one-crop country. You want us to grow nothing but long-staple cotton for your mills in Manchester. You fix the price for the cotton, too.
No, Sire, the people of Egypt don’t consider themselves free. They think there is still a long way to go before they know real independence.
A Negro Grazer in Kenya, Africa: I was grazing my cattle on the plain lands of my country. Then your police and Territorials drove us all off the land. You took our best cattle. What you left us died for lack of food. And now you make us work as laborers on these farms.
Our wives and children die like flies. We wonder what your Queen would do if her two princesses were starving. She’d do something about it and we intend to do something, too!
A Coolie Worker of Hongkong: My life is spent loading and unloading English merchant ships. I watch day after day the resources of my people being drained off in your ships. The Chinese soldiers certainly could use that food and supplies in our war against the Japanese! My brother workers in Japanese Shanghai are no better off than I am. You English hate the Japanese, but it is only because they are rivals and interfere with your own dirty work. You first taught them how to oppress us – they are only apt pupils.
When I work all day for my copper pennies and my bowl of rice, then I understand that both of you are enemies of the Chinese people.
Bantu, Indian, Negro Workers of South Africa: We toil in the South African mines, extracting gold and jewels for you. At night, when we leave the mines, they lock us up in compounds. In Germany and Italy they call these places “concentration camps.” But we had them long before they did.
Your government legislates against us in the interests of the tiny white minority. They own everything. We live like the negroes in the South of the United States. We have many more “Jim Crow” laws here than in America.
When you ask us to die for a “democracy” we have never known you will face a united answer: No!
An Arabian Peasant in Palestine: To prevent Arabs and Jews alike from seeing the real enemy, your militarists stirred up communal fighting in this land of peace. For one year now you have been conducting a violent war against us. Thousands of Arabians have died from British bullets, bombs and machine guns.
Now you want to win us to your side as part of your war plans. But we trust you no further than we would a desert snake. Your imperialists are the world’s greatest double crossers! Arab and Jew must unite against the British if either are to ever be free.
A Dock Worker, British West Indies: We dock workers have organized into militant industrial unions. This has stimulated the organization of sugar mill workers, transport workers, plantation laborers, etc. General strikes against the intolerable conditions imposed by your industrialists and landlords have swept over the West Indies. You sent down a commission which has requested some changes in the Constitution. As if legal phrases on paper will satisfy us!
Our islands have been known as the most loyal section of the British Empire. But no longer! Our loyalties go now to our brother colonial slaves – all 500,000,000 of them – who are struggling to shake off your death grip.
From the Gaya District, British Bihar Province: Your Majesty is also the Emperor of India.
When we have finished paying rent, interest of debts accumulated over an endless period, land taxes, well taxes, etc., we have absolutely nothing left. We must forage for food and clothing. Is it any wonder that our Province has the highest death rate in the world?
Your British Indian army has joined with the “goondas” of the native landlords to smash our peasant unions. But we have learned from the Russian peasant who acted in 1917.
A Jute Worker of Calcutta: In the British jute mills along the Ganges there are 200,000 Moslem and Hindu proletarians. We have fought the factory owners for years. We are India’s vanguard in the struggle against imperialism.
With a general strike, we smashed your efforts to cut our wages last year. Our unions are more powerful than ever. The British understand that the 5,000,000 industrial workers of India constitute their main threat. When we return to our slum hovels in Calcutta at night we know that it is our action you fear most of all.
A few weeks ago when our brothers around Bombay resisted your efforts to enlist hem in your imperialist army, your troops murdered 65 of them in cold blood. This is another in the endless chain of assassinations, massacres and slaughters by means of which you have strangled us for 150 years.
India has been called the brightest jewel in your crown of Empire. You took your crown and all its jewels from us. You will stop at nothing tr retain it. But the workers and peasants of India are leading the drive of the colonial masses to destroy and wipe out forever the world Empire of British imperialism.
 



The struggle of India’s 375,000,000 people for their freedom
from British tyranny is centered today in the struggle between the
contending wings of the Indian Nationalist Congress.
The conservative right wing, headed by Mahatma Gandhi, indulged in
much radical talk and threats for a while, but has again staged a
treacherous retreat and is doing its utmost to prevent any action.
Utilizing the false grounds that the country is not prepared for a
campaign of civil disobedience, Gandhi is pushing for further
negotiation with the British authorities.
Subhas Chandra Bose, former president of the Congress, spokesman
for the left-wing Nationalists, has lately issued a statement
blasting Gandhi and his supporters from stem to stern. It is one of
the bitterest denunciations of the Gandhi leadership ever to be made.
In his statement Bose accused Gandhi of sabotaging the desire of the
Indian people to struggle and of dissipating the revolutionary
energies of the masses.
Of still greater significance was Bose’s statement that the
Congress left wing would not go along with the Ghandhists unless they
immediately adopted a program for action. Bose stated that the left
wing would go forward on its own, regardless of Gandhi’s
attempted sabotage. He likewise accused Gandhi – and correctly
so – of more violently opposing the Congress radicals than the
British imperialists.
 
No Support to Britain!
The Congress Socialist Party, India’s leading radical party,
in a statement criticizing the Gandhi leadership for attempting to
bargain with the British on the issue of the war, has declared: “We
cannot conceive of any gesture or concession on the part of the
British Government that could possibly justify the Congress in
supporting the imperialist war.”
This viewpoint genuinely represents the sentiments of all Indian
radical workers. No support to the British under any circumstances!
Meanwhile, the struggle of the masses continues. In the city of
Jubbulpore, 100 natives were killed and wounded by British police –
who were exercising their democratic right to murder unarmed people –
when they held a demonstration protesting against rising food prices
produced by the drainage of India’s food supplies for British
war needs. Pravda, publication of the Soviet Russian
government, reports “mass arrests” of Congress radicals
are now going on.
Figures released by the British authorities dealing with strikes
for the first six months of this year reveal the growing activities
of India’s working class. There were 109 strikes, involving
100,000 workers. A total of 1,580,000 working days were spent in
these strikes. Textile and jute workers accounted for 40% of the
strikes and 62% of the workers involved. The figures for the last six
months of 1939 will run far higher.
 



“One can only speculate regarding the future, but one possibility is that even in our own lifetime we shall see this great creation – the British Empire – crumble and fall to pieces.”
* * *
THE RETURN of Lord Linlithgow, viceroy of India, from the council rooms of Chamberlain has made it clear that the masters of India are prepared to shortly put into effect their Federation scheme. The Times of India, organ of English imperialism, bluntly states that all but minor preparations have been made to enforce this new device by means of which the British raj is to be strengthened and furthered. Reports indicate that the Princes of India’s feudal states, whose consent to Federation is needed, have about completed their secret negotiations with the British and have accepted. The Maharajas of Hyderabad, Baroda, Travancore and Kashmir (most important of the native states) conferred among themselves last November and drew up concrete demands as their price for acceptance. These crafty and absolute dictators feel they can drive a hard bargain with embattled, post-Munich Britain. Above all, they demand suppression of the Indian Nationalist Congress in the British provinces, plus greater support in crushing their own People’s State Congress movement.
Federation is the burning question of India today. It is absolutely synonymous with the question of India’s liberation. Every struggle of the Indian masses in the past five years – from a strike to mass hartal – will assume its ultimate meaning as measured against the approaching Federation war. Successful imposition of their plan by Britain and its native allies would push back the possibilities of a free India perhaps for decades. It is important, therefore, for us to know the provisions of Federation.
Federation “reflects in its content ... merely the determination of British imperialism to beat back the rising tide of mass revolt in India by tightening its octopus hold over the country with the help or a new constitutional machinery.” It is a detailed plan for welding the feudal and land-owning interests together as a bloc and for preparing India for participation in England’s coming wars.
“... it organizes at the top all the anti-democratic and unprogressive vested interests under the direct control of imperialist bureaucracy.”
“British imperialism is attempting to cement all its reactionary alliances, to forge stronger instruments for repression and to tighten its girdle for a fresh and more powerful offensive against the freedom movement of the country.” (Quotations from: The Indian Federation by Z.A. Ahmad.)
Federation tips the balance overwhelmingly in favor of feudal, land-owning (zamindari), banking and finance interests and thus turns the administration of India over to the most reactionary forces. The proposed Federal Constitution will work as follows:
1) The high command will be a British-appointed Governor-General with dictatorial powers. He can veto or approve any bill; prohibit discussion or amendment of any bill; suspend the Constitution; summon or prorogue the Legislature; appoint or dismiss any Minister; make police rules; issue decrees; utilize the armed forces, etc. The cynical British – fearing they may have messed up somewhere – have added in 32 sections powers which this Governor-General may exercize in his individual judgment, without even consulting his self-appointed ministers!
“The Federal Government will thus be in reality a one-man rule, unsurpassed in many respects by oriental despotisms or modern dictatorships.” (Ibid.)
2) Section 5 of the Government of India Act (1935) provides for a Federation composed of the British provinces and acceding native states. Accession of the states is voluntary; that of the provinces compulsory. The states are granted superior positions. Although possessing only 25% of India’s population, they receive in the two-house legislature provided by the act 33% of the seats in the lower house (Federal Assembly) and 40% in the upper house (Council of State). In addition, the Princes may appoint their entire quota of representatives to the legislature, thus forcing the 81 million States people living under their absolute domain to be without any representation. This is part of the basic constitutional provision by means of which the Indian States can retain their present governmental systems of feudal despotism without having to introduce any reforms.
3) The voting system provided for is a throwback to British imperialism’s most reactionary methods. In the Native States there will be no voting whatsoever. In the Provinces, property requirements limit the total vote to 150,000 people. 150,000 may vote out of a total population of 365 millions!
Legislature seats are divided along communal lines. There are special seats for communal minorities in addition to general seats. Moslems, Sikhs, Scheduled Castes, Christians, etc., all have separate elections. Each territorial constituency is split up into communal groupings when voting takes place. This harmonizes with best British “divide and rule” traditions. Its proposal is final proof of the abysmal failure of Gandhi’s civil-disobedience movement of 1931–1933 which was directed primarily against separate electorates.
4) Federal Finances: Over 80% of the Federal budget is non-votable and outside Legislative control. 90% of Federal revenue will be drained from the British provinces; only 10% from the states. The revenue flow provided for will be directed toward the central government and will leave the provinces responsible for the upkeep of the various public services. The effect of this will be that these public services (health, education, medicine, etc.) will “remain as of old – stunted and undeveloped, and the illiteracy, disease and poverty of the people will continue to be as rampant as they have ever been ...”
No trade restrictions against England are permitted; any preferences granted to Indians must likewise be granted to the British; the boards governing the Indian Reserve Bank and railways are to be appointed by the Governor-General. These and a host of other measures will assure the economy of Federated India remaining in the hands of its despoilers.
To summarize: Federation means the forging of an alliance between the British imperialists and the native rulers, landowners, bankers and industrialists – all having as their aim the exploitation of India’s mass population. It means the crushing of the national liberation and revolutionary movements. Federation means a one-man military dictatorship presided over by an English Führer. This is a constitution of slavery and bondage, seeking relentlessly to reinforce the entire system of imperialist exploitation.
* * *
The Indian Nationalist Congress is on record as opposed in principle to Federation. This opposition, however, is purely verbal. The INC today more than ever is dominated by the Gandhi-right wing group of native bourgeois whose interest in “independence” consists in their desire to create an India wherein their own brand of capitalist exploitation may be “freely” employed.
The All-India Congress met during the crucial days of Munich. The outcome of this meeting clearly displayed the INC’s desire to compromise the Federation issue. The nationalist leaders refuse to attack Federation in its vital spots. Their program is expressed by Sardar Patel, leading bourgeois nationalist and the Jim Farley of India. Patel demands of the British an overhauling of the Constitution with an eye to granting more representation to the provinces before the INC will talk compromise. He will accept any agreement that grants a freer hand to the native capitalists. Gone is any idea of unconditional opposition and mass satyagraha (civil disobedience) to Federation. These Congress leaders are unquestionably carrying on secret negotiations with the British authorities.
The AICC met for five days. All it did was to launch a fierce drive against the Congress left wing! A resolution charging the “lefts” with preaching violence and class-struggle was adopted. The left wing was threatened with exclusion. Although war was so close that the British had begun to mobilize native troops and were prepared to outlaw the Congress, no resolution on the subject was adopted. For five days these pathetic “leaders” sat around praying that the war danger would pass over. The right wing was fully prepared to participate in the war as England’s loyal ally. Gandhi conveniently forgot his “non-violence” to justify a war against Hitler. With the exception of the communist party, the left-wing leaned towards pacifism. The Stalinists bleated about the danger from Japanese imperialism and extolled the virtues of the English brand. All in all, the Congress leadership showed itself as spineless and incapable of action. Had war broken out, there is no doubt that an unwilling India would have been forced to participate as Britain’s ally and 1914 would have been repeated.
So stifling was the atmosphere of this AICC meeting that the left wing members staged a demonstrative walk-out. Gandhi, servile tool of the British and native mill-owners, then delivered an ultimatum to the left wing in his weekly paper, Harijan. He is more than ever wrapped up in his credo of non-violence and passive resistance. The Mahatma has by no means finished his career of sabotaging India’s liberation struggles! Lately, he has condemned peaceful picketing by strikers because it may lead to violence. He even frowns upon his own technique of mass satyagraha! To him, the slogan of non-violence is an efficacious corollary in his defense of imperialist violence. The fact that this life-long traitor is still the leading figure in India’s nationalist movement is sufficient indication of the state of affairs. Gandhi is still Britain’s finest policeman in India.
What of the Congress ministries today ruling 8 out of 11 British provinces? Particularly of late have their actions earned the hatred of the peasant and working masses. Let us cite a few examples:

Madras Congress Ministry – Suppressed various newspapers, including Congress and nationalist organs. Has likewise suppressed many civil liberties of the people.
Behar Congress Ministry – Arrest and gagging of numerous kisan leaders. Concerted drive to crush peasant organizations.
North-West Frontier Congress Ministry – Beating, jailings and murdering of Congressmen, Congress Socialists and, above all, kisan satyafuthis. This ministry is particularly distinguished for its ferocity against the peasantry.
Bombay Congress Ministry – Adoption of a Labor Disputes Bill, called by workers the Black Bill. Ordered police to fire on strikers three times during November 7th general strike in Bombay. Leads ministries in justifying violence against “disorderly” workers and peasants.
United Province Congress Ministry – Open support to terror organized by zamindari. Thousands of tenants have been dispossessed. The slogan of this ministry is “relief to the zamindars!”

In broader outline, the Congress ministries have done the bidding of the British; supported the employers as against the unions; the landlords as against the peasants. They have moved steadily to the right by ignoring the Election manifesto and have alienated the peasant and toiling masses. Office acceptance – originally explained as a move to win liberation from “within” – has decidedly strengthened the British raj. Moreover, it has provided the governmental staff and apparatus necessary to administer the coming Federation.
The Congress directly sabotages the struggles of the States’ people against their feudal lords. The AICC adopted a resolution re-affirming its official position of “non-interference” in States’ affairs. As late as December 1938 the Congress Working Committee (top leadership) again stated this hands-off position. Thus the Indian nation is divided – by the British and Congress – into two camps. Meanwhile, one can say that the most significant event of the past year has been the mass uprising of the States’ people against their rulers. In Rajkot state a violent battle has been proceeding against the local Maharajah. Gandhi demanded withdrawal of charges against this Prince so that he could negotiate a peaceful settlement. The masses refused and continue their fight. Another example is Travancore – long upheld as a model Indian state. Here the fight against the ruler has been led by a State congress – the praja mandal. Thousands have been jailed, hundreds wounded in street fights, and 40 killed to date. Gandhi demanded suspension of this struggle and met the same refusal. Due to the Congress’ hostile attitude toward them, the States’ people look upon Congress as an enemy organization and appear determined to carry on independently.
The INC’s rapid shift toward reactionary policies has succeeded in dragging the Congress left-wing along with it. This is especially true of the Congress Socialist Party, and its unofficial leaders, Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose. Nehru, just returned from a lengthy tour of Europe and England, arrived amid paens of praise from the Communist Party or India for whom he has apparently become a front. The language of Stalinism – supplied at first hand by his private secretary whose membership in the CP is well known – fits the Pandit well.
“The only possible policy, if Britain believes in democracy [?], is to shed imperialism utterly and rapidly and replace it by free democratic institutions in these [colonial] countries, which instead of weakening it will then be powerful allies.” (Nehru, The Congress Socialist, Nov. 20, 1938.)
In other words, for a mess of constitutional reforms Nehru will become Britain’s loyal ally. He also proposes a real “collective security.” Henceforth Nehru takes his place in the list of Stalinist fronts, to be cynically tossed aside after serving his purpose. Let him remember the fate of a Largo Caballero!
Nor does Subhas Bose, Congress President, offer a more revolutionary appearance. This pitiful “leader” wallows in the wake of the Congress right wing, invariably “compromising” the uncompromisible by accepting the High Command’s dictate. He is silent on the many crimes committed by Congress against workers and peasants. On the Federation issue he says, “If Federation is imposed, we shall have to resist it by non-violence and if necessary [!] by a civil-disobedience movement.” This petty-bourgeois democrat understands nothing of Gandhi’s failure and is fully prepared to again break the neck of the liberation movement. These men are simply leaders without program.
The reaction of the Socialist party to the offensive launched against it by the Congress right wing was to beat a hasty retreat – almost a rout! At the AICC meeting they had no independent plan of action against war and Federation. Pacifist phraseology was their contribution. When Gandhi threatened to split the Congress, Masani, acting secretary of the party offered to have anyone expelled from his party who was caught advocating “class struggle or violence”! Masani, “extreme” left-winger, author of fine articles on the Moscow Trials and the war question, blossomed forth as a Gandhist policeman! In this age of centrism the cleavage between words and deeds assumes Hamlet-like proportions in men like Masani. Behind the ancient cry of “Don’t split the Congress,” the CSP indulges in endless capitulation to the High Command.
The Bombay general strike of Nov. 7 measured the merit of each left wing organization. This strike arose from an attempt of the Congress ministry to adopt a reactionary labor bill demanding class peace and approaching forced arbitration of strikes. The bill encouraged company unionism and challenged elementary labor rights. The All-India Trade Union Congress condemned the bill. The Bombay unions prepared for mass opposition. But the Congress Socialists brought everlasting discredit to their organization by accepting, “with reservations” this bill. They proposed amendments. When the unions decided to have a general strike, the Bombay CSP refused support and insolently withdrew from the entire struggle. They were with Congress, right or wrong. Aside from completely discrediting themselves in the eyes of the Bombay proletariat – the most advanced of all India – the CSP turned over strike leadership to the Stalinists and the notorious Dr. Ambedkar, demagogic head of a reactionary communal movement. Dr. Ambedkar, posing as the leader of a militant workers’ party seems to have gained the most. The tragedy of the entire matter is that this former British stooge has now become the unquestioned leader of Bombay’s Hindu “untouchable” workers.
The strike failed to prevent adoption of the Black Bill. But it did demonstrate an enthusiasm for battle on the part of Bombay’s workers. An estimated 150,000 to 20,000 participated in a 24-hour strike despite police firings and repression. But its Stalinist, communal leadership had no aim beyond that of winning a temporary, demagogic influence over the masses. After the strike, the CSP issued a smug statement claiming events had justified their boycott. It will pay dearly for its withdrawal from and condemnation of this proletarian activity. A so-called “revolutionary socialist” party that refused to lead anxious workers may find itself in rapid decline unless it makes a sharp re-evaluation. As for the Stalinists – threatened with exclusion by the Bombay Congress – they are already abjectly apologizing. Bombay’s militant proletariat is leaderless and victimized.
The course of this strike is a significant example of two major tendencies – both equally soothing to Britain’s fears of losing India – that account for present Indian politics. On the one hand, the INC has adopted a direct anti-working class and anti-peasant policy as part of its real aim of compromising Federation. On the other hand, the so-called “left wing” prepares the masses for passive acceptance of the approaching Slave Federation by failing to offer a program of action, a goal or leadership worthy of the name. One must frankly state that unless drastic changes take place, a terrible catastrophe will befall India’s workers and peasants – namely, imposition of Federation.
The masses of enslaved Indians have long outgrown Gandhism. For decades they have been ready to push ahead to decisive combats with the British raj. A signal to launch a mass attack on Federation would be only too welcome. Will India accept Federation? Or will a war against Federation be the start of a direct struggle for independence, developing into a colonial workers and peasants socialist revolution?
 



The French “Popular Front” government stabbed Spain’s fighting Loyalists in the back by keeping an iron wall between them and war materials.
The “Popular Front” premier, Leon Blum, organized the Non-intervention Committee which served as a double-barrelled lock between the Loyalists and the munitions they needed.
When the Catalonian Loyalists and their women and children fled into France they were hurled into concentration camps, surrounded by electrified barbed wire.
Double-dealing, cynical, suave, ruthless, scheming. The French imperialists have developed these traits to a fine degree, in the process of carving an empire out of the world. The French have had to play second fiddle to the British when it comes to reckoning up colonial spoils. Where the British Empire contains 500,000,000 odd people, that of France contains 100,477,000. Each Englishman has approximately 13 colonial slaves working for him, while for France the ratio is 2½ colonials to each Frenchman.
 
World-Wide Extent of French Empire
The French Empire is divided as follows:

The American and Australasian colonies: territory of 129,978 square miles – population of 1,112,000.
 
African and Syrian colonies: territory of 9,910,710 square miles – population of 36,890,000.
 
Asiatic colonies: territory of 900,842 square miles – population of 21,640,000.

This total world area of 11,000,000 square miles (excluding France) spreads over the entire globe and makes of France a world Empire, all of whose imperial possessions are at stake in the present conflict.
It includes the Canadian coast islands, West Indies islands, French Guiana, East Indian Islands, Tahiti, New Caledonia, New Hebrides, Tunisia., Algeria, Morocco, Jibuti, Madagascar, Indo-China, Somaliland, Equitorial Africa, Togoland, Dahomey, Ivory Coast, Niger, Cameroons and Syria. In addition, there are a host of small island groups dotting the Pacific, Indian Ocean, etc. which – as with the British – serve as naval bases, refueling stations, military centers, etc.
 
Colored Cannon-Fodder for the Slaughter
The colonies supply an enormous manpower for the French imperialist army. Figures for 1935 show that (1) In the French Foreign Legion there were 16,500 colonials; (2) The African army had 103,500 soldiers and (3) The Colonial army had 87,500. There were 230,000 soldiers overseas in 1935 and the number has probably doubled by now. Forced enlistments and recruitment drives have been going on for over a year.
French imperialism has had a history as long and bloody as that of the British.
As early as 1830 they held possession of Algiers, the most valuable of their possessions. For over 100 years they have drained this Mohammedan country. It is the India of the French Empire. Next came Tunis, an area likewise of great value.
In the 1860’s, the French took time off from their act of carving up China to take possession of the five provinces of Indo-China (Laos, Cambodia, Annan, Cochin-China, Tongking). All of them were subdued and occupied by a large military force. The English, incidentally, were the leading spirit in the London-Paris axis that existed at that time. They grabbed up the Malay peninsula while the French took over Indo-China. London and Paris were the forerunners of Berlin and Rome in imperialist teamwork.
A sharp struggle took place over Morocco which France needed to protect its Algerian colony. It was finally given to France in 1911 after the Agadir crisis led Europe to the brink of war.
After the World War, France and England wrote their Versailles Treaty. In addition to exerting a commanding influence over the “Little Entente” countries of Central and Balkan Europe, the French divided Germany’s African colonies with the British and also got a mandate for Syria.
 
Colonial Revolts Put Down
The French have faced two major revolts on the part of the Arabian nationalist movement for freedom. In 1912 they put down a general Moroccan rising and In 1920 they put down the Riffs who were led by the famous nationalist leader, Abd-el Krim. French imperialism aped its English brothers in ferocity and cruelty.
In 1925 they subdued a nationalist insurrection in Syria. Their administration of this “protectorate” was so vicious that even their own creation – the League of Nations – was obliged to formally condemn French maladministration.
The French Empire has consistently followed the British imperialist tactics of plunder and loot, military and dictatorial rule, suppression of all nationalist and democratic movements. The rulers of France-like their fellow imperialists across the Channel – can only have their tongues in their cheeks when they talk of fighting for “democracy” and “civilization.”
 



No Empire in the world today rests on a more shaky and unsteady foundation than that of France.
In Central and Balkan Europe the entire system of post-[war] alliances created at Versailles by the French conquerors has crumbled. The blows of German imperialism have smashed the encircling chains of French imperialism.
In its world empire the French have likewise suffered heavy losses. Japan has challenged them successfully in the Far East. Italy has made big gains in the Mediterranean. America has taken over much of France’s influence in Mexico and Latin America. Even its closest ally and “friend” – the British Empire – has not hesitated to chisel away at the declining Empire of France.
But not their rivals alone have made the French capitalists and rentiers (coupon clippers) feel the cold chill of death hovering about them. Primarily the French fear the rising wave of nationalist revolt. As in the case of Britain’s world empire, the French are facing a movement of 60,000,000 colonial people who will use each and every difficulty of French capitalism to march one step further towards freedom. Above all, when France seeks to drag them into another world war we shall see these native masses fight with the bitterest determination.
 
Scope Of Revolt Against French Masters
Let us cite a few examples of what the French are facing even now:
(1) Tunis-Algeria: When the French Popular Front Government came into office in 1936 a revived nationalist movement in the North African colonies thought its moment of freedom was at hand. Under the leadership of its party – The North African Star – the people of Tunisia, Algeria and French Morocco closed ranks. But they were disappointed. The Popular Front regime, acting under orders from its industrial and banking overlords, established military rule in these colonies, outlawed the North African Star, jailed hundreds of its leaders and revealed its determination to hold tight to France’s prize colonies.
Since then the nationalist movement has been forced to carry on its work for freedom against fierce oppression. But not for one moment has its popularity declined among the people. When their time comes the revolutionists of “France’s India” will take a leading role in the final break-up of the French Empire.
(2) Indo-China: This highly important colony supplies France with its rubber supply. Its workers and peasants have been completely at the mercy of the French plantation, owners, merchants and shipping interests.
But there exists in Indo-China the strongest colonial section of the Fourth International. It has elected many representatives to important bodies in the major cities. For four years (1933-1937) it forced the Communist Party of Indo-China to have a united front with it, directed against French imperialism. Only when the Stalinists had completely exposed themselves as loyal supporters of the French was this united front broken off. The people of Indo-China now look to the Trotskyists for leadership in a direct assault upon the Daladier semi-fascist government.
(3) Syria: We quote dispatches from Damascus and Angora:
“Reports from Syria indicate that the rising of tribesmen in the Kurd Mountains is spreading daily in an alarming manner. Tribesmen armed with two field guns, machine guns and modern rifles have sent an ultimatum to the French authorities demanding the immediate release of their chief and fifty others who had been arrested.”
“The police fired on crowds this morning demonstrating against the action of the Syrian authorities to suppress disorders. The French government notified the Syrian government that they were taking over all powers necessary to preserve internal security. All police functions have been transferred to the Mandatory Power (France).”
All of Syria has been swept by a series of general strikes and mass protest demonstrations against the brutal French rule for the past year. This colonial people is a sharp needle in the side of French imperialism and is in the forefront of the colonial struggles.
(4) The African Colonies: France’s holdings in eastern and western Africa are experiencing the same general nationalist revival as the British African colonies. Reports indicate intense organization of negro sailors, dock workers, plantation workers, etc. Here, too, the French fear for the security of their rule.
It took two hundred years to construct the French Empire with its 100,000,000 people. It will take a fraction of that time for its destruction and replacement by independent nations of workers and peasants. Just as surely as the British Empire is doomed, so is that of France.
The position of the Fourth International is crystal-clear. We are the opponents of all world imperial systems, be it that of Britain, France, America, Germany, Italy or Japan. There is not the slightest difference between the fascist imperialisms and the “democratic” imperialisms beyond the fact that each wants what the other has. The oppressed colonial peoples, forming the overwhelming bulk of mankind, will refuse to march in any war except one for their own liberation. They will show the workers of Europe and America who the real enemy is and how they too can win their freedom.
 

an Stanley: The Irish Question (May 1939)




Judd (Stanley) Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

 
Sherman Stanley
The Irish Question
 
From The New International, Vol. V No. 5, May 1939, p. 157–158.
Copied with thanks from the Workers’ Republic Website.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.
 
To the Editors:
In the April issue of The New International there appeared an article by William Morgan on the subject of Ireland and its “revived” nationalist movement.
I find myself to be in complete disagreement with its evaluation of the activities of the Irish Republican Army as a revolutionary force and believe that the attitude of our international movement has not been correctly represented. The article is incorrect from two aspects: (1) some of its statements are wrong politically; (2) its omissions are of a serious nature.
Our general approach to the national revolutionary movements in the world colonial empires of Britain, France, America, etc. may be briefly summarized as follows:
1. Clearly establishing the utmost solidarity with the people of the oppressed colonial or semi-colonial nation, we direct our major attack against the imperialist oppressor. In the case of Ireland, our energetic support goes to the people of Ireland struggling for full independence from British imperialism.
To us, the British Empire ranks among the most reactionary forces in world history and its complete breakup and destruction is our goal. This is elementary.
2. Our attitude towards the colonial nationalist movement is that of active participation in its practical struggles against the imperial power and the utmost political solidarity in each progressive step forward it makes.
3. Towards the petty-bourgeois leadership of the colonial movements (Chiang Kai-shek, Gandhi, de la Torre, etc.) and their reactionary activities we retain complete independence of the right to attack and criticize. If not for these reactionary leaders world imperialism would long ago have crumbled away. They are our enemies. Against their doctrines we advance the transitional program of the Fourth International as outlined in the colonial section of our World Congress thesis. In its most general form this is the program of the permanent revolution.
The above may appear to be a repetition of the familiar, but it is my opinion that Ireland and its nationalist movement are partly an exception to the above general pattern. Ireland is a semi-colonial country that has developed a capitalist and landlord ruling class of its own, capable of independent rule. In recent years – under the de Valera régime – it has marched along the road of clerico-fascism, similar in many respects to the Dolfuss Austrian type. A reading of the new Irish Constitution will verify this. The White Steed – a new Irish play – is, I think, a fine artistic representation of the present Irish government.
This Irish bourgeoisie has succeeded in so demoralizing and isolating the nationalist forces that – in the shape of a revived IRA – it has resorted to tactics that can only increase its isolation from Ireland’s and England’s workers. Far from witnessing the upsurge that comrade Morgan speaks of, it appears to me that the movement of Ireland’s people is indeed at a low ebb. What indications are there of a mass stirring of the people in support of the IRA? Ireland’s labor movement is practically down to zero, its organized peasant movement is non-existent, there are no reports of labor or peasant strikes, demonstrations on behalf of those IRA men who were imprisoned for their bombing activities. In a word, there are no objective facts to prove that Ireland is stirring along class lines. Certainly the bombings have aroused no support among England’s workers. One could not for an instant, for example, compare the present Irish nationalist movement with that of India. In India – despite the treacherous leadership of Gandhi and his followers – there is an upsurge because it is based upon a mighty class force, namely, the throwing into action of millions of workers and peasants organized into their labor and peasant unions and struggling for independent expression in the ranks of the Nationalist Congress. What action beyond the activities of an isolated group is taking place in Ireland today? What to comrade Morgan is a “revival” appears to me as the gestures of despairing petty bourgeois, who are incapable of getting down to rock-bottom and attempting to revive the dormant labor and peasant movements.
It is necessary to be unsparingly critical of the “program” of this IRA group. There is no question that we aid and protect these men from the vengeance of the British blood-hounds. This is not the issue. But the fact that they have no program whatsoever – beyond that of bombing – only makes it more necessary for us to point out its obvious limitations. Comrade Morgan does not do this. Furthermore, in practise, the IRA has shown itself to be extremely reactionary in many instances. Its ambiguous relations with the traitor de Valera, its not so ambiguous relations with the fascist Franco régime in Spain, its kow-towing to the Irish Catholic Church, its supreme unconcern with labor, peasant and socialist problems – all of these clearly stamp the IRA as an exceptionally backward and limited nationalist movement. By no means do I state that it has no possibilities. That remains to be seen. But we cannot bury our critical attitude towards the IRA merely because it appears to be the only movement.
The question of the bombings is secondary and solely a matter of the most effective tactics to be employed. That the IRA considers it to be the only worthwhile activity to engage in only reveals its almost incredible backwardness. In my opinion, they have been ineffective in arousing sup-port and action among the people. Morgan calls them the carefully planned acts of “revolutionists”. Perhaps, but what of it? What sort of substitute are they for protest meetings, demonstrations, strikes, etc.? In what way do they further or help revive the mass movement? How do they awake England’s workers to Ireland’s situation? Where is the evidence of the healthy effect of these bombings? As a tactic they are as effective as a fast by Mahatma Gandhi (and incidentally belong in the same category!). Gandhi too, “plans” his fasts! He plans them so that he will appear to the masses as a substitute for their action, as their redeemer and savior. When Gandhi fasts India stands still and is “saved” – for the British!
In addition, there are two serious omissions in the article. First, comrade Morgan mentions the newly formed Irish Republican Brotherhood as a progressive development of the IRA. He says these men “go about their business”. What is their business and how does it differ from that of the IRA? Precisely what is the IRB?
Secondly – and most important – there is absolutely not a word of material or information on the present Irish labor movement – in its trade union and socialist form. Or is there no labor movement?
I strongly suggest that what is needed is a more scientific and exhaustive study of the Irish question – one based less on emotional longings and wishful-thinking than Morgan has given us.



 


Sherman Stanley, New York.






Wafted along by a gale of ballyhoo and expensive propaganda, His Majesty, George VI, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions beyond the Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India, and his Queen, Elizabeth, are well entrained on their month-long tour of Canada.
On June 7th Their Imperial Majesties will enter the United States – the first time such an event has occurred in the history of the British Empire. They will proceed to Washington, there to be entertained royally by our democratic F.D.R. at a garden party whose cost has been estimated at a cool $15,000! From Washington, our royal guests will be taken by special train to Red Bank, N.J., and then embark upon a destroyer which will land them at the tip of Manhattan island. A short visit to the World’s Fair will be followed by ceremonies at Columbia University over which the perennial Nicholas “Miraculous” Butler will preside. Then comes the return trip to the isles of Britain and “home” in Buckingham Palace.
 
Who Are the Real Rulers?
Who are George VI and his queen, Elizabeth? In the eyes of the American press which is in danger of over-straining itself in its task of pumping up their majestic virtues, while at the same time attempting to depict them as ordinary, “homey” folks (just like you and I) they appear as symbolic representatives of the world’s greatest Empire. They are the leaders of our closest and noblest allies, the British. They represent “white supremacy” – the rule of Anglo-Saxon civilization. The American press, deliberately interested in fostering the Chamberlain “peace front” conception, is engaging in a high-pressure campaign to put across Their Majesties.
We can easily understand the difficulties involved in this scheme. The British Empire, like all world empires, is ruled over by a handful of bankers, industrialists and coupon-clippers. The imposing facade of royalty can serve only as a deceptive front, covering up the naked imperialist banditry behind it.
 
History of British “Democracy”
Secondly, every thinking person knows that there is no such thing as British democracy. How can a “democratic” government be presided over by a feudal king who sucks up countless millions each year of his futile existence? Has not everyone heard of the role of “Perfidious Albion” (the world’s cleverest double-crosser) in world affairs? The entire might of the Empire rests upon the 500,000,000 native peoples who slave and sweat in the colonies of India, Ceylon, Africa, etc. The crown resting so precariously upon the head of George VI was carved and bejeweled by handicraftsmen of India. It will be toppled off by the mighty uprising of these enslaved Indian workers and peasants. The story of British imperialist rule in its colonies is one of endless murder, violence and treachery against the colonial masses.
And finally, in the very personalities of these imperial representatives we have a fine reason for the natural repulsion that every American worker feels towards them. Surrounded by countless lackeys and flunkies whose sole task appears to be an endless scraping and bowing (except when they have to change His Majesty’s clothes, which apparently happens continuously), George VI emerges as a completely colorless, lifeless and dull personality.
England in its time produced dramatic and colorful kings. But in its period of decline, the British Empire can only be represented by this impotent, stammering dolt who only reminds us of the imbecilic “king” in the famous Russian puppet film, The New Gulliver. To witness his feeble attempts at majestic posing in the newsreels, to listen in on his nervous, empty and useless efforts at speechmaking is to come face to face with the realities of this so-called king.
Intent of Visit Is Clear
As for his wife, Queen Elizabeth, it is apparent that she is endeavouring to supply what is lacking in George VI. What would the American capitalist press have to say if not for her! This daughter of a Scottish earl, whose entire family is connected with British industrialism – her brother is the chairman of an important English mining company – dominates the events of the visit. Her job is to prop up the failing king! At the host of petty and ridiculous functions that go to make up regal life, Queen Elizabeth tries bravely to cover up the deficiencies of her weakling husband.
Let the sob-sisters pile up column upon column of “human interest” stories! Let the press editorialize on their kingly virtues! Nothing can hide the obvious intent of these Canadian and American visits.
Canada over a period of years has evolved along lines that have made of it an independent capitalist nation in its own right. It is only nominally a part of the British Empire, much as King George is only nominally the ruler of the Empire. Actually, American imperialist interests are far more important in Canada and have much more to say about Canadian political affairs. The king’s visit to Canada is a theatrical gesture having as its motive the effort to tighten up the loosening ties that bind her formally to England. The masses of Canada have long ago expressed their unwillingness to send men overseas to fight in another British war for the preservation of its imperialist hegemony. Chamberlain more aware than ever of the cracking-up of the British Empire, is seeking support among the Canadian rulers for his war aims. That is why he has sent his royal puppets on their visit As for America – here too the motive is crystal clear. Chamberlain, and the imperialists whose tool he is, realizes that he must depend to a large extent upon Roosevelt and the more powerful capitalism of America for support not merely in the approaching war, but especially in the suppression of the colonial revolts that are inevitable in the near future. Chamberlain seeks a tighten ing of the Anglo-American alliance because he needs American imperialism as a source of supplies in the suppression of the colonial movements. He needs” America as an ally to help preserve the British Empire. Hence we are blessed with the visit of his “good-will” agents.
 



It is instructive to contrast the records and activities of Mohandas K. Gandhi, leader of the 5,000,000 strong Indian Nationalist Congress, in the last war and the present war.
Gandhi, just returned from South Africa where he had first developed his theories and methods of non-violent, passive resistance, rapidly asserted himself as the leading figure of India’s nationalist cause.
The Congress, which previously had been a small pro-British organization of wealthy Indian “liberals” and civil service bureaucrats, began to grow rapidly under his leadership. It became a mass organization of the Indian middle class.
 
A Summary of His 1914–1918 Record
When the war began, Gandhi, in consultation with leading British authorities in India, gave his unqualified and unhesitating support to the war. He proclaimed that it was a war for right and justice.
And what of India ? Why should she support the war? Gandhi accepted completely certain vague promises (which were never kept) made by the British Viceroy. Nothing concrete was given. Gandhi became an open recruiting agent for the British. He toured the country raising money, troops, etc. He urged Hindu and Moslem alike to join the British armies.
What was the result? India sent more men into action than all of the British dominions combined (close to 2,000,000). They fought in France, China, the Gallipoli peninsula, Arabia, etc. Hundreds of thousands died, particularly in the Dardanelles. A stream of wealth poured from India into the British war chest. The British plundered the country to satisfy the needs of the war. India mobilized its huge manpower and resources for the British ... and obtained absolutely nothing.
 
Gandhi’s Record Today and What It Means
When the Second imperialist World War opened up, Gandhi expressed his immediate willingness to perform his 1914 role all over again. He alone of the Congress Executive Committee wanted to give unconditional support to the British. He didn’t even ask for any promises as he had in 1914! He was prepared to betray the nationalist cause even more shamefully!
But not the millions of workers and peasants. If Gandhi had proceeded in his first intentions when the war began, he would have been knocked aside and uprooted like a sapling in a thunderstorm. He would have lost his entire following and influence. For India refused to support dying British imperialism under any conditions. That is the will of the people.
This is the explanation for the militant stand taken today by Gandhi. He reflects the ferment, the action, the determination of India’s masses. His latest demand for immediate independence (without going through stages) expresses the desire of every Indian worker and peasant. The Congress slogan of a freely elected Constituent Assembly for India is the burning revolutionary slogan of the hour, rallying tens of millions to its banner. Gandhi, desiring to stay at the head of the masses so as to prevent the movement from developing too rapidly and becoming revolutionary, is forced to swing into line.
Every revolutionary worker will give his full support to the freedom demand and endorse the proposed Constituent Assembly. But he will have not the slightest trust or confidence in Mahatma Gandhi or the conservative leaders who surround him. Their desire is not for a genuine revolutionary struggle, but to remain at the head of the masses so as to hold them within the bounds of ‘legality” and pacifism.
What is the meaning of the complete change in Gandhi’s attitude since the war began? Without the slightest hesitation we can state that India today is a seething cauldron, bursting with the revolutionary energy of the masses. It is the workers and peasants of India who have already given the first call to revolt against the imperialist war. They are acting and forcing the Gandhists to act with them. The revolutionary upsurge of India has just begun!
It is carrying Gandhi along in spite of himself. Once it begins to feel its full strength and to reach out for freedom and revolutionary power, it will lightly toss aside Gandhi or anyone else who stands in its way.
 



The financial wizards of “The City” – London’s Wall Street – are nervously fingering their money bags these days. Without exception the people of all of England’s world colonies hate and detest the British rule. These colonial people will utilize the first available opportunity – the war – to oust the British.
Many times before the British have faced opposition in the colonies. They have always succeeded in staving off the inevitable, however. One of their principal methods has been to buy off and bribe the leaders of the opposition movement, or to maneuver things so that the colonial masses are “led” by agents of the native capitalist class whose basic interests are with the British. This is what they have done for example, in India (Gandhi) and in Ireland (De Valera).
They have not hesitated for one moment to use the armed forces of the police and the British Colonial Army. The British unleash a Hitlerite reign of terror when necessary to preserve their rule. They have done this in Palestine, in Ireland, in their African colonies and especially in India.
 
World-Wide Fight Against British Rule
Never before, however, has colonial opposition been so solid in its determination to put an early end to British rule. Militantly conducting the struggles of today, the colonial masses grimly await the opportunities that tomorrow holds out for them. Let us cite a few examples of today’s opposition:
Ireland: A newly revived nationalist movement has shattered the sweet dreams of the British money-baggers. The Irish are starting in once again where the traitor De Valera left off. Their struggle is for a united, independent Ireland – free forever of British domination.
India: The workers and peasants of this vast country of four hundred millions are in the forefront of the struggle against British imperialism. In the past year this country has had a wave of strikes – general strikes in Bombay and Calcutta, the working class centers – militant demonstrations and actions for freedom. Represented in the Indian Nationalist Congress alone are 5,000,000 workers and peasants who are pledged to gain complete independence for their country.
The Indian nationalist movement provides the biggest headaches for the bankers of “The City.” That movement is rising over the heads of Gandhi and his conservative following. Once this is accomplished, then the British know they can kiss good-bye to “the finest jewel in the Crown of Empire.”
Ceylon: In this important and strategically located island, the left-wing Socialist Party of Ceylon is leading an aggressive and direct struggle against the British. Little news reaches the outside world of their battles. Ceylon – a pearl of “democratic” England – is hermetically sealed from without. Meanwhile, from within, the British cary on their violent attempts to crush a people who never give up.
West Indies: These islands, famed for their hurricanes, have brewed a storm too severe for the British to handle. Labor – militantly led under the banner of the C.I.O. – has organized the dock workers, sailors, sugar mill workers, etc. Wave upon wave of strikes have served notice on the British that here too they are not wanted.
 
Can’t Fool Them All the Time
Egypt: The British granted a fictitious “independence” to some fake nationalist politicians a few years back. They thought that these men could indefinitely fool the laborers and peasant “fellaheen.” The British, who wrote the treaty, kept control of Egypt’s foreign, affairs, financial matters and arranged for British troops to remain in the country. The thing was a fake from the word “go.” Today, the masses led by radical students, continue the struggle for independence, real independence. Chalk up another thorn in the side of the British – right at the entrance to the vital Suez Canal!
Kenya, Union of South Africa, etc. All sections of Britain’s African colonies have been stirring restlessly. Headquarters of the African nationalist and revolutionary movement, which operates directly from London itself, reports warm responses to the work of the organizers it sends out. Organization of black workers in sections of the Union of South Africa is progressing as never before. These men will show that they too understand that freedom and British rule have nothing in common.
Even those sections of the Empire that are actually independent, capitalist nations are deserting the British. So great has been the pressure of the people in Australia, Canada and the Union of South Africa against supporting England in any war that the leaders of these governments have been forced to declare publicly that they will not send any soldiers overseas to aid the British.
We doubt if these capitalist politicians mean it. But we don’t doubt that the people of these lands mean it! And their word will be the final word.
All of this spells death for the British Empire!
The most significant event in the rise of capitalism was the erection of this Empire. The most significant event in capitalism’s fall will be the destruction of that Empire. And we who live now will have the glorious opportunity of witnessing its break-up and replacement by independent, free nations of workers and peasants, associated with and aiding one another in a world socialist society.
 




One-fourth of the world’s land area!
 
One-fourth of the world’s population!
 
One-fourth of the world’s food supplies!

So may we describe the imperial might and majesty of the British Empire today – that Empire which has reached the height of its historic course and upon which the sun is finally beginning to set.
British imperialism is preparing to go to war. The entire population of Great Britain is kept continuously on needle-edge by military notices, air-raid drills, conscription drives and feverish preparations for conscription of the laboring masses. The munition plants work around the clock, day in and day out. England’s huge textile plants are being converted into war production units. Each ship of the British navy has steam up and is prepared to sail at a moment’s notice to the military posts assigned by the Admirals. The Empire was built by violence, conquest and pillage, terror and destruction. The same weapons keep it together over the opposition of the masses of people who compose it. But when it comes to preparing for war, then the world is told of British “democracy,” British civilizing powers, British love of peace.
 
Scope of the British Empire
There is British territory in every portion of the globe. The Empire occupies a total land area of 12 million square miles.
In 1935, its population totaled 475,004,458 people. But this figure did not include the 76,000,000 people of the Indian Native States which are, in reality, under British control.
Under the Union Jack live the most diverse groups and races of people – ranging from the blacks of Africa to the pale whites of the London slums. They may be roughly divided into the Malay, Indo-Chinese, Indo-European, Semitic and Hamitic (African) groups.
 
The “Democracy” of the Empire
What portion of these half a billion people are white? It is estimated that only 68 million or about 12% belong to this dominant ruling race. And only about 40 million inhabit “mother” England, the imperialist nerve-center of this world Empire. It is this minority – about 1 to 13 – that domineers over the lives and destinies of hundreds of millions of subject people.
British propagandists are accustomed to dividing the Empire and its tributaries under various headings: Mother England, the Dominions, the Crown Colonies, Protectorates and India, which they classify separately. But this is a superficial and false division. The British Empire consists of England – the industrial and financial ruling heart of the Empire, with London, the “City” as it is called in imperialist circles – at the center. Then there are the “dominions” of Canada and Australia which in reality have the status of independent, capitalist nations in their own right. These countries have developed an independent capitalist class and are not directly under the thumb of the British imperialists.
 
Huge Extent of Subject Countries
Of overwhelming importance in the British Empire are the numerous colonies where British might and force reign supreme.

Far Eastern Colonies: India, Ceylon, Malaya, Hongkong, Borneo, etc.
 
West Indies: Jamaica, Trinidad, British Guiana, etc.
 
South Africa: The Union, Basutoland, Rhodesia.
 
East Africa: Egypt, Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Uganda, Kenya, Zanzibar, Nyasaland.
 
West Africa: Nigeria, Gold Coast, Sierra Leona, Gambia.
 
Australasia: New Zealand, Fiji, Papua, etc.

In addition, there are 81 other cities, island groups and small territories too numerous to list. The world is dotted with military bases, strategic centers and coaling stations that are a part of the gigantic “defense” apparatus these master imperialists have created. The Bermudas, Gibraltar, Malta, Aden, Corfu, Ceylon are but a few.
Thus lies the huge skeleton of the Empire. Within its reaches toil the Bantus of South Africa extracting coal and gold from the mines of Transvaal, Indian laborers weaving jute products in the mills that line the shores of the Ganges, Scottish shipbuilders working on British Men-of-War in Glasgow harbor, Indian fur-trappers in Canada’s Hudson Bay areas.
 
How the Empire Was Built
By conniving where possible, by fraud where conceivable, by conquest where unavoidable, this Empire was built.
Since losing the 13 colonies that later evolved into capitalist America, the British imperialists have not given away or freed a single inch of land that came under their rule.
On the contrary, for a 200 year period they have kept up a speedy rate of expansion and extension.
The provinces of India were subjugated by a conquest that extended over a period of 150 years. Millions of natives were either killed by the “civilizing” bullets of His Majesty’s Colonial troops or died from famines artificially induced by the conquerors.
Ceylon, Hongkong, Egypt, South Africa – all were conquered by force of arms.
Germany’s African colonies were part of Britain’s prizes from the World War.
Privileged rights and “spheres of influence” were wrested from the helpless Chinese in a series of bloody wars.
 
Hitler and Franco Learned from Britain
Hitler learned from the practices of the British how to suppress local opposition movements and then move on to new grabs. The art of enlisting mercenary, colonial troops with the aim of suppressing civil uprisings was taught to Franco by his British brothers.
The British Empire rose to its present position on a tidal wave of blood and violence never equalled. Before it gives a single one of its prizes to an imperialist rival, before it sets free a single one of its colonies it will fight with the ferocity born of desperation. That is the meaning of British foreign policy today: the determination to hold on to its world possessions.
 



The British have the reputation of being the world’s best colonizers.
The 500,000,000 colonial people scattered throughout the world arid who are on the receiving end of this colonization agree. They agree that when it comes to stealing the last bit of gold, thinking up new taxes for starving peasants, creating inhuman conditions for factory workers, there is no one who can hold a candle up to the British.
After the World War, Germany’s African colonies were taken over by the British. The African natives who have lived under the imperialist rule of both England and Germany have a saying that the only difference between the two is that the British can’t do the goose step!
 
Started Concentration Camps
The British originated the idea of concentration camps during the Boer war when they penned up thousands of their prisoners.
To this very day, thousands of miners who toil in the mines of the Union of South Africa are locked up each night in “labor compounds” which are policed by British troops.
In Indian cities like Calcutta and Bombay, native factory workers return to homes – after an average 10-12 hour day – that possess no water or toilet facilities; no bathtubs; no cooking equipment – nothing but mats on stone floors.
Who gains by this constant exploitation?
Certainly not the masses of people who live in the colonies! They are ground down by such permanent misery that death becomes a way out for them. India has the world’s highest death-rate for the newly-born. All of the English colonies are breeding places of the diseases that accompany malnutrition and famine, such as bone diseases in all forms, tuberculosis, hook worm, plagues, etc. The Technique
When the British take possession of a colony they do a thorough job of it.
First their soldiers establish military authority over the defenseless people. Then they make an agreement with a minority section of the native population which they transform into servants of the British imperialists. Finally – after they have purged the population of all those who object and have filled all the available jails – the British begin to rule.
The plunderers load British ships with the wealth of the country. Gold, jewels, textiles – they take everything. It is calculated that at least $50,000,000,000 worth of material was removed from India during the 19th Century.
 
One-Crop System
British landlords, plantation owners, real-estate investors begin operations on the peasantry. With British thoroughness, they oust the peasants from their lands and drive them to work in the cities or mines. They force the people to stop producing food necessities (that is, with the exception of food products that are needed in “mother” England) and organize profitable one-crop systems. Thus, the Indian province of Bengal has an overwhelming majority of peasants who grow nothing but jute, the
price of which is fixed by the British. Wheat, flour, beef, butter, wool, hides, rubber, etc. are all imported – at British prices – from the other colonies. Where the British permit any sort of industrial growth they make sure it remains in their hands only. British capitalists and bankers own the gold mines of South Africa, the coal and iron mines of India, the jute mills of Calcutta, the textile plants of Bombay, the sugar refineries of the West Indies. The transportation and public utilities systems of all the colonies are in their possession. Between $800,000,000 and $1,000,000,000 is the annual profit made by the British from their investments in India. Have you seen in newsreels the flashing Crown Jewels of the British King and Queen? That’s the blood and sweat of countless peasants and workers, miners and factory-hands.
 
From Both Ends
And to these colonies the British export – at not too small a profit – an annual average of $1,500,000,000 worth of manufactured goods in the form of textiles, machinery, etc.
This is the British Empire – the landlord beating down the native peasants; the mill-owner standing at the back of the native worker; the merchant driving his shrewd British bargain and reaping his profits that are based upon a worldwide “preferential” tariff system.
Over and above all of them stands the financier, the banker, the super-imperialist of “The City.”
 
Imperial “Civilization”
The only schools ever organized by the British in their colonies have been schools for use by the English community or the children of natives who work hand-in-glove for the British.
In India, 300,000,000 people cannot read or write any language.
The British never seriously attempted to raise the cultural level of any of the backward peoples they have enslaved. They have never attempted to root out primitive customs, backward religions and superstitions.
Nor should we expect them to do so! Ignorance and exploitation go hand in hand. A British imperialist once remarked: “A coolie (the common British expression for a colonial worker) who can read is worse than a free man, because he can free others!”
 
“Democracy” in the Colonies
According to the new Constitution the British are attempting to install in India, 500,000 people will be eligible to vote! One-half a million out of 375,000,000!
All sorts of property qualifications, communal divisions, etc. are put in the way of voting.
And even the mildest nationalist parties are outlawed if they show any signs of gaining strength. The colonial people can no more vote for candidates of their choosing than, the workers of Germany or Italy can.
Where local parliaments do exist, as in India, their teeth are pulled in advance by laws that render them powerless.
And these parliaments are invariably stuffed and packed by Englishmen or their agents, who exercise automatic control.
There is no more democracy in a British colony than there is in a Nazi concentration camp! Military-police dictatorship is the system that rules. If this were not so, the colonial peoples would have cast out the hated British rulers long ago.
 



Mohandas K. Gandhi, the Mahatma of India, has offered the world his advice on the present world crisis. Perhaps this is the result of inspirational dreams after his 4-day fast in Rajkot. Almost anything can happen on an empty stomach!
This advice is about as useful as his advice to the Czech masses during the first Munich crisis. Then he urged them to lay down in front of the onrolling German tanks!
Now Gandhi urges the “democratic” imperialist nations to disarm themselves “simultaneously.” Then, the idea is, Hitler will be shamed into doing likewise. Or, perhaps, Hitler will drop dead with surprise when “peace-loving” Chamberlain scuttles the British navy!
Incidentally, we never heard of Ghandi [sic] demanding the disarmament of the British and Native armies that trample upon India. And we recall how in 1914 this “pacifist-at-any-price” gentleman urged 1½ million Indian soldiers to fight on Britain’s side during the World War.
 
Crazy Like a Fox
Gandhi’s advice would be in the nature of a joke, or the empty hallucinations of an old man if it were not for certain other facts in his interview with a N.Y. Times correspondent. To expect the “democratic” imperialisms of this world to strip themselves of armaments on the very eve of what may be a new world struggle between themselves and the fascist imperialism is equivalent to expecting the capitalists of this earth to hand over their factories to the workers. But Gandhi is no senile, half-crazy old man. As the saying goes – “he is crazy – yeah, like a fox!” Inside this shrunken-up head lurks one of the shrewdest brains of the Far East.
By posing as an “absolute” pacifist, Gandhi attempts to perform the double purpose of (1) deceiving his own following who genuinely oppose war – especially on the side of Britain, and (2) preparing for his inevitable – and ardent – support of British imperialism when the war does come. Gandhi figures that people will say: “It must be a good war – even Gandhi is for it”
When the pro-British Times correspondent asked him bluntly, “What will the Congress party do should Britain become involved in a European war,” Gandhi refused to answer. “But won’t you try to go to the root of the situation?” the correspondent persisted. “A wise journalist never goes to the root,” responded “pacifist” Gandhi. Yes, and a shrewd politician never commits himself, especially when he’s carrying on negotiations with his supposed-to-be enemies!
For even at this moment Gandhi is bargaining with the British for concessions and reforms to the New Slave Constitution that the imperialists wish to impose upon India. What does Gandhi offer the, British? Support of the Indian Nationalist Congress in wartime, millions of native soldiers to fight on European and Asiatic battlefields, a billion dollars to the British war-chest. In 1914–1918 Gandhi raised $750,000,000 for the British. This time he promises more.
 
Hokum Doesn’t Go
But the Mahatma will have a hard time putting across his act. India’s masses are fed up with this hokum, especially since they realize that it will mean their lives at the service of their bitterest enemy. The Congress left-wing and revolutionary socialists are pledged to utilize Britain’s participation in a war as an opportune time to free India by revolutionary means. “No support to Britain in any war it may conduct,” is their slogan.
Gandhi fears the sentiment of the working and peasant masses. When asked if India is progressing, he replied, “Yes, it is. I get frightened sometimes, but there is progress at the bottom, and that progress is sound.” What frightens Gandhi is the realization that revolutionary action at the bottom means a clean sweep at the top!
 



The 52nd Annual Convention of the Indian Nationalist Congress – the mass movement of Nationalist India – is now in session in the tiny village of Tripuri in Central India.
The British slave-masters of India are openly signifying their desire to install throughout the country their brutal military dictatorship which they disguise under the name of Federation. Lord Linlithgow, the Chamberlain-appointed viceroy of India, openly states his intention to impose the new Slave Constitution upon the country within the next few months.
Prior to the Congress sessions the country was swept by a series of bloody religious and communal outbreaks between Hindus and Moslems. These riots are the clearest possible symptoms of the major battles that approach. Their meaning is equivalent to that of a falling barometer at sea. They are deliberately organized, planned and provoked by the British in an effort to relieve the powerful pressure of mass discontent. Already they have resulted in hundreds of deaths and thousands of wounded in some of India’s major centers – Lahore, Cawnpore, Calcutta, Benares, etc.
The action of the British in instigating these riots between men who really have the same interest in driving out the foreign oppressors, reveals the desperate position of the imperialist overlords. They are determined to hold on to India no matter how much slaughter and bloodshed is required. In the next few months even the most cynical bourgeois will be unable to talk of British “democracy.” The British and Scottish troops of His Majesty’s Colonial Army will be giving lessons in pillage and destruction to Franco’s Moors!
 
Ghandi [sic] Strengthens Right Wing
Over 6,000 delegates from the most distant corners of British India’s 11 Provinces are assembled at Tripuri. They are meeting on a rough plain where a temporary village of bamboo huts has been erected. Will they furnish the revolutionary leadership eagerly sought by the workers and peasants? The 500,000 workers, peasants, students and middle class Indians who are attending the open-air Congress impatiently await the answer.
Early reports indicate that a sharp and bitter struggle between the conservative followers of Gandhi on the one hand and the radical-minded Congress socialists on the other hand is now going on. Gandhi – who is now held in high favor by the British imperialist circles, and who is looked upon (with complete justification!) as England’s best friend among the Indian people – is determined that the Congress shall not pursue revolutionary methods. Apparently he has succeeded by his recent demagogic fast in strengthening the hand of the Congress right-wing. The furthest thought from Gandhi’s mind is to embarrass the British by launching a direct mass struggle for power. It is with little wonder that we learn of his nomination as “Britain’s best policeman” in India. He, along with his middle-class and capitalist following, do not oppose the Slave Federation of Britain, provided certain milk-and-honey reforms are adopted.
 
Liberal Leads Left
As for the Congress left-wingers, no doubt many of them are putting up a serious and militant struggle against the compromisers. But they too suffer from the false notion that national unity at any price is preferable to a split in the Congress ranks. They have pinned their hopes on a false leader who differs in no respect from any of the numerous middle-class “friends of labor” who always end up by going over to the other side. Subhas Chandra Bose, newly-elected Congress President, is a liberal, cloaking his vacillations in loud-mouth phraseology. But nobody can expect a revolutionary lead from him. This “friend of labor” wrote in a recent issue of the Indian Stalinist paper, “The unity of the national fight for Independence must be maintained. Let this be clearly understood that we of the Left do not hanker for positions, we do not want to capture the Congress and to oust the Right. We want to retain them, even at the very front of our movement.” To depend on Bose for leadership is equivalent to going into battle with hands tied and eyes blindfolded.
 







Since the article printed below was written, Gandhi has ended his fast at the request of the Viceroy of India, thus once again capitulating to British imperialism. The analysis of Gandhi’s role in the Indian situation is, of course, in no way changed; if anything it is made clearer.



* * *
In tiny Rajkot – a minor state with 75,540 people, located in the Kathiawar area of Western India and ruled over by a feudal lord with absolute powers – Mohandas K. Gandhi, conservative and compromising leader of nationalist India is conducting another of his hunger strikes “unto death.”
The 69-year old Gandhi, now weighing less than 80 pounds, has launched another of his dramatic, individualistic acts because of the failure of the Thakore Sahib (29-year old feudal lord) to live up to an agreement that had been made between Gandhi and himself.
For the past four months the workers, peasants and villagers of Rajkot have conducted a militant struggle against the dictatorial ruler and his corrupt administration. The total income of the Raja in the past four years has amounted to $2,300,000. This has been sweated out of the 65 peasant villages in the State.
 
Civil Liberties Unknown
Today the treasury is empty. Out of this money all but $8,000 was spent on the ruler and his numerous vices. The $8,000 constitutes the sum total spent on “education” over four years! It is estimated that the Thakore Sahib spends $720 per day on himself. His despotic privileges include that of making the people work at forced labor. Civil liberties are unknown to Rajkot.
It was against this tyranny that the masses, organized in their Praja Mandal (States’ People Congress), rose. Their mass processions, demonstrations and militant actions defied the repression of the Thakore and his British advisor, Sir Patrick Cadell. Police beatings, arrests, firings and terror did not stop the workers and peasants. Rajkot became the symbol of Rebel India. From outside this state thousands of left-wing nationalists and socialists poured in to aid their brothers.
 
Tool of Britain
Behind the Thakore Sahib stands the entire British Empire. This ruler is but a willing tool in the hands of the British imperialist slave masters. They can feel beneath Rajkot a surging current of mass discontent rapidly gathering speed all over India. The 365 million people of India are fed up with British military and slave “democracy.” They are ready – for the third time since the World War – to march forward and do battle with the hated oppressors from over the seas. The Rajkot struggle is but the vanguard of mightier struggles to come.
And so when the action of Rajkot’s people had brought the Thakore to his knees and forced him to dismiss his British advisor, the British decided to make a test-case. The Thakore had signed an agreement with Gandhi permitting him to appoint a 10-man, representative commission to draw up a new democratic constitution. Under pressure from the British, he rejected the proposed list Gandhi had drawn up and announced the end of the agreement. The British Resident announced a no-compromise fight was on. A mass general stoppage of work immediately swept the entire state.
 
Masses Desert Gandhi
This is the background of the present Gandhi fast. But beneath lies a still more basic reason. India’s masses have long outgrown the conservative and compromising tactics of Gandhi. Time after time have they been led by the Mahatma into battle with the British and then, at the decisive moment, he and his middle-class following have deserted.
The Indian Nationalist Congress which Gandhi has led since 1919 and which is the mass nationalist movement of the country with a membership of 4½ million, has begun to reject Gandhi’s pacifist, half-way measures. The Congress rank and file bitterly oppose the People’s Front methods employed by the Gandhi-ist right-wing politicians who hold political power in 8 out of India’s 11 provinces.
The waning influence of Gandhi was clearly displayed at the recent election of the new president of the Congress when his nominee was defeated by the candidate of the Congress socialists and left-wing elements. It is this new generation of radical fighters who have challenged Gandhi’s 20-year old leadership. Gandhi has undertaken his demagogic and sensationalistic action in a desperate effort to place himself once again at the head of India’s mass movement.
 
Diverts Struggle
Instead of drawing up a plan of action against the British; instead of summoning the workers and peasants into mass action against their rulers; instead of urging the peasants to seize the land and the workers to take over control of India’s industry Gandhi – like the shrewd and clever politician he is – is attempting to center all attention upon himself and divert the masses from the real business at hand. This is the real meaning of his dramatic action. Gandhi will try to place himself at the head of India’s marching armies – the better to strangle them!
But this time the masses cannot be deceived so easily. If Gandhi can offer nothing but his old tricks he’ll soon be left far behind. The third mass movement of India since the war threatens already to outstrip the others in scope and in extent. Previous Appeal issues have described the wave of peasant actions and labor strikes now going on. Already there are reports that the Congress ministries may be forced to resign due to mass pressure from the Congress rank and file.
 



THE ISLAND OF CEYLON lies at the southern extremity of the vast sub-continent of India. Within the confines of this beautiful island, known as the Pearl of the British Empire, a bitter struggle has been in progress between the masses of Ceylonese people (Sinhalese) and the handful of British plantation owners, militarists and imperialist gangsters. Below the reader will find the story of Ceylon, further indication of the malignant and vile characteristics of dying British “democratic” imperialism, and the agressiveness and vitality exhibited by the colonial masses of the British Empire in the efforts to remove from their throats the hand that threatens to strangle them.
* * *
Ceylon is a large island, one-half the size of England and 5/6 the size of Ireland. In the military and strategic sense it is of major importance to the British since it straddles the two sections of the vast Indian ocean created by the jutting out of the Indian peninsula. Ceylon is another “knot” in the British life-line of supply and communication that leads from London to Hongkong. Like the other centers of British naval and war strategy, Ceylon has been turned into a naval and air base.
Economically, the island is overwhelmingly agricultural, the predominant system being that of the plantation. The sole industry that exists is that connected with docks and transportation (railways). There are a few factories that perform elementary steps in the preparations of the various raw materials produced. The largest factory, employing 1,000 workers, is situated in Colombo, the leading city (300,000 population).
An analysis of the population reveals the dictatorial and predatory nature of the British rule. Out of a population of 5,306,863 (1931 figures – there are now closer to 6,000,000), there are exactly 9,500 Europeans, including the small aristocratic caste of Ceylonese Dutch Burghers who have polluted the island with their presence for 150 years. That is, the white rulers constitute 0.156% of the population!
In addition, there is a large and important minority of Indians who have been imported over a period of years from Southern India (Madras Presidency, Travancore, etc.) to work on the tea plantations. They number 659,311 (1936) – over 10% of the population – and constitute a major problem in the national and revolutionary movement.
The 5,000,000 odd Ceylonese workers and peasants have little or no racial or historic connections with the Indian people, contrary to popular belief. They come from a distinct, semi-Mongolian-Malayan race and speak their own language (Sinhali) which is unrelated to the language of the southern Indians (Tamil). Their traditional religion is Buddhism, to which (contrary to its backward, slothful nature) reactionary Christian missionaries have endeavored to impart an aggressive, proselytizing nature. The object of this has been to create communal differences between Indians and Sinhalese. British “divide et imperatore” policy assumes the most amazing forms, even to the extent of trying to make “better” Buddhists out of Buddhists!
There are about 1,400 plantations on the island, on which are grown tea, rice, coffee, rubber, tobacco, tropical fruits and the coconut tree for copra. 85% of the plantations are British owned. Since tea forms over 60% of Ceylon’s export trade, the tea plantation system is most important. All tea farms are worked by agricultural, landless proletarians who draw an average wage of 10 cents to 15 cents per day for their labor. There are under cultivation on a large-scale basis the following products: tea, 442,000 acres; rubber, 475,000 acres; coconut, 900,000 acres; rice, 834,000 acres.
What are the general living conditions of the population? (For the sake of contrast, we must bear in mind that they are quite superior to those of the Indian masses. India is still the world’s most exploited colony.)
The average wage in Colombo is approximately 1 rupee (30 cents) per day. This holds for dock workers, tramcar workers and general laborers. There is no unemployment or sickness insurance; no form of relief beyond that engaged in by bourgeois charitable institutions. Widespread malnutrition and primitive sanitation create conditions naturally conducive to those fearful epidemics and plagues that sweep over Asia: malaria, bubonic plague, etc. In 1933, there were 1,000,000 cases of malaria, out of which 250,000 died! Maternal and infant mortality is very high, averaging 197 per 1,000 in the ten years ending with 1936. The reason is simply, the fact that there are practically no midwives.
Aside from the capitalist plantations, a considerable feudal land system still exists. In return for a small piece of land on which rice is grown, peasants work the estates of the landed aristocracy. No land has been given to these impoverished peasants. On the plantations, the workers live in what are known as “tied cottages” in England. They are owned by the planter who, in addition, runs the company store. This system naturally makes the agrarian worker the complete slave of the British planter. Anybody visiting a plantation worker without permission of the planter commits a criminal offense.
Ceylon is a Crown Colony of the British Empire. This means it is ruled politically direct from London and the Colonial Office. The British-appointed Governor-General has complete powers, equivalent to the Viceroy of India. There is a State Council of 60 members, elected by adult franchise and controlled by the party of the planters. The feeble strings that go to make up Crown Colony “democracy” are all held in the hands of the plantation owners. Such in brief outline is the scheme of things on Ceylon.
* * *
There are two “special” problems, both linked up with the basic struggle for independence, that confront the revolutionary socialists of Ceylon. First of all, there is the problem of Buddhism, the religious issue. To quote from a report written by a recent revolutionary visitor to the island, “As in most countries where the peasantry forms the bulk of the population, religion not only plays an important part in the cultural life of the people, but is also used by the aristocracy to consolidate its position.” The problem is essentially that outlined by Lenin in his pamphlet on Religion. That is, drawing a dividing line and thrusting a wedge between the upper Buddhist priesthood and the poor, more progressive lower stratum. We shall see below what progress is being made along these lines.
Of far greater significance is the problem of the large Indian minority. With the fall in Ceylonese trade and the marketing value of its products, and with the sharp rise of a revolutionary socialist movement, the plantation bosses are endeavouring to practice the familiar British “divide and rule” tactic. The 600,000 Indians living in Ceylon are in the position of aliens without any legal status. The government has decreed that all those who are unemployed must leave or be deported. This would immediately affect at least 10,000 of them – a mass deportation.
In his 1935 report, the Indian agent said, “The plight of the Indian laborer who loses his job ... is indeed a sad one. He has no asylum here [Ceylon] – and if he were to drag his weary limbs to the land of his birth ... his position would be no better.” The Indian Nationalist Congress has sent Jawarharlal Nehru to discuss the problem with the Ceylon government, but the socialists of Ceylon will be acting wisely if they keep their eyes on this chronic capitulator and tool of the ever more impotent Mahatma Gandhi. The Indian minority problem is of basic importance to the Ceylonese movement precisely because the fate of Ceylon is bound up so closely with that of India. It would be fatal indeed if the revolutionary Marxists would concede one inch to the reactionary “solution” proposed by the Ceylon government and which will, with certain petty modifications, be accepted by the spineless Nehru.
The real solution to this problem is the revolutionary solution, that is to say, a full understanding that the Indian and Ceylonese masses belong together, in joint struggle against the imperialists and their agents. Concretely this means a campaign that will allow the Indians to become citizens of Ceylon, with full democratic liberties; a campaign to merge and unify the Sinhalese and Indian trade unions that exist; a joint agricultural union that will include all workers in its ranks, etc. The plan to drive out the Indian workers, to make them the scapegoat for British imperialism must be fought tooth and nail! The Indian workers have the same economic problems as the Sinhalese workers and peasants, except in more aggravated form. They have the same desire for national independence and freedom because they too come from a subject country. Is it not perfectly clear that they can be the most loyal and militant fighters in the independence struggle and the struggle against plantation landlordism? Beware of another Palestine in Ceylon!
At the head of the workers and peasants of Ceylon stands the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (the Ceylon People’s Equality or Socialist Party). In 1935 there was not a single workers’ party on the island. In December of that year a group of 50 students and workers formed the LSSP which had a phenomenal growth because of its cleverly combined electoral and mass activity. Its membership is now several thousand and has an unquestioned leadership over the 6,000,000 island workers and peasants. In its first election campaign the Party won two seats in the State Council and could carry 10–15 today. Its two Council members forced through a Shop Hours Act limiting the working day to 10 hours (it had been 12 to 16 previously); obtained milk and food supplies for children in the schools, etc.
The LSSP publishes its propaganda in 3 languages: English, Sinhalese and Tamil. Its Sinhali paper has a regular circulation of 8,000 copies and is read by 8–10 times that number. “In outlying villages, all the adults read the same copy.” Pamphlets and leaflets on colonial and world affairs are frequently published in the 3 languages.
The Party has organized unions of railway and tramcar workers and is at present organizing a union of all general laborers in Colombo. It is likewise active among the plantation laborers and small peasants. It is among these people that the LSSP attempts to expose the pro-imperialist character of the upper Buddhist priesthood by forcing them into the open on specific issues. Often support is won from the poorer local priests who are brought into the fight for specific reforms. The LSSP has developed a dramatic technique of conducting work among the masses while linking up these struggles with the goals of national independence and socialism. It is a mass party with mass influence. And as such it offers a serious threat to the Chamberlain slave masters and the Ceylonese plantation owners.
The bourgeoisie has organized its own political organization: the Sinhali Maha Sabha – consisting of brown industrialists, remnants of the landed aristocracy and white plantation overlords. Its overt aim is to smash the Lanka Sama Samaja Party, set up a colonial military dictatorship and put an end to the nationalist movement. Its immediate tactic is to prevent the LSSP from making gains at the forthcoming Council elections by creating bureaucratic constitutional barriers.
At the same time, this imperialist party intensifies its direct attack against the LSSP and the workers. Police brutality, arrests, victimization on the job, breaking up of meetings by hired goondas (hoodlums), etc. These are the every-day tactics of the British, driving relentlessly toward their dictatorship. They are attempting to hermetically seal the island of Ceylon while they fulfill their criminal work in the dark of night. But they face an adversary who is not paralyzed by the treacherous doctrine of a Gandhi! They face millions of workers and peasants who are led by a Party that has solemnly declared in National Conference its determination not to support British imperialism in any war it may conduct and which has rejected as laughable the idea of unity or capitulation to imperialism, as advocated by the Stalinists.
* * *
Ceylon, conquered and ruled by the sword, has been in British hands since the year 1796. It is today unquestionably one of the weakest links in the chain of empire. While far ahead of all the other British colonies in militancy, aggressiveness and leadership it is nevertheless only typical of its sister colonies in its irresistible desire for self-determination and freedom from British rule.
“It may be that the first successful revolt against the chain that binds the colonies to Britain will be that of the inhabitants of this island. Ceylon’s workers and peasants are fully prepared to take their part in the fight for the establishment of world socialism.” (ibid.)



Winston Churchill is the newly-appointed First Lord of the Admiralty – the head of the British Navy.
Winston Churchill is one of the new members of the Chamberlain cabinet.
Winston Churchill is the man scheduled to be the next Prime Minister of England, replacing the decrepit Chamberlain.
 
Highlights of Career
But there is much more in the record of this man. We list below four of the highlights of his career:
(1) He was the man who organized the notorious Dardanelles or Gallipoli campaign conducted by the British Army in the First World War.
In this campaign – which military authorities recognize as the most bloody, inefficient and treacherous campaign in military history – over 1,000,000 were slaughtered by the Turkish Troops. Practically all of these men were Hindu and Moslem troops recruited in India. The peninsula of Gallipoli was drenched in the blood of British colonial slaves, who died in a futile attempt to take Constantinople (Istanbul).
 
Anti-Soviet
(2) Winston Churchill was later Lloyd George’s Secretary of War. He was the man who sent a military expedition into Russia to help the White Guard armies in the struggle against the newly-born Soviet Union. He was in the vanguard of the imperialist invasion of workers’ Russia.
(3) Winston Churchill was the man who led the fight against the New Constitution for India. This “Slave” Constitution aimed at centralizing all of India under military control, but granted certain limited concessions in the parliamentary field to the native people. Churchill opposed the slightest concession to the Indian people. He wanted full military dictatorship over India, with absolutely no concessions.
(4) Winston Churchill was the man who led England’s most extreme war mongers against the Chamberlain “Appeasement” (remember that?) policy. He wanted war, immediate war, brutal and final war.
 
What War Is About
Winston Churchill is a super-imperialist, a super-militarist, a super-labor hater, a super-reactionary.
The fact that this man is conducting the war for the British is proof in itself what the war is all about.
It is an imperialist war for colonies, for the right to exploit colonial peoples.
It is not a war in the interests of workers or of the colonial people.
We can rest assured that every Indian worker and peasant, every colonial slave in the British Empire knows what lies behind this war. The appointment of Winston Churchill helps strip away all illusions. Winston Churchill is the most hated imperialist in the entire British Empire. This war is hated by 500,000,000 people in the British Empire. They will use it as an opportunity to strike heavy blows against British imperialism and for freedom.
 



The ruling capitalist clique of America has launched a determined drive to repeal the Embargo Act within the shortest possible time. The entire prostitute press and its paid hirelings are frantically at work attempting to din into the ears of the American people the astounding lie that repeal of the Embargo Act – will keep us out of war!
The sale and shipment of war supplies to one set of the belligerents – and the entire world knows that only England and France can make use of the “Cash and Carry” plan for the simple reason that Germany is effectively blocked off from America – is paraded before us as “an act of the purest neutrality.” What a miserable fraud this is! Franklin D. Roosevelt’s career has always been marked by the depths of its deceit and hypocrisy, but even he outdoes himself when he attempts to pose as a “neutral” while acting in complete consort with the Allied imperialist powers.
 
States the Case for Repeal
Walter Lippman, familiar columnist for the New York Herald-Tribune, and fair-haired darling of the Wall Street speculators, has stated the case for repeal of the Embargo Act in his Saturday, September 23rd column. It is well worth looking into the words of this imperialist spokesman.
Lippman states that the issue, in its simplest form, is whether repeal or retention of the embargo will lead the United States into war.
But Lippman is only prepared to tackle one angle of this problem. He carefully avoids any discussion as to what will be the results if the Act is repealed and F.D.R.’s plan is put into effect. Throughout his lengthy article and its involved argument, there is not the slightest admission (nor denial!) that the “Cash and Carry” policy is a major step towards plunging us into the war.
 
What’s Wrong with the Argument
Why must we insist upon this point? What can be wrong with selling war supplies for cash only and which will be carried in other than American bottoms? How can that put us into the war?

It commits the U.S. again (we say ‘again’ because F.D.R. has already done so in numerous speeches and actions, such as holding up the Bremen) on the side of the Allied powers. “Cash and Carry” can only mean British and French cash, carried by British and French merchant ships.
 
It returns the U.S. to the so-called system of International Law. But it was precisely this system that existed when Woodrow Wilson was successful in dragging America into the First World War. Far better would it be to call this the system of “incidents and provocations”! For example, under the International Law system, the authority of each nation extends to a point 3 miles beyond its coasts. All that is needed, then, is for German U-Boats to venture within this 3 mile limit and sink a British freighter carrying some of our war supplies. There we have an “international incident”! We can already hear the cries of American industrialists, merchants, ship-owners, insurance underwriters, bankers, etc., for “more adequate protection of our sales.” Imperialist International Law, far from being a safeguard against war, is simply an excuse-providing system for war.
 

American Business Boom Ahead

”Cash and Carry” means at least a partial business boom in America. Everything indicates that the Allies will make huge purchases of war stocks and raw materials. This means that American business men, sniffing the warm smell of substantial profits after many lean depression years, will plunge heavily into expansion, building and speculation on the Market. They will roll up huge surplus profits which they will seek to invest in the Allied countries or their dominions (Canada). The entire banking system of America, now stuffed with idle money and credits, will become geared to this boom and expansion – all of which is dependent in turn, upon the successes of the Allied powers.
 
How long would it be before any “Cash and Carry” system is replaced by a purely “Credit” system? Already, the Senate Committee in charge of drafting F.D.R.’s bill is talking of changing the “cash” provision to a “90-day credit” provision. The American rulers will find a thousand and one loopholes in their own act as their needs require it. As profits mount, and orders pour in, the “Cash and Carry” policy will change to the same “Credit” policy as existed during the last war.

America will become the supply base, the life-breath, of the British and French. Whether the business is transacted in “cash” or “credit” makes slight difference. The effect is the same. American capitalism becomes an integral part of the “democratic” war machine. And this is called “neutrality”!
We can already hear the arguments of the 60 Ruling Capitalist Families. “We cannot let the Allies lose because then there would be a terrific industrial and financial crisis in America.” “You workers must support our entry into the war or else you’ll lose your jobs.” And among themselves they will be saying, “What will happen to our profits? We must act swiftly or else our structure of profit will crumble.”
This is the meaning of “Cash and Carry.” Cash in on the war orders, carry the American people into the war!
(In our next article we shall take up Walter Lippman’s arguments against retention of the present Embargo Act.)
 



A brief survey of the steps already taken or in process of being taken by the Roosevelt government shows how far the American government has gone in its war aims.
We list some of the highlights in the plans of FDR to drag us into the World War on the side of the “Allied” imperialist powers.
(1) Proposed repeal of the Arms Embargo Act. This is scheduled to be completed shortly and then the Allies will begin, purchase of arms, munitions, implements of war, etc. Germany, of course, can purchase nothing.
The “debate” of America’s doddering, old Senators has degenerated into a tragic farce already. One by one, the “isolationists” fold up, or reduce their opposition to pathetic squawking. The results of the debate are cut-and-dried.
 
“Credit and Carry” – the Old Morgan Game
(2) Proposed 90-day credit clause in the “Title and Carry” provision of the Repeal Act. This gives the Allies needed credit, plus the fact that actual ownership of the goods remains with the American capitalists during the danger period of transit.
This 90-day credit provision, calculated to assure an early entry into the war, is the 1939 equivalent of J.P. Morgan’s long-term credits of 1914.
(3) Proposed exemption of the Canadian-United States border from the “Title and Carry” provisions of the Act. This leaves the Canadian border wide open as an entry through which Americans can carry all forms of supplies bound for the Allies. Let it be remembered that Canada is at war already!
(4) The Declaration of Panama establishing a zone around the two American continents, in some places extending 600 miles out to sea.
This will protect the British and French merchant marine as well as protect colonial possessions of the Allies within the Caribbean area, in actuality, however, extending US imperialist hegemony over Latin America.
 
Committed to Allied Cause
(5) In addition, there are a series of “minor” facts, all of which taken together further raise the sum total of commitment to the Anglo-French imperial cause: (a) government censorship of information on ship cargoes and sailings; (b) the drive against German-Nazi agents, while British propagandists are untouched; (c) the acitions of American officials and diplomats abroad (Kennedy, Bullitt, Drexel, etc.) which have openly aided the Allies in their practical and propaganda war; (d) delaying of the German liner, the Bremen.
(6) Canada: Roosevelt, in speech after speech, has bluntly declared his intentions of fighting “for Canada” if it is in any way threatened. Canada is listed as a special prize in the books of America’s rulers. Under no circumstances can this, semi-colony of the American imperialists be touched!
(7) M-Day Conference in Washington: This very week the leading. Army officials are meeting in closed conference to discuss the most intimate, practical details of the M-Day war plans. The question that will be asked is a simple one:“Is your department ready for instant action?” “Have you perfected your plans for mobilization of the nation’s men, industries and supplies?”
This Washington M-Day Conference has placed as point one on its agenda. It will put the finishing touches to the vast military dictatorship planned by America’s 60 Ruling Families when the war opens.
 
Propaganda Coming Thick And Fast
(8) General War and Pro-Ally Propaganda: Many American workers are conscious of the fact that they are daily deluged with pro-war and pro-Ally propaganda. Every boss newspaper in America uses its pages to blare forth war news heavily loaded from official British and French sources.
The movie – here all we have to do is list some of the current Hollywood productions(Nurse Edith Cavell, Confessions of a Nazi Spy, Four Feathers, Beau Geste, U-Boat, etc.).
The radio – news broadcasts are heavily tainted; speakers (whether of “isolationist” leanings or not) are all for the Allied imperialists; radio plays and sketches; patriotic jam sessions, etc. – all alike shout for war.
Add the sum total of all these things and you have spelled the words WAR and EARLY ENTRY.
More than any other of the imperialist powers, American capitalism – the most powerful in the world today – stands to gain by the war and its continuation.
Hitler really would like a temporary peace – to consolidate his Polish holdings and to make more secure his pact with Stalin.
The British and French rulers, who are mortally afraid of losing their colonial Empires, would willingly come to a robbers’ imperialist understanding with Hitler if a working agreement could be reached.
But not FDR and the American ruling class! They want war and more of it. It means (1) Huge war orders with an accompanying boom in American business ($80,000,000 in aircraft orders are now being fulfilled and await only the repeal of the Embargo for shipment. This is but a taste of the forthcoming war orders!); (2) Involvement in the war opens up the possibility for America to win by means of crushing blows delivered by the powerful war machine it can create and thus emerging as supreme arbiter of the world – the dictator of a World Versailles Treaty.
These are the main reasons why the capitalist United States of America is not merely a driving force in making the current war take on wider military aspects, but also the reasons why, if FDR has his way, an early entrance will occur.
 



The Indian Nationalist Congress – representing 5,000,000 organized members and tens of millions of Indian nationalists – this week ordered its ministries in the eight leading provinces of British India to resign in protest against British imperialist policy.
These resignations precipitate the first serious political crisis of the present world war. Although the war is a bare two months old, all the conditions for a major revolutionary situation exist in India!
Last week the British imperialist rulers again gave a true indication of one of their reasons for participating in the present imperialist war.
For weeks since the war began, the British-appointed Viceroy of India had consulted with leaders of various political and communal organizations. He had bent special efforts to win over (buy off with concessions) the leaders of India’s Nationalist Congress.
The Premier of the Bihar Congress Ministry stated the position of the right-wing leaders and followers of Mahatma Gandhi in a resolution he introduced in the National Assembly to the effect that England must clearly state its war aims with regard to India.
And then the answer – immediate cause of the present crisis – came in the form of a White Paper issued by the Viceroy.
The answer was a flat refusal to grant the 375,000,000 people of India their freedom and independence, coupled with several exceptionally vague promises.
Lord Linlithgow, the Viceroy answered three specific questions that had been put to him:
(1) What are the war objectives of the British government? To this his reply was that Chamberlain had already given the answer – that is, of “destroying Hitlerism.” His Lordship does not feel it necessary to go beyond this evasive and hypocritical statement.
 
“See About Future”
(2) What is to be the future of India after the war is over? The Viceroy’s reply was equivalent to the statement, “Well, we’ll see about that when the time comes.” True, some mention is made of a distant “Dominion Status” to be reached by gradual constitutional stages (lasting a few centuries?).
Even in the last war the British made more concrete promises for independence upon completion of the war. This time there was not even a promise upon which the reactionary Gandhi could hang his hat or loin cloth.
The conservative Premier of Madras is quoted as referring to the statement as “deeply disappointing ...”
But it was only a “disappointment” to those who expected something from the British, or aimed at deceiving the workers and peasants into expecting something. The British imperialists give nothing, absolutely nothing – they have long been in the habit of taking.
 
No Concessions
(3) What plans can be made for future co-operation in the war ? Here the Viceroy gets down to brass tacks and proposes a “united front” of all Indian classes in support of the “common cause.” That is, Indian manpower to die on the battlefields of Europe and Asia to assure a continuous flow of gold for the British money-baggers.
Linlithgow, while openly hinting at the necessity for “Indian unity,” has not as yet swung widely with his imperialist police club. But knowing the bloody history of British rule in India for150 years we can expect full enforcement of the military dictatorship if the Congress leaders do not come to heel shortly.
The tottering British Empire is in such a state of affairs that it cannot even offer a crumb to its loyal servant, Gandhi, and his followers! British imperialism has nothing for its colonies but increased exploitation, conscription into mass armies and brutal police rule.
For the vast masses of British and Native India, Ceylon, Hongkong, Afghanistan, Tibet, Iran,Iraq, Palestine – the story is the same. They will supply their manpower, food products, raw materials, mineral wealth – all to be bombed, sunk and destroyed by Britain’s rival imperialists. The wealth of mighty peoples is to be squandered in a futile attempt to keep alive a dying ruling class and its exploiting system.
The moment it became clear that the endless negotiations had been useless; the moment it became apparent that the British had revealed themselves all over again to be nothing but slave masters – then a storm of protest broke over India.
This bitter hostility was directed not only against the British, but against its would-be supporters and agents – the conservative Congress leaders with Gandhi and Nehru at their head.
These spokesmen for the native, Indian capitalist class have led “Popular Front” ministries in the 8 provinces for 2½ years now. In that time they have conducted themselves as administrators of the British rule, bringing upon themselves the deep hatred of India’s workers and peasants.
 
Masses Want to Fight
If they act now it is only because (1) the British spit in their faces before the entire world; (2) they were forced to act due to the explosive power created by the population of India who want to fight now for their freedom. These traitors act only under the sharpest compulsion of the workers and peasants, and then only in a limited way.
The leading Working Committee of the Congress in its resolution instructing the ministries to resign made it clear that it wants no mass struggle for freedom at this time (or ever). It is attempting to wring a few parliamentary concessions of a minor nature from the British. Negotiations failed; now they’ll try threats. And so, their resolution warns against mass satyagraha (civil disobedience) and political strikes.
But the resolution of the 375,000,000 Indian slaves reads entirely different! Theirs is a resolution of determined struggle for freedom and independence. Despite the will of the handful of Indian bosses and landlords, the present action indicates the beginning of a revolutionary struggle for India’s freedom. It will not be hard to buy off the conservative Congress leaders – but the workers and peasants can never be bought off. The first potentially revolutionary crisis of the war is at hand. Of that there can be no doubt.
 



The uppermost question in the minds of imperialist diplomats today is, “What next from Stalin and his regime?” Is it possible for Stalin – already deeply enmeshed in his alliance with Hitler – to withdraw? Or must he continue along the path of conquest and enslavement upon which he has set out?
Stalin and his bureaucratic cohorts have raised to their lips the bottle containing the heady wine of conquest and expansion, pressed from fruits gathered by their plunderers. The first drops have tasted sweet and have gone down smoothly. Will Stalin now, give an additional tilt to the bottle so as to increase the flow?
Let us summarize what has been done by the ruling Kremlin powers to date. They have conquered Eastern Poland (Byelo Russia and the Polish Ukraine) and established their undisputed rule over this large area. Estonia has been made a military “protectorate”, with such conditions that its whole national structure is, in effect, ruled by Russia. With this arrangement there has come sea control over the North Baltic (Gulf of Finland) and military positions that make the capitulation of Finland inevitable before the threats of the Kremlin rulers.
Latvia and Lithuania are meekly following behind Estonia and are likewise foredoomed to become “protectorates” – thus giving control of the entire Baltic Sea over to Stalin. Bessarabia – a totally undefended section of the tottering Rumanian state – can be plucked by the Kremlin’s hand at a moment’s notice. Rumania is eventually to be parcelled between Fascist Germany and the Soviet Union. Thus, a transportation route running from Georgia and the Caucasus, via the Black Sea and Rumania, has been cleared. Over this route will flow a part of the raw materials bound for Hitler’s troops.
As to the fate of Turkey and the Balkan nations, while this question has been postponed for the time being by the signing of the Anglo-French-Turkish Pact, it is nevertheless more likely that the German-Russian alliance will be more potent. The door has been left open for this eventuality by an “escape” clause in the Pact which categorically states that under no circumstances will Turkey fight against Russia.
The great strategic value and importance represented by the Dardanelles and Bosporus – as proven by the great campaign waged for control of the Straits and the Gallipoli peninsula in the last world war – make it vitally necessary for Stalin to attempt to hold Turkey in line. This fact, combined with the traditional policy of German imperialism – the drive to the East – will tend to dominate the fate of the Balkans.
 
Not a March for Liberation
Already there are reports that indicate the rapid approach of events in the Near and Far East which will have the utmost significance for the oppressed colonial peoples of Asia. These reports indicate the intention of the Stalinist bureaucratic gang to embark on a program of expansion southward and eastward.
Fulfilling his current role as a supporter and agent of German imperialism, Stalin may – at the command of his present master – be instructed to strike vital blows at British imperialism in its territories that extend from Iraq on the West to distant Burma on the East.
These lands are now the prize possessions of the badly shaken British Empire. They include Iraq, Iran (Persia), Afghanistan, British and Native India, Nepal, Tibet, and Burma. Within its vast confines live hundreds of millions of colonial slaves – workers and peasants – who have suffered long years under the harsh rule of “democratic” British imperialism. These people – representing almost one-fourth of humanity (500,000,000!) have been swept by tidal waves of revolutionary nationalist sentiment for liberation from imperialist rule.
The people of these British colonies desire – above all their national independence. Right now their lives are spent as colonial slaves working in the interests of the hated British slave-masters. The oil fields of Iran, the produce of the “Fertile Crescent” of Mesopotamia (Iraq), the mineral and industrial wealth of India – all of these are exploited by the British imperialists.
But Stalin would not come down among these people as a “liberator” or a revolutionary enemy of British rule. If Stalin should march south into the Persian oil fields; if he should attempt to overrun Afghanistan as a route into the Punjab, the most fertile and developed agricultural area of India; if he should conceive of a double invasion of India by way of Afghanistan from the West, Sinkiang and Tibet from the East; then we must openly state that he comes as an enslaver of the colonial peoples – not as their “emancipator”.
 
Colonials Will Reject Stalinism
The key answer to this complex problem lies in the overwhelming desire of these colonial people for their real, genuine freedom and national independence. Although the forms and methods of conquest and oppression of Stalin may vary greatly from those of British imperialism, nevertheless the entire nationalist and colonial revolutionary movement will instinctively reject and oppose any moves of Stalinism in their direction.
If reports continue to come through of the massing of Red Army troops in Sinkiang, of border violations in northern Afghanistan, of Nazi and Stalinist agents at work among the colonial peoples in attempts to deceive them and misuse their more than justified hatred of “democratic” British enslavement, then we shall return to what may become a burning question for the revolutionary colonial movement.
For the masses of the countries involved in these events there is only one slogan that strikes to the root of their desires: Neither British imperialism, nor enslavement by the Stalinist bureaucracy. National independence and the right to work out their own revolutionary and socialist destiny!
It took the Stalin regime three months to intervene in the Spanish revolutionary events, with results that everyone is acquainted with.
Now with the beginning of activity on the part of the 375,000,000 people of India in a drive to gain their independence from British tyranny, the, Kremlin masters are already casting an anxious eye in the direction of India. They are already laying the basis for their counter-revolutionary intervention through the pseudo-revolutionary activities of the Indian Stalinists and GPU agents! Stalin stands in unholy fear of a colonial revolution in India. Such a revolution would knock at the very doors of the Kremlin and threaten the ruling caste with immediate overthrow.
 



“The history of British Imperialism is written in letters of blood from Congo to Canton.”
(Statistics compiled by Sherman Stanley from The India Year Book: Industrial Labour in India – ILO publication – series A, No.41; Simon Commission Reports; Times of India; The Hindu; Congress Socialist, National Front; Bulletins of the Kisan Sabha, etc., etc.)
 
The Facts:

The British have been in India for 250 years.
They have been the complete masters of India for 150 years.
There are 285,000 Englishmen in India – that is, 1 Englishman to 1,300 Indians.
The British Army comprises 60,000 soldiers, plus British officers for the native army of 600,000.
 

British Profits:

(1800-1860) – 1,000,000,000 sterling in gold, jewels, interest, etc., taken out of India.
Total Capital Investment: approximately $7,800,000,000 – yielding annual average return of $900,000,000.
September 21, 1931 to December 31, 1932: $298,-000,000 in gold bullion was shipped to London from India.
Interest collected annually on Indian National Debt: $100,000,000.
Marx's Estimate of England's Profits:
Rent plus dividends on capital investment plus railway profits plus civil and military pensions plus war taxes equals annual income of 60,000,000 Indian workers.
 

The Peasantry:

There are 270,000,000 peasants.
They are divided into 700,000 villages.
There are 40,000,000 unemployed agricultural workers.
The Halis (slaves): average of 12 years debt slavery each; 4½ annas (9¢) fixed wages per year.
 
Interest, Debts and Taxation:
Bengal peasants: Total annual taxation equals 40% of total harvest value.
(1929-1939) 50% of Bombay Presidency peasant debts paid by seizure and sale of peasant lands.
Interest rates on loans: 25% (minimum) to 200%.
Total agrarian debt: $4,500,000,000.
 
Peasant Taxation and Debt Burden:

Rent to local, private landlord.
Land tax payable to province or native state government.
Land tax payable to British government.
Interest on loans from local money lenders.
Taxes on water wells, streams, cattle, grazing lands, forests, license fees, wood-chopping, etc.
Tax on imported and exported agricultural products.
Feudal obligations: forced labor on roads, buildings, etc.; marriage, birth and death taxes; religious dues; hunting taxes, etc.

Land Hunger:
Bengal (1931) : 9,995,000 landless laborers (25% of total Bengal peasantry).
Bombay: below 5 acres – 1,128,732 families. 1 to 25 acres – 2,047,986 families.
“Making a Living”:

Bihar Province:




 


Annual expenses


Annual Income




Rent


$  85,000,000


$250,000,000




Interest


$100,000,000


 




Cultivation


$  85,000,000




Total


$270,000,000


$250,000,000



Deficit: $20,000,000
plus: Central government land taxes
plus: Livelihood of peasantry
Total: Permanent Slavery
 
The Workers:

There are 51 million “Untouchables” (outcasts) with no rights whatsoever. They constitute the bulk of the industrial and agricultural proletariat.
Average Annual Income: (per capita)



India


 


England


 


United States




$13.50


$369.00


$680.00



Percentage of population with annual income over $300: 7%
Bombay Wages: (highest in India)




Men


 


Women


 


Children




27¢ per day


20¢ per day


7¢ per day




The Native Princes:

There are 562 native rulers (Maharajas) in India.
Estimated wealth of the Nisam of Hyderabad:




Annual Income


$     50,000,000




Gold Bars


$   250,000,000




Jewelry


$2,000,000,000




Total


$2,300,000,000




The Indian Budget: (1935-1936)



 


Percent




Military Expenses


  23.9




Interest on National Debt


  22.5




Police and Jail Expenses


    9.6




Civil Administration


    8.7




Education


    5.7




Medical and Public Health


    2.6




Agriculture and Industry


    2.1




Miscellaneous


  24.9




Total


100.00




Police Rule:

At the height of the Civil Disobedience Movement (1931) the following number of arrests took place in some of the districts of one of the 11 provinces:




District


 


No. Arrests




Midnapore


13,731




Arambagh


     906




Tamil


  3,942




Karnatak


  4,633




Kalra


  4,715




Ahmedabad


  2,793




Surat


     837




Total


31,557



Note: This was during a 6-month period (Jan.-June 1931).
 
The Government of India:

War-time India is ruled by the Viceroy; the provincial Governors; the British “advisors” in the native states.
Each of these men possesses full military and decree powers in his area.
Parliamentary representation under new Constitution:




 


British India


Native States




Population


256,859,787


81,310,845




Number of Seats (both houses)


400


229




General Conditions of Life:

Illiteracy: 345 million people cannot read or write any language.
Education: 2/3 of 700,000 Indian villages have no schools.
Life, Death and Infant Mortality:



 


India


England




Life Expectancy


23 years*


55 years




Death Rate per Thousand


26.8


12




Infant Mortality per Thousand


250


51




* Life expectancy in 1881 was 30 years.



Deaths:

6,000,000 die annually in India.
44% of deaths are due to malaria.
Bengal province: 750,000 under the age of 15 years die each year.

Housing: Calcutta: An average of 9 to 10 people inhabit rooms having an average size of 8 ft. x 6 ft.
Nourishment: (Estimate of Sir John Megaw).



39% – Well nourished




41% – Poorly nourished




20% – Badly nourished



Hospitals: There are 6,700 hospitals – that is, 1 hospital to each 163 square males.
 

Miscellaneous:

Bengal – 1771: 10,000,000 died in food famine.
1858-1922: There were 72 military expeditions on the Northwest Frontier.
Upkeep of one British soldier equals 4 times that of an Indian soldier.

 



(Concluded from last issue)
The Presidential fight for repeal of the Arms Embargo Act is scarcely a week old and already F.D.R and his fellow war-mongers have met a bitter opposition from the masses of American people.
With instinctive understanding, the American workers have grasped this simple fact: repeal of the Embargo Act and “Cash and Carry” are new major steps on the road to war. The flooding of Washington with protests is the outspoken voice of working class men and women.
But F.D.R. has taken the war road and, if he has his way,will not listen to these voices. Instead, while pursuing the same aims, he will advance new arguments, attempt new persuasions. But all will have the same war aims!
 
Lippman Raises a Few Bugaboos
Walter Lippman, authentic spokesman of American financial and banking interests whose views on the Embargo problem were discussed in the last issue of the Appeal, has already given us an advance look into the new arguments certain to be advanced by F.D.R.
(1) If the Allies cannot purchase arms, Hitlerism will triumph and Western Democratic civilization is lost. This is the first bugaboo raised by Lippmann.
Unfortunately for him, there is today not the slightest vestige of “democracy” remaining in a single one of the Allied countries. Chamberlain and Daladier are the first to admit this. To prove this point, all that one must do is to compare, point by point, the laws governing the Allied powers with the laws governing Hitler’s Germany. They differ not in the slightest because they are modeled on the same general rule: the suppression of democratic rights and liberties for the sake of preserving the rule of a small capitalist minority.
(2) But, adds Lippmann, even if we retain the Embargo, the “democracies” can still get arms and munitions. They will build factories in Canada and elsewhere and will utilize American raw and semi-finished products. “Even with the embargo on arms, this country will develop a great war trade ...” Such products as wheat and flour; semi-fabricated steel; sugar; horses; dressed meats; metals; ores; tools; machinery, etc., are totally unaffected by the Embargo.
To Lippman, the question of the Embargo struggle is simply shall American capitalism join forces now, or wait a little longer.
“The Embargo merely lengthens the period in which the war industry would operate by the time needed to organize abroad the plans which pass semi-finished goods through the final stages of manufacture.”
In other words, whether or not the Embargo is retained makes small difference – merely a matter of inconvenience.
But in the first place, there is quite a good deal of excitement about such a small thing. So much excitement that the American press, and Mr. Lippmann, are set to call those who oppose removal of the Embargo “Nazi agents.” Actually, Lippmann fully realizes the significance of the forces that are opposing change.
And if the “democracies” do not really need American help, then how explain their hesitations and vacillations? The answer is plain. British imperialism will not really begin to fight until it has America – American supplies, wealth and manpower – lined up solidly behind her. Lippmann lies when he says the “democracies” can build factories in Canada and elsewhere. England and France are in such financial straits that they find it difficult to finance their immediate war needs.
 
Suggests a Way of Financing
(3) But Lippmann has a way of financing to suggest. If the Allies cannot get help from America and find it necessary to build factories in Canada, they can get the finances from their Empires! Here is an admission of what England and France really are and what the war is really all about. If money is needed, turn to the hundreds of millions of colonial slaves in Africa and Asia – they will supply us! Increase our exploitation of the Negroes, Indians and yellow races so that we can build munition factories. Here is an admission of the completely imperialist character of the present war.
To sum up: Mr. Lippmann would have the Embargo lifted because to retain it would mean the end of Western “democracy”; because the “democracies” can get needed supplies anyway (then what’s the excitement all about?) and because it means larger war orders, profits and boom.
A good beginning has been made in answering these war-mongering statements by the flood of protests deluging Congress. Defeat of F.D.R.’s “Cash and Carry” proposal and of his efforts to repeal the Embargo – and this is decidedly possible if American labor speaks out loudly and boldly – would be a blow at the war maker’s camp. True, by itself, this would far from end the danger of America being plunged into the war. But the next step after that would be clearer than ever: take the war making power out of the hands of F.D.R. and the Congress.
 

