, Caste and State in the Soviet Union by Tom Kemp 1962


Tom Kemp 1962
Class, Caste and State in the Soviet Union

Source: Labour Review, Volume 7, no 2, Summer 1962. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 

For those who wish to make a serious study of the Soviet Union and reach conclusions about its social character and the direction in which it is moving there are no sacred texts. Everything which has been written by Marxists and others must be checked and re-checked against the facts in their development. Such a study is not only important, it is also unavoidable, for it is impossible to operate in politics today without having in mind a definite conception of what the USSR is and where it is going – what form of society it is, what relation its leaders have to that society, what their real aims are and how they are related to their ideology, that is, to what they say these aims are. Even among those who are critical of, or hostile towards, the Soviet Union there are wide divergences of opinion on these questions: but the need for an opinion of some kind, backed up by a coherent theory, is generally accepted to be inescapable. In the working-class movement insufficient independent thought is given to these questions, for understandable reasons. On the one hand there are the official or self-appointed apologists of the Soviet regime who claim that ‘socialism’ was achieved in about 1936 and that the present period is one of the threshold of communism. If such views are only accepted in full by Communist Party members and fellow-travellers, such is the power of the Russian revolution that, at least in some part, and particularly at the rank-and-file level, they influence even many who, in other respects, are far from being on the Left. On the other hand, especially since the onset of the Cold War, the ranks of the labour movement in Britain, America and the non-communist sections in the Western European countries have been strongly receptive to the anti-Soviet theories current among the propagandists and ideologists of the capitalists. Given all the difficulties standing in the way of fathoming the ‘Russian enigma’, and the impact of the ‘revelations’ of the period since 1956, it is perhaps understandable that some people, even on the ‘Left’, should seek to wash their hands of these questions, claiming that they are irrelevant to the tasks of British socialists. Such a withdrawal into a perplexed insularity was characteristic of many of those who broke with the Communist Party in or after 1956 and subsequently presented themselves as ‘the New Left’. In fact, unwillingness to pursue to the end the necessary discussion of Stalinism and its origins was a major source of the weakness of this trend and, paradoxically, a reason for its failure to establish a place in the politics of the labour movement in Britain, since it meant that policies on a whole series of questions were left vague, hesitant, obscure and confusing.
We have today, then, the disarray of the apologists, making the best of the achievements of the Soviet Union and vainly trying to evade the question of how Stalinism arose; at the other pole those who accept that the USSR is nothing but an oppressive and aggressive force bent on world conquest; there are all manner of other interpretations between these extremes. What has to be counted with, in particular, is the force of the revulsion against Stalinism found among many socialists and the pressure of ‘public opinion’ created by this, enhanced by the Cold War and cleverly exploited in intellectual circles by such organs as the Congress for Cultural Freedom. We should not be surprised to find on the Left, then, a number of ‘theories’ of rejection of the Soviet Union with a certain degree of attractive power for young people and intellectuals who are looking for correct explanations and yet, at the same time, are sensitive to the pressures in their own social milieu.
I
The theories which we are about to examine have in common that they discern in the set-up in the Soviet Union a new form of class-divided, exploiting society with its specific ruling class and political system. Apart from this they have secondary differences: some consider that this represents a form of capitalism – ‘state capitalism’, ‘bureaucratic capitalism’; others see in it something quite distinct from capitalist society and describe it as ‘bureaucratic collectivism’, ‘managerial society’ or ‘state socialism’. Various other sub-classifications may be made: for example, there are several variants of the ‘state capitalist’ theory, which is of special interest both because it claims to analyse Soviet economy in the precise terms of Marx’s Capital and because, in a looser way, many people today speak of the Soviet Union as ‘state capitalist’ without really having thought out the reasons for doing so. In addition, adherents of this theory represent a definite trend in the ‘Left’ in Britain and a number of other countries to a much greater extent than the adherents of the ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ theory.
All these theories can claim intellectual roots in discussions in Marxist circles which go back to before 1914, to the classic tenets of anarchism or anarcho-syndicalism and, more particularly, to the attempts made, first in Russia, then in the workers’ movement internationally, to describe and account for the degeneration of the Soviet power from the early 1920s onwards. A full history of such trends would thus have to deal with the Bordigists and other groups which broke from the Communist International in this period, the Workers Opposition in Russia, the rise of the Left Opposition and the discussions which arose within its ranks from its very inception. There is certainly little novelty in the principal ideas of the versions which have found currency more recently in the writings of James Burnham, Tony Cliff, the French review Socialisme ou Barbarie, [1] Shachtman and his group in the USA, Milovan Djilas and many others. What is important at this stage is less the differences which undoubtedly exist between these theories than the common ground which they share. However, relatively more attention will be given to the theory of ‘state capitalism’ than to the others.
The problems presented by the development of the Soviet Union and the emergence of other states with a similar social system are undoubtedly difficult because of the unprecedented character and scale of the social transformation involved, as well as the deliberate policy of concealment and falsification of data pursued by the rulers of these states. In the years following the Russian revolution, for example, features developed in Russia, owing to the isolation of the revolution in a backward country, very different from those which socialists had expected after the overthrow of capitalism. The process of degeneration which took place in the Bolshevik Party, which changed it out of all recognition; the altered relations between the party, the state and the working class; and the emergence of a politically dominant stratum enjoying economic privileges amid general hardship and poverty, strained the resources of description, theoretical perception and vocabulary. The search for a short-cut, the need for a simple key to the unravelling of complex and disheartening problems, soon brought suggestions that nothing had changed or that there had been a relapse into capitalism or into a new exploiting society. After all, the Mensheviks had argued that the revolution ought to have been a bourgeois revolution leading to the full establishment of capitalism in backward Russia; what was more natural than to see in the developments of the 1920s the carrying out of capitalist tasks by capitalist methods leading to the installation of capitalism of a new type? Either the Russian revolution had been a mistake or, presumably by a series of imperceptible stages, power had been taken from the workers and assumed by a new exploiting class corresponding to the bourgeoisie under capitalism.
In their earlier forms such theories were not worked out to their logical conclusion. That came later, and what it meant, in short, was that the categories of Capital, intended to apply to competitive private enterprise capitalism, could be affixed to Russian society in the Stalinist phase. Instead of many competing capitalists there was now a single capitalist, the state. The complete fusion of economic with political power brought into being ‘integral bureaucratic capitalism’ which only ‘applies to the whole of the economy and society the methods which private capitalism created and applied in each particular factory’. Far from being socialism, or anything resembling it, ‘it is the most finished realisation of the spirit of capitalism, it pushes to the limit its most significant tendencies. Its essence consists, like that of capitalist production, in reducing the direct producers to the role of pure and simple executants of orders received.’ [2] All that Marx wrote about the impoverishment, alienation and divorce from the means of production of the worker is regarded as strictly applicable to the USSR. If one enquires about the reason for the absence of periodical crises of over-production, or of problems arising from the tendency of the rate of profit to fall, these are held to be ‘inessential’ aspects of Marx’s analysis of capitalism. [3]
Although some bourgeois observers have pointed out parallels, in fact superficial ones, between Soviet and capitalist societies, economists have not fallen into the error of establishing such an identity. [4] The kind of economic theory accepted as orthodox in capitalist countries does not recognise the kinship of Soviet economy with that in these countries. This theory is, indeed, for the most part incapable of analysing Soviet economy in the same terms as that which it employs in relation to capitalist economy; the former it sees as a planned economy, the latter as economies which, in greater or lesser degree, are beholden to the laws of the market. It has been left to self-styled Marxists to turn superficial resemblances into the claim that Soviet ‘state capitalism’ is the ‘most finished realisation of the spirit of capitalism’, prefiguring in fact the situation towards which monopoly capitalism in America and Western Europe is tending.
II
A detailed theoretical refutation of these claims is not necessary; it cannot be made on a point-by-point basis. The theories are vitiated by the premises from which they start. Once one has made up one’s mind that, in a literal sense, the understanding of Soviet society can be read off from Capital it is only a question of finding the most convincing analogies; affixing the right labels and glibly discarding what does not fit the thesis. Isolated aspects of Soviet experience are abstracted unhistorically and compared to equally isolated aspects of capitalist society. This method itself depends greatly on a display of ‘Marxist’ erudition and upon emotional reference to disagreeable sides of Stalinism. It is typical, for example, that it should hold up the ugly reality of Russian experience for comparison with some abstract model of a healthy workers’ state, as though this clinched the argument about the social nature of the USSR. The reader does not realise that he is being gripped by his emotions and blinded by knowledge, but a moment’s pause will show that the reasoning is entirely mechanical. It is based on the conception of some ideal type for a workers’ state, torn out of all historical reference, and of the Soviet Union as a finished social formation, subject, at any rate according to the ‘state capitalists’, to the same laws of capitalism as were analysed by Marx, and with a new ruling class represented by the bureaucracy, the collective capitalist.
Adherents of the theories of ‘state capitalism’ and ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ want us to believe that in the USSR and Eastern Europe a functional bureaucracy has become a new ruling class. Thus we find assertions like the following: 
The bureaucracy does not individually own, it collectively controls – and hence prevents other strata from participation in decision-making. Individual members of the bureaucracy, like individual entrepreneurs, may run the risk of elimination from its ranks, but the bureaucracy as such is a self-perpetuating ruling class whose power is defined by its relation to the means of production, that is, by its relation to the state. Far from being a parasitic excrescence on a healthy body it is an integral element in a corrupt social structure. [5]
It was against theories of this kind, put forward inside the American Socialist Workers Party in 1939-40, that Trotsky fought his last theoretical battle, as he had fought before against those who had maintained that the Soviet Union had become a new form of exploiting society. [6] He fought to maintain a view which, in association with the Left Opposition, first in Russia, then outside, he had evolved over the previous ten years. This view finds its most complete expression in a book which, at the same time, is a major contribution to Marxist theory, The Revolution Betrayed. It takes the form, not of a snap definition, but of a sociological characterisation too long to quote here. Trotsky does not accept the view that the question has been finally settled by history but says that it ‘will be decided by a struggle of living social forces, both on the national and the world arena’. [7] Trotsky maintained that despite the usurpation of political power by the bureaucracy the essential conquests of the revolution had been preserved: nationalised property and planned economy corresponded to the social basis of proletarian hegemony. In the special conditions of Russian development the bureaucracy had emerged from the working class and became ‘the sole privileged and commanding stratum’. Trotsky was prepared to admit that ‘the very fact of its appropriation of political power in a country where the principal means of production are in the hands of the state, creates a new and hitherto unknown relationship between the bureaucracy and the riches of the nation’. [8] A real qualitative leap would, however, be required before the bureaucracy could legitimise its rule and make itself a new ruling class. In 1939, with the conclusion of the Hitler-Stalin pact – which blew sky-high the tacit pro-Sovietism of progressive petty-bourgeois and intellectual circles – the minority in the SWP argued that somewhere along the line such a change had taken place; they were not sure when, but they were anxious to find coherent theoretical reasons no longer to have to defend the Soviet Union at a time when this had become difficult and unpopular.
In the course of the discussion which subsequently took place Trotsky, as it were, put into the mouths of his critics arguments which they accepted and built upon. We have already examined the basis of these arguments. In fact Trotsky did accept that a ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ society was a theoretical possibility. One of the leaders of the struggle against Trotsky, Max Shachtman, has recently argued that this marked a sharp change in Trotsky’s thinking. [9] In fact this was not so; perhaps less explicitly he had said much the same thing in his earlier polemic against Urbahns, [10] as well as in The Revolution Betrayed. What Shachtman dare not face up to is that Trotsky set certain conditions for accepting that the corner had been turned and that a new exploiting society had been established in the USSR. It would have been necessary to accept that the definite defeat of the Russian working class at the hands of the bureaucracy had taken place and that the social conquests of the revolution of 1917 had been finally liquidated. The significance of this on the international plane would be correspondingly immense. The way would be open for the assumption of power by such a new ruling class on a world scale, as Bruno Rizzi and later Burnham argued was taking place. It would suggest that the working class was incapable of assuming power, or at least of holding it for any length of time. It would assume the indefinite continuance of capitalism, or its supersession, in decline, by something worse. The logic of this, too, was accepted by Burnham: the real theme of his The Managerial Revolution is the failure of the Russian revolution and abandonment of all confidence in the working class. [11] Burnham went logically, and rapidly, into the camp of reaction. The movement of Shachtman was slower: he wanted to accept part of the sociological analysis, without accepting all the political implications. Even so, he accepted the basic one in the situation of 1940: the abandonment of defence of the Soviet Union. This meant then, as it does now – as a direct derivation from the theory of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ or, for that matter, of ‘state capitalism’ – that there was no difference between the USSR and a capitalist country: the defeat of the USSR was of no particular concern to the world working class. But, as Trotsky pointed out in the course of the controversy: 
... the system of planned economy [despite the profound deformations introduced by the bureaucracy], on the foundation of state ownership of the means of production, has been preserved and continues to remain a colossal conquest of mankind. The defeat of the USSR in a war with imperialism would signify not solely the liquidation of the bureaucratic dictatorship, but the planned state economy; the dismemberment of the country into spheres of influence; a new stabilisation of imperialism; and a new weakening of the world proletariat. [12] 
This remains as true in the era of Cold War as it was at the time when it was written. It is not true, as Shachtman argues, that Trotsky determined the nature of a social order (that is, the USSR) by appraising the prospects for political success of its upholders and opponents. Trotsky tried to work out the dialectical relationship between them in the whole international context of the struggle between classes. Shachtman eventually tired of his ambiguous position; after many years he led his followers into the bosom of American Social Democracy which had long since come to terms with the State Department. [13]
In the course of this prolonged itinerary, during which Shachtman showed many flashes of polemical skill, he and his followers cooperated with the adherents of ‘state capitalist’ theories. This was typical of the unprincipled politics which followed from the position both had adopted on political questions. Because they temporarily drew similar political conclusions they were quite prepared not to raise the very different sociological paths which had led them to such conclusions. In the article already quoted he sums up his opposition to ‘state capitalism’. 
A social order [he writes] in which there is no capitalist class, no capitalist private property, no capitalist profit, no production of commodities for the market, no working class more or less free to sell its labour power on the open market – can be described as capitalist no matter how modified by adjectives, only by arbitrary and meaningless definition. [14] 
One would hardly imagine that he cooperated with ‘state capitalists’ for many years; presumably no explanation ever took place between the two trends on such questions. Certainly Shachtman’s arguments against ‘state capitalism’ are dealt with in all the expositions of the theory and dismissed as concerning the inessential attributes of capitalism, and the ‘bureaucratic collectivist’ theory remains weakest on its economic side.
III
Before we can deal satisfactorily with these theories it is necessary to discuss, from a Marxist point of view, the meaning to be given to key terms in the controversy. We shall therefore need to say what we understand by ‘class’, ‘ruling class’, ‘bureaucracy’, ‘capital’ and ‘capitalism’ and shed light, as this is done, upon the issues which are in question. Of course, this can only be done very inadequately within the limits of a single article. In fact, Marxists need to give much more attention than they do to these questions. It is not surprising that those Marxists who owe allegiance to the official Communist Party line can offer little or no assistance in this field. It is notorious that Soviet sociologists do not dare to ask the most elementary questions about their own society. The ideological bankruptcy of the Stalin period was officially admitted at the Twenty-Second Congress, and a great theoretical void now exists in the world communist movement – which is temporarily filled by vacuous declarations and misquotations from Lenin. The inability and unwillingness to consider the social roots of Stalinist degeneration has made it necessary to attribute all excesses to the personal characteristics of one man – a hair-raising disregard for the elements of Marxism. The few attempts which have been made to carry on a discussion in Marxist terms have been hastily scotched. When the basic questions have been raised the answers given have generally been puerile. In fact, however, there can be no development of Marxist analysis which does not consider carefully, in Marxist terms, the social and class nature of the Soviet state. The inability of the ‘orthodox’, that is, Communist Party, Marxists, to reply to the theories of ‘state capitalism’, ‘bureaucratic collectivism’, etc, derives from the fact that they cannot begin to do so without treading on dangerous ground. [15] The great merit of Trotsky, and in this he developed Marxism in a creative way, was that he did carry forward such an analysis – pointing out much which even the apologists for the ruling clique had to admit, 20 years after – and drew the necessary political conclusions. No apology is necessary, therefore, for the fact that this exposition and polemic are made along the lines which he indicated. In fact, no one can venture into this field with any authority without having mastered The Revolution Betrayed and In Defence of Marxism. Nothing much of what the state capitalists and ‘bureaucratic collectivists’ claim as their own thought will not be found, duly refuted, in these works.
The existence of classes is determined by the fact that different social groups stand in different specific relationships to the means of production, and thus to the allocation of the social product.
It is often said that Marxists have never clearly defined their approach to the concept of class. Perhaps the following quotations may take the place of a full exposition:
Classes are large groups of people which differ from each other by the place they occupy in an historically definite system of social production, by their relation (in most cases fixed and formulated in laws) to the means of production, by the dimensions and method of acquiring the share of social wealth that they obtain. Classes are groups of people one of which may appropriate the labour of another owing to the different places they occupy in the definite system of economy. [16]
A class is defined not by its participation in the distribution of the national income alone but by its independent roots in the economic foundation of society. [17]
The ruling class is that class which, through its ownership of the main means of production, is able to appropriate the social surplus, that is, that part of total output over and above what is received by the direct producers.
To a given ruling class, therefore, correspond particular property forms and specific relations between it and other classes in the society. Such a ruling class will itself be stratified; there may also be conflict between its different sections. The relation between political power, concentrated in the state, and the ruling class as a whole shows considerable variation. In complex, class-divided societies of the capitalist type, the actual exercise of state power may be in the hands of a stratum which enjoys some independence from the ruling class as such, though it is ultimately answerable to it. Indeed, there is room for considerable variation in the form of capitalist rule – parliamentary democracy, bonapartist dictatorship, presidential government, fascism. In any case, the actual authority of the state is vested not in capitalists as such, not in property owners, but in a hierarchy of salaried servants – the upper layers of which will have the closest ties with the economic ruling class – who form a functional bureaucracy. Even in business considerable powers, but not ultimate determining power, have, of necessity, to be vested in similar people. The relations between the ruling class and the bureaucracy which is an emanation of it are not fixed and constant; they vary with innumerable factors, some of which tend to increase the autonomy of the latter while others restrict it. There is no recorded case, however, in a capitalist society of such a bureaucracy (even taken in the widest sense, to include business executives, party bosses, etc) establishing itself as a ruling class. The test of a state apparatus and those who occupy positions in it is whether their policies and exercise of power, internally and externally, have the function of preserving the social foundations, legal protections and ideological domination of the class which owns the main means of production. It would be a very foolhardy man who suggested that the political regime of the USSR had acted in any way to stabilise, strengthen and legitimise the power and privilege of the managers and technical intelligentsia since Burnham’s book was written. In practice, as distinct from the manuals of speculative sociology of The Managerial Revolution type, the ruling class under capitalism has remained firmly based upon the ownership of the means of production, and the attempt to establish a distinction between this and ‘control’ has remained a fiction.
It is a mistake of many writers to use the term ‘capitalism’ with no discrimination. Eminent economic historians, for example, have been known to argue that capitalism began when primitive man began to use a digging stick, and have subsequently distinguished numerous varieties of capitalism from that day to this. Other non-Marxists refuse to use the term at all. Marx, however, was interested in precisely what distinguished what he called the ‘capitalist mode of production’ from all economic systems which preceded it. He recognised, of course, that it had certain features in common with its predecessors and, as though to anticipate the misuse of his own terms, he made it clear that a distinction had to be made between these and the essence of capitalist relations which defined that mode of production. Answering those who wished to blur the distinction between capitalism and other forms of economy he wrote: 
Because a form of production may... be brought into line with its forms of revenue – and to a certain extent not incorrectly – the illusion is strengthened so much the more that the capitalist conditions are the natural conditions of any mode of production. [18] 
As for the division of the product he went on to say ‘if we deprive both wages and surplus labour of their specifically capitalist character, then we have not these forms, but merely their foundations, which are common to all social modes of production’. [19] Nor does accumulation necessarily indicate the presence of capitalism. 
In economic forms of society of the most different kinds [wrote Marx], there occurs not only simple reproduction, but, in varying degrees, reproduction in a progressively increasing scale. By degrees more is produced and more consumed, and consequently more products have to be converted into means of production. This process, however, does not present itself as accumulation of capital, nor as the function of a capitalist, so long as the labourer’s means of production, and with them, his product and means of subsistence, do not confront him in the shape of capital. [20]
Anyone who wants to apply the term ‘capitalist’, however qualified, to the form of production which prevails in the Soviet Union has therefore to prove that the means of production are ‘capital’ and do so confront the working class. Whether some of the ‘forms’ are similar to those in unquestionably capitalist countries: whether there are wages, surplus value or classes, are secondary matters. From the very first chapter of Capital Marx is concerned with social relations, relations between men, whose real character is hidden and deformed. Thus, under capitalism these relations take the form of the exchange of commodities, with labour power itself a commodity bought in the market by the owners of the means of production, the capitalists. When the means of production acquire the form of capital, that means that they – ‘dead labour’ – have the power to extract a surplus from the living labourers which is appropriated by the owners of the means of production. The capitalists personify this relationship between the means of production and the working class, with nothing to sell but its labour power. The capitalists produce not for their own enjoyment, or to satisfy social needs, but in order that, from the surplus value extracted from the workers, they may accumulate. This they do, not from choice, but from necessity; not to accumulate is to fall behind in the race and eventually to perish. The standstill of accumulation is the decline of capitalism.
To the basic capitalist relationship in production correspond the intricate ‘laws of motion’ of the capitalist mode of production with which Marx was concerned. With this relationship, too, goes the allocation of social power to the class which owns the means of production and appropriates surplus labour: that is, the predominance of the bourgeoisie and the various state forms by which this class preserves its hegemony. Correspondingly, the division of society into classes, determined by ownership or non-ownership as the basic criterion, gives rise to the struggle between classes in which the maintenance or winning of state power is, in the last analysis, at stake.
In the Soviet Union the means of production are not owned by the bureaucracy, they are nationalised, state property. The additions which are made to them from the surplus labour of the direct producers become part of the nationalised property and cannot be appropriated either individually or collectively by the bureaucracy. This inability to appropriate the means of production does not prevent the bureaucrats, as effective controllers of the means of production through their monopoly of political power, from according themselves excessive incomes either for services rendered, at their own valuation, or by illicit means. Yet if the bureaucracy controls the state, it is not avowedly in its own name but as the representative of the proletariat. The distribution of the social product is, in part, arbitrarily determined by those who possess the monopoly of political power. On the other hand the disposal of the surplus product, as part of the social product, is neither under the control of the bureaucracy to do as it likes with nor is it subject to the pressure of accumulation for accumulation’s sake, as under capitalism, bringing into existence more ‘capital’ in the shape of means of production alienated from the workers.
Those who argue that the bureaucracy ‘really’ own the means of production through their control of the state have produced no economic analysis to explain the specific workings of this new exploiting system. Certainly the bureaucracy has great privileges in income, but even the greatest of these differentials can only lead to differences in consumption, whereas the surplus appropriated by capitalists plays a specific role in the whole productive mechanism, constantly consolidating the ‘domination of dead labour over living labour’. The high incomes of the bureaucrats can in no way be used to build up their power over the direct producers. In many ways, the high income of the bureaucrats weakens rather than strengthens the base of their power: by exposing the parasitic role of the bureaucracy and contributing to the corruption and isolation of its members from the workers and peasants, it produces contradictions precisely in that sphere of the political and ideological superstructure where the bureaucracy’s power is rooted. In this way the specific contradictions of the bureaucracy’s rule necessitate the political revolution which began in the 1953 rising in Eastern Germany and in Hungary in 1956.
Nominally the means of production are the property of the whole people. Far from being able to renounce this conquest of the revolution of 1917 and replace it by a frank assertion of supremacy, the ruling stratum is obliged, by propaganda and programme, by education and the distribution of the works of Marx and Engels and Lenin, to conceal itself behind an ideological smokescreen. Even when the variance between the officially proclaimed theory and current practice is most glaring, nevertheless their consistency must be proclaimed or, by some subtle casuistry, an explanation must be offered for popular consumption.
This is not the behaviour of a ruling class. Nor does the individual insecurity of its members which, under Stalin could lead to instant physical elimination, find an easy explanation within the terms of state capitalist theory. More and more, on investigation, and in the light of actual developments since Stalin’s death, does the view of the bureaucracy as a ruling class prove inacceptable. It has no necessary place as such in the circuit of exchange. The source and form of its incomes, leaving aside its illicit predations, however high, are precisely the same as those of the working class as a whole. The pressure of the working class and peasants for increased consumption, as well as the internationally-imposed need to build up and extend the means of production – always outside its ownership – provide objective limits to its distributive share. [21] In those circumstances it is by no means free to use and abuse the means of production in its custody. Certainly the bureaucracy as a whole has to wage a struggle against such abuses getting out of hand on the part of individual members. Collectively it is increasingly sensitive to the fact that its continued political predominance depends upon delivering the goods and concealing its economic privileges. Its continued predominance is not made necessary by a specific form of property. The form of property corresponds already to the hegemony of the proletariat brought about through a social revolution. The bureaucracy was always an historical anomaly; its role was, and remains, parasitic. [22] It cannot back up its political rule by establishing a new form of property, nor does it personify capital, as required by the state capitalist theory. [23]
Of course, all this does not prevent the appearance in the Soviet Union of all sorts of abhorrent practices, but these horrors were tied up from the first with the parasitism of the bureaucracy. They followed precisely from its insecurity, from its anomalous position, from its usurpation, from the contradiction between theory and practice – which, in the special conditions of backward Russia’s isolation in a period of capitalist decline, led to Stalinism. The bureaucracy, like Stalinism, did not spring from nowhere. Both had the same social roots and were interlaced for a whole era. The procedures of Stalinism were inescapable for the bureaucracy in a particular phase of Russian development. When those conditions changed it sought to rationalise those procedures as a way of maintaining its power, confronted as it was by a large, growing and increasingly self-conscious working class which wanted to enter fully into its legacy, the legacy of the October Revolution. For this to become effective there will be no need to change the property relations, which correspond fully to those of a workers’ state. What must go is the usurping political function of the bureaucracy which it exercises, of course, already in the name of the working class. The way to put paid to the political degeneration which led to the rule of the bureaucracy lies in the political revolution which, through workers’ councils and militias, enables the working class to rule in its own right.
The conclusion of this discussion must be that in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe what is called the bureaucracy does not form a new ruling class and that there is not to be found in these countries a new form of exploiting society. Appearances apart, the evidence of history and the conclusions of Marxist sociology are conclusive on these points. Traditional terminology, even that of Marxists, is not always adequate to cope with the infinite variety of living social forms. Certainly what we call ‘the bureaucracy’ comprehends a social layer representing some 10 to 15 per cent of the population, larger in size and more varied in composition than those generally included in the term in orthodox sociology. There is no doubt that many of these people are carrying out functions which would be necessary in a healthy workers’ state. Large sections, however, such as the secret police, or those concerned with industrial discipline, only exist because of the antagonisms which result from the privileged and usurping position of the stratum as a whole. It is this special and anomalous position which, while preventing the bureaucracy from being a class, makes necessary the use of some other term. When Trotsky hit on the term ‘caste’ he was aware that this, too, had its shortcomings:
We frequently call the Soviet bureaucracy a caste, underscoring thereby its shut-in character, its arbitrary rule, and the haughtiness of the ruling stratum which considers that its progenitors issued from the divine lips of Brahma whereas the popular masses originated from the grosser parts of his anatomy. But even this definition does not of course possess a strictly scientific character. Its relative superiority lies in this, that the makeshift character of the term is clear to everybody, since it would enter nobody’s mind to identify the Moscow oligarchy with the Hindu caste of Brahmins. [24]
An important point is that a caste is not defined by its relationship to the means of production; it is not economically necessary but is a product of superstructural forces – ideology, religion, war, conquest. Thus, in these states, the caste-like peculiarities of the bureaucracy arise from the political degeneration of the Stalin era, the isolation of the revolution in a backward country and the precautions which the bureaucracy has taken to preserve its anomalous position and social privileges. It performs no function in the course of production which justifies its de facto monopoly of political power. Its role is not made necessary by the form of property. Its existence is bound up with the preservation of the conquests of a working-class revolution, but is actually in conflict with the property forms. In fact no independent basis for its rule exists; in that respect it is not a class, independent of the working class of which it is, historically, an emanation and from which, in terms of source of income, it is not distinguished. If it absorbs a disproportionate share of the social product that is because it disposes of the social surplus – but still can do no other than deploy most of it in the building up of additional means of production. In doing so, however, it does not create capital or behave as a capitalist class. It cannot alter the nationalised basis of the economy nor is it, as a specially privileged ruling stratum, necessary to it. It is best described, then, as a parasitic excrescence which arose in the course of the process of degeneration which went on in the USSR or, by transference, affected the East European countries. It can be removed by a political revolution which will not only leave intact the social-economic base but will enable the full flowering of the latter to take place. The road to socialism in these countries thus lies through the re-establishment of workers’ power; the Hungarian Commune of 1956, based as it was on workers’ councils, foreshadows the future line of development. Whatever adaptations the bureaucracy may make, it is confronted by an increasingly powerful and self-conscious working class which no attempt at self-reform will satisfy. The political monopoly of the bureaucracy is, indeed, the only basis for its social existence in these countries. The fragile and contingent nature of its rule, which now moves from crisis to crisis as the events since 1953 have demonstrated, removes any possibility that it can consolidate its position and create a new form of class rule. A product of international defeats for the working class and of hardship and penury in the USSR, it cannot survive a period of international working-class advance.
Trotsky, in all his writings on the social character of the Soviet Union, never lost sight of the international and political conditions of the domination and the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Succeeding in the period of exhaustion of the Russian masses, and contributing with its strategy of ‘socialism in one country’ to the international defeats which further isolated and discouraged the Russian workers in the 1920s, the bureaucracy came to stand between the Soviet proletariat and its true role beside the workers of the world in the struggle against imperialism. The basic class antagonisms remain the same: the struggle between the imperialists and the international proletariat, with the Russian workers having made a major breakthrough in 1917, but prevented from playing the necessary role of ally with the workers of the advanced and colonial countries by the political policy of the Stalinist bureaucracy: ‘The bureaucracy upon which Stalin leans is materially bound up with the results of the consummated national revolution, but it has no point of contact with the developing international revolution.’ [25] The combination of the struggles of the large and developed industrial working class in the USSR itself together with the solution of the ‘crisis of leadership’ in the labour movements of the advanced countries, is the death-knell of the bureaucracy. This perspective points clearly to the major responsibility of Marxists in relation to the USSR: defence of the conquests of October, together with implacable struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy in the creation of a Marxist leadership, both in the capitalist countries and in the ‘Soviet bloc’.
IV
Something has already been said about the practical political conclusion which should be expected to follow from the type of theory now under consideration. In the light of events, while adherents of these trends have rejected defence of the Soviet Union, they have not always been able to resist being impressed by the economic, and even by the social, accomplishments of that country. Since they have decided that the bureaucracy is a new ruling class, moreover, it is difficult for them to deny it a valid place in history and thus to ascribe to it these very accomplishments, albeit achieved with the help of exploitation and ruthless oppression. Remarkably enough, therefore, a rapprochement takes place between the open apologists of the bureaucracy and the ‘state capitalists’ (the ‘bureaucratic collectivists’, strongest in the USA, are more consistently anti-Soviet): for both historical necessity and objective laws made Russian development what it was and justify, or legitimise, the rule of the bureaucracy, including at least some of its draconian measures. The position adopted on this question is not free from contradiction and is obscured by the weakness of the ‘state capitalist’ analysis of the post-Stalin developments in the Soviet Union. Thus, in one place, Cliff, writing of the bureaucracy, states: 
Unable to rely on the self-activity of the people, denying all working-class democracy, Khrushchev has to rely on bureaucrats to control other bureaucrats. The hydra of bureaucratic anarchy and its concomitant bureaucratic control, grows on the soil of worker’s alienation from the means of production and exploitation of the labourer. [26] 
But a page or so further on in the same article he says: 
The efforts and self-sacrifice of the people have raised Russia, despite bureaucratic mismanagement and waste, to the position of a great industrial power from being, in terms of industrial output, fourth in Europe and fifth in the world to being first in Europe and second in the world. She has stepped out of her sleepy backwardness to become a modern, powerful, industrially advanced country. The bureaucracy has thus earned as much tribute as Marx and Engels, paid to the bourgeoisie. [My emphasis – TK] [27]
Why, under the conditions of extreme exploitation described in his earlier book Stalinist Russia the people should display such efforts and self-sacrifice is not explained; nor, in a study which lays heavy emphasis on bureaucratic mismanagement and waste, is it clear why he should wish to praise the bureaucracy, if only in the same terms as those used by Marx and Engels of the bourgeoisie. The only feasible explanation seems to be that the ‘state capitalists’ have become impressed by the indices of industrial production and by the scientific and technological achievements to which even the most hostile publicists are now obliged to pay tribute and are trying to integrate as best they can into their scheme of things. Since, according to them, all the conquests of the revolution have been filched away by the new bureaucratic ruling class of state capitalists, inevitably a large share of the credit must go to them – in fact it is but a short step to accepting that they have earned, and deserve, the large incomes and extensive privileges which they indeed enjoy. The implication is already there.
Moreover, if the bureaucracy is responsible for these achievements in state capitalist Russia, where it has expropriated the workers and now exploits them, and if in the advanced capitalist countries the working class has not been able to shake off the ruling class and even displays a certain political apathy, well that may mean that capitalism has the upper hand and will itself be freer to move towards the ‘state capitalist’ model as the result of further defeats of the workers. Such a line of thought can lead, through rejection of the conquests of the revolution of 1917, and acceptance of the inevitability of the defeat of the Russian working class by the new ruling class, to pessimism towards the whole prospect of socialism – unless some sharp and unexpected turn in the situation comes along, like a severe economic crisis or imminent threat of war. At least in the advanced countries the ‘state capitalists’ do not see very much hope for independent working-class action, although they talk about ‘autonomous and conscious action of the working masses’ free from control of party organisation and discipline. Indeed for some of its adherents all leadership is now rejected in a way which has become a positive obsession removed not only from Marxism but from all practical possibility of effective intervention in the labour movement as it is today except as an element of confusion and division. One such ‘theoretician’, for example, even finds the ‘effective essence of class relationship in production’ in ‘the antagonistic division of those participating in production into two fixed and stable categories: those who give the orders and those who execute them’. 
The socialist revolution sets out [he continues] from the very beginning to eliminate the distinction between directors and executors as fixed and stable categories in production as well as in all other fields of collective life; because it is in this distinction that the division of societies into classes takes concrete form. [My emphasis – TK] [28] 
Although even Socialisme ou Barbarie has not been able to refrain from some form of organisation to propagate its ideas, it emphasises that: ‘The organisation does not aim to lead the class and to impose itself on it, but will be an instrument of its struggle.’ [29] Why a presumably spontaneous struggle should require any organisation at all is not explained, nor what happens if the struggle employs methods, or seeks ends which are not those of the organisation which wishes to be its instrument. But Marxists must seek to win leadership and to wrest it from the hands of the Social Democratic and Stalinist bureaucracies in whose hands it now resides, which can only be effected through organisation.
The logic of the state capitalist position is drawn clearly enough by Socialisme ou Barbarie, less explicitly, perhaps, by its counterparts in Britain. Amongst other things it must be to oppose those who do seek to lead the working class and to unseat the existing leadership with cries about bureaucracy, substitutionism, dictatorship and so on. Meantime it means in practice knuckling down to the existing leaders, while waiting for the working class to get moving spontaneously, without benefit of organisation. Hence the explanation of some of the curious combinations, alliances and manoeuvres which have taken place in recent years inside the Labour Party and the Young Socialists. No doubt many of these people have been acting in good faith: nonetheless they have been following out to its logical and disastrous end a wrong theory which has taken many out of the labour movement altogether. If for no other reason the theories of ‘state capitalism’ and ‘bureaucratic collectivism’ must be understood, combatted and exposed.
V
The appearance of varied theories of the Soviet Union as a new form of capitalist, or exploiting, society couched in purportedly Marxist terms represents a running away from the real issues presented by Stalinism and its aftermath, generally under the pressure of public opinion in the capitalist countries. That they can win some support from people who genuinely desire to be Marxists is, at the same time, partly the result of the abysmal theoretical level of Communist Party writing on the Soviet Union and the sheer lack of renewal in Marxist thinking in circles influenced by it. In this and other articles we try to fill this vacuum and contribute to the theoretical arming of the genuine Marxist movement. It would be stupid, however, to adopt a too facile attitude to those who are led astray by theories like those of ‘state capitalism’ or ‘bureaucratic collectivism’. [30] Not only do these raise real problems – often echoing bourgeois sociology – which require to be dealt with, but, as Trotsky’s lengthy and patient rebuttals of such theories show, doing so is a real political task – a task not simply of hitting out, but of winning over those confused by such ideas. Some discussions of these theories by self-styled Trotskyists or Marxists show a desire to find a simple answer, or are simply unwilling to take up the real points raised by their adherents. We intend, in subsequent articles, to deal more fully with some of the problems involved in the analysis of modern advanced societies which have a bearing on this controversy.
Notes
1. Burnham wrote his book The Managerial Revolution after his departure from the American Socialist Workers Party following a lengthy factional discussion in 1939-40 over the nature of the USSR. It was, in the main, a working out, even to the point of absurdity, of themes which had been prominent in this discussion. The principal ideas had already found expression in writings by Laurat, Hilferding and Bruno Rizzi (the latter in a work entitled La Bureaucratisation du Monde). Whether or not Burnham was directly inspired by Rizzi has been the cause of some controversy. See Le Contrat Social, November 1958, January and March 1959, Arguments, no 17 and no 20 with communications from Naville, Hal Draper, Rizzi himself and others. Shachtman was co-leader of the SWP minority and developed, in the magazine The New International, the theory of ‘bureaucratic collectivism’. Socialisme ou Barbarie has been published in Paris since 1949. The fullest statement of its own ‘state capitalist’ theory is in no 2, ‘Les rapports de production en Russie’ by P Chaulieu. Tony Cliff is the only consequential theorist of the ‘state capitalist’ tendency in Britain. His book Stalinist Russia appeared in 1955 [available at M.I.A.]; the implications of the theory appear in the pages of the magazine International Socialism. Djilas, former Yugoslav partisan leader and minister, developed a ‘state capitalist’ theory to explain Soviet society in the period after the break between Stalin and Tito. When he extended it to Yugoslavia as well he soon found himself in gaol. His book The New Class, theoretically inferior to the former works, nevertheless became a best-seller. See my discussion in Labour Review, Volume 3, no 3, 1958. Bordiga seems to have found no disciples in Britain, but his tendency continues to exist in Italy and France (where it publishes Le Programme Communiste). The ‘Johnson-Forrest’ tendency in the USA developed a rather incoherent ‘state capitalist’ theory, an exposition of which, State Capitalism and World Revolution, was published in Britain in 1956. More ‘academic’ versions of the same or similar trends of thinking are represented by Wittfogel, Seton-Watson, etc (see D Bell, ‘Ten Theories in Search of Soviet Reality’, World Politics, April 1958).
2. ‘The concrete development of the Russian economy under bureaucratic domination differs in no way, as far as its general orientation is concerned, from that of a capitalist country... the essential objectives and the fundamental means (the exploitation of the workers) are identical with those of capitalist economies.’ (Socialisme ou Barbarie, no 2, p 20, my emphasis – TK)
3. Socialisme ou Barbarie, no 2.
4. For example, R de Jouvenel, ‘Some Fundamental Similarities Between the Soviet and Capitalist Economic Systems’, The Soviet Economy (Congress for Cultural Freedom, 1956).
5. L Coser and I Howe, editors of the American review Dissent, a haven for ex-radicals of varied hues, in Voices of Dissent, p 98. They were members of, or sympathetic towards, the Shachtman group of ‘bureaucratic collectivists’.
6. See LD Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism. [Available at M.I.A.]
7. The Revolution Betrayed, p 255. [Available at M.I.A.] This comes at the end of an almost page-long definition of the transitional nature of the Soviet Union. ‘Doctrinaires’, Trotsky added, prophetically, ‘will doubtless not be satisfied with this hypothetical definition. They would like categorical formulae: yes-yes, and no-no. Sociological problems would certainly be simpler, if social phenomena always had a finished character.’
8. The Revolution Betrayed, p 249. [Available at M.I.A.] See also ‘The USSR in War’, In Defence of Marxism. [Available at M.I.A.]
9. In Survey, no 41, April 1962, p 106: ‘Having insisted that Russia remained a workers’ state because the rule of the bourgeoisie had not been restored and nationalised property still prevailed, he – Trotsky – now conceded that the workers’ state could be utterly destroyed even if the bourgeoisie did not come to power and even if property remained nationalised.’ [Available at M.I.A.] Note that Trotsky was speaking about Russia as a degenerated workers’ state and traced out the processes of that degeneration. To concede the theoretical possibility, which Shachtman takes to be a change in Trotsky’s thinking, is one thing; to establish its actuality is another. For what this would imply see the text of this article.
10. Urbahns, a German Communist leader, adopted a state capitalist position after breaking with the Comintern. Trotsky’s polemic against him, first published as The Soviet Union and the Fourth International, but subsequently as The Class Nature of the Soviet State, dates from 1933, at a time when Shachtman had not yet discovered his differences. [Available at M.I.A.] Trotsky then wrote: ‘The bureaucracy is not a ruling class. But the further development of the bureaucratic regime can lead to the inception of a new ruling class: not organically through degeneration, but through counter-revolution.’ Such a counter-revolution has not, in the intervening period, been in the bureaucracy’s power to make; its defensive position in Soviet society has been increasingly evident since the death of Stalin in 1953.
11. Burnham claimed the support of the discoveries of modern bourgeois sociology for his view of the new ‘managerial society’. Michels and others argue that administrative power as such gives rise to undemocratic and privileged rule, and since administration will always be required there will always be class divisions and class power. One of the assumptions behind this is the lack of initiative and interest on the part of the vast mass of mankind, who remain incompetent to take on the responsibility of rule. They, and Burnham along with them (see his book The Machiavellians) [available here scribd.com – MIA ], fail to see that this characteristic which they claim to see in the masses is itself a product of the separation of mental and manual labour and the monopoly of education and culture in the class societies they know. Their own position in these societies prevents them from understanding the real initiative and ability of the masses. Some historical accounting by the founder of the ‘managerial revolution’ theory would not be out of place. In 1940 Burnham saw all the advanced countries and particularly the USSR as examples of the triumph or impending triumph of the managerial ‘class’. But in which of these countries has the managerial ‘class’ been able to consolidate its rule as the leader of the new social order? German ‘national socialism’ is in ruins; the Soviet bureaucracy is experiencing a prolonged and bitter crisis because it stands in contradiction to the nationalised property forms; victories against the ‘old’ capitalism? (See Pierre Naville, in Arguments, no 17.)
12. In Defence of Marxism, p 122. [Available at M.I.A.]
13. Shachtman’s ‘Independent Socialist League’, formerly ‘The Workers Party’, ingloriously dissolved itself in 1958 and its members entered the SP-SDF. Its final statement stated: ‘We do not subscribe to any creed known as Trotskyism or defined as such... We are strongly in favour of a broad party with full party democracy for all, which does not demand creedal conformity on all questions, etc...’ The sudden demise of the journal The New International was a shock to the ‘state capitalists’ in Britain who had cooperated closely with it for some years.
14. Survey, no 41, p 104. [Available at M.I.A.]
15. One may instance the discussions in the Italian Communist Party which, while aware of the incompatibility of the Khrushchev ‘explanations’ of the ‘personality cult’ with historical materialism, have not dared to go much further than to state this fact, and which have now been reined in by Togliatti in any case. As an example of theoretical banality we may quote from the book Inside the Khrushchev Era by G Boffa, L'Unità correspondent in Moscow, which has enjoyed some vogue in Europe among fellow-travellers for its ‘admissions’, now part of the new apologetics – the starry-eyed, Dean of Canterbury type being vieux jeu. Daringly raising the question – ‘The social democrats, the Trotskyists, and later the Yugoslavs spoke of a “new class” emerging from the so-called “Stalinist bureaucracy"’ – he goes on to provide ‘the answer’: ‘This concept of new class is completely invalid. At no time was the bureaucracy able to change the relations of production in its own favour. It never even approached this area. Not one of the fundamental principles of socialism was ever undermined [sic]. Bureaucratic elements do tend to separate out and form distinct strata, detached and isolated from the people – this is the nature of bureaucracy, its outstanding characteristic. But such a tendency does not strengthen bureaucracy. Instead it brings it into open conflict with Soviet society.’ The feebleness of this argument requires no demonstration. It is interesting, that Boffa, like all the orthodox, deliberately confuses the use of the term ‘bureaucracy’ as applied to a distinct social layer – whose existence is denied – with that of certain administrative vices, red tape, etc, which causes accidental divisions between some functionaries and the public at large.
16. Lenin, ‘A Great Beginning: The Heroism of the Workers in the Rear. On Communist Subbotniks’, Selected Works, Volume 9, p 432. [Collected Works, Volume 29, available at < https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1919/jun/19.htm">M.I.A.]
17. Trotsky, The Class Nature of the Soviet State. [Available at M.I.A.]
18. K Marx, Capital, Volume 3, p 1021 (Kerr edition); p 853 (FLPH edition). [Available at M.I.A.]
19. K Marx, Capital, Volume 3, p 1022 (Kerr edition); p 854 (FLPH edition). [Available at M.I.A.]
20. Capital, Volume 1, pp 609-10 (Allen & Unwin edition). [Available at < https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch24.htm">M.I.A.]
21. Any such objective limits are denied by P Chaulieu, ‘Les rapports de production en Russie’, Socialisme ou Barbarie, no 2.
22. As Trotsky puts it, ‘in so far as the bureaucracy robs the people (and this is done in various ways by every bureaucracy) we have to deal not with class exploitation in the scientific sense of the word, but with social parasitism although on a very large scale’ (The Class Nature of the Soviet State, Ceylon edition, p 13). [Available at M.I.A.]
23. Needless to add, the formulations of the official sophists, as expressed, for example, in The Political Economy Textbook, which claim to have ‘abolished the antagonistic contradiction between accumulation and consumption’ (p 549) because the means of production are ‘at the disposal of society for further production, serve the interest of the whole people and cannot provide the basis for exploitation’ (p 512), have no scientific value. They merely provide the verbal smokescreen behind which the bureaucracy maintains its usurpation.
24. In Defence of Marxism, p 6. [Available at M.I.A.]
25. LD Trotsky, The Workers’ State and the Question of Thermidor (1935), Socialist Labour League pamphlet. [Available at M.I.A.]
26. International Socialism, no 1, Summer 1958, p 45. [Available at M.I.A.]
27. International Socialism, no 1, Summer 1958, p 52. [Available at M.I.A.]
28. P Cardan, ‘Declarations of Principles of Socialisme ou Barbarie’, The Review of the Imre Nagy Institute, no 6.
29. Statement on back cover of Socialisme ou Barbarie, no 33, 1962.
30. For example, the treatment by Ernest Mandel in Traite d'Economie Marxiste, Volume 2, Chapter XV would hardly disturb any adherents of these theories. He merely asserts: ‘Contrary to what is affirmed by numerous sociologists who claim to utilise the Marxist method of analysis, the Soviet economy does not display any of the fundamental aspects of capitalist economy.’ His main proof rests on the view that the accumulation of means of production is an accumulation of use values, that there is no profit and no anarchy of the market and that there is no bourgeoisie. According to him the adherents of the state capitalist theory are right when they say that the norms of distribution remain bourgeois and the adherents of the bureaucratic collectivist theory are right when they deny the capitalist character of Soviet production. Trying to keep purely within economic categories he says: ‘In fact, the Soviet economy is characterised by the contradictory combination of a non-capitalist mode of production and a mode of distribution which is still fundamentally bourgeois.’ This is most inadequate and is no real answer to the theories of which he claims to have disposed. Pierre Frank, on the other hand, in his preface to the recent reprint of the French translation of The Revolution Betrayed, argues that such theories all have their starting point ‘in the strengthening of the extraordinary weight of the state in the whole of social life’. He draws attention to the increased importance of the ‘new middle classes’. But apart from discussing various hypotheses, it must be said that he does not squarely meet the arguments of those whom he assumes that he has disposed of. See also W Edwards, ‘The Soviet Union, What It Is, Where It Is Going’, Bulletin of Marxist Studies, no 2, 1958.
 


Tom Kemp Archive




1




W.W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth, Cambridge University Press, 21s
IT is notorious that, in present-day capitalist society, there is a never-ending quest for a satisfactory ideology to take the place of the discredited dogmas of the past and meet the challenge of Marxism. A terrible intellectual void is discernible among those educated managers, administrators, technicians and publicists who have placed their talents in its keeping for a due share of the good things of life, accompanied by chronic anxiety. The void is filled, in one way or another. From their ranks come many a fluent pen and plausible doctrinaire purveying mysticism for the soul-sick and so on through to sheer cynicism for the hard-headed. But something more is needed than fashionable evangelists and story-writers. There is a demand for some solid explanation of economic and social development which does not challenge the assumptions and values of capitalism. Something comparable, in fact, to the comforting bourgeois doctrines of ‘progress’ which were blown sky-high in the twentieth century. WW Rostow, who has already achieved prominence as an economic historian [1], now comes forward to provide what purports to be at once a coherent answer to Marxism and a comforting philosophy of history for the adherents of capitalism.
Rostow proclaimed, indeed, that he was going to provide ‘an alternative to the Marxist interpretation of modern history’ and ‘challenge Marxism’. What he said in the lecture halls echoed into the City of London and was given the unusual amplification of publication, in advance of appearance in book form, by the widely-read business organ The Economist with the subtitle A Non-Communist Manifesto. [2] It would thus reach an important stratum of the salaried servants of capitalism whose conviction about the necessity of what is  would thus be reinforced. At the same time Rostow’s thesis would be thrown out more widely, to be discussed among, and perhaps to influence, those students and intellectuals especially concerned with economics and the social sciences.
At first sight, then, it might seem surprising that Rostow is so seriously concerned with the refutation of a doctrine which is hardly likely to have made many inroads into the first category of readers. But it is not really so strange. It was at one time generally assumed by the orthodox that The Communist Manifesto had been buried along with all the other economic and historical errors of Marx and Engels. Now, however, much time and energy is devoted to the refutation of Marxism, a testimony to its power and to the failure of its enemies to deal with it intellectually. Once it was enough to pretend that Marxism did not exist; now the challenge can no longer be evaded, but has to be dealt with in deadly earnest. More: other theories, especially theories of history, have to be defined in relation to Marxism, and this is Rostow’s concern. It is not that he is speaking to an audience infected with the virus and is trying to cure them: few could have read much of Marx at first hand. It is simply that Marxism provides a fixed point of reference: it has endured among the changing fads and fashions of the intellectual world and the host of other interpretations which have come and gone. Rostow, by implication, thus pays Marxism an immense tribute. He does not consider any other historical position – there is only his own, and Marx’s. Let us see how he deals with Marx, what his alternative is worth – for The Economist describes it as ‘one of the most stimulating contributions made to economic and political thought since the war’ – and to what practical conclusions it leads.
It cannot be said that as a refuter of Marx Rostow adds much to the long list of his predecessors in the way of distortion and bad faith. One suspects that his study of the works of Marx and Engels has been neither so protracted nor so meticulous as his confident assertions lead one to believe. In any case, his understanding of their meaning is certainly defective. Whenever possible he identifies Marxism with the parody of it which provides the Soviet rulers with an ideology; and ‘communism’ he takes as the Soviet system of today. This leads to some statements which are quite fantastic in terms of classical Marxism. [3] Indeed, his own theories, as we shall see, share with Stalinism a determinism which leaves little room for the creative activities of flesh-and-blood men and women. Frequently he merely trades on his ‘reputation’ and simply employs the method of counter-assertion instead of demolishing the Marxist case: enouncing what he believes without argument or proof. At other times he copies Marx, that is, he makes statements which are basically the same as those which Marx, or Marxists, would make (which may arise from ignorance), or admits ‘broad similarities’ between his system and Marx’s. Indeed, he leaves himself plenty of escape routes; clarity of statement is not one of his virtues, he prefers a certain fuzziness of language and the insertion of an imprecise qualification. Marx, he tells us, was ‘a lonely man, profoundly isolated from his fellows’ – a statement which was simply not biographically true in any sense.
 
The Stages of Economic Development
There is no doubt, however, that as an anti-Marxist advocate Rostow is a difficult customer. He knows when and what to distort. He also knows (although perhaps again it is ignorance) which parts of the Marxist challenge to ignore. But it is in his own positive alternative that he shows, inadvertently, his evasion of the main questions which Marxists pose in the historical field.
From the beginning of his exposition Rostow is in fact in retreat, or taking evasive action. Returning to the attempt to delineate ‘stages’ of economic development which had been abandoned by the empiricists, Rostow appears to believe that he has found a new criterion which supersedes the Marxist sequence of social formations as found in The Communist Manifesto, Anti-Dühring and elsewhere. But he does not face up to and provide cogent reasons for rejecting the Marxist division. He is content to admit that ‘there are some broad similarities between the Marxist sequence and the stages of growth analysis’ – the description he applies to his own pattern. This pattern is devised independently of social relations, in terms of the level of growth, output per head, that is, a purely quantitative measure.
In the course of his discussion, however, it is soon evident that the ‘broad similarities’, where they exist, merely smuggle back into the picture the key role of the social relations governing production. His own division is as follows:

The traditional society
 
The transitional society
 
The ‘take off’
 
The maturing society
 
The society of high consumption.

These are the stages through which all societies are supposed to pass. The advanced countries are at present in the fifth stage, the rest of the world in the four previous stages, but most of it already out, or on its way out, of the first.
What is this ‘traditional society’ with low productivity and a slow rate of growth? It is evidently what Marxists know as ‘feudalism’. Rostow himself describes it as a society with ‘a hierarchical social structure with little scope for vertical mobility – with wealth and power concentrated in the hands of those who controlled land rents’, namely the feudal nobility. This was, in fact, the key to this stage. Such a society, indeed, already marked a considerable advance in productivity over more primitive societies. It had a settled agriculture, a complex social structure and a social division of labour which permitted, besides the existence of a luxury-loving ruling hierarchy, a considerable flowering of human culture – all at the expense of the dependent cultivators from whom a surplus was extracted with the help of what Marx called ‘extra-economic coercion’.
In discussing the Marxist view of human development Engels pointed out that: 
A surplus of the product of labour over and above the costs of maintenance of the labour, and the formation and enlargement out of this surplus, of social production and a reserve fund, was, and is, the basis of all social, political and intellectual progress. In history, up to the present, this fund has been in the possession of a privileged class, on which also devolved, along with this possession, political supremacy and intellectual leadership. [4]
This is a useful point of reference, not only for dissecting ‘the traditional society’, or feudalism, but for testing Rostow’s subsequent stages of growth. Not just the level of production, or even the rate of growth, but how the surplus was produced and who secured it – these were the fundamental questions, upon which, in the last analysis, the rate of growth and the level of productivity depended . What Rostow does is to define his stages in terms of the dependent variations – output and consumption – and not the determinants, to confuse changes in quantity with changes in quality.
When seeking the main reason for the slow growth of the traditional society Rostow has to admit that the barrier to change was the feudal ruling class itself. Only when the nobility was displaced by what Rostow, to avoid that embarrassing term ‘class’, chooses to call ‘a new leading Élite’, were the barriers to change overcome. [5] The feudal nobility, in effect, scooped up the surplus and put it to non-productive purposes. Only as part of this surplus was acquired by the bourgeoisie did new relations of production, which were eventually to disintegrate the old society, take form. It was the members of this class who directed income into ‘roads and railways, schools and factories, rather than country houses and servants, personal ornaments and temples’. Yes, here were the rational utilitarians who valued men ‘for their individual ability to perform specialised functions’ and were able to enlist science in the widening and transformation of the environment and the methods of production.
The driving force of this class was the rational pursuit of acquisition carried on in particular circumstances in which ‘competition makes the immanent laws of capitalist production to be felt by each individual capitalist, as external coercive laws’. [6] Capitalist relations introduced a new dynamic factor into the economy: the pressure to accumulate in order to invest for the purpose of increasing the scale of production and reducing unit costs. In order to retain and increase their share of the social surplus the bourgeoisie revolutionised the productive forces, thus fulfilling its ‘historical mission’, succinctly described by Marx as ‘the ruthless development in geometrical progression, of the productivity of human labour’. [7] The continued working out of this process right down to the period where the ability of the bourgeoisie to fulfil this mission reaches limits inherent in the system itself, and which sees it swept aside in a significant area of the globe, spans the remainder of Rostow’s stages.
The ‘transitional society’ is none other than the passage from feudalism to capitalism, the remaining stages are, at the most, only one way of dividing up the subsequent history of capitalism. When Rostow speaks of the requirement for growth being a ‘rise in the rate of investment and the stock of capital per head’, he has, in fact, made the whole process a mechanistic one by abstracting from the social relations in which it occurred.
In fact, the process of accumulation involved the extraction of surplus value from a property-less class of wage-earners and its realisation on the market, as it still does in capitalist society. But this takes place in a changing and complex social setting; in Capital, to give precision to his economic concepts and formulations, Marx frequently abstracts from these surrounding conditions. But he makes it plain that he is abstracting and does not confuse reality with his theoretical model (which is more than can be said of many economists today). He was quite explicit that theoretical conclusions had to be tested by close investigation and by practice. The pure capitalist relation between wage labourers and the owners of the means of production has to be inserted in a society which, for example, would contain carry-overs from other systems, remnants of the classes which went with them (the landlords could adapt themselves very well to capitalism). The system also provokes a self-defensive response on the part of the workers which modifies the operation of the laws of the system. [8] Marx stated quite plainly, too, that the same ‘economic base’ may show ‘infinite variations and gradations in its appearance, even though its principal conditions are everywhere the same. This is due to innumerable outside circumstances, natural environment, race peculiarities, outside historical influences and so forth, all of which must be ascertained by careful analysis.’ [9]
 
Marxism and Determinism
If the economic base could show ‘infinite variations’ all the more so could the ‘superstructure’. To present the Marxist interpretation as a simple economic determinism, as Rostow does, in which the base directly determined the nature of the superstructure or in which men are assumed to follow their own self-interest single-mindedly is simply an inexcusable distortion. Perhaps there are a few formulations which could be taken out of context to support such a view for polemical purposes. It appears that Rostow knows quite well that these did not represent Marx’s view of historical materialism. It is with patronising dishonesty that he permits himself the statement ‘there are a few passages in Marx – and more in Engels – which reveal a perception that human behaviour is affected by motives and objectives which need not be related to or converge with economic self-interest’. [10]
This is presumably a reference to some of the passages in later works and correspondence in which Marx and Engels developed and refined certain of their concepts and dissociated themselves from some of the over-simplifications of their disciples. But nowhere did they assume, except within the terms of abstract economic-model-making, that real human behaviour could be understood as the pursuit of individual self-interest. A fair-minded perusal of Marx’s writings should be sufficient to expose any such interpretation. [11] Of course Marx’s prime intention was not to investigate motives. In Rostow’s account we find an inconsistent assemblage of various theories and assumptions about human behaviour. He wants to dissociate himself from what he wrongly assumes is Marxism by his stress on the fact that capitalists are not only out to make money, but are also inspired by ‘power, adventure, challenge and prestige’. At the same time, the main lines of his theory of development are the outcome of a quasi-automatic process, ‘compound interest’, which hardly appears to require human intervention. Even his sponsors of The Economist cannot refrain from the remark that ‘he may seem to claim to have invented a diabolical law of perpetual historical motion, and embodied it in a steam-roller’. [12]
How can Rostow explain that ‘economic change has social and political effects’, without analysing the material conditions and social and class relations in which men live? He draws rigid lines between the ‘economic’ and the ‘non-economic’. He swamps all references to that central theme of The Communist Manifesto, the class struggle, in his newly-branded ‘stages of growth’. Yet, to take a simple example, the behaviour of businessmen in the twentieth century has an historical, social root and could only become acceptable after a long period of bourgeois dominance. It is quite different from that of a feudal lord or a Chinese mandarin, because the material environment is different, and because of the specific class relations of capitalist society. The very motives other than the search for profits of which Rostow speaks are also the product of bourgeois dominance, and take their special form from the social environment.
‘I paint the capitalist and the landlord in no couleur de rose’, wrote Marx in the Preface to Capital, ‘here individuals are dealt with only insofar as they are the personifications of economic categories… My standpoint can less than any other make the individual responsible for relations of production whose creature he socially remains.’ [13]
The self-expansion of capital, accumulation for accumulation’s sake, is part of the system; as he personifies Capital, a particular set of production relations, the capitalist, as long as he remains such, has to accord with its demands. Rostow asks, as though he had discovered something profoundly important, ‘how can one explain the ardent striving of men [he means capitalists – T.K.] long after they have made more money than they or their children could conceivably use?’ [14] Yes, instinctively, when he asks what they have done he first answers in terms of making money. But his own reply to the question, given in advance, was that ‘the game of expansion and money-making was rewarding in terms of the full range of human motives’. Precisely the same thing might be said of the gambler or even of the criminal. In fact, the capitalists who go on piling up money do so, on the one hand, because they have come to personify capital as a result of their place in the relations of production; as long as the system is in a phase of expansion and they are in a good line they can do no other. On the other hand, the explanations can run from the none-too-pleasing assumptions of same psychologists (money = excrement) to… Rostow’s own. But, without the laws of capitalism these explanations have no interest because it would be impossible to go on piling up money, anyway!
Of course Marxists do not deny that businessmen are other things besides personifications of the capitalist process of accumulation and exploitation, that they seek all manner of gratifications, create favourable images of themselves and genuinely believe them. Nor do they assume that the only active moulders of history were those directly owning the means of production and operating them in the bourgeois epoch. The bourgeoisie is, and always was, a structured class, not one composed entirely of capitalists. It was bound to ally with others when it gathered strength within the womb of feudalism. It contained, besides industrialists, merchants and financiers, the officials (although not always), the professional men, the literary and scientific intelligentsia, part of the clergy as well as landowners and farmers (some of them). What gave this class its common measure was that it derived its income from the surplus value of those having nothing but their labour power to sell; and with that went, though not automatically, a consciousness of common interests as men of property, of ‘standing’ and ‘respectability’. However, some members of this class were, at the same time, able to attain to a certain autonomy in relation to the economic system and to influence it in one way or another. [15] Some tried to reduce its inhumanity. Others contrived to speed up its development or to guide it into one direction rather than another. Marxists do not overlook this phenomenon and those responsible for it, but they do trace the social roots of what such men do and the impact of their actions. They see them in relation to the position of the whole class and, particularly, of the class struggle; of the nature of the state; of the role of ideology.
This is not the place for a systematic exposition of historical materialism, but sufficient has perhaps been said to expose Rostow’s parody of it. As for his alternative ‘interpretation’, despite his display of specialist virtuosity and his ambitious claims for it, he fails to provide adequate criteria for the distinguishing of his stages – smudging over significant changes and creating distinctions of no more than secondary importance.
To substantiate this judgement in detail would inevitably take up as much space as the original articles so that all that can be offered here is a selection of points. Thus if we return to his second stage, ‘the transitional stage’, we find that, despite himself, he has to mention the changes which the Marxist would highlight, though he buries them in a discussion of results rather than causes. He has to indicate that this is a period in which capital is being accumulated and concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie (though he does not use the term), but he does not dwell on the accompanying dispossession and proletarianisation of the direct producers.  [16] As Marxists see it, this is the central feature of what is, in fact, the early process of capitalist penetration into industry and agriculture. In the course of this, labour-power itself becomes a commodity in one sector after another, though largely without any technological revolution in the instruments of production; this is the phase of capitalist-organised manufacture. [17] There is, as Rostow says, ‘much variety in the sectors which have played the key role in the take-off process’. By this he means that in one place cotton, in another iron, in another timber took the lead in industrialisation. [18] The decisive point, which has to be ignored to fit in with his scheme, is that those sectors which took the lead and grew rapidly did so primarily because they had become subject to a new dynamic: the laws of capitalist production.
 
Industrial Capital and the Nation-State
Capitalism was already well established before what Rostow designates as the ‘take off’, the early period of industrialisation, after which ‘economic growth becomes more or less automatic’, could take place. The essential force behind the upsurge of industry was quite simply the massive extension to it of capitalist relations. This acceleration of growth was associated with new and more productive techniques developed in response to the incentives provided by expanding markets and rising profits and the existence of a proletariat. While Rostow keeps this in the background he readily ranges over a wide field to illustrate what might be summed up as the point that no two ‘take offs’ were alike. This is neither surprising nor original.
For Marxists, differences in the timing and tempo of capitalist development on a world historical scale are interpreted not by formal comparison but dialectically. The international nature of capitalism is important to stress, especially because Rostow tends to neglect the necessary links which bound the various capitalist states to the world market. [19] Already the burgeoning of capitalism in Western Europe would not have been possible without the widening horizons of the known world brought about by the opening up of new routes to other continents. The pioneer industrialisation of England was closely bound up with the strategic position of English trade and shipping in overseas markets, including the seizure of colonies. The slave trade and the plunder of India considerably furthered the accumulation of capital, part of which flowed into the new capitalist factories and mills. Certainly the formation of English industrial capitalism was a world process which had its repercussions from Virginia to Calcutta, from China to Peru. English capitalists virtually dragged a world market into being, ground out ‘primitive accumulation’ from the slave trade and the toil of African slaves; they uprooted peasants from the English counties, and subjected the market to their own needs for an entire epoch. Indeed, without the subjection of an expanding world market to its requirements, economic growth in England could not have gone on at a cumulative rate. There is, in fact, nothing automatic about compound interest: it has to come from somewhere; for England at this time her world trade and colonial monopoly had not a little to do with it.
Moreover, once industry was established in one part of the world, other countries were affected by it and could, under certain conditions, take it over and assimilate it into their own economic structures. Consequently no subsequent industrialising process repeated exactly that of the pioneer country where it had taken place, so to speak, organically. Not only were features of the most advanced technology and organisation grafted on to societies which were otherwise ‘backward’, but these countries stood in an entirely different relationship to the world market to that of England at a corresponding stage of development. Not only did the existence of this world market lead to the subjugation of some countries to those of the colonising powers, but those nations newly industrialising took advantage of the possibilities of participation in the world division of labour which it offered. [20] Capitalism in one country could not exist, and competition in the world market was an inevitable extension to the global scene of what happened between capitalists inside each country.
It may be noted here, too, that the countries which industrialised after England frequently did so as part of a more or less conscious effort with assistance from the state. In its time, the state had been closely associated with the rise of capitalism in Britain, but the actual industrialisation which began in the second half of the eighteenth century was carried through primarily by individual entrepreneurs responding to the laws of the market. In Prussia, Russia, Japan and other countries state officials played a prominent or even decisive role in promoting industrialisation. Without the model of England and the existence of the world market their efforts, like those of forerunners in the eighteenth century, would have been doomed to failure. In the nineteenth century it was different: the state could, and did, play an active role. [21] But what it did, even in Japan, was to give an artificial boost to capitalist development, not to create a new and distinct form of economy. This was done in a variety of ways, by sweeping away restrictions on enterprise, granting tariffs and subsidies, encouraging invention, raising capital, even setting up and running key industries – in short, by providing favourable conditions for the development of capitalism.
Rostow talks about the state as though it were always an independent force over and above the social and class structure. Indeed, he goes to extremes in the autonomous role which he grants to political and ideological forces in economic development. He states that: ‘As a matter of historical fact, xenophobic nationalism has been the most important force in the transition from traditional to modern society – vastly more important than the profit motive.’ [22] ‘The historical fact’ is no more than the interpretation of some selected facts by Rostow; the confident assertion is not backed up by sustained argument. There is, indeed, some retreat, when he states that ‘xenophobic nationalism has not, of course, been the only force at work’. It is typical of his method that he never gets down to assessing its precise role. Like the state, xenophobic nationalism seems to hang in the air, to be ‘disembodied’ (to use one of his own terms). Historically nationalism inheres in particular social groups for specific reasons: it does not descend from the skies to refute the materialist conception of history. Nationalism and the nation-state arose in close association with emerging capitalism; their special historical achievement was to create the political form within which the capitalist mode of production became dominant. It is true that there was not always and invariably such an association, nor would it be argued that nationalism was only the expression of the political interests of the bourgeoisie. State-building, especially in its earlier stages, was undertaken by dynastic monarchs in struggle against feudal prerogatives and decentralising elements. Where they failed to link up with a progressive bourgeoisie (for example, Frederick the Great and Joseph II in the eighteenth century) the ‘traditional society’ of Rostow’s terminology remained in being. Capitalists have not invariably been nationalist in their profession; at times they have leaned towards an ostensible cosmopolitanism, as in the Free Trade movement in England in the mid-nineteenth century. Even in the latter case the following of the movement was attracted by material interests, especially the possibility of getting access to foreign markets.
From an abstract ‘rational’ standpoint the material gains from a more effective utilisation of the international division of labour through cooperation would have been greater than the actual contest for the market between states. But capitalism, the bourgeoisie, needed the national state in its struggle against feudalism. As the states-system of the modern world evolved, frontiers, boundaries, customs barriers, national tax, wage and price differences became relevant economic facts. Material interests and nationalism remained closely intertwined, and as capitalism developed its history was marked by wars for the creation of national states and wars between states.
Did these wars have economic roots? What of the Marxist-Leninist theory of imperialism? When Rostow considers these questions we can forecast his response. Wars are the result of faulty ‘choice’, a preference for unproductive political over productive economic objectives. There was, in his estimation, no economic basis for imperialism, which he identifies with political annexations in which the flag followed trade – unnecessarily and irrationally – for reasons of prestige and the pursuit of power. Thus he asserts that: ‘Nothing justified much ado about colonies on strict economic grounds from (say) 1873 to 1914; but the competition went on because colonies were accepted symbols of status.’ Colonies were not acquired only because of an actual or supposed economic value: that is obvious enough from a cursory survey of history. What was characteristic of this period, however, was that powerful forces inside the main capitalist countries were seeking wider and more certain markets, assured supplies of raw materials, new investment fields, as well as strategic positions whose value, if they had any, derived from the international nature of the contest.
The theory of imperialism assumes that capitalism was embodied in nation-states, that a contradiction arose between the development of the productive forces within each state and the extent of its market and resources, and that the drive for colonies represented the search for an escape from this dilemma. That the active participants in and proponents of imperialist expansion responded to other immediate stimuli and that these economic drives were cloaked in the ideological trappings of political nationalism, racialism and the ‘white man’s burden’ was only to be expected. Rostow’s assertion assumes that economic forces as powerful as those generated by modern industry were somehow tamed and kept in tow by the flag-waving and platform rhetoric of politicians and propagandists.
 
Capitalism of a New Type?
Marxists see the struggles of rival imperialist powers in a shrinking world as the source of the world wars of our century. Rostow finds that ‘as far as they have an economic base ... it lies in the contours of the Eurasian arena of power and particularly in the temptations and fears presented to new mature powers by the transitional societies in Eastern Europe and China’. With such high-sounding phrases and vulgarised geopolitics Rostow brushes the problem aside. For him, ‘ambitious nationalism’, ‘the temptations of power’ (to which Germany ‘succumbed’ in 1914), the existence of ‘soft spots’ or the ‘choice’ by ‘mature societies’ of military expansion rather than other alternatives suffice as explanations. Today, it is happily assumed that the United States, Britain and Western Europe have renounced these temptations and policies, while the Russian leaders still maintain their drive for world hegemony.
This division of the world underlies Rostow’s political thinking and we may say that the ‘new’ interpretation of history turns out to be a more sophisticated apology for the policies of the State Department as well as an ideological justification for capitalism. While he has been arguing not with genuine Marxism, but with the rigidly deterministic derivation from it which under Stalin became the ideology of the Russian leadership, so his own system shares many of the shortcomings of the system which he is opposing. This is evident not only in his method – the irreversible ‘steam-rolling process’ going on without human intervention – but also in his view of the world. Just as for Stalin–Khrushchev the world is divided between ‘peace-loving’ and warlike powers, so for Rostow the same division exists, with the signs reversed. America and her allies seek peace, Russia and hers are bent on world domination. Both for Rostow and his Soviet counterparts any initiative or independence by people outside and against the power systems is just unthinkable.
His international policy for the atomic age derives from his simplified basic assumptions. We may use the summary which The Economist makes for him because it brings out quite starkly its true nature. The West, that is, the capitalist states:
... must try to make the choice of attempted world domination so unattractive to the Russians as to be unattainable; it must maintain and reinforce a network of alliances which denies the Russians all the routes to a military breakthrough by military adventures with which they still toy. On the other hand, and here current summit-climbing comes in, the West must make the choice of a high-consumption society ... as easy, as natural and as face-saving for Mr Khrushchev as it can. [23]
It is assumed that in some way, namely by the use of nuclear deterrents, the Russians – that is, the Khrushchev leadership – can be made to choose ‘high mass consumption’ instead of military expansion. He speculates about social trends in Russia which make such a shift conceivable. In fact, however, since Rostow sees in Russia the predominance of the political over the economic, and a new technique of power – as well as a formidable example for backward countries seeking to industrialise – the main stress, as The Economist rightly points out, is on military alliances and weapons, which can bring about some alteration in Russian policy. [24]
Rostow does not consider the internal effects of such policies in the Western countries, but he does give some indication of what he thinks are the innermost tendencies in modern capitalist economies. To consider these it is necessary to refer once again to his stages. After industrialisation has got under way, the economy passes through the stage of maturity, when, he admits, ‘it behaves in the most Marxist way’. As growth continues, development is assured into the stage of ‘high consumption’, which again is arbitrarily defined in terms of output per head. The use of this designation makes it possible to conceal the actual vast inequalities in consumption levels within these societies. Consumption is seen through the suburban living of the American middle class, which sets the pace for the world. Some people, of course, lag behind because of their own fault. There is, for example, the European worker who, between the wars, ‘took only slowly to the idea that gadgets, travel and other services a mature economy can afford were really for him’. Such fatuous comments do coexist with other more prescient remarks. He does not disguise the fact, for example, that in the 1930s the American economy after its preceding surge forward, ‘appeared almost to have stabilised itself at a lower level, when World War II, like a sort of deus ex machina,  restored full employment’. In fact it has only been kept on an even keel since by further shots in the arm, notably those associated with the spending of the state on armaments. Even Rostow is worried. ‘Unless consumption levels press outwards’, he says, ‘capacity in consumers’ goods industries and those supplying them will be underused and the impulse to invest will be weak.’ In other words, industry must have markets in which goods can be sold at a profit, otherwise the system will come to a halt. The point at which it does so is not determined by the satisfaction of the all-round needs of the masses, even in the advanced countries and these needs are not to be identified with ‘gadgetry’. Prewar American consumption levels were lower than those of today, but a slump came nevertheless; it was not incapacity to consume but inability to pay which provided the barrier.
Of course, consumption under capitalism has risen; there has been a ‘sharing’, though in unequal proportions – determined by the social relations of productions – of increased productive capacity. What capitalism cannot do is to plan the rational use of resources for optimum consumption; it cannot regulate labour time equitably between its members or provide leisure and facilities for the full development of their capacities. It cannot control the effects of a social division of labour in which some men are objects for attaining the ends of others. It is locked in its own categories and subjects men to them whether they will or not. Rostow makes a fantastic identification between ‘high consumption’, US style, and the ‘communism’ about which Marx wrote. According to one of his statements, ‘the societies of the West have… made their way to the brink of communism without succumbing to Marx’s prognosis’. [25] This is a parody of Marx which Rostow has produced by falling dupe to his own interpretation: if consumption goes on growing, won’t ‘communism’ in the sense of abundance, become a reality? But the concern which Rostow feels about the limits to mass consumption, his satisfaction that there exist backlogs of neglect in important investment fields or about the ‘extraordinary and unexpected decision of Americans to have more babies’ [26], shows that the real problem is whether capitalism, as Marxists would say, can go on extracting and realising surplus value on an expanding scale. Since the 1930s this has been possible because one deus ex machina after another has ensured that markets existed for expanding output. Rising consumption was incidental to this and only on a superficial view can define this period of capitalist development.
Rostow puts in the foreground the level of output (identified with consumption) which is perhaps the most important feature distinguishing capitalism today from that which Marx knew and analysed. Otherwise, capitalism is still capitalism and if Rostow had spent any time in examining the relations of production he would have been bound to conclude that in qualitative terms his last three ‘stages’ are indistinguishable. Before he can consume, the worker has to sell his labour power, to work for a boss. While he is at work he is at the boss’ disposal. At the end of the week or month he draws his pay cheque – and if he wishes to draw the next one he has to be at the boss’ disposal at the due time and place at the beginning of the next week or month. As his wage makes up the whole of his means of existence he has no other alternative; or rather, those alternatives are open to only a few workers, say, by trying to secure ‘independence’ by opening a small shop or by turning to crime.
What the worker produces is not his own – nor can he decide the tempo or conditions under which he works. Even the union can only modify these within the limits which the maintenance of the system imposes. For most workers, their labour has been largely severed from interests or a sense of fulfilment. Work has become separated from life and yet deeply involved with it. What counts is what happens when work ends: the night out, the TV show, the annual holiday, though even here ‘work’ accompanies the worker everywhere and he cannot shake off its shadow. But it is here, in ‘leisure’, that ‘real life’ begins: which is in large part nothing more than the necessary rest, recuperation and repose of nerves and bodily tissues without which work would be impossible. If he gets more of it than his father or grandfather this is partly because modern work is more intense, more grinding for body and nervous system. And, even so, it has had to be wrested from the purchasers of labour-power in struggle and not granted through the inexorable processes of ‘high consumption society’.
Real life begins ... but ‘real life’ is often far from living up to men’s expectations; and perhaps for women the problem is worse. And so refuge is taken in the various media of escape purveyed as part of the commodity production of capitalism. Output per head includes, of course, the activities of advertising men, the trade in narcotics of the mind and body, the unwanted and useless gadgets bought under the pressure of the latest sales techniques. The system pours out goods which it convinces people that they want, while leaving many needs poorly catered for. Some are able to consume on a fabulous scale while large sections of the populations placed by Rostow in the ‘high consumption’ range have only the bare minimum of house-space and food, not to speak of the other amenities of life.
 
The Basic Contradiction of Capitalism
Marxists hold that the capitalist system gives birth to its own grave-diggers, the modern working class. Rostow occasionally mentions workers, but he never pauses to consider what they are, what they do, what place they hold in society – he tries to merge them into the general category of consumers (which covers all members of society regardless of class). Here is one of the essential falsities of his picture of modern capitalism. He evades the Marxist challenge by simply ignoring class differences. Yet even in periods of high prosperity with rising consumption levels, even when led politically and in the trade unions by men who accept the fundamentals of the system the working class remains in practice unreconciled to it. The sums which are spent on human relations, industrial psychology and ‘welfare’ by business are a monument to its failure, its failure to exorcise the class struggle, the central theme of The Communist Manifesto. Of one thing we can be sure, as long as capitalism survives the industrial relations experts will never work themselves out of a job. But Rostow says nothing about this. To consider man as a producer would mean examining the social relations of production and employing Marxist criteria which would run counter to those which he adopts. Only by retaining the viewpoint of a consumer can he give his interpretation a semblance of consistency.
Ambitious as his programme is, Rostow fails to provide adequate means for distinguishing his ‘stages’ of economic growth. For all this erudition and pseudo-science he only combines the old bourgeois history, emphasising ideas, desires, sentiments, great men and status symbols as the determining forces, with concessions to economic determinism, and then profusely illustrates his points with all manner of doubtful examples. His major purposes are laid bare in his more directly political statements to which this display of knowledge and academic virtuosity is designed to lend support. He mingles self-complacency with inexplicable doubts and fears; he conforms, in fact he is ultra-conformist on the main issues, but he gives expression to a few private doubts and misgivings. His major fear is the Soviet Union and what the Soviet Union symbolises for him and for US capitalism. He tries to cut the USSR down to size, as it were, by emphasising all those features in its development which resemble those of the United States, whereas it is the differences which are essential, whether considering the history of Russia before the Revolution or Soviet society today.
For example, Rostow gives no reason except ‘reactive nationalism’, or the drive for world hegemony, for supposing that Russia is aggressive, any more than he supplies any evidence for the peaceful orientation of the USA. He fails to see, or evades discussing, the fact that all the fears he expresses about the American economy do not apply to the USSR. With a nationalised and planned economy there is no reason why long-run deceleration of growth curves should give rise to any problem, because resources can be deployed rationally to conform with social needs. Likewise, before this stage is reached, it is possible to make use of automation more fully and without the problems of technological unemployment which arise under capitalism. It is true that because of the particular distortions which have crept into Soviet society the full potentialities of planning have not been realised, but that is quite a different matter.
There is something else which worries Rostow very seriously because it concerns a world challenge to capitalism. As we have seen, he rejects – or misunderstands – the Marxist theory of imperialism. He assumes that ‘colonialism is virtually dead’, which is true, at the most, only in relation to open political control of colonies. Rostow is very worried lest these former colonies and other backward countries should follow the Soviet model, hence like many other publicists, he argues that ‘the West’ should increase aid to them, in order to inoculate them against the ‘disease’. What he omits to point out is that these areas are by no means free of economic imperialism. Nor is there any lack of capital supplied through the big extra-territorial companies, when there is scope for the profitable opening-up of natural resources to meet the demand of the world market. What is lacking is capital for all-round development, and it is this which Rostow wants to see supplied.
States do already supply capital to countries in Asia and Africa because of their sensitivity to the challenge of the USSR, but also for another reason which Rostow does not mention. Foreign aid, in India for example, has been necessary to enable the national bourgeoisie to maintain itself in power; without it the Congress government would have fallen long ago. As it is, the national bourgeoisies in semi-colonial or former colonial countries have had to lean on foreign capitalists externally – or to manoeuvre between them and the Soviet Union – and on the forces of the old social order internally. The main obstacle blocking faster industrialisation is to be found in the social relations of production; the nature of the national bourgeoisie and of its partnership with landed interests inhibits faster development because such essential preliminaries as agrarian reform cannot be carried through. Of course, massive aid from outside can prolong the existence of these regimes, though it cannot dispel the contradictions of the social structure; and it is in the interests of world capitalism that they should be kept in being. But the initiation on the requisite scale of an autonomous process of internal accumulation is beyond the power of the bourgeoisie in these countries. Hence the dilemma which Rostow feels so acutely. [27]
In fact, his theoretical weaknesses and political intentions are here revealed once again. In particular one of his crucial blind spots is preventing him from seeing the prospect clearly. His scheme leaves no room for the intervention of the people as a political force, much less for the clash of classes. Consequently he overlooks the fact that the challenge in Africa and Asia cannot be reduced to the intervention or example of the Soviet Union. Of course this is a factor but, as far as the struggle of social forces in these countries is concerned, the Soviet leadership are only inverted Rostowians. Both overlook the advance of the colonial revolution towards a phase where it challenges the dominance of the bourgeoisie; they fail to consider that this, especially when linked with the resurgence of the working class in the advanced countries, will accelerate the demise of capitalism and topple the bureaucratic leadership in the Russian–Chinese bloc of non-capitalist states.
In the meantime, Rostow helps to adapt the ideology of capitalism to changing times, but still a distance behind the times. His sensitivity to Marxism, although he distorts it and fails to consider part of its case at all, is a significant testimony to its strength. If his attack stimulates Marxists to probe more fully into the kind of problem which he raises, test, and if necessary reformulate their own interpretations, so much the better. Rostow’s work is among the best of its kind from the anti-Marxist camp.
* * *
Notes
1. Especially with the articles and lectures reprinted as The British Economy in the Nineteenth Century and The Process of Economic Growth. He was also responsible for writing up collective works on China and the Soviet Union in volumes which, while containing useful material, could be described as products of the Cold War.
2. The articles which are the subject of this critique are the author’s abridgement of the lectures which appeared in The Economist for the 15 and 22 August 1959. Judging from the lecture reprinted in The Economic History Review for August 1959, the full version is more nuanced than the articles. The latter do bring out the essence of his thinking more sharply and will clearly exercise the greatest influence, and that justifies them. All quotations, with a few exceptions which are from the Economic History Review article, are, unless otherwise stated, from these articles, but page references have not been given.
3. Thus, ‘communism is a curious form of society appropriate only to the supply side of the growth problem, and likely to wither in the age of high consumption.’ (my emphasis – T.K.) What will take its place? Capitalism, perhaps?
4. F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, p. 268. This book is, of course, one of the most valuable sources for the understanding of the materialist conception of history.
5. Rostow speaks, for example, of the need for ‘transferring surplus income from those who would waste it in prodigal living to those who will invest it and regularly plough back the profits’. Other people – unidentified – ‘must be prepared to lend their money on long-term’, and so on. Bourgeois ideologists have always been able to criticise the prodigality of the nobility! But where did this money come from? Where did the ‘surplus income’ originate? The classical economists said ‘abstinence’. Weber said from the abstemiousness produced by the protestant ethic. Marx pointed to the process of ‘primitive accumulation’. Rostow just leaves a gap. Later, ‘for growth to become self-sustained, all that is necessary is a rise in the rate of investment and the stock of capital per head’. ‘All that is necessary ...’, but this does not explain the source or the process of accumulation ...
6. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 1, p. 603. ‘It compels him to keep constantly extending his capital, in order to preserve it, but extend it he cannot, except by means of progressive accumulation.’
7. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 3, p. 308. ‘The effort to reduce the cost price to its minimum becomes the strongest lever for the raising of the social productivity of labour, which, however, appears under these conditions as a continual increase of the productive power of capital.’ Also Volume 3, p. 1027.
8. There are plenty of references scattered throughout Capital. See also the rich analyses of contemporary developments in The Eighteenth Brumaire, Class Struggles in France and Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (more than one modern historian has burrowed into these and made use of the insights of Marx and Engels with scant or no acknowledgment). For an historical study there is Engels’ Peasant War in Germany, recently republished in English (Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow). Where, in these works, is it assumed that ‘capitalist societies’ made ‘all their major decisions simply in terms of the free market mechanism and private advantage’ or that ‘political, social (or) economic power neatly followed the fact that property was privately owned’ (a somewhat ambiguous statement – T.K.) as Rostow asserts?
9. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 3, p. 919. (my emphasis – T.K.)
10. From the article in Economic History Review, August 1959.
11. Historical materialism seeks to grasp the historical process in its many-sided dialectical totality as the product of flesh and blood men. Instead of assuming some rough equality between so-called ‘factors’ – which are no more than abstract concepts – it sought the ultimate determining forces and did not take men at their own valuation. As Rostow says, ‘The life of most human beings since the beginning of time has been mainly taken up with gaining food, shelter and clothing’: and that is precisely where Marxists begin – though not end – their analyses.
12. An editorial in The Economist, 22 August 1959.
13. K. Marx, Capital, Volume 1.
14. Economic History Review, August 1959.
15. This is clearly possible also for members of former ruling classes and for state officials attached, not to the bourgeoisie, but to the dynastic or ‘bonapartist’ state.
16. Like a true inverted Stalinist he passes over the human costs of economic development with only a passing reference: it is only when real wages are rising that ‘workers’ come into the picture.
17. Analysed as a preparatory period for industrialisation by Marx in relation to England and Lenin for Russia, see The Development of Capitalism in Russia (in English, FLPH, Moscow).
18. But, of course, considered on a world scale there had first to be cheap iron, a new source of power (steam) and machines made by machines. The supposed ‘variety’ is spurious unless seen in this perspective.
19. Rostow makes a miracle out of countries like ‘Switzerland, Israel and Hong Kong, which have performed a kind of economic rope trick, climbing into industrialisation with virtually no means of support’. Since he mentions the world market in the previous sentence there was no reason to marvel at this. The economic development of England, Germany, Russia and America were also inseparably connected with the world market, though in different forms. England virtually dragged a world market into existence as a complement to her industrialisation; Japan made use of it.
20. See previous note.
21. Many factors contributed to this. To be noted are the further decay of the old feudal structures through the penetration of commodity dealings and the extension of the market – as, for example, in the decline of serfdom – the corresponding growth of the bourgeoisie and the application of what might be called ‘bourgeois’ techniques to government.
22. His examples are not happily chosen. Thus he claims that ‘in Germany it was certainly a nationalism based on past humiliation and future hope – the Junkers and the men of the East, more than the men of trade and the liberals of the West – that did the job’ (that is, brought a modern society into existence). The case of Germany was interesting and complicated, but this snap judgement is certainly wide of the mark. Marx and Engels followed events in Germany closely and the latter left an unfinished work with the title Force and Economics in the Establishment of the New German Empire (in French in Le rôle de la violence dans l’histoire, Editions Sociales, 1947) which shed a lot of light on the subject and, indeed, fits in with more recent writings. Far from being protagonists of German nationalism or industrialisation the Junkers, as a caste, sought to conserve its privileges in mutual cooperation with the Prussian ruling house. Their revenues fell short of their rising expenditures, despite their transformation into rural capitalists in the eighteenth century. They were constantly on the edge of an abyss from which they were held back only with state aid (members of the caste dominated the bureaucracy), which made it a ‘proletarian nobility’, ‘parasitic’ and ‘doomed to disappear’, in Engels words.
The material means for German industrialisation came from the coal, iron and potash deposits developed with English techniques and foreign capital to begin with and with state aid playing a part. The bourgeoisie was certainly the carrier of the national idea against the Junkers. Their defeat in 1848 and subsequent political impotence left the way clear for a different solution: a revolution ‘from above’ effected by means of a civil war. The leading role was taken by a Junker, it is true, but he owed his success to his ability to act in the sense of the material needs of German industry – safeguarding his class, but not with its active support, except as officers in the army. When Bismarck completed the task of providing the political and legal basis for German capitalism, in deference to the Junkers many feudal vestiges remained, but these held back, rather than promoted economic growth.
The German bourgeoisie was nationalist because its material interests demanded a unified national market. But nationalism, in Germany as elsewhere, attained a certain ‘autonomy’, removed from calculations of direct material interest, let alone individual self-seeking, when it gripped large masses of people. That it continued to be a powerful force, however, can be understood only against the background of the imperialist rivalries which dominated world history from the last nineteenth century. Germany’s late arrival in the world market, like that of Japan, gave her nationalism a strident, and then (with Nazism) a pathological quality. The fact that it was also all-pervading – witness the pro-war stand of the Social Democratic Party in 1914 – does not mean that it was not nurtured by objective, material forces. The links between ‘base’ and ‘superstructure’ are never direct and straightforward; but when their dialectical interplay is studied the material roots can be exposed.
23. The Economist, editorial article, 22 August 1959.
24. This is a euphemistic wav of referring to the heavy social costs of capitalist industrialisation. During this phase of ‘maturity’ society even becomes ‘a bit bored with the miracle of industrialisation’ (what a characterisation! – T.K.) and throws up a crop of deviant personalities, including, inevitably, our friend Karl Marx. Strange that his influence should have grown, not waned.
25. Economic History Review, August 1959.
26. One wonders whether this was a gift of Providence or was the result of the emphasis on sex in American life.
27. ‘Communism ... is a kind of disease that can befall a transitional society if it fails to organise effectively those elements that are prepared to modernise.’ Strangely enough, at this point, he starts using the term ‘capitalism’, since it is the only way in which he can distinguish the economy of ‘the West’ from that of the USSR. Thus ‘Communism’s hope now lies not in crises brought on by a struggle to unload exports, but in the capitalist world’s excessive absorption with domestic markets.’ Which is an incorrect appraisal anyhow.

Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 21 February 2020


emp: The Politics of Prosperity and Depression (1960)





Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Tom Kemp
The Politics of Prosperity and Depression
(February-March 1960)

From Labour Review, Volume 5, No. 1, February–March 1960, pp The Politics of Prosperity and Depression.

Transcribed & marked up by Ted Crawford & D. Walters  for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2009.

The decade of the ’50s will stand out as one of paradox and contradiction in the history of British capitalism. Like the other advanced countries, it experienced an upsurge of unprecedented prosperity after something like a quarter of a century of relative stagnation, depression and total war. Apparently, therefore, it has shown great resilience in the face of these trials, and a superficial glance might lead one to conclude that it is now stronger than before. In fact, however, not only has the prosperity of world capitalism been built upon a combination of specially favourable factors, some of which have worked themselves out and been replaced by others—a happy situation which the upholders of the system would do well not to count upon indefinitely—but part of that prosperity has depended upon the serious world crisis arising from the confrontation of two incompatible world systems. The British economy is now tied more closely than ever before to the world market; it can no longer count upon massive investment income from overseas, it has, more than before the war, to export or die. The rapid recovery of the capitalist world market from the dislocation of depression and war has been a major factor in sustaining prosperity in Britain. If that market ceases to expand, and even more if it should contract, intensified international competition would thrust a considerable strain on British capitalism because of the comparative rigidity of some of the structures which it has inherited from the past. At the same time, there stands the crucial sustaining role in the capitalist economies today of armaments expenditure and the continual outflow of dollars from the United States which is directly dependent upon the Cold War.
To conclude that capitalism, either in Britain or on a world scale, is stronger now than before the war simply because the level of unemployment is now much smaller or because there is general prosperity would be seriously to misread the picture. In particular it leaves out the impact of what has been happening to capitalism—and what can be expected to happen in the coming period—upon the working class and, for that matter, important segments of the middle class. The dynamics of social change and political action are not geared precisely to the ups and downs of the business cycle as is sometimes thought. We do not have to wait for a slump before we move into action. Rather there is a complex interaction of forces, not least among which are those which intersect in the consciousness of the human participants, and which, in turn, lead to certain courses of action being taken which react upon the material situation. For example, unemployment or a threatening slump can dull consciousness, disintegrate organisations and lead to a relative weakening of the working class. Such a situation, typical of the 1930s, provided a breeding ground for fascism and prepared setbacks for the working class.
It should be pointed out here that non-Marxist economists tend to conceive of society as a mass of consumers, differentiated only by their purchasing power. If the general level of purchasing power has been going up they assume that the system is in good health and see the future in terms of onward and upward. For Marxists, however, society is made up of classes standing in specific relationship to the means of production and to each other. Where one class owns the means of production and concentrates immense social power in its hands, so, all the more, does it stand over those who have nothing to sell but their labour power as an antagonistic, alien force utilising them as objects in the interests of a small clique. Nothing which has happened in the field of consumption, employment, social services and the like can cancel out this over-riding fact. At the point of production interests clash and the class struggle provides a continuous front which runs throughout the economic apparatus. At any particular time that front may, for most of its tortuous length, appear quiet; but the transformation of human energy, sweat and muscle into the means for the wealth and social power of the ruling class in capitalistic society goes on without respite. In fact workers know that this tussle for dignity as well as a share in the results of production goes on uninterruptedly, even when they do not reason it out and consciously take their stand on socialist policies. They may, for example, quite happily repeat the shibboleths of the daily press and vote Tory until the day when a tightening up in workshop procedures or a deliberately dragged-out wage negotiation sends them out to be ‘wildcats’ along with the others.
The class struggle is a vital factor in the assessment of the prospects for capitalism; it is integral to it and inseparable from it. The relative strength of the contending classes and the support in society which they win from other classes are decisive.
Of course, all sections of workers do not react in the same way and at the same time. Past experience, the nature and organisation of each industry, its rate of development, whether it is expanding or declining—all these play a part and result in great inequalities and unevenness between workers in different industries, and, because of geographical specialisation, in different parts of the country. Moreover, some industries have greater strategic significance than others in the economic life of the country—docks, transport, mines, for example—and what goes on in them is thus of more weight than the actual numbers involved would lead one to believe. In any case, Marxists do not base their prognosis upon the spontaneous reaction of the various sections of the class. Objective conditions prepare the ground; it is organisation which brings action, and which plays the linking role between one section and another. It is always necessary to be part   of the movement of the class, not to sit back, observe and predict on the basis of some kind of ‘research’ undertaken from outside. Nor can tactics and policy be imposed from outside; they must take full account of the understanding and experience of the participants.
THE DEPRESSION OF THE ’30s
Instead of a post-war crisis and slump, repeating the ’30s on a more grandiose scale and marking the end of capitalism, there has been renewed prosperity and expansion. It was difficult for friend and foe alike to discern, in the ’30s, any new expansive force likely to lift the system into a renewed prosperity for more than a short period. On the other hand, once such a force, or a combination of forces, could be found, the historical experience of capitalism had been that for periods extending over several shorter trade cycles it had been able to move on an ascending curve. Such a period had, indeed, preceded the First World War and had only come to an end in 1920. From that time, at any rate in Britain, the general curve had been downwards, and the world depression which came at the end of a sharp American boom in 1929 was thus superimposed upon an already stagnant economy.
The depression of the 30s had a number of special features which made it unlike anything which we can expect to issue from the present situation of the British economy. The depth and duration of the depression were exceptional; they arose out of special circumstances which cannot be examined in detail here. It is generally recognised, however, that a slump of much smaller dimensions would have even more profound social consequences today, at the end of a period of considerable prosperity. Even the comparatively small recession of 1958 revealed signs of something like a crisis of confidence among the defenders of capitalism. In the summer of that year the business press gave expression to many forebodings and, surprisingly enough, after 20 years of Keynesianism, many economists seemed to be at a loss to know what could be done if the downward spiral should continue in the United States. The first point which can be made, therefore, is that there is no need for the next depression to be as severe as that of the ’30s to shake the system to its foundations.
The incidence of the depression of the ’30s was very uneven as between industries and regions. The main burden of excess capacity and unemployment fell upon the industries concerned with investment and the export trade. The situation in these fields reflected the adverse change in Britain’s world position which had come about after the First World War and which marked an inability of the industrial structure to adapt itself to the new conditions. On the other hand, technological change did not come to a standstill, and re-adjustment was taking place. Notable signs of this could be seen in the continued expansion of such industries as motors, radio and electricity, some branches of engineering and, in general, those which were directed to the internal consumer market. For large numbers of workers, therefore, the ’30s were not necessarily years of slump and unemployment. It is true that the insecurity was there, but an improvement did take place in the standard of living.
This relative immunity to slump of sections of British industry was closely tied to another factor --the fall in the prices of primary products and the favourable shift in Britain’s terms of trade. By cheapening commodities entering into capital outlays and wages this kept up the profit rate and, at the same time, enabled workers to maintain or improve their consumption levels, at the same time as the pattern of consumption was changing. The slowness of the adoption of new techniques and new industries in the earlier part of the, 20th century meant, in fact, that there was room for new investment and expansion in such fields in Britain during the ’30s. The growth of these modern sectors of industry was an important sustaining influence in British capitalism in the 1930s; it prevented a slump from being more devastating; it enabled a fairly rapid if partial recovery to be made; it tended to divide one section of workers from another.
Partly, of course, this favourable side was an aspect of Britain’s imperialist position: the ability to draw vast tribute from overseas debtors, to profit from the misfortunes of primary producers and even to draw on capital invested overseas. Here Britain is undoubtedly much weaker than before the war. On the other hand, the necessity now to sustain and expand exports gears up industry to a much higher level all round than was attainable then. The high level of exports makes a powerful contribution to the continued possibility of extracting and realising surplus value on an extended scale which is the key to post-war prosperity, though, of course, it is not the only factor. In this sense the changed relationship of the British economy to that of the rest of the capitalist world market—which means greater vulnerability to shocks transmitted to it from outside—has the short-term effect of contributing to a high level of activity at home. But the cushioning effect of overseas investment and a strong imperialist position has partly disappeared today: and in the long run that is perhaps of greater importance.
What did working-class action amount to against this background? Here again only a summary of the main points can be offered. But the answer surely was that this was a decade of betrayal, defeat and to some extent of demoralisation. The betrayals came industrially in 1926, politically in 1931. Both these dates marked setbacks to the working class associated with the ruling class’s problem of stabilising and shoring up the worm-eaten framework of British capitalism. It is true that there was a lot of activity of one kind and another, including a leftward flurry in university and intellectual circles: but in practical effect it amounted to very little. If the crisis had been as serious here as in Germany, given the state of leadership of the working-class organisations at that time, there seems little reason to doubt that they would have been broken just as easily.
Like any other capitalist crisis, that of the 1930s was historically unique. This brief recapitulation of some of its main features in Britain shows that the forthcoming economic problems—those likely to arise after a period of sustained prosperity in a changed world situation—will be different in essential particulars. It is important here to note that the Marxist analysis of crisis derives, as it were, from a ‘chemically pure’ capitalism. But the inner laws of development which drive the system from prosperity into its opposite have concrete historical results which help to determine the ways in which the laws will operate and the consequences which they will have. To think in terms of the 1930’s as a ‘classic slump’ is in a way misleading. Of course it did confirm the Marxist prognosis in a striking way, but the many Marxists who could discern no way out for capitalism and who concluded that breakdown was at hand certainly allowed themselves to be too strongly affected by the prevailing trends, to the exclusion of other possibilities. Likewise, in the post-war years, when Marxists were scanning the horizon for the ‘inevitable’ slump, the same error was made. Such subjectivism was, in essence, rooted in a mechanical adherence to certain aspects of Marxist analysis which seemed to fit the case so perfectly that others could be left out without loss.
As a matter of fact a number of Marxist writers who were prominent in the ’30s have subsequently defected and become adherents of some version of Keynesian orthodoxy. Their reasoning seems to have followed roughly the lines that if capitalism could find a way out through State-sponsored measures acting on investment and consumption, then the whole of Marxist economics was defective and capitalism could and would avert another depression. Under pressure from a new, more fashionable doctrine they were derailed, largely because their own erstwhile ‘Marxism’ was mechanical and incomplete; in the final analysis it left the overthrow of capitalism to irresistible and impersonal forces which were going to tie the economic system in insoluble contradictions. It left out the decisive factor—the need for a movement and a leadership anchored in. the class whose historical task it is to excise capitalism from history. In other words, in short, such ‘Marxists’ had no confidence in the working class: it was not surprising that some of them, as Parliamentarians, sought to substitute themselves for the class and steer the system painlessly into what they thought of as ‘socialism’. What in fact happened, in Britain, was that a synthesis of Fabianism and Keynesianism contrived to salvage the system and prepare it for the renewal of energy which it secured in the 50s.
Another variety of formalism; less dangerous, but nonetheless to be guarded against, is to begin reciting—at the first signs of recession—the whole supposedly Marxist litany through to deep slump and even complete breakdown. It is no good having rigorous respect for the book and trying to fit existing trends into the revealed word. That, indeed, is not Marxism, and discredits Marxism among all those who are ready to pounce at the first sign of dogmatism. However, it is sometimes difficult to avoid giving this impression, especially when trying to estimate the immediately forthcoming situation for the direction of political work. To exaggerate the prospects of a capitalist decline is a lesser error than to adopt reformist illusions which disarm the working class politically; but it is an error, and like all errors of this kind, can do harm.
THE PROBLEMS OF PROSPERITY
There is every reason to believe that the phase of expansion through which capitalism has been passing has been storing up a number of problems familiar to Marxists. There is the question, for example, of finding continually expanding markets for the increased capacity which is being built up during the boom. There are the disproportions which appear between different sections of the economy. There are the problems of redundancy arising from automation and rationalisation, which have been concealed so far by the buoyant demand for labour in the economy as a whole. There is a string of international problems caused by the narrowed field for extensive capitalist development arising from the colonial revolution and the economic growth in the Russo-Chinese bloc. It is not difficult to add to this list of actual or potential strains which could give prosperity the death-blow at some time in the future. But there is no means of determining the time-span within which such crisis-points are likely to mature. Nor is it certain that even if they do they will not be counteracted by other forces within the system. Probably, in any case, the major condition for a large-scale slump is that there should be a recession in the United States reaching further into the basis of the economy—and especially into consumption levels—than the recession of 1958. From such a recession it is doubtful whether the other capitalist countries could insulate themselves; and the direct impact on some of the primary producing countries would be greater than on the advanced countries. Thus, although the stronghold of the world capitalist system might initiate a downward movement, the pressure would be strongest on the weakest links. This is one of the reasons why so many anxious eyes in the United States and Western Europe are turned towards the ‘underdeveloped countries’!
Although such world-sweeping perspectives should be in the framework of our thought about the economic future, our main immediate concern is with the most likely course of events in Britain itself. Even if these international factors do not bring crisis within the near future, the ’60s are unlikely to see a steady upward progress. The recession of 1958 already offered some pointers and some lessons. In the first place this recession established clearly that British capitalism was not immune from cyclical downturn.. Moreover, the measures to deal with it were late, slow in getting to the root of the trouble and would have been impotent but for the temporarily favourable international situation which emerged for Britain. The major weapon—which is still a main support of the prevailing prosperity—was the opening up of wider possibilities of realising surplus value through the expansion of credit (notably personal and hire-purchase credit) to sustain consumption. But this method has its limitations. In so far as it reaches back into the investment industries and initiates an autonomous expansion, or enables the old momentum to be resumed, it can exercise this effect for some time. Again, rising consumption, even on the never-never, may for a time add weight to the ‘you’ve never had it so good’ slogan and thus take the edge off the militancy of some workers, who, at the same time, are weighed down with heavy H.P. repayments. On the other hand, if other gashes appear in the fabric of prosperity, for example, owing to loss of overseas markets or an American recession, it is difficult to see how even easier credit can be resorted to. Indeed, under those circumstances the volume of hire-purchase and other debt would be a depressive factor, weakening the viability of the system.
Here again, a cumulative spiral into deep depression would not necessarily follow. The 1958 recession also shows—just as did the depression of the ’30s—that depressed sectors can co-exist with others which remain prosperous and continue to expand. Nor is this surprising if a few possibilities are considered. If armament spending remains at its present level, industries dependent upon it will remain prosperous. If there is intensified trade competition, there may be direct effects on some industries through a loss of orders, but the pressure on employers to modernise and mechanise to meet this competition will mean orders and employment in the firms producing capital goods. That means, essentially, the most advanced sections of industry in engineering, electronics and chemicals. On the other hand, while continued technological advance may favourably affect these groups, it would intensify the already obvious problems of the older industries such as coal and cotton.
Even in a review of this kind we might remember that the continued expansion of some of the growing-points in the economy, such as motor cars and consumer durables, cannot be taken for granted. A wave of optimism seems to have surged through these branches of industry, which are now counting more firmly than before on a number of years of expansion. But the fulfilment of these hopes depends upon the market at home and overseas into which many factors necessarily enter. At any rate, despite the important role which these industries have played in prosperity, the curve of growth may more or less rapidly flatten out once the effects of the credit expansion are exhausted. In that case the reaction upon other sectors may be quite severe.
In the meantime, then, we can anticipate that some industries will continue to expand under conditions of modernisation and prosperity. With full order books, optimistic prospects and booming profits employers may put up an ostensible front of reasonableness and willingness to make concessions. While they economise on labour power by increasing production with no addition to their labour force, and perhaps some reduction, they can pay more for each unit. In fact they could pay a good deal more than they will be willing to offer. The conflict of interest at the point of production is, as has been said, inherent in capitalist economy; exploitation at Â£30 a week can be as real as exploitation at Â£5. It is on this basis that workers in the prosperous industries find themselves in struggle on the same terms as their less fortunate brethren.
SLUMP AND MILITANCY
The general conclusion is that the Marxist does not wait for some inevitable day of reckoning when capitalism will topple through its own weaknesses. On the contrary, he recognises that the effect of slump can be to disarm and demoralise the working class, as happened to a considerable degree in the ’30s. The present mood of the working class is sometimes hastily described as one of apathy or complacency. Certainly this describes the attitude towards the traditional organisations, both the Trade Unions and the Labour Party, and it would be truly remarkable, after a long period of prosperity—with many young workers who have never known anything else—if there were not some complacency. This is not the place to analyse the relations between workers of the rank and file and their leaders, or indeed to examine the influences which flow around and into the working class from the capitalist environment. Marxists have never assumed that the workers were homogeneous as a class or would attain to a consciousness of their position in society and role in social change by a spontaneous process. Neither do they equate apathy towards the bureaucratic leadership of the mass organisations with indifference to the class struggle. That struggle, as has been seen, is for most of the time a silent and unspectacular process: but when it bursts out into open conflict there is certainly no lack of fighting spirit or solidarity. The relations of capitalism in which the worker is enmeshed, whatever the material level which his wages permit him to ‘enjoy’, are a standing invitation to resistance on his part, since they make him the object of another’s purpose and deprive him of any real say in how his working life should be spent. Employers know this well enough and the ‘enlightened’ ones spend quite lavish sums to try to ‘integrate’ the worker into the enterprise—which largely means to dull his consciousness of his own exploitation. In fact they have not succeeded in this task; even the apparently most docile sections can turn over suddenly to strike action. While the demand for labour power has been running high in the period of full employment, the working class as a whole has built up not only a higher material standard than before the war, but also a determination to preserve and improve upon that standard. Any attack by the employers or the State consequently invites resistance: a resistance which is all the more tenacious because even in prosperity workers have not become reconciled to capitalism, even if they do not express this clearly and directly.
Apathy towards leaders who are reconciled to the system can only be regarded as a healthy disrespect for humbug. Opposition to mechanisation and new processes is really a spontaneous defence of men against the demands of dehumanising Capital. Fundamentally the only difference between the present-day worker in production and the worker whose situation Marx delineated with such care and prescience is that the former carries home more spending power at the end of the week. He still knows, however, that it is a condition for existence that he stands ready to furnish his labour power to the employer when the next working week begins. No matter whether the social force, Capital, is personified by an individual capitalist, a limited company or a nationalised board, the worker is still exploited.
It is on this basis that Marxists devise their tactics and strategy in the present-day struggle for socialism. They set to work in the here and now, with things as they are, confident in the ability of the working class, when it rises to the level of consciousness which the situation demands, to take charge of its own destiny in society. In doing so they do not pin their faith on irresistible processes, nor do they assume that only slump and depression can move workers to take stock of their position in society and move to do something about it. When assessing the changes which capitalism constantly undergoes, they take care to distinguish the form from the essence; the changes which have been hailed to constitute a ‘mutation’, in fact alter the form  in which capitalist relations express themselves while leaving the fundamentals unchanged. They take warning from history that periods of apparently unlimited upsurge have occurred before in the history of capitalism—bringing with them a train of ‘revisionist’ thinking in the socialist movement—and have ended in war and depression or stagnation. When defining capitalism as a regime of crisis they do no more than sum up in a phrase the undisputedly stormy history of capitalism in our epoch, with its record of wars, colonial oppression, insecurity and now the ever-present threat of complete destruction or a return to barbarism after a nuclear holocaust. A few years of increasing production of TV sets, washing machines and motor roads cannot cancel out this debit balance of inhumanity. Nor can we forget that this very prosperity has been accompanied by, in fact to no small extent has rested upon, an unprecedented peace-time expenditure on armaments and active preparations for a new war.
The very progress of prosperity, too, has seen the accumulation of a knot of economic problems which cannot be analysed here. It has been inseparably connected, for a large part of the time, with inflation and chronic international imbalance. It has fallen short in rate of growth of that attained in the Soviet Union and China. It has been unable to stem the growth of the colonial revolution or to grapple with the problem of the under-developed countries. Within the orbit of capitalism as a world system even the standard of living has probably declined in the past quarter of a century: to have our eyes fixed on the situation in a few privileged areas is to ignore what on the world historical scale can be condemning the system to destruction. All these and related questions need fundamental examination in the light of Marxism and it will be our task to undertake this in the coming year.

Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 17 October 2009


emp: Torture, Ltd? (February 1960)





Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Tom Kemp
Torture, Ltd?
Gangrene
(February 1960)

From Labour Review, Volume 5, No. 1, February–March 1960, pp 32-36.
Transcribed & marked up by Ted Crawford & D. Walters  for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2009.

Torture, Ltd?
Gangrene
With an introduction by Peter Benenson
Calder Books, 7s. 6d.
A recent news report that French army officers were attending training courses in ‘torture’ was hardly surprising in these times, although they, like their counterparts in other armies and police forces, have always seemed to get on remarkably well without formal instruction. This book documents some brilliant – or should it be clumsy? – examples of the handiwork of some French and British practitioners: a comparatively small sample, it must be said. Here are the accounts of their torture, in Paris itself, by Algerian student suspects, which formed the book La Gangrene, which was pursued by the de Gaulle government last summer. A real study in the refinements of the modern Inquisition. There is an account of the Hola Camp massacres and, in between, the remarkable experience of an English officer whose human instincts (he rose from the ranks) put him on the wrong side of the brutalised agents of colonialism in Kenya and earned him five fantastic months in prison without trial.
These valuable documents are preceded by a lengthy disquisition on torture by Mr. Benenson which is, shall we say, tortured. If I have understood him aright, torture is wrong because it does not achieve its purpose – ‘the greater the pain, the less of the truth’, he says. When threatened with torture suspects give wrong and misleading information to save their skins, thus preventing the true facts from being brought to light. Khrushchev gets the truth quicker than Stalin ever did, &c. Harken, ye interrogators and gaolers the world over, a little kindness goes a long way! If Mr. Benenson’s advice is followed, the army and police will attend courses in extracting information without pain or discomfort to the victim. And, to save democracy, Ministers will resign when tortures and atrocities perpetrated by their underlings are brought to light.
I did have the feeling, which became a certainty when reading this book, that the title had a significance which had escaped its editor. The regimes which use torture exude brutality as a gangrenous wound exudes pus – and the remedy is a surgical operation, not a soothing balm.
TOM KEMP

Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 21 February 2020


emp: Stalinist Planning (February 1960)





Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Tom Kemp
Stalinist Planning
Over-centralisation in Economic Administration
A Critical Analysis based on experience in Hungarian Light Industry
(February 1960)

From Labour Review, Volume 5, No. 1, February–March 1960, pp. 32–36.
Transcribed & marked up by Ted Crawford & D. Walters  for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2009.

Stalinist Planning
Over-centralisation in Economic Administration. A Critical Analysis based on experience in Hungarian Light Industry
By Janos Kornai
Translated from the Hungarian by John Knapp
OUP, 32s. 6d.
The forbidding title of this work should not prevent socialists from looking closely at what it has to offer. It is one item in a vast body of literature which has appeared in Russia and Eastern Europe dealing with technical problems of economic planning, very little of which has been made available to English readers. While much of it is of doubtful value – often consisting, before about 1953, of little more than a distorted theory padded out with liberal quotations from Stalin – there has always been a modicum of worthwhile work among it. For all their faults, these countries’ experience must be studied and understood by socialists: and one way of beginning is with the theoretical work which accompanied these clumsy laboratory experiments in planned economy.
This study differs from most of the others in being highly critical, indeed in some ways negative, in content and this, together with the quality of the research work which went into its composition, no doubt prompted the decision to bring out an English translation. It reminds us that all problems do not end when the industries of a country have been nationalised and planning authorities established. It gives an inside picture of the baneful consequences of the imposition upon Hungarian light industry of a planning model of the Stalinist type – but it does not escape from the categories of thought of the Stalin system.
*
According to Kornai, for example, the economic problems of pre-1956 Hungary arose from specific, removable faults, especially the excessive importance of instructions from the centre to which the industrial enterprises were obliged to conform, lack of realism on the part of the authorities and too frequent changes in policy. But though he recognises that behind these heavy-handed policies was the fact that ‘arbitrary methods of leadership had become widespread ... in many fields persuasion was replaced by bullying’, his remedies seem very inadequate.
In fairness, of course, it must be remembered that to go much further than this would have been to commit himself to support for the revolution of 1956 – and then, no doubt, this book would never have been published by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences!
What Kornai does show is, however, valuable. Under the planning system taken over from the USSR the whole rhythm of production at the plant level was greatly affected by the premiums to top management, which in turn hinged upon the fulfilment of quarterly plans fixed in money values. Plan-fulfilment became a fetish to which the material interests of smart administrators were geared. To puff out the index more expensive articles might be produced. Towards the quarter’s end there would be a terrific spurt to top the 100 per cent. fixed by the plan, then to lapse back to a routine tempo. This system hardly made either for industrial efficiency or for the production of the right kinds of goods for consumers.
Such a result is by no means an inevitable concomitant of planning. But the answer to the question of the right balance between centralisation and plant initiative cannot be solved by an abstract formula. Under Hungarian conditions centralisation was imposed – but although it bred bureaucratism and bullying it was not the centralisation which was essentially, at fault, but the fact that power was concentrated in the hands of bullies to begin with. It was not merely the excessive use of instructions, but the social basis of the people who issued the instructions which were determinant.
Formally, Kornai makes good points. We can agree with him that ‘a socialist society must be based on the activity and initiative of the workers’. Of course, the Hungarian workers showed in 1956 that; as he puts it, they had had enough of bureaucracy and ‘demanded a change for the better in our methods of economic administration’.
But with Kadar and the same ‘top management’ in control Kornai’s recommendations, even if acceptable to the masters of present-day Hungary, would make no substantial difference. He suggests, for example, (i) a more complex and comprehensive system of material incentives for economic administrators; (ii) fewer changes in top management; (iii) stimulation of workers’ interest by ‘profit-sharing schemes’. It reads very much like the recipe of some writer on business administration in a capitalist country! He sets great store by ‘material incentives’ to the men at the top (i.e., give them bigger salaries). He wants to see bigger wage and salary differentials. He is honest enough to face the basic dilemma: the workers ‘have not been able to feel that they really own the enterprises’. But he can offer no basic solution; his criticism remains on the safe side, and he out of gaol. It is one thing to speak piously of ‘the need for an early introduction of factory democracy’ – but factory democracy is the job of workers, and what the workers did about it in Hungary is already heroic, but tragic, history; but not the last chapter. Certainly it will not be handed out on a plate by the ‘top managements’ of corporate business or nationalised enterprises. The most they can offer is the kind of tepid reform which is the mouse brought forth by Kornai’s labours.
TOM KEMP

Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 21 February 2020




The capitalists breathed a sigh of relief in 1958: De Gaulle had established his “strong” regime. But the solution solved nothing and the General faces the fate of his predecessors
Recent weeks have once again revealed just how deep are the fissures in French society behind the apparent solidity of the façade provided by the Fifth Republic.
While indifference remains widespread – is, indeed itself a symptom of crisis – it is rarely based today on a confident belief that De Gaulle has matters in hand. Even his friends have pierced the myth upon which his successes have been based; one by one, behind the throne, they are getting ready to fix the succession – if they can do so without the decisive intervention of the masses. And slowly, hesitantly, it is being realized by opponents that the regime is not impregnable and is not able to solve the problems of French capitalism.
For the present, the heavy incubus of the long record of betrayal of the official working-class organizations still hangs over the opposition, but there are signs of a change, and these signs, restricted as they are, have been sufficient in recent weeks to evoke an almost hysterical response on the part of the government. Papers have been seized, their offices searched, activists have been detained and left-wing university teachers and radio employees, as well as other intellectuals, have had sanctions taken against them. Both the new lines of opposition – directly striking at the essence of state power and the idea of “legality” – though supported only by a small vanguard as yet, and the measures used against them have caused heart-searchings through the ranks of France’s important, and predominantly left-wing intelligentsia. As the most sensitive section of French society it reflects the slight tremors which foreshadow the more intense shocks which the regime will have to face in the near future.
 
TO UNDERSTAND what is happening now, we have to cast our eyes back at the last decade of French history. In May, 1958, the regime had reached an impasse from which it could only escape by a sharp turn to new methods. Its problems were reflected in the low state of morale of the French ruling class and the deep divisions within itself which became an obstacle every time determined action seemed called for. The undermining of the confidence of the ruling class was no new thing. It had been apparent in the thirties; it brought about the capitulation of 1940 and had provided the background to the governmental instability of the period since 1945. It had weakened the capitalists in face of the working-class challenge. Indeed, only the “peoples front” policy of compromise and betrayal (i.e. supporting De Gaulle) by the Socialist and Communist party leaders in 1944-47, as in 1936, had enabled capitalist rule to survive. But it survived under constantly deteriorating conditions.
The French Empire was in process of disintegration. The French voice in the counsels of the great powers had become thin and was ignored with impunity. The shattered post-war economy was put back into action with billions of American dollars and with the exhortations of the Communist party leaders to “produce first.” (The CP only changed its tune when the crucial time for social change had passed away.)
Buoyed up by external aid, the French economy got into gear and embarked on a process of uninterrupted expansion. But this expansion was accompanied by sharp social strains and divisions within the ruling class and proved extremely painful to large sections of the petty bourgeoisie. The reasons for this lay in the antiquated nature of much of the apparatus of production and distribution and the pressures imposed upon it in the course of modernization. Conflicts and clashes of interests appeared between the modernizers in industry and the civil service and the vested interests of the older sections of the economy and their political friends. Hence the emergence of a number of warring but barely distinguishable political parties and groups all representing one or another section of the bourgeoisie or of the threatened peasantry and petty-bourgeoisie.
Thus, although in the fifties industrial production moved up at a brisk rate and important industries were given a face lift, social disintegration and political incoherence advanced with equal rapidity. With the onset of the nationalist revolt in Algeria in 1954, the situation steadily worsened and new opportunities were opened up for working-class action which the “left” parties failed to take advantage of. The Socialists, when in the government, carried on the war; and the verbal opposition of the Communists did not prevent them voting the special powers needed by the government to deal with the “emergency” nor was it matched by effective support to the Algerian revolution or to the big detachments of the Algerian proletariat forced to work in French industry by the poverty of their own country.
 
No Way Out
On the other hand the French bourgeoisie was forced to hang onto Algeria at all costs. Not only did it have a big economic stake, but a successful national struggle against colonialism would be a signal for a generalized revolt in the other African colonies. Moreover, without North Africa, the world position of France would once more be downgraded. These were the main reasons for building up in Algeria an army of some half a million men, largely composed of young conscripts. This vast army, officered by men anxious to revenge the defeats suffered in Indochina, was given virtually a free hand to maintain French rule at any price and by all means. In this it was seconded by the million-strong settler group in Algeria itself, profoundly influenced by racialism and right-wing extremism.
The Algerian war, as it dragged on, contributed a further festering stream to the already empoisoned social relations of the metropolis. The social crisis became deeper. Repression and even torture became everyday necessities. Parliamentary democracy became quite unworkable. It ceased to guarantee the essential interests of the leading sections of the bourgeoisie; it fostered all kinds of corruption; it fell into open contempt among the people. The settler revolt of May 1958 gave it the final push and gave the bourgeoisie the opportunity to throw off its fetters altogether. The depth of the crisis was now clearly revealed and the main sections of French capital thus tacitly agreed, if its rule was to continue, some of the old differences would have to be put aside and new, authoritarian content put into superficially democratic forms. This pointed clearly in the direction of General de Gaulle, who had been preparing himself for just such a moment for over a decade.
 
DE GAULLE’s task was twofold. First, he had to work out more favorable conditions for French capital at home both by strengthening the state apparatus and stamping out political intrigue and corruption. Second, but interrelated with this, went the object of defeating the nationalist movement in Algeria or forcing it to come to terms in a way satisfactory to French investment interests in that country.
The first of these proceeded comparatively smoothly. De Gaulle took over when the business cycle was moving upwards again on a world scale. His regime was thus able to take the credit for continued prosperity. In addition, by putting the exchange value of the franc on a more realistic basis and holding wages in check, a distinct improvement took place in the competitive position of French exports in the world market. The yawning balance of payments gap was thus bridged, though at the expense of a fall in real wages and a check to the home market, which is only showing its full consequences with the signs of slackening of the export boom. While the indices show, superficially, a continued improvement in production, behind the rising curves lies the fact that many sections of the economy, especially agriculture, have continued to resist adaptation. The restricted purchasing power of workers and peasants and the inability of French capitalism to grapple with such problems as housing have revealed that the much-discussed “neo-capitalism” has changed nothing fundamentally; especially has it done nothing to reconcile the working class to capitalist relations of production.
De Gaulle has been living in the past two years on a tremendous fund of credit derived from the confidence placed in him by diverse sections of the ruling class, but also from the widely held belief that he had the key to all problems. Even on the home front that has not been so; and the change in the economic climate is beginning to reveal just how little he has been able to achieve in the way of a permanent strengthening of French capitalism. At least here weaknesses and omissions have been concealed. The crucial problems which no one can escape concern Algeria.
In most other African colonies, De Gaulle has found obsequious house-boys temporarily, though he hopes permanently, to stand as guarantors for French interests against the colonial revolution. In Algeria, however, he has been up against an elemental movement, already in armed action, with deep social as well as national roots. Here, although many of the leaders of the National Liberation Front (FLN), may from time to time have been prepared for compromise, the circumstances of the struggle have left little room for a deal. For one thing it would lead to their denunciation by their own more militant supporters as a sell-out. Algeria is no Senegal and no Cyprus. Moreover, the presence in Algeria of the settler movement and an army under the command of a fanatical officer corps considerably narrows down the concessions which even De Gaulle can make in negotiations to bring about a settlement which will conserve the vital interests of French capital. Consequently, the Fifth Republic has been no more successful than its predecessor in bringing to an end a bitter conflict which it stubbornly refuses to recognize as a war. The war itself, with all its consequences, undermines in its course the foundations of confidence upon which De Gaulle’s government is based.
 
The Youth Rebel
As it does so, the war itself becomes more and more a nuisance and an outrage to French citizens; the most acutely affected and the most sensitive to its effects are the youth and the intellectuals. It is from their ranks, therefore, that has come the first movement which has openly proclaimed the need to fight the war by illegal means if necessary, as part of the struggle against the regime itself. The trial of a number of courageous people who had given assistance to the Algerian struggle resulted in the drawing up of the now famous Manifesto of the 121, which called for solidarity with them.
The clandestine actions of the accused, which resulted in their receiving heavy sentences, have clarified the issues and sparked off a series of reactions in all directions. The panic of the government has been revealed, and, at the same time, a searchlight has been turned on the regime itself. In recent weeks there can be little doubt that the French bourgeoisie has felt more threatened than at any time in the past two and a half years. The old lack of confidence in itself has come to the fore – now expressed in a waning confidence in De Gaulle. The struggle for succession now goes forward in intensified intrigues; in plotting which resembles the last year of the Fourth Republic; and the old parties are now reconsidering their relationship to the regime itself.
Rumors are heard that former contenders for power, Pinay and Soustelle, both former ministers in the De Gaulle government, are now ganging up together with their eyes on the future. Socialist chief Guy Mollet, who only last June, at his party’s conference, boasted that De Gaulle was carrying out their policy in Algeria, has now seen fit to make an outspoken criticism of that same policy; he clearly wished to draw a sharper line between himself and a regime which, it daily becomes plainer, is not eternal. Right through the old parties similar signs of change can be discerned.
 
The Manifesto
At the same time, the actions of the 121, headed by Jean Paul Sartre, have outlined more clearly the nature of the policies pursued by the “left” parties on the Algerian question. The most touched is, of course, the Communist party. It began with statements which condemned the “illegal” methods used by the resistors in terms not unlike those current in the bourgeois press. Lately, however, it has been more cautious. For one thing, Khrushchev’s recent references to Algeria, have been less indulgent to De Gaulle than those of the Camp David period. For another, the rank-and-file, obviously uneasy, has been pressing for a more militant stand. Thus, while still admonishing those calling for acts of resistance – desertions, aid to the nationalists, etc. – the tone is milder, and is now accompanied by the claim that the Communists must organize and carry on work in the army, not engage in individual acts of resistance. From a Leninist point of view the argumentation appears impeccable, but it is no secret that the carrying on of communist work in the army is something which has not been done systematically for a long while. In fact, since the days of the Popular Front, when communists have been marching, with only brief intervals, behind the tricolor and shouting patriotic slogans louder than anyone else it has been quietly abandoned. It is significant, however, that, at least verbally, it should be restored to respectability. Partly through the long-run effects of Communist policy, therefore, the workers are still largely inert.
 
THE sensitive intellectual sections, as has been stressed, have been the first to move. But it must not be thought that the majority have acted in a positive way. They were, in fact, put on the spot by the Manifesto of the 121, but in their great majority vigorously rejected its implications, so that while prepared to speak up for freedom of speech, they were not prepared to line up in active struggle against the government. The most widely supported petition, put into circulation by the teachers’ unions, is a quite mild document by comparison. It calls attention to the “moral” problems raised for young conscripts by the Algerian war. It goes on to say “the crisis of conscience and the spirit of revolt among the youth are inevitable, [the signatories] are persuaded that they will only get worse until the cause is removed: the war itself.” This piece of undoubted logic is followed by a call for a “negotiated peace,” before peace is imposed (by whom is not clear) amidst “convulsions” in France as well as in Algeria. And a warning is included against the “ultras” and the army officers who carry on the war. There is no analysis of the nature of the conflict, just the peace slogan – which could be merely an appeal to General de Gaulle himself to make peace.
In its majority, therefore, the “left” intellectuals themselves are evading the main issues. Clearly, their consciences are tormented by what they hear about tortures and repression carried out in their name (as they sometimes put it) and by the effect of the war on youth – either by making it absorb racial poison or leading it onto illegal paths. The use of the term “convulsions” is particularly revealing. It is difficult to see how anything can be resolved in a progressive direction in France or Algeria without “convulsions” and to act on any other presumption is to play into the hands of reaction. Yet the intellectuals around such journals as France-Observateur and L’Express have not yet woken up to this. Apparently the teachers and others who sign this petition, genuine in their opposition to De Gaulle, and in their desire to see justice done, etc., still wish to be able to return to their studies and cafes with some kind of an assurance that there will be no “convulsions.”
 
Suppression of the Facts
All this time, moreover, the government counter-attacks at the intellectuals’ main media of independent expression. The weeklies already mentioned have been seized a number of times of late, not so much for their editorial opinions as for factual reporting about the Algerian conflict. The government, which as yet does not dare to curtail press freedom directly, hopes to wear down the intellectuals’ press by striking at it through its finances. The seizures result in heavy financial losses and also means that many readers do not see the papers at all. In fact these “independent” journals are more vulnerable than the Communist party press, which is run at a loss anyway and largely distributed through party members and cells. The government wants to destroy the “independent” papers because it is afraid of the facts about Algeria being widely disseminated – and from sources not easily smeared as “Communist” or “Russian.” In so doing, it reveals its own fear of the consequences of a widespread popular awakening. It, too, does not desire “convulsions” – which must inevitably follow an intervention of the organized working class.
But the task of the French intellectuals is not to try to find a way around such intervention, but to contribute, so far as they are able, to the construction of a new leadership which can make that intervention, when it at last takes place, a decisive one.
October 17, 1960
 
Editor’s Note
1*. Tom Kemp teaches Political Economy at Hull University in London, England. [sic!]

emp: Torture, Ltd? (1960)





Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Tom Kemp
Valuable Signposts
The Economics of Communist Eastern Europe, by Nicolas Spulber. (Chapman and Hall, 100s.)

From Labour Review, Vol. 3, No. 4,, August–September 1958, p.111-113

Transcribed & marked up by Ted Crawford & D. Walters  for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2009.

For anyone wishing to make an assessment of the economic development of eastern Europe since 1945 this work provides an indispensable ‘point of departure’, as its author describes it. It is undoubtedly the fullest factual and statistical study of the area to be found between two covers in English and a testimony to the industry, if not to the insight, of Professor Spulber. He is clearly unsympathetic both to planning and to the regimes of eastern Europe, but his personal observations are kept to a minimum and his speculations are, on the whole, extremely cautious. This makes his book one which can be of value to those socialists who wish to understand the implications of Stalinist economic policy. It is true that Spulber identifies Marxism with the parody of it current in the USSR and the ‘people’s democracies’ and that he takes as inherent defects of planning what are merely excrescences and blunders grafted on to it in the Stalin era; and it is necessary to reinterpret much of his material before it can be of use for this purpose.
An important feature of this book is the mass of statistical material which it contains, conveniently laid out in tables and charts. The sources used are those of the government concerned; these sources, with all their defects, can, with careful checking and analysis, yield fairly reliable evidence about the structure and development of the economies. There are, however, important gaps in the official statistics: no balance of payments figures for the years after 1948 and no breakdown of national income figures by type and amount of personal income, for example. No doubt security considerations account for the former: the latter serves to disguise the disproportionate share of national income which has found its way into the pockets of the privileged strata.
The region which this book examines—it includes Yugoslavia, but not east Germany and Albania—was, before 1939, with the exception of Czechoslovakia, one of the most backward in Europe. It was predominantly agricultural, had a rapid rate of population increase, little experience of industrial development and a low average income per head. It was to a large extent under the control of foreign capital; as Spulber admits: ‘The foreign trade of the region as a whole was basically geared to the industrial countries of Europe’ (p.9). Not only did foreign capital control virtually the entire banking and credit system, but it was predominant in the larger enterprises in industry, mining and petroleum. While having a client status in relation to foreign interests, the ruling classes of the area were among the most arrogant, short-sighted, greedy, callous, cowardly and corrupt to be found anywhere in the world. Statesmen, journalists, officials, even monarchs were for sale to the highest bidder. Who can doubt that this area would have remained a fief of foreign capital, economically retarded and exploited as it had been for centuries, if such people had remained in control? There was a necessary cleansing process to be performed: the way it was done, the part played by the Red Army and the Stalinist parties, the holding in check of popular initiative and the installation of a tame bureaucracy, subjugated by purge and pressure of all kinds, account for the peculiar deformations of the new regimes that emerged. But the extent of the transformation, and its historical import, cannot be written down as Spulber appears to do: his relegation of the social and political context to a few lines, or a footnote here or there, makes many of the economic changes appear meaningless.
One does not have to be an apologist for the ‘people’s democracies’ to recognize the significance of what has been happening in eastern Europe. Indeed, the point is that thanks to wrong policies, stupidities, blunders and a slavish application of Russian policies and methods the industrialization of the area—the only way in which its people could be released from their secular backwardness and semi-barbarism—has involved avoidable suffering, the pointless sacrifice of many fine people and the identification of Marxism and socialism with practices fundamentally alien to them. But this industrialization necessarily involved a social revolution to get rid of the old ruling class and could only be undertaken within the framework of a planned, nationalized economy. All this is not to be found in Spulber’s book—in fact it is diametrically opposed to his own preconceptions.
What Spulber does, however, as he ‘objectively’ unfolds and interprets the course of development, is to provide evidence for a critique of ‘Stalinist’ policies—identified by him as socialism, planning or Marxism. And it is for this purpose that his book is especially valuable.
*
A fundamental question, raised at a number of points, which clearly shows the conscious adoption of a pattern derived from the USSR, is that of the priority allotted to the building up of heavy industry on the model of the Russian five-year plans. Now, given the conditions of eastern Europe, and the fact that little or no external aid could be expected, capital for economic development had to come from domestic resources. The greater the emphasis on heavy industry, the larger the proportion of current output which had to be devoted to investment, the less there was available for increasing (or even maintaining) levels of consumption. In the early stages of industrialization it is inescapable that the latter will be held in check: a socialist policy should aim at winning voluntary acceptance for this necessity at the same time as it shows a realistic grasp of the fact that this is conditional upon providing material inducements in the shape of a flow of consumption goods. Obviously a government with an overwhelming apparatus of coercion could, for a certain period, impose a high fate of accumulation and depress standards of consumption—but only at the price of alienating a large and growing proportion of the population. In eastern Europe when this process was being carried forward the people had already borne years of war, occupation, economic disorganization and shortages: there were limits to the further sacrifices which they could be expected to bear. A correct policy would, therefore, have aimed at keeping sacrifices to a minimum, consistent with providing the industrial basis for a considerable improvement in living standards in the future.
The policy actually pursued was a replica of that carried out in the. USSR. After the short, two or three year plans of reconstruction, five-year industrial plans were embarked upon which gave overwhelming priority to heavy industry, particularly iron and steel and engineering. Obviously these industries had to have special attention if industrialization was to proceed. But this was not all. Each country ‘aimed at all-round development, each stressed the necessity of producing within the economy every type of goods, even those whose cost had previously appeared prohibitive’. The policy of providing the basis for industrialization was therefore pursued beyond all reason and within the economically irrelevant boundaries of the national States. Every set of bureaucrats had to have their ‘own’ steel works or heavy engineering complex, their Nowa Huta or Sztalinvaros, and the economy of each country was screwed up to the attainment of objectives which both common sense and socialist theory should have shown to be irrational.
*
We therefore have the spectacle of each country pursuing its own objective of building up heavy industry with scarcely any co-ordination of the national plans. The programme of ‘socialism in one country’ was applied to a number of small countries, most of them backward, and with resources quite unsuited for an all-round development of industry, particularly for a complete heavy industry. Thus, in Spulber’s words: ‘Each country set itself the task of developing a complete engineering industry, almost regardless of cost and of the duplication of efforts involved'’(p.330). This type of development involved abandoning international specialization and lowering the efficiency of investment’ (p.304—Spulber’s emphasis). Instead of the area being conceived as a whole, in conjunction with the USSR, and in relation to the opportunities of trade with the rest of the world, each set of planners sought to work out their own salvation. Those of Rumania and Hungary were further burdened in the early post-war years by the need to pay reparations to the USSR! It is true that some division of labour was imposed by circumstances—primarily the distribution of natural resources, which made Poland an exporter of coal, Rumania of oil, Czechoslovakia of manufactured goods etc. Since 1956 more conscious, but still limited, efforts at co-ordination and co-operation have been made, because of the break-down of the old methods. But the damage had been done: one-sided development, massive misdirection of resources, unnecessary sacrifice of consumer goods production, the wasting away of popular goodwill and nightmare years of penury and purge. Far from discrediting planning, however, as seems to be in Spulber’s intention, this reflects the negation of planning, the fanatical pursuit of the form while sacrificing the essence, which comprises the sum total of Stalinism in this field.
Why was such a policy adopted? By his self-denying unwillingness to consider the political implications Spulber can give no clear answer. It all seems perverse, unreal, contributing to some omniscient purpose. No doubt he is right in declaring that it was not ‘simple mimicry’ of the Soviet pattern. That doesn’t make it any the less mimicry of a kind: but the process by which it was reached was complex and would take too long to investigate here. Certainly the thinking of the political and economic leaders must have been rigidly circumscribed by Stalinist orthodoxy in these matters: but it included a large element of sycophancy and servility as well as mere dogmatism.
In the closing pages of the book, where this problem is reverted to under the heading of ‘autonomy v. integration’, Spulber puts up a fuller but still inadequate explanation. In the course of the plans each of these countries became increasingly closely linked by trade with the USSR—a trend which was, of course, reinforced by the cold war, and especially by the Battle Act restrictions on ‘strategic’ exports from western sources. This focused attention on the ‘preeminence’ of the USSR. Indeed, since the area as a whole did not constitute an integrated economic unit—and the policies pursued had been working in the contrary direction—each State was highly dependent on the Soviet market and on Soviet supplies of key materials, such as iron ore and some machinery. What Spulber does not make clear is that as a consequence this underlined the political dependence of each government, and its servility to Soviet policy. To a considerable degree this must have been deliberate—especially after the Yugoslav break-out. A greater degree of economic co-operation within the area—which could have done much to ease and speed the process of industrialization—would have weakened the ties which bound each ruling clique to the Soviet Union, and enabled it to play an independent role in relation both to the West and to Russian demands. This was not to the liking of the Soviet rulers. And the vigorous efforts to stamp out ‘Titoism’ in the trials of Rajk, Kostov and Slansky show also that the rules of economic policy as made in Moscow were not followed without qualm by responsible leaders in the satellites.
A major weakness of the east European economies was the failure of agricultural output to rise as planned, which added a serious food shortage to the general crisis and overstrain which produced the changes in 1953 known as the ‘new course’. This followed soon after the death of Stalin and took place together with the Malenkov line of increased emphasis on consumers’ goods. It also coincided with the admission by Khrushchev of the shortcomings of kolkhoz agriculture in the USSR itself. In eastern Europe we find in the agrarian measures the same slavish adherence to Stalinist practice as in the case of industry. No fundamental attempt was made to adapt the policy of collectivization to the nature and needs of the agrarian system in each country, which could vary from the high concentration of land ownership in Hungary to its quite wide distribution in Bulgaria.
*
A series of ‘mistakes’ was made in agricultural policy, mostly directly traceable to an inflexible adherence to the Soviet model, notably over-haste in establishing collective farms, which could not be supplied with machinery of suitable quality, and measures against ‘kulaks’ which drove them off the land without providing for satisfactory alternative methods of cultivation. The ‘new course’ represented a slowing down, or even reversal, of the policies of previous years. But the change was not prolonged; within a year or two, and accompanying the rejection of the ‘Malenkov’ policy in the USSR, its exponents were denounced as ‘Right deviationists’ as, for instance, Imre Nagy. The return to the old policies in an unadulterated form was, however, out of the question. It was generally admitted that collectivization would have to be spread over a longer period than had been at first envisaged. The alacrity with which most of the Polish kolkhozes were dissolved in October 1956 shows how they had failed to strike deep roots among the peasantry, largely owing to the ham-handedness which marked their history. Agrarian policy as a whole was a conspicuous failure, not only because of bureaucratic methods, but because of the allocation of insufficient investment to this sector, which was, of course, tied up with the general unbalance associated with the emphasis on heavy industry at any price. The equipment in the collective farms, as well as in agriculture as a whole, was inadequate in amount and frequently worn out. Productivity often lagged behind pre-war and even total outputs at the end of the five-year plans were ‘for all countries except Rumania … below the ones scheduled for 1948-9 at the end of the reconstruction period’ (p.354 — Spulber’s emphasis).
The acceptance of Stalinist methods at the level of the enterprise produced no better results. Piece-work payments, wages differentials and Stakhanovism were introduced; ‘socialist emulation’ was organized by the trade unions, which were, in effect, part of the State apparatus; ‘one-man management’—one of Stalin’s ‘contributions’ to socialist theory—installed the leadership principle in the factory. The continuous Press criticism of ‘bureaucratism’ failed to get to the heart of the matter, which was the failure to elicit the full co-operation and support of the workers. Defence expenditure still further burdened the national income. The struggle to exist assumed in many cases a desperate and savage form. There were general indifference and ‘constant recrimination against increased waste of social property, widespread theft, and depletion of resources. Innumerable decrees have imposed severe sentences for such “offences”, but they have continued to grow and multiply’ (p.345). Spulber’s material on consumption levels is not very full and his assertion that it was curtailed during the five-year plan rests primarily upon the ratio of consumption to the national income. Considerably more information is required on this aspect, and it seems clear, from Poland and Hungary, that resentment at the privileged scale of living of the bureaucracy has been a factor as important as the low or declining absolute level of a large section of the population.
*
Recognition of the shortcomings of Stalinist factory policy produced the Yugoslav innovations of ‘decentralized management’ and elected workers' councils, which subsequently influenced developments in neighbouring countries. But such devices, when introduced from above, are merely fig-leaves to cover the naked irreconcilability of the interests of the ruling, clique with those of the mass of the workers. Only when solidly based upon the active support of the workers themselves, growing out of their aspirations and needs, can they provide the way out.
All in all, the experience of the countries surveyed in Professor Spulber’s study helps us very much to understand the problems of countries undergoing economic development. This experience should be analysed more fully by socialists. Approaching the material from a contrasting starting point, Spulber sets up some valuable signposts, although they may at times bear misleading inscriptions. Let us hope that we shall some day have an equally thorough job performed from a socialist standpoint.
TOM KEMP

Kemp Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 17 October 2009




Conflicting hopes and fears have been aroused in
other countries by the increased exports from the Soviet bloc. What is
the real perspective?
RECENT spectacular evidence of the technological prowess
of the USSR has made the capitalist world increasingly conscious of the
economic challenge from that quarter. Serious attention has been paid
to Khrushchev’s reiterated boasts of the ability of the Soviet Union to
catch up with and outstrip the advanced capitalist countries
economically. But while that is a matter for the next few decades, the
increasing activities of the USSR, and the other countries in its bloc,
in the sphere of international trade and, more recently, as a source of
aid for former colonial and “backward” countries, in direct competition
with the USA and the advanced countries, has raised the prospect of a
new and even sharper immediate challenge.
It is true that not only Soviet propagandists, but also those
Americans concerned with impressing Congress and public opinion with
the need to step up military spending and foreign aid, have an interest
in exaggerating the volume of this Russian aid. Even when allowance has
been made for this, there can be no doubt that the Soviet bloc
countries are now pressing into the capitalist world market to an
extent which was impossible only a few years ago; moreover there are
considerable potentialities for this to go much further in coming
years. A new, and it must be admitted, incalculable factor is being
injected into the political, as well as economic, world relationship of
forces. Despite deficiencies and contradictions in the available
evidence it is advisable to summarize these new trends and estimate
their significance for the future.
 
The Background
As a preliminary, the past relationship of the USSR with
the capitalist world market needs to be sketched in. [1] Lack of exportable surpluses, the
hostility of the outside world and to no small degree deliberate policy
had, by the 1930’s, reduced the foreign trade of the USSR considerably
below that of Czarist Russia. During the Five Year plans, especially
the first, the direct impact was felt of conditions in the world
market. An indispensable minimum of imports had to be obtained from the
capitalist countries, especially of machinery to be paid for with
agricultural products. The collapse of prices during the depression,
and, consequently, the deterioration of Russia’s “net barter” terms of
trade, had a markedly unfavorable effect on the plan. [2]
The policy of building “socialism in one country,” apart from its
political aspect, meant a degree of self-exclusion from the world
market which could only increase the burden of heavy investment
required by industrialization under pressure. Not that the USSR could
be completely self-sufficient – certain raw materials, machine tools
and manufactured goods could only be obtained in the course of trade.
Indeed, when the normal channels were interrupted by the outbreak of
war in the West in 1939 it was indispensable to rush through trade
deals with countries which were still accessible.
Then, after 1941, the economic contact  with the
capitalist world greatly increased, primarily because of the need for
strategic commodities and armaments. This took the form of a large
import surplus covered by the Lease Lend agreements with the USA,
Britain and Canada. No doubt in the short-lived false dawn of the
Teheran and Yalta conferences closer economic ties with the Western
countries were expected.




You Can Say That Again
“Nobody in his right mind wants war. But it
is questionable how many people in their right minds direct the world’s
destiny.”
– C.L. Sulzberger in the July 21 NY Times.




However, the extension of the Soviet sphere in Eastern
Europe, the Marshall Plan and the “cold war,” culminating in the Korean
affair, resulted in the East-West exchanges being greatly reduced. The
USA sought to deprive the USSR, and later China, of strategic materials
and imposed this policy on her clients in the Marshall Plan itself in
1948. The Labour government in Britain imposed its own ban in 1949. In
the course of the next few years these restrictions were made more
detailed and were reinforced by the passage of the Battle Act in the
USA in 1951. In addition an embargo was imposed upon trade with China
through a resolution of the United Nations.
From the Soviet side a theoretical consecration of the reduction in
trade was given by Stalin in his last work, Economic Problems
of Socialism, in which he spoke of “two parallel world
markets.” He claimed that this outcome represented an aspect of “the
general crisis of the world capitalist system”; with the “socialist
camp,” as a result of its fast rate of industrial development, moving
to a position where its members will “not only be in no need of imports
from capitalist countries, but will themselves feel the necessity of
finding an outside market for their surplus products.” [3]
Not long before in the same year, 1952, an International Economic
Conference was held in Moscow as a climax to a great campaign to break
through the trade embargo and increase the volume of exchanges with the
capitalist countries. In terms of its effects on trade, this piece of
junketing was a failure, though it no doubt scored some propaganda
points. On the basis of Stalin’s pronouncements the persistent demands
for East-West trade voiced by the Communist parties in the capitalist
countries appear contradictory – unless it was to provide a market for
those “surplus products” of which Stalin spoke. It was more likely that
Stalin was rationalizing a situation which was far from being to the
advantage of the USSR and that the trade embargoes were having adverse
effects not only on the Eastern European countries – cut off from their
traditional markets – but on the USSR itself. [4]
Looked at from the technical standpoint of, say, the economists of
the Economic Committee for Europe at Geneva, the price that was being
paid by both sides for the artificial division of the old continent was
harmful and unnecessary. [5] It
was not difficult to point out that the abnormal reduction in the
volume of exchanges did nobody any good, and that complementary
economies were being kept apart at great cost. In practice, however, no
iron curtain divides politics and economics. There were, of course,
politicians and businessmen in the West who would have liked to see a
greater volume of East-West trade, which could have eased the balance
of payments difficulties of the Western countries and provided a way
out of economic, political and military dependence on the USA. However,
in the main, and no doubt correctly, the West European bourgeoisie
estimated that its survival was linked with the USA, as the dominant
segment of the capitalist world system. The costs and risks of the

“cold war” – with American support – were preferred to the problematic
advantages of “peaceful coexistence”; that is, maintenance of the
status quo in face of gathering revolutionary processes which Western
imperialism felt must be rolled back if capitalism were to avoid
extinction. Of course, the nature of the problem changed with the
development of the world situation. By the mid-1950’s, if not earlier,
among the allies of the USA there was growing dissatisfaction with the
trade restrictions.







East-West trade, as such, offered no panacea for an evil
which was rooted historically in the dire problems of an outworn social
system on the one hand and the contradictions of bureaucratically
degenerated, or deformed, regimes on a progressive base on the other.
Although the prosperity of the capitalist world in this period made the
problem less serious, the latent trade war breaking into the open
became increasingly burdensome to both sides – the demands of the world
market were reasserting themselves.
Not only, as Stalin had foreseen, did the Eastern bloc have export
surpluses, but it also needed goods from the rest of the world in
increasing volume to carry through its industrial plans and meet the
demands of consumers for a greater choice and variety of goods. At the
same time, the world political situation offered possibilities of
strengthening relationships with the “uncommitted countries,” such as
India, Burma and Indonesia, through the offer of industrial, technical
and military aid. On the side of the capitalist states, the passing up
of lucrative trading possibilities became increasingly irksome,
especially as the danger of imminent war receded and problems of
overproduction and increased trade competition loomed ahead for certain
industries.
 
“Peaceful Coexistence”
In the view of the Soviet leaders, “peaceful
coexistence” presupposes increased trade between the “two world
markets.” Thus Mikoyan, at the Twentieth Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, brought out the doctrine of comparative
costs to underline the point. [6]
No doubt such arguments express a sincere desire for a modus
vivendi through the normalization of trading relations with the
capitalist states. At the same time they express the fact that the USSR
is not, and cannot be, isolated from the capitalist world market.
Since 1955, when summit talks took place in Geneva, trade between
Eastern and Western European countries has been increasing. In 1956 it rose

by 20% and a further rise occurred last year. But on both sides
restrictions remain which are bound up with the political division of
the world. In any event, the further industrialization of the USSR, and
more particularly Eastern Europe, may have reduced the possibility of
export from the area of the “traditional exports,” mainly food and raw
materials. Their demands upon the world market will likewise have been
undergoing change. The simple complementarity of the two “halves” of
Europe is no longer as plain. By this time more manufactured exports
could figure in the trade of the East European countries; on the face
of it they may penetrate more easily into the less developed countries
outside the Soviet bloc rather than into Western Europe.
The goods which Western Europe has been sending East in greater
quantities in recent years are “raw materials for capital goods
industries” and “engineering products” – an index of the demands of
industrializing countries. For example, the Soviet Union and Poland
have, in recent years, placed important orders for complete industrial
plants and power station equipment. [7]

On the other hand, it is well known that such countries also export
complete plants or “aggregates,” mostly to others in the bloc, but in
some cases outside it. Thus specialization and the advantages of the
international division of labor are asserting themselves once again, if
at a higher level.
The end of the phase of apparently boundless prosperity in the
capitalist countries reinforces the demand for a reappraisal of the
possibilities offered by these markets. In 1957 Britain decided to seek
trade with China, despite the embargo, though still within the limits
of the restrictions on strategic exports. Under conditions of a
spreading trade crisis in the West there may well be a struggle for a
place in these markets. [8] While
these openings cannot avert a trade decline they can alleviate the
position for those countries which are prepared to go along with the
Soviet Union and her allies in other respects. A situation might,
therefore, arise in which the USSR would be able to drive hard bargains
because of the anxiety of the capitalist countries to find a market for
their goods. On the other hand, the arrival on the world market of
goods of which the USSR has an oversupply herself might aggravate the
decline in prices of such products and worsen trading problems in the
capitalist world. A recent example of this is the sale of aluminum,
which has obliged Canadian producers to lower their prices. [9] However, the role which foreign trade
plays in the capitalist economies and those which are centrally planned
is different in certain important respects. The capitalist countries,
as well as having to provide themselves through foreign trade with
commodities which it is impossible or uneconomic for them to produce in
their own territory, need markets to realize their goods at a profit.
At the same time, because of the anarchic nature of capitalist
production relations, to continue to realize goods at a profit in the
internal market may depend upon not merely maintaining but increasing
the export market. For capitalist countries, “export or die” becomes an
economic imperative in time of slump. While, as regards the USA, its
disproportionate development in relation to the rest of the capitalist
world market has produced unrealizable surpluses – in goods or
productive capacity – and to sustain the level of profits and activity
a permanent unpaid export surplus is necessary. Of course, the
surpluses are disposed of in such a way as to serve the interests of
American capitalism.
In the case of the USSR and similar planned economies, foreign trade
is bound up with the plan itself. However, it does present some special
problems. For example, since agricultural production varies with the
harvests there may be years in which surpluses are available for export
or when imports are required in order to meet a shortage in the
harvest. For the rest, the endeavor will be made to regulate the volume
of import-export flows in accordance with the requirements of the plan.
Of course, plans may not be achieved, or they may be overfulfilled;
but, once the plan is operating, changes in exports and/or imports will
require reallocation of resources within the plan. This may limit the
willingness of such countries to participate in multilateral trade in
the world market. Generally, they will have a preference for bilateral
agreements which determine in advance the amount and kind of goods to
be exchanged – and for a capitalist economy it may be difficult for
such an undertaking to be fulfilled. [10]
If some inflexibility in foreign trade arises from a plan, the plan
does not dominate foreign trade to the extent it does internal economic
developments. As one authority puts it: “If the State is master of all
the economic levers of command inside the USSR, the bodies concerned
with external trade have, on the contrary, to take account of price and
production movements, fluctuations in supply and demand, which occur
independent of their will. Also, given the profound repercussions
which, in certain circumstances, the non-fulfillment of
the plan for foreign trade will have on the execution of the production
plan, one reaches here one of the weakest points of all planning
carried out on the scale of a single country, large as it may be. [11]
Under planning, then, there are definite limitations to the scope
for altering the volume of imports or exports in the short run –
assuming that they first have to be paid for out of current (planned)
production by the sale of goods at world market prices; while exports
can only be increased at the expense of (planned) investment or
consumption unless output has exceeded that planned. Failure to import
on the scale planned or to sell what had been planned at favorable
prices will affect the plan adversely. On the other hand, the necessary
readjustments can be made under the control of the planning bodies.
There is not the same drive to dispose of export surpluses at all
costs, such as is found in the capitalist economies. It is, of course,
fundamental that there should be a state monopoly of foreign trade.
What this very terse summary of a complex problem shows is (1) that
the world market and the international division of labor impress
themselves on a planned economy in one country; (2) that in the short
run the foreign trade of such an economy cannot be varied entirely to
order. It is true that increased imports can be paid for from reserves
of gold and foreign exchange, or even from credits, while exports could
be supplied on credit or made as grants, but, apart from
overfulfillment of the plan in that line, only at the expense of
domestic consumption and/or investment.
This implies that there are definite, and it may be, in the short
run, quite narrow limits to the increase possible in East-West trade.
Within these limits, however, trade and aid can be consciously directed
and employed with deliberation by the USSR and, to some extent by the
East European countries, as a political weapon. Again its effectiveness
will depend upon circumstances. The ability to turn trade on and off,
to switch imports from one country to another and provide aid in the
service of foreign policy has been demonstrated many times over the
past decade or two. Thus the political significance of the purchase of
part of the Egyptian cotton crop or even of the Icelandic trawler
catch. Credits were withdrawn from Yugoslavia at the time of the break
with the Cominform; new credits were extended after the reconciliation
in 1955, and withheld as part of the virulent anti-Tito campaign in the
summer of 1958. The entry of the USSR into the world economy on a
growing scale as buyer, seller and creditor opens up ways of altering
the political balance in her favor.
Even with the growth in trade between East and West which has taken
place in recent years it remains below the prewar level. It is still
very small in relation to the total trade of Western Europe. Thus
imports from East Europe and the USSR were 8.4% of the total in 1937;
in 1956 they were only 3%. Exports at 6.8% in 1937 were down to 3.5% in
1956. The only countries whose trade with the Eastern European
countries exceeded 15% of the total were Iceland, Finland, Yugoslavia
and Turkey – geography, rather than politics, played a major role here.
[12]
As far as the Soviet Union is concerned it seems probable that means
of payment are no problem when goods are urgently required – gold,
foreign exchange, arms, or whatever it may be, are made available. Use
is made of multilateral payments; for example, earnings in sterling
from the sale of goods to the United Kingdom may be used for the
purchase of raw materials from the Sterling Area. Since the absolute
volume of the exchanges with the Western countries is still so low, it
seems likely that they would have to increase many times over before
means of payment became a real problem. Political factors at present
play the main role. This seems to have been the case, for instance,
with the large “shopping list” publicized at the time of the
Bulganin-Khrushchev visit to Britain. Only a fraction has been bought,
even though much of it was not covered by the embargo on strategic
goods. [13]
For the other East European countries the political obstacles are
even more apparent. Their desire to sell in the West – their main
prewar market – is no doubt still important and they would be only too
happy to follow Poland in obtaining credits from the same sources,
although they may not like to say so openly, since imports could ease
internal economic strains. It is difficult to see any possibility of
closer economic inter-penetration on the basis of “peaceful
coexistence.” Indeed, the development of the European Common Market, so
far as it succeeds, will probably constitute an obstacle to
reestablishing trade links between East and West. [14]

 
Recent Appeals
Notable efforts have been made lately by the USSR to
develop a larger volume of East-West exchanges. American newspapermen,
economists and finally the President himself have been appealed to with
arguments of mutual interest. Thus the Soviet economist, Aboltin, in a
special communication to the American Economic Association, indicated
that the “socialist” countries “offered a stable market not subject to
cyclical changes.” Attuned to the current recession, he made the point
which is a frequent standby of Soviet propaganda; that is, that “In
case of an economic crisis the guaranteed stable market provided by the
countries of the socialist system can substantially improve the lot of
the working class and the peasantry and also alleviate the difficulties
of industrialists hit by the crisis.” [15] Khrushchev made a similar point in his letter to
Eisenhower of June 2, 1958. The substantial purchases from the USA
which he contemplated “would enable American industries to work at a
higher percentage of their capacity and would raise the level of
employment.” [16]
It can hardly be assumed, however, that Khrushchev and his academic
cohorts are only thinking of the welfare of the working class, or of
industrialists, in the capitalist countries. Khrushchev is capable of
speaking for hours about the future, with its competition between
socialism and capitalism, without referring at all to the role of the
working class in the advanced countries. Nor should the contradiction
in the idea of the Soviet Union offering itself to capitalism as a life
line in a period of crisis have escaped his academicians. Indeed, the
goods which are obtained by trade still have to be realized in the
internal market. How can that be accomplished when such commodities are
glutting the market owing to depression?
Everyone knows that Khrushchev acts quite empirically, and speaks as
he acts – by definition, as it were, he cannot be a “revisionist.” In
the letter to Eisenhower the motives of the East-West trade campaign,
from the Soviet side, seem quite transparently revealed. If the
grandiose 15-20 year plans upon which Khrushchev is staking his
reputation are to be realized, tremendous additional investment will be
needed – he loses no occasion, for example, to stress “the paramount
task of developing heavy industry.” However, the lags and
disproportions in Soviet economy, for all the rapid expansion of recent
years – and in part because of it – are manifest. There is, therefore,
an imperative necessity to alleviate the strains, as far as possible,
and to increase the flow of goods on to the market without prejudicing
the fulfillment of the plans.
Here foreign trade can play an important role. Especially when there
is a desire to “catch up” in fields where the Soviet Union is
especially backward. If finished goods can be obtained in such fields,
considerable investment can be avoided and valuable time bought. This
is especially true in relation to plastics and chemicals – in which
serious lags behind developments in the advanced capitalist countries
exist. Although Khrushchev says: “The Soviet Union has every
opportunity, and all the necessary resources, for successfully
fulfilling the programme” [17],
he goes on straight away to admit, in effect, that this is only so in
the long run. Meanwhile he proposes a long list of machinery which the
USSR would like to buy in the USA at once, offering in exchange, it may
be said, the raw materials which typically figure in the export lists
of a less developed country.
The attractive prospect held out to capitalism of alleviating crisis
by trade with the Soviet Union disguises Khrushchev’s purpose of
diminishing the strains of the present phase in Soviet economic
development. This recognition is not, of course, an argument against
East-West trade. But it does stand in contrast to some of the official
boasts or claims that the Soviet Union has broken away from the
capitalist world market, built “socialism in one country,” and so on.
The Economic Committee for Europe falls into such a mistake when it
says: “The costs of autarchy are by now probably insignificant for the
Soviet Union ...” and draws a contrast between its situation and that
of the smaller countries of Eastern Europe. [18] The statement is valid only in the most abstract
way; i.e., in the light of the mass and variety of Soviet natural
resources. In terms of the real world it is meaningless.
For one thing the USSR is closely tied up with the other countries
in the bloc, and through them with the world market. And more directly,
as has been seen, not only the political but also the purely economic
costs of autarchy are far too high for Khrushchev to be able to meet.
His efforts to secure a larger place in the capitalist world market
give the lie, too, to Stalin’s pretensions regarding the parallel world
market.
 
The “Second” World Market
The economic relations of the USSR with the “peoples
democracies” have shown many contradictions over the past decade. Most
of these countries were economically backward; the first task, after
the reconstruction phase in the early postwar years, was
industrialization. At the same time, the economic links of these
countries had formerly been predominantly with the Western European
area. Under the new conditions, however, the leading trading role was
played by the USSR both as an exporter and an importer. In addition,
some of these countries were obliged to pay reparations to the USSR. [19]
What was most remarkable was the limited nature of the progress
achieved in coordinating the economies of these countries, although
they were all, after 1948, organized on a planned basis under the
control of Communist parties, The Council of Economic Mutual Aid
(CEMA), set up in 1949 as a counter to the Marshall Plan (which some of
the East European countries might have sought to join but for Soviet
opposition), did little more than facilitate agreements for trade and
industrial and technical assistance between pairs of countries. [20] There were innumerable
bilateral bargains amounting to barter deals – nothing as flexible as
the multilateral clearings possible between the Western countries in
the European Payments Union (EPU). [21]
At the same time, within these countries, all of which were small,
and all except East Germany and Czechoslovakia backward, the attempt
was made, in a short space of time, to establish a rounded industrial
structure with emphasis on heavy industry on the lines of the Five Year
plans of the Soviet Union. This served to underline their dependence
upon the USSR – especially for industrial raw materials such as iron
ore – which also became a main outlet for their exports. There was,
however, little specialization between the countries in the
industrialization plans, apart from that which was obviously imposed by
physical factors.
The upshot of the unimaginative following of the Soviet model was a
sequence of strains and stresses, particularly marked from 1953 onwards
and culminating in the Polish October and the Hungarian Revolution in
1956. These methods had been costly in popular good will as well as in
resources. It was particularly obvious that there had been inadequate
coordination of planning and trade, despite CEMA.
At its sixth session in December 1955, CEMA took steps to bring in a
greater degree of division of labor as far as engineering products and
fuels were concerned. Provision was also made for greater coordination
in the separate national plans. However, it was not until the Warsaw
meeting of CEMA, in July 1957, that proposals were put forward for
long-term coordination of the national plans for ten or fifteen years.
Permanent commissions were set up to consider the problems of
particular industries and to secure a greater degree of cooperation in
research and development. A multilateral clearing was also to be worked
out for facilitating trade within the area. These belated projects,
which are still in the formative stage, are a token of the previous
lack of such coordination, of which there have been many complaints in
the East European countries in the last two years. [22]




Congressmen at Work
The need for legislation to lower
restrictions on trade with other capitalist countries has been urged by
Eisenhower as “vital” to “free world” strength. That the message did
not fall on unit elligent
minds is illustrated by the record of Congress at its last session.
Exemption on duties was granted muzzle-loading pistols
and revolvers, since these are “artistic antiques” and would have “no
adverse effect on American employ merit.”
Also duties on harpsichords and clavichords were
lowered from forty to the eighteen per cent levied on pianos. The old
rate, naturally, must be paid on instruments imported from
Communist-controlled countries.
The legislators likewise did their duty by beating back
an attempt to restrict imports of wood charcoal by charging a tariff of
$4 a ton, another attempt to bar imports of cobra snakes and eggs, and
still another to regulate imports of piranha fish for tropical
aquariums.
However, on the other side of the ledger, the
congressmen killed a bill to give exemption to bagpipes, kilts and
other items “particularly and specifically pertaining to Scottish
Highland attire and use.”
Similarly to be weighed against their achievements was
rejection of a measure that would have ended import duties on “common
horse, mule or ox shoes, of wrought iron or steel.”
Finally, before adjourning, they refused to permit free
import of Cheddar cheese for “the international Cheddar cheese scoring
contest at Fond du Lac, Wis.”




It has now become customary to castigate the mistakes of
the earlier period and to accept the proposition that considerably
greater advantage must be taken of the international division of labor.
Of course, the advanced countries, Czechoslovakia and East Germany, in
this area were particularly disadvantaged by the shrinkage of foreign
markets as well as by the inadequate degree of division of labor within
the bloc itself. Thus V. Kaigl, Director of the Economic Institute of
the Academy of Science of Czechoslovakia, has stressed the elementary
truth that in order to take advantage of the economies of large-scale
production and automation the heavy fixed costs must be spread over a
large volume of output. [23]
For a country with a small home market and a high degree of
specialization in manufacturing, like Czechoslovakia, that means fuller
participation in external trade, “the need to intensify specialization
and the co-ordination of production between all the countries of the
socialist camp.” It is true the Kaigl speaks only of the “socialist
camp,” but no doubt it would be greatly to the advantage of
Czechoslovakia to extend its market more broadly in other parts of the
world, in the underdeveloped countries, for example, to which it could
export machine tools and other products needed for developing industry.
The economic strains experienced by the countries in the Eastern
European bloc has led to greater interest being taken in participation
in the international division of labor. In order to determine the goods
which it will be advantageous to trade with the rest of the world,
however, more careful assessment will have to be made of relative costs
of production.
According to a recent number of the Economic Bulletin for Europe it
is anticipated that endeavors to take fuller advantage of the
international division of labor will result “in some reversion to
commodities traditionally exported to Western Europe which had been
neglected in the past, and increased efforts may be made to push the
production of those commodities among the new export items which appear
to be competitive on western markets at prices more or less reflecting
domestic production costs.” [24]
The same journal notes that Hungary, East Germany and Poland have
“granted enterprises the right to conclude deals directly with foreign
firms in some industries.” An instance of such a deal is that between
Poland and India in 1956, concerning state enterprises on both sides in
which Polish steel and cement were exchanged for Indian iron ore. [25]
Up to now, however, the East European countries have been highly
dependent on the USSR. To a considerable extent Soviet trade took the
form of an export of raw materials which later, in part, returned to
the Soviet Union in finished form. But a good deal of the
industrialization of the area was carried through with the help of
machinery and even fully equipped plants from the Soviet Union.
Continuing industrialization, especially because of the disproportions
involved in the method by which it was undertaken, has increased
dependence on the USSR. Meanwhile the flow of finished goods back to
her market now constitutes an important addition to supplies for
consumers increasingly insistent upon the availability of more and
better quality goods.
No doubt these countries have been assets to the Soviet Union, at
least until the last two years or so – she has been able to get the
better of trading bargains. Since no balance of payments figures are
published and such items as military aid are unknown it would be an
impossible task to draw up a balance sheet. Even hostile critics now
admit that the current net balance is flowing the other way. [26] Hungary has become a heavy
liability. Considerable aid and concessions have had to be made to
Gomulka’s Poland and, in a lesser degree, to East Germany and Albania. [27]
 
China Needs Aid
The victory of the Chinese Communists and the need to
carry forward the economic development of a backward Asiatic country of
600,000,000 people simultaneously raised new and immense problems. The
major part of the capital for investment in Chinese industrialization
had to come from domestic resources. But outside assistance was
imperative and, with the hostility of the capitalist world, it could
only come from the USSR and Eastern Europe – themselves by no means
endowed with a surplus of capital in this period.
Although a great deal of equipment for industries and collective
farms was received from these countries, this aid was offset to some
extent by that which China had to grant to North Korea and Viet Nam.
The Chinese economy was under considerable pressure to export, and
still is, in order to expand trade with its trading partners in Eastern
Europe or anywhere else so far as trade restrictions allow. The
economic problems of China have not been unlike those of the East
European countries in recent years. The Soviet Union has taken the
place of the rest of the world as a trading partner – accounting for
about 80% of Chinese trade in 1954. Several loans have been obtained
from the USSR to
be paid off in agricultural and mineral products and handicraft goods.
Still capital is short and some raw materials have to be bought
abroad. This imposes a strain on agriculture, which is the main sector
from which exports can be derived. While agricultural production
increases too slowly, domestic consumption tends to rise; as a
consequence, “planned targets for export often have to be lowered
because of increased domestic demand.” [28] There is no doubt that the trade embargo imposed
by the United States has, as was intended, increased the strain of
industrialization. [29] Or
putting it another way, if China could have participated more freely in
the world market her economic development would have been smoother.
Whether in its European or Asian segments the so-called “parallel
world market” has been inherently incapable of compensating for lack of
fuller participation in the world market. Indeed, the fullest
possibilities of international division of labor within this market
have not been seized as they could have been. In large part because of
the nature of the economies which compose it, the volume of their
exchanges is very much smaller than those in the rest of the world. The
raising of income levels within it both depends upon, and will make
necessary, increasing specialization and exchange – thus does the world
market impose itself.

 
Soviet Prestige
In the last decade or so the attractive power of Soviet
central planning has been particularly marked in those countries which,
having recently acquired political independence, have been seeking to
carry forward policies of economic development. Even where this
influence has not taken the form of the emergence of an influential
Communist party, it has, nonetheless, been evident in the prestige of
the USSR and the interest taken in its economic achievements. Indeed,
the experience of the USSR is directly relevant to countries faced by
the need to embark upon heavy investment programs in order to raise
future income levels. The remarkable economic development in Soviet
Central Asia, for example, cannot fail to impress when compared with
the continued stagnation or sluggish growth of similar areas. [30]
Further, the existence of a non-capitalist group of powers provides
the ruling groups in the newly emancipated countries with valuable possibilities of
maneuver and of leaning upon the Soviet Union in order to counter the
influence of imperialism. [31]
Until the last few years, however, although the USSR might proffer
counsel and facilitate cultural exchanges and the like it could hold
out little in the way of material assistance to compare with the flow
of US dollars. But this pattern is changing. To a certain extent, and
in growing measure, the countries of Asia today, perhaps those of
Africa tomorrow, can turn to the USSR for technical and financial
assistance, thereby reducing their dependence on the capitalist
countries and contributing to the rounding out of their new-won status.
As already pointed out, there is a double possibility of propaganda
exaggeration in the extent of the aid so far given. On the other hand
some capitalist critics have been busy deflating these exaggerations to
something like their true dimensions.
Of the total of $1,900,000,000, for total Soviet aid to
“uncommitted” countries since 1955 publicized by the State Department,
one-quarter went to Yugoslavia, one-quarter in arms to Egypt, Syria and
Afghanistan, and, according to The Economist, of the
remainder, “only a fraction has actually reached the recipients.” [32] There are, of course, sour
grapes in this writing down of a new threat to world capitalism which
actually cannot but give grave concern both in the USA and in Britain
Indeed the increasing attention it receives in the press is an index of
mounting anxiety. After all, the arms shipments to Egypt were a thorn
in the side of the imperialists; nor can the more recent aid to
Indonesia, relatively small as it is, be brushed off so easily. [33] Since the credits so far
granted are for a period of years, the whole sum has not yet actually
been received in goods; but it will be – and there will be more to
follow. The significant thing is that a beginning has been made.
However, when all has been said and done, both aid and trade are, so
far, on a relatively small scale. Future aid depends upon the ability
of the Soviet economy; and also upon the health of the East European
countries and China, which will undoubtedly have prior call on
available resources.
What are the prospects here? Clearly, continued rapid growth on the
scale necessary to fulfill Khrushchev’s promises will require
considerable new capital investment in the USSR. Some sectors of the
economy, in particular, will require either expansion or a greater
effort at re-equipment. Certain geographical areas, including Central
Asia, lag behind in income levels and still need much new investment if
they are to be brought up to the level of the more advanced regions.
Agriculture, transport and power, for example, all need huge new
investments of capital if per capita income is to be brought up to West
European levels. Likewise, in Eastern Europe, further Soviet aid may be
needed in order to bolster the economy. As for China, there will, for
many years to come, be an inexhaustible demand for capital.
Great demands are therefore likely to be made on Soviet productive
capacity in the coming period, so great that a tremendous outflow of
aid to “uncommitted” areas is unlikely. On the other hand, there will
undoubtedly be “surpluses,” both of raw materials and of capital goods,
as capacity expands, which it will be in the interests of the Soviet
Union to exchange on the world market or to deploy in aid in accordance
with international political needs. Indeed, it may, in the interest of
external security, be worthwhile, or necessary, to supply these goods
on long credit terms to underdeveloped countries. On the other hand,
taking Khrushchev’s protestations of “peaceful coexistence” at their
face value, the Western countries may propose, as The Economist

suggests, Soviet participation in a United Nations program of aid to
the underdeveloped countries.
Trade, as distinct from aid, between the USSR and Eastern Europe and
the other continents, also remains of comparative insignificance. Thus
a United Nations report states, “Even after the increases in recent
years, trade with overseas areas is still of relatively small
importance in the foreign trade of East European countries. In 1956 it
probably accounted for some 6-8% of their total foreign trade and some
30% of their trade with the Western trading region.” Similarly, “For
the overseas trade-partners the relative importance of the trade is
even smaller and rarely amounts to more than 3%.” [34]
Trade with Latin America is small – since that area is under the
dominance of the USA – so is that with Africa. Even in Asia and the Far
East, where the prestige of the USSR is highest, trade is still small
compared with that of the capitalist countries. Thus India’s trade with
the USSR and Eastern Europe is roughly only one-tenth that with the
United Kingdom. The same is true of Indonesia, where trade with the
USSR in the first six months of 1957 amounted to only  £8,000,000 for
imports and exports combined.
The Soviet impact on world trade, while growing, so far remains
small. There is no special pressure to sell, though there is clearly an
advantage in exchanging surpluses for goods which can contribute
positively to internal economic development. But Soviet transactions –
selling, buying or making credits – can be pursued with one eye on the
political implications. The politically independent underdeveloped
countries, seeking to extricate themselves from economic subservience
or wishing to find a support in opposition to the imperialist powers,
turn increasingly to the USSR for economic aid. Political expediency,
as well as the claims of economic advantage, will in fact largely
determine the kind of bargains into which the USSR will enter. And in
the existing political division of the world there is not the choice of
abstaining. From this standpoint, too, the USSR finds itself
inextricably involved in the world arena. In particular it cannot stand
by and watch the “underdeveloped” countries swinging into the balance
against the Soviet Union, behind the USA under the rule of American
stooges.
 
Conclusions
This survey suggests that the economic impact of the
“Eastern bloc” on the capitalist world market, while growing, is still
modest. There appear to be distinct limitations to spectacular growth
in the immediate future, though no doubt the trends of recent years
towards a greater volume of exchanges will be continued.
The further growth of those economies will impose the need for
greater specialization – both within the so-called “socialist camp” and
between its component countries and others in the capitalist orbit. As
pointed out, the Czechs, with their advanced industry and confined
territory, are especially sensitive to this factor. But to a greater or
lesser degree these needs are felt from China to Rumania.
Increasing contact with the world market will impose the need for
greater flexibility and will reveal weaknesses – exposing bureaucratic
mismanagement to the scrutiny of comparison. Indeed this has long been
the case, especially with East Germany and Czechoslovakia. Thus the
United Nations Economic Bulletin for Europe pointed out that in both
these countries in 1957 “the relatively high rates of growth of
over-all output which have so far been maintained conceal continuing
failures to produce the assortment and quality of goods required and to
reduce production costs according to plan. The familiar reports of
failure to meet export contracts continue in Eastern Germany, where the
annual plan for export deliveries was fulfilled only to the extent of
44% in the first 8 months of this year [1957].” In Czechoslovakia
“equally familiar complaints persist – of failure to deliver machines
and equipment of required type and quality, both to domestic users and
to export, and of shortfalls in planned supplies of rolled steel and
other foundry products.” [35]
In the period of the first Five Year plans in the USSR, what
impressed world opinion was not only the tempo of growth which was
achieved but the coincidence of it with falling production, chronic
depression and stagnation in the capitalist world. In assessing the
full economic impact of the USSR in the coming period, therefore, it is
not only its relations with other countries and the world market which
will be significant. To a greater extent this will reside in the
possibility of economic difficulties, stagnation or even decline in the
capitalist world side by side with continued expansion in the centrally
planned economies. Then, for example, the question of the influence
which this will have, not only on the underdeveloped countries, but
also on the working class of the advanced countries becomes of
paramount importance.
The terms of the problems of East-West economic relationships are
simplified and vulgarized in the current propaganda of the Soviet
leadership and its faithful echoes throughout the world. In fact, far
from being straightforward, these relationships are shot through with
all the contradictions which arise from the confrontation of the two
systems resting on incompatible bases.
On the one hand both “camps” are part of a world market – which
asserts itself upon all countries despite political barriers. Indeed,
these two “camps” compete and conflict in and through this market – for
example to win the allegiance of “uncommitted” countries – just as they
carry on economic dealings which are mutually advantageous. But beyond
this the development of the non-capitalist segment weakens permanently
and progressively the economic and political hold of the capitalist
world system. It withdraws whole areas of the world from imperialist
exploitation. It provides a point of leverage which other peoples use
to win or extend their freedom of action.
On the other hand, the weakening position of capitalism, which shows
through despite the prosperous recent phase of its development, leads
individual countries to look to their own possibilities of extending
their market by trade with the Eastern bloc. This tendency has been
more pronounced precisely since the boom has shown signs of flattening
out and has even given place to the probability of recession on a world
scale. Under these conditions it becomes more difficult for a common
policy of trade embargoes and restrictions to be imposed at the command
of the USA.
At the same time, the economic development of the Eastern European
countries, the USSR and China proceeds amid disproportions, distortions
and sudden turns. Their productive forces expand, but not smoothly and
in a straight line. There are weak links, unsolved problems, and the
overhead of the bureaucratic political regime. A prime need is that of
increased coordination and specialization to smooth the process of
industrialization and to satisfy the demands of consumers for more
goods, greater variety and quality. The pressure towards fuller
participation in the world market follows – but not on the lines
indicated by the “peaceful coexistence” nostrum of maintenance of the status
quo. The 
basic issue in the long run is: Will capitalism be able to continue to
dominate the world market? This is already so apparent that even
comparatively slight encroachments by the USSR cause alarm and
speculation, especially where the “underdeveloped” countries are
concerned.
The working out of the issues discussed here will be inextricably
involved with all those political and economic forces determining the
fate of mankind in coming years. No tidy set of slogans can provide an
answer; but in elaborating policy for the working-class movement
careful note must obviously be taken of all the trends and
possibilities, of which some indication has been given, in order to
utilize them to the best advantage.
 



America’s recession terrified capitalists in
Europe. But the dreaded impact has not been felt as yet. A Marxist
explains why
ONE of the most significant aspects of the American
recession of 1957-58 was the attention which it received in the
European press. Even before it became clear that it was to be the most
acute since the war, it had probably occupied more space in the press,
especially in Britain, than the two previous postwar recessions
together.
The defenders and beneficiaries of capitalism in Europe began to lay
bare some of the anxiety which had been dormant during the great boom
era. Some resentment against the transatlantic big brother, whose every
minor ailment was liable to afflict its weaker brethren with
debilitating disease, was to be detected. Others sought in the lessons
of the past the key to the “American Enigma” [1] and some dire predictions were circulating by
midsummer, 1958, even in the sober pages of United Nations
publications. It is true that all good men accepted that a recurrence
of anything like the depression of the 1930’s was out of the question. [2] But if their arguments were
subjected to rational appraisal it could be seen that faith played an
important role in them.
As it happened, of course, more by good luck than judgment, the
predictions of numerous economists on both sides of the Atlantic that
the recession would be sharp but short seems to have been confirmed.
The revival currently proceeding could be a mere respite before a more
drastic downward plunge; such things have happened before. On the other
hand the prospect of a renewed powerful upswing, based on a high level
of new business investment, seems improbable for the moment. It seems
unlikely, therefore, that the European economy will, in the coming
months, receive much impetus from the United States; if anything the
situation on this side of the Atlantic is likely to set limits to the
extent of American recovery.
Both segments of world capitalism are in positions today somewhat
unlike anything predicted. How did this occur? Even those who were
confident that the recession in the USA would not be prolonged, often
tended to be gloomy about its impact upon the rest of the capitalist
world. Thus a long, leading article in the London Economist,
regarded as an organ of City business, put forward a series of detailed
proposals intended to deal with the threatened shortage of dollars
consequent upon the recession. [3]
Dollar injections into the world economy on a sufficient scale to
prevent the volume of world trade being curtailed were to be effected
either directly or through the underwriting of the Sterling Area and
the turning of the International Monetary Fund into a “super central
bank” well supplied with dollars. A heartfelt appeal to “economists in
the American administration” to “start working on the minds of the
non-economists among their colleagues” concluded the article, which
reflected the prevalent anxiety in business circles at the time of its
appearance in May 1958.
In the following month the Economic Bulletin for Europe
contained a highly technical article on The International Impact
of the United States Recession which made less specific proposals
but was based on similar premises. [4]
That is, a chronic shortage of dollars was in the offing and if world
capitalism was not to be severely shaken by the inevitable trade
contraction which would ensue, the United States should “take part in
arrangements designed to alleviate the impact of the recession on
international liquidity.” And these “would be needed even if domestic
action were to be taken in the near future to raise demand in the
United States.” There was another alternative to which the authors of
the article pointed: “concerted action by the industrialized countries
of western Europe to maintain high levels of output and trade in the
international economy outside the United States.” [5] And this would entail some measure of discrimination
against imports from that country.
The Labour party’s economic program, published in July, while seeing
the “possibility of a world slump arising out of the present American
recession,” evaded the question of how its effects in Britain could be
countered. The main line of defense suggested was the restriction of
dollar imports; i.e., discriminatory practices hardly to the liking of
the US government. [6] Clearly the
authors of this document sincerely hoped that the danger would never
have to be faced. Not long before, one of the Bank reviews, discussing
possibilities for government action to maintain home demand, added that
it was “certain that the UK could not hope to spend itself out of a
serious American recession.” [7]
From about May 1958 an undercurrent of serious doubt crept into
discussion of the American recession for several months, especially in
Britain which was particularly vulnerable to cold blasts blowing in
from a disorganized world economy.




In God We Trust
American billionaires are withholding
investments in Asian and African lands because of their “fear of
expropriation,” according to the Dec. 7 New York Times.
But these “also are the regions in which the Communist ‘economic
challenge’ is being most vigorously pursued.”
Philip Cortney, chairman of the United States Council
of the International Chamber of Commerce and president of Coty, Inc.,
came up with the following solution to the problem:

“It will require more intelligence than
dollars, enlightened selfishness and unselfishness of the free nations
and people, a great responsibility of their leaders, if we are to stave
off the flux of the barbarians. So help us God.”





Precarious Equilibrium
The reason for the anxiety was that even before the
recession began European capitalism faced the prospect of a serious
recession of its own. [8] In both
the previous postwar recessions in the United States powerful upward
movements had persisted in most European countries. Then, throughout
the 1950’s, Europe had experienced a surge forward of investment and
production with a classic capitalist boom superimposed upon a high
level of activity generated by armaments and other state expenditures.
As a consequence there was a strong pull on the industries producing
means of production both to expand their own capacity and to equip the
industries turning out consumer goods. The extent of this investment
boom differed in each country, being generally most rapid and
far-reaching where wartime destruction and previous underinvestment had
left a terrific backlog of investment opportunities, which, in the
favorable conditions of an expanding world market and technological
change, could be profitably exploited.
In the nature of things such a boom tends to exhaust itself – rising
costs cut into profits, some sectors of industry grow
disproportionately and markets tend to become saturated. Already during
1956 the rate of expansion had slackened and in many countries it
slackened still further in 1957. [9]
During 1958 a distinct contraction was perceptible in Britain, Belgium
and the Netherlands and was incipient in a number of other countries.
The emphasis of economic policy had shifted from coping with the
inflation and recurrent pressures on the balance of payments, which had
accompanied the boom, to the problems involved in utilizing capacity
and maintaining the rate of new investment. Not only did the American
recession threaten to confront the European countries with a new
shortage of dollars to maintain their external trade but it could
precipitate a sharp and perhaps uncontrollable plunge in domestic
activity.
Despite the rapid recovery of the capitalist world market since the
war, largely made possible by dollar injections through the Marshall
Plan and other American aid programs, it is still in precarious
equilibrium. The disproportion between the United States and the rest
of that market still remains. It shows itself in the dependence of the
other countries upon their ability to earn dollars for essential
payments in the USA. And most capitalist countries – Western Germany is
the main exception in Europe – have very slender reserves available to
cushion adverse changes in their own balance of payments. The fear of a
repetition of the 1940’s, with their chronic dollar deficits, hangs
over foreign economic policy. Hence the measures taken by the British
government in September 1957 to meet a drain of sterling, though that
meant dampening down business activity at home. Hence, too, the
measures proposed in many quarters during 1958 to meet the apparently
imminent all-round shortage of dollars expected to be a consequence of
the US recession.
The boom in the industrial countries was closely interlocked with
the growth in their foreign trade, including increasing trade amongst
themselves and with the USA. The expansion of demand from the primary
producing countries consequent upon this boom in turn reinforced it.
For some time before 1957, however, commodity prices had been falling,
raising the prospect that within a foreseeable time they would have to
curtail their imports from the industrial countries – setting in train,
or contributing to, a contraction in world trade and depression in the
industrial countries. The US recession introduced a new fear, that of
further pressure on commodity prices by reason of the lower demand for
imports, likewise playing back upon the industrial countries.
Such expectations had shown themselves to be only partly valid in
the previous US recessions. As it happened in 1957-58 a number of other
factors entered the picture, obscuring the clear-cut outlines that had
been expected or feared. In fact the manifold relationships of the
capitalist world economy do not lend themselves to mechanical
representation as a series of two-way transactions or cause-and-effect
sequences. They are inherently dialectical in their complex
interactions; shot through with unevenness and contradictions.
Moreover, each boom-slump cycle in capitalist development shows its
special features: the effect of technology, harvest variations, wars
and war preparations are among the factors which may impose variants on
the abstract theoretical pattern. The resultant for any particular
national economy of the happenings in the world market – to which it
contributes in greater or lesser degree – are not easily deduced from
the original elements. Thus, for example, a recession in the United
States will not have easily predictable results on other countries. A
good deal will depend upon the nature and extent of the recession, as
well as upon the point at which it impinges upon the latter, whether
they are booming, as in 1953-54, or on the threshold of contraction as
during 1958. Likewise experience shows, as will be seen, that a
downturn in the USA does not necessarily aggravate the outstanding
economic problems of other countries. Some may, at any rate for a time,
derive more good than harm from the fact.
 
Why They Escaped
The most direct way in which the recession could have
made its impact upon the European economy was through a fall in US
demand for its exports. All the main European producers have made
special drives in recent years to extend their direct sales in the
expanding American market, with not inconsiderable success. Had these
sales dropped, the effect on the industries most concerned would have
been severe. No doubt there would be a time lag until pre-recession
orders had been fulfilled, but repeats could have expected to be lower.
In fact, however, while some European exports did fall off others rose,
making possible an overall increase for the first nine months of 1958.
The key to this unexpected outcome lies in the nature of the US
recession to date. The main brunt fell on investment outlays,
inventories, industrial production, business profits and employment,
all spread unevenly over the economy. On the other hand, though
consumer demand ceased to rise as it had been doing during the previous
period, and even fell back a little in per capita terms, the aggregate
level of consumption fell by no more than about one per cent. If
European exports had entered the circuit of exchange via the production
of means of production (Department I) as raw steel, heavy machinery,
machine tools and raw materials, they would have felt the full blast of
the reduction of American industrial activity. Indeed, since imports
from Europe would have tended to be the first to be cut the effect
would have assumed an exaggerated form; Europe would
have become a depressed area. As it is, comparatively few European
exports pass through those parts of the economy most severely affected
by the recession. A considerable part enter more or less directly into
the consumption stream, either in competition with the American-made
article or as non-competitive specialties. The maintenance of
consumption meant that their market was preserved, especially as they
were not generally the kind of goods consumed by workers most affected
by unemployment and short time.
Had the recession become increasingly virulent during the second
part of 1958 there is no doubt that these favorable conditions would
have been in jeopardy. Consumption would have fallen, and had it
reached the higher income levels, European imports might have been
severely affected. In addition, had higher tariffs been imposed under
pressure from American manufacturers, or had they switched successfully
to compete with the imported article, a valuable market might have been
greatly reduced.
A special factor of considerable force was the ability of European
automobile manufacturers not merely to maintain, but greatly to
increase, the volume of their sales, despite the depression in the
American industry. Not only did that mean valuable dollar earnings; but it
contributed to the high prosperity of the European car industry which,
both through its heavy investment outlays and its rising production
figures, had been a star performer in the boom of the fifties. [10]
The behavior of American consumption was clearly a vital factor in
preventing direct contagion of the European industrial countries. At
the same time, the influence of American conditions on already existing
world trends contributed to easing rather than intensifying their
dollar problem as had been expected. It is true that these expectations
had foundation in the light of the experience of the latter part of
1957 when there was some constriction of the flow of dollars into the
world economy. Thanks to the maintenance of American consumption,
decline of exports and continued foreign investment there was no
overall shortage of dollars in the course of 1958.
As far as the industrial countries of Europe were concerned, the
main operative factor was a continued improvement in their terms of
trade as the prices of primary products continued on their downward
course – assisted on their way by the fall in American demand.
Consequently, coincidental with the recession in 1958, has gone a
strengthening in their balance of payments, and additions have been
made to their international liquidity in the shape of gold and dollar
reserves despite a falling off in world trade. [11]




Class Index
One of the Greek philosophers is reputed to
have said that man is the laughing animal.
In light of the scientific investigations of Professor
Alex Inkeles, a Harvard sociologist, the Greek view evidently requires
further refinement. Prof. Inkeles has found that the laugh is a
barometer of social status.
“Contrary to popular belief, the lower you are in
social status, the less likely you are to report having laughed during
the past day.” In addition, lower-status women are more likely to have
said they have cried.
The professor reported, moreover, according to United
Press ( Dec. 6), that his “rule held true in warm countries such as
Italy, as well as cold countries, such as Britain.”
Thus modern science must be credited with another
discovery of far-reaching benefit to mankind. You can now tell a
capitalist by his horse laugh.




This process has imposed a serious strain on the primary
producers, more particularly those whose staple exports have been
subject to marked declines in world prices. Some have been running
heavy deficits in their current balance of payments, drawing down
reserves of foreign exchange previously accumulated in other centers,
London in particular. Loans and credits from various sources, including
the United States, have enabled them to go on buying from the
industrial countries. In general, however, their position has become
more precarious and will be made even more so to the extent that
production falls in Europe. At any rate the industrial countries of
Europe have automatically profited from their embarrassments up to now.
Unless the recent slight recovery in primary product prices is
confirmed and continues for some time, or further injections of foreign
aid can be obtained, some of the underdeveloped countries will have to
make cuts in imports and impose further trade restrictions. The
attractions of trade with, or aid from, the Soviet Union will increase.
The recent agreement between Argentina and the USSR is but another sign
of the times, for Latin America is a comparatively new field for such
deals as far as the latter is concerned. [12] It is noteworthy that business representatives of
Germany, France, Britain and other countries have been scouring the
region for years in an effort to extend their trade; rivalries would
certainly intensify if Europe’s difficulties increase.
Up to the last quarter of 1958 the American recession has had few
appreciable effects on European capitalism and may even have
temporarily alleviated some of its more pressing problems. The fears
which were so widespread a few months ago have tended to be dissipated.
Confidence seems to have been favorably influenced by the behavior of
Wall Street prices as well as by the easier foreign exchange position.
The usual seasonal pressure on sterling, for example, did not occur
this year; instead there has been an unusually high surplus on the
balance of payments. Nevertheless, in Britain, Belgium, the
Netherlands, and to some extent in France, recession is either
developing or is feared.
 
Respite for How Long?
The threat to the equilibrium of the world market, and,
even more dangerously, to the very survival of capitalism which would
have followed upon a severe American slump spreading out on a world
scale seems to have receded into the background for the moment. The
spokesmen for European business are visibly relieved. Now they are
wondering what sort of respite they have secured. As one of them wrote
recently:
“Europe has so far remained largely insulated from
American developments. Unfortunately it looks as though she will
continue to be so in the immediate future, for it is unlikely that the
American recovery will produce a rapid improvement in the economic
climate here.” [13]
In other words, a number of European countries – West
Germany seems the most important exception at present – are facing
their own recession unaided by any powerful uplift from a full-scale
expansion across the water. In this negative sense the American
recession has had an important bearing on the situation of European
capitalism. The mere failure of the United States to continue its boom
through 1957-58 may deprive Europe of the spur it needed, and still
needs, to prevent it from lapsing into a comatose state of
semi-stagnation, symptoms of which have been apparent in Britain for
some time. [14]
For the present, facing lowered production and unemployment that has
risen above the 500,000 mark, the Conservative government consoles
itself with the improvement in the strength of sterling. The shape of
the problems looming before European capitalism are perhaps most
sharply delineated in the case of Britain, but in essence they are to
be found everywhere. In France and Germany they have been slower in
coming to the forefront for a number of special reasons, but they may
not be long delayed and would break through very quickly were there to
be a sharp contraction of world markets, such as might be precipitated
by a worsening of the position of the primary producing countries.
In the meantime the governments of the capitalist countries, under
the pressure of business interests, have been considering how they can
maintain their share of trade in the more intense competition now
expected. The proposals for a European Free Trade Area for the sixteen
OEEC countries (those which benefited from the Marshall Plan) and for a
customs union, known as the European Common Market, of France, Germany,
Italy and the Benelux countries, have been given a new appraisal in the
light of changing prospects. Each country is now afraid of being at a
disadvantage if others have their way; threats, menaces, bickering and
horse-trading have characterized the negotiations of recent months over
initiating the new structures. [15]




Clean Earth
Whether a clean bomb will be produced is
still uncertain. What is certain is that the bombs already made can
produce a clean earth.

“It would ... be possible,” said the
Council of the Federation of American Scientists, Nov. 25, “for a
fanatical ruler to pull down the entire human race to destruction. With
a stockpile of the size that now exists, it is possible to cover the
entire earth with a radiation level which for 10 years would remain
sufficiently intense to prove fatal to all living beings on land.”





No substantial agreement has been arrived at
internationally to deal with the eventuality of a deepening of the
recession. Instead, steps have been taken to give exporters more
generous credits or to diminish the threat of outside competition by
restrictive policies. Each national capitalism seems likely to seek a
solution of its own problems regardless of whether the measures adopted
will adversely affect the prospects of the others. The race will be to
the strongest. Thus the French industrialists, with their high
production costs, seek to avoid a situation where they will have to
confront their German competitors in their own territory with the lower
level of protection which entry into the Common Market will impose.
Likewise the British cotton textile manufacturers, hard hit by
competition from Hong Kong (and to some extent from India, as well as
from China in Far Eastern markets), have been trying to secure a
“voluntary” limitation of exports into their home market from Britain’s
colony.
Moreover, in general, recession seems to have a loosening effect on
the common front which the capitalist powers have put up against the
Soviet bloc since the war.
The immediate prospects of European capitalism depend upon the
capacity of the system to extract and realize surplus value on an
expanding scale. Clothed in special forms, concealed, if not modified,
by the changes which it has undergone in recent decades, the classic
dilemmas of capitalism still impose themselves. The most pressing
question is whether markets can be expanded to enable the capacity
built up during the boom to be profitably employed and to enable the
producers goods industries – most threatened or affected by falling
output – to resume their advance. [16]
Even the adherents of the system are mostly convinced that this can
only be done by some measure of state intervention amounting, in
effect, to the provision of markets in which surplus value can be
realized and which would not otherwise have come into being. [17]
In Britain there has already been some decline in arms spending as a
proportion of national income, and Prime Minister Macmillan has offered
this as one of the reasons for the growth in unemployment. On the other
hand the continued rise in industrial production in France through 1957
was accounted for in part by “a steep rise in public expenditure,
consisting primarily of higher military outlays connected with the
Algerian conflict.” [18]
Although some German sources claim that the slight recession
experienced in some sectors earlier in the year has been overcome,
there is little doubt that performance will be less brilliant in 1958
than for many years. [19] In
the first half of the year the rise in exports came to an end; they
were expected to fall in the second half. The effects of this
slackening has so far been counteracted by continued construction and
investment, but the United Nations Economic Bulletin for Europe
doubts whether this “will suffice to secure an accelerated increase in
total output in the rest of the year given the tendencies towards
stagnation or decline of private consumption and exports.” [20] The prospects of West Germany depend
to a large extent upon the future behavior of world trade and whether
incentives will be found for a continued high level of investment. Its
comparative immunity from the effects of the American recession does
not signify that it. will be able to continue on an upward course.




The Real Incentive
A recent study of 2,500 “wage” incentive
plans in 29 Industries reveals that for every 1 per cent increase in
wages earned by the worker, the companies on average increased
productivity by 3.1 per cent and cut unit costs 1.25 per cent.




Now and in the near future the Keynesian claims that
appropriate fiscal measures and government spending can avert
depression will be put to the test. Already in Britain the rapid
increase in unemployment within the last nine months has induced the
government to step up investment in the nationalized sector, lower the
interest rate from its crisis height of 7% down to 4½% and take
measures to encourage installment buying of homes, cars and consumer
durables. There is not much doubt that these measures can give some
relief by creating, as it were, an artificial market. The volume of
consumer credit, for example, is only about one-fifth that current in
the USA. [21] With one car to
twelve people, against one to three in the USA, the automobile
manufacturers look hopefully towards a growth in the home market
demand. At present, however, cars carry a luxury tax (known as
“purchase tax”) amounting to 60% added to the factory price. Even with
10% deposit and two to three years to pay, as under the new credit
terms, few workers can expect to buy a new car. [22] The Conservative government will no doubt
consolidate electoral support with the middle class with such measures,
but whether they will stem the drift into recession depends upon many
factors, including important ones quite beyond their control.
 
Not Immune
Countries with high export ratios, such as those of
Western Europe, cannot expect to expand for long unless the whole world
market is doing so. A great deal depends upon whether the present
limitation of the market is a passing phase or merely the prelude to a
resumed expansion. The shift towards a more optimistic view of market
prospects which has been taking place in the past two or three months
in business circles is obviously based upon the latter view. [23] The growth in foreign
exchange reserves – a result of falling import prices – has given the
industrial countries the means whereby to finance the larger volume of
imports needed in the early stages of a re-expansion. On the other
hand, if their exports continue to fall not only would this tend to
dissipate the reserves once more but government spending and fiscal
policy would be of doubtful efficacy against the cumulative
deceleration taking place within the economy. The main difficulty would
be of maintaining those industries and sectors hardest hit by the loss
of overseas orders, as well as by cut-backs in private investment which
would also follow. [24]
A situation of this kind could have been expected to follow for
Europe had the American recession deepened and extended through to
1959. As has been seen, other counteracting forces, largely of a kind
which cannot be counted upon to recur, were sufficiently potent to
alleviate, rather than intensify, the tendency to recession already
apparent in Europe. Certainly the experience of the past year does
nothing to prove the immunity of Europe – or of one or more countries
on that continent – to a subsequent depression. Should it coincide with
a contraction of the world market the most exposed sections of European
capitalism would be thrown into an economic crisis which, while perhaps
not as profound as that of the early thirties, might be even more
significant in its political results.




Space Can Wait
“The ultimate goal of space travel is
sometimes cited as justification for the missiles race. Anyone who
believes this belongs on a psychoanalyst’s couch. Since the intensity,
duration, spatial distribution and frequency of radiation bursts are
only now being investigated, it is by no means certain that man can
venture into inter-planetary space and survive. And if it should prove
feasible, what’s the hurry? An effective therapy for cardiovascular
disease alone would be worth far more to the human race than a few
fledgling astronauts setting foot on the moon.”
– Carl Dreher in the Dec. 13 Nation.




That is not to say that the strengthening of the
working-class movement in the European countries necessarily depends
upon a sharp deterioration in the economic situation. The growing
uncertainty, the threat to jobs, the swings from inflation to
recession, the inability of the system to justify itself in terms of
living standards will provide increasing opportunities for developing a
new leadership on a militant socialist program. At the same time, the
crisis of confidence on the part of the advocates and beneficiaries of
the system, which came close to the surface under stress of recent
events – in Britain the fear of an American depression, in France the
crisis of the colonial system – may break through and stand fully
revealed.
It is not suggested that these possibilities are immediate; but they do
seem
to sum up the tendencies in European capitalism. Taking account of the
complex interplay of all the components; considering the effect of the
spread and consolidation of the colonial revolution; adding the
possible consequences of increased rivalry and pressure from the
Soviet-Chinese bloc – then the prognosis of an indefinite smooth
expansion of world capitalism seems entirely excluded.
A primary unknown is the time schedule. It is impossible to foresee
how long it will take for these various processes to work themselves
out and at what time conditions will be most favorable for superseding
a system which has long outlived its historic usefulness.
Nor should it be assumed that capitalism will break down of itself.
Without the intervention of the subjective factor, a conscious
socialist movement, capitalism will always be able to “solve” its
problems as it has done before: through crises, fascism and war.
 



What is the significance of the goals announced by
Khrushchev at the Twenty-First Congress? Study of the Seven Year Plan
provides illuminating data
THE targets adopted at the Twenty-First Congress of the
Communist party of the Soviet Union are claimed not only to mark the
entry into the last leg of the race to catch up and outstrip the
advanced capitalist countries in per capita output but also to lead to
the threshold of communism. These claims need to be appraised carefully
and realistically on the basis of the present and potential capacity of
the Soviet economy, their relationship to the balance of social forces
inside the USSR and their consequences for international political
developments in the coming fifteen years.
 
Industrial Growth
The economic tasks are defined by Khrushchev as
entailing “the all-round development of the productive forces” while
conserving the priority development of heavy industry. [1] Indeed, capital investments provide the
limiting factor in the rate of growth of the economy and the attainment
of figures in the plan turns upon their full realization. The scope and
nature of the investments comprised in the seven-year target figures
give a fairly full guide to the way in which the economy will have to
be redirected to take advantage of what has been achieved in past
plans, as well as to make good, as rapidly as possible, the lags and
deficiencies which still hold back the Soviet economy. Without
overcoming these weaknesses it is idle to talk of “balanced
development.”
The range and abundance of minerals to be found in that part of the
earth’s surface within the USSR apparently ensures that the physical
possibility for the achievement of the target figures is sound enough.
However, it will be necessary to bring about considerable shifts in the
relative importance of the various areas in total output of iron ore,
petroleum and other minerals. This means further rapid development in
Central Asia, the Urals and Siberia and will involve the urbanization
of new areas and the recruitment of workers for the new enterprises
from the countryside or perhaps from Western Russia. Although there may
be disadvantages in this, it will be possible for the new productive
units to be built on an optimum scale, making use of the latest in
technology.
At the same time technical efficiency now imposes wider use of
alloys, especially in developing branches of industry such as
electronics. Nonferrous metal production therefore takes prominent
place in the plan. In chemicals the Soviet leadership has been
expressing dissatisfaction with output, especially of artificial and
synthetic fibres and plastics. Output of the former is to grow four
times, that of the latter to be stepped up over sevenfold. In addition,
though not mentioned by Khrushchev at the Congress, production is to be
greatly increased in East Germany and Czechoslovakia and machinery is
to be obtained from those countries. It will be recalled that machinery
for building up this lagging sector of industry was one of the items
which Khrushchev sought for purchase from the USA  in his letter to
Eisenhower in the summer of 1958.
Special attention is being paid to the power base, and significant
changes in the relative importance of different fuels is involved. The
share of oil and gas is to rise from 31% to 51% and that of coal to
decline correspondingly. This follows a trend already marked in the USA
and Western Europe. In the case of electric power the need for speed
has clearly dictated the preference for thermal over hydroelectric
stations. The figures announced for electric power output will bring
Soviet per capita consumption in 1965 up to only 73% of the American
level for 1957, a sobering thought which prompted Academician Strumlin
in an article published last December to query the adequacy of the plan
in this direction. [2] He also
proposed the completion of the Krasnoyarsk hydroelectric station. It is
difficult to tell whether his criticisms carried any weight in the
adopted target. Khrushchev did, however, have to explain that to keep
the existing proportions between thermal and hydroelectric station
construction would either involve a cut in the planned capacities in
operation or greatly increased investments.
This underlines the inevitable limiting role of investment as well
as the heavy burden of “catching up.” What it means is that the period
of planning has to be confined within a time-span which cramps the
rational allocation of resources and which threatens to provoke waste,
if not disproportions. Thus Lenin’s ideas on electrification are being
deformed to suit the specifications of “socialism in one country.”
The great distances of Russia and the spacing out of natural
resources and fertile and populated areas has always given the
transport system a key place in economic development. All advance
hinges upon the transport system which, if it lags behind, spreads high
costs and disorganization far and wide. The pressure on the transport
system has always been immense and it has barely kept pace with the
demands imposed upon it. Inevitably, therefore, considerable funds have
to be provided for the modernization of the railways and the extension
and improvement of the road system. The railways, again following in
the wake of the advanced countries, will be turned over to diesel and
electric propulsion, while traffic capacity is planned to double.
As for the road system, that has always trailed behind. For a
country of such distances and with such a large and scattered rural
population the number of motor vehicles is remarkably small; an index
of the still considerable weight of inherited backwardness. [3]
Likewise many of the roads are incapable of coping with the speeds
and loads of modern vehicle traffic. “Motor roads will be built with a
durable cement and concrete surface,” Khrushchev says, implying that
too many still have the rough dirt track of the days of the peasant
cart.
Both roads and houses consume immense quantities of concrete and
cement. The clear lag here makes necessary a gigantic target: an
increase in the next seven years equal to the present output of the USA.
All the constructional industries will be subjected to heavy strains
to attain such targets. Nor is it any longer merely the comparatively
crude task of adopting and assimilating a ready-make technique from the
more advanced capitalist countries. The tasks now being set are far
more delicate and difficult, involving the carrying forward of the
all-round level of technology to a higher level and fitting it to the
requirements of a planned economy. At least one element in the
reorganization of economic areas carried out in 1957 was precisely
determined by the changing level of the Soviet economy.
Realization of the new difficulties likely to be encountered has
evidently prompted the setting of a lower rate of growth than that
attained in the earlier five-year plans, a point which has been seized
on by most hostile critics. Khrushchev’s own words are no doubt true
enough when he states that the plan “is being drawn up in such a way
that it can be carried out without overstrain” and in order to make it
easier to avoid disproportions, the great nightmare of Soviet planners.
In other words, it might be said that a slackening growth rate is,
among other things, a precautionary step. The current planners and
their regime cannot in fact release all the energies inherent in a
planned and nationalized economy. They are constantly launching
broadsides against waste, neglect and mismanagement – to no apparent
avail. They are constantly exhorting one or another section of the
population to work harder and better. In words, at any rate, they pay
respects to the need for the support and active participation of the
masses. But it is clear, if only from these repeated pleadings and
warnings that they do not have, and cannot attain to this situation.
 
The Promises of More and Better
Nevertheless it is undeniable that the fruits of past
economic development are now being reaped, if still laboriously – and
if still unequally distributed. The expansion in production means that,
even with no change in the proportionate production of consumer goods,
there is more to distribute in absolute terms. The growing availability
of many goods which until recent years could not be found even in the
Moscow shops is attested to by all visitors to the Soviet Union. It is
true that they mostly tell about the capital, where per capita retail
sales may be as high as three or more times those in the provinces.
Even so, improvement has been taking place, and the insistence of the
Russian workers and peasants upon more and better consumer goods of all
kinds means that there can be no turning back. Not only that but it is
evident from the words and deeds of the Soviet tops in the past few
years that, even while defending their privileges and the prevailing
inequality in the receipt of the good things of life, they are
increasingly sensitive to criticism. To defend their order it is no
longer enough to distort Marx, it is also necessary to deliver the
goods.
Their ability to do this, greater than before because they now
handle an economy at a higher level of industrialization, is still
limited by many factors. Their own incomes and perquisites obviously
constitute one barrier. A closed book in the official record, for
obvious reasons, unequal distribution of the “good things of life” is
itself admitted. When Khrushchev states, however, in reply to the
unmentioned offstage critics with whom he frequently debates, that what
he calls “equalitarian Communism” [4]

“would only eat up our stockpiles, make extended reproduction
impossible and block successful expansion of the economy” he says
precisely nothing about the point at issue.
He seems to be trying to say that more equal distribution would mean
reduced production, but that is not necessarily so. Once a certain
volume of consumer goods production has been planned the problem is how
it shall be distributed – and that can have nothing to do with eating
up stockpiles, preventing extended reproduction or blocking economic
expansion. Perhaps the wrong things are being produced for a more
equitable distribution – too many limousines and not enough washing
machines – just because incomes are unequal – that is what
happens in capitalist countries; there is no doubt that it occurs in
the USSR as well.
In order to defend the privileges of the bureaucracy, for that is
what it amounts to, there has to be constant insistence that the actual
distribution of income follow the socialist principle of “from each
according to his abilities, to each according to his work.” The incomes
of the ruling stratum are thus assimilated to their “labor
contribution,” which it is implied, is greater than that of other
members of society. Let us leave aside here the theoretical
difficulties of reconciling this view with the claim that the USSR is
in sight of communism, and consider how Khrushchev faces up to the
critics.
He refers, for example, to “some scientific workers” who alleged
that “distribution according to work signifies application of bourgeois
law to Socialist society.” He wriggles round this charge by asserting
that inequality of shares are inevitable in “the first phase of
Communist society” and has nothing to do with “bourgeois law.” Either
the “scientific workers,” out of discretion, perhaps, did not state
their case very well, or, which is more probably the case, Khrushchev
has distorted it as wilfully as he distorts Marxism. Certainly, and
that is the important thing, the bourgeois norms of distribution
penetrate everywhere into Soviet society hidden behind such expressions
as “payment according to work performed” and “material incentives.” The
bad faith, bluster and apologetics of the spokesmen of the ruling group
bear witness to their bad consciences and their sensitivity to
criticism.
In fact it is constantly necessary to refute what the Political
Economy Textbook called the “petty bourgeois doctrine of the
equality of wages.” Doubtless no one has put forward such a demand, but
the strong current of opinion rising against special privileges and
glaring inequalities can be inferred from the space devoted in Soviet
publications to an oblique, but increasingly sophistical defense of
them. Not long ago, for example, the same Professor Ostrovityanov who
was editor-in-chief of the textbook showed signs of some second
thoughts.
“As we advance to communism,” he wrote, “the gulf
between maximum and minimum wages will be reduced by further raising
the wages of the lower paid workers, which will be brought about by the
growth of production, the lowering of production costs, the
cutting of the staff apparatus and the reduction of the excessively
high incomes of various groups.” [5]

(My emphasis.)
It is not often that reference is made to “excessively
high incomes” and Khrushchev did not feel called upon, at the Congress,
to ask for any sacrifices from the assembled functionaries and members
of the staff apparatus. [6] Even
the members of the “anti-party group” were not given the severe
punishment of having their emoluments reduced to the level of the
lower-paid workers.
Definite promises have been made, however, to raise the wage levels
of the lower-paid grades, and what has been said about them points to
the existence of a submerged fifth of the working population still on
the standard of bare necessities. Thus it is promised that workers paid
from 270 to 350 rubles a month will be raised to 500-600 rubles over
the seven-year period. In other words there are many workers whose
day’s wages can buy no more than a quart of milk, a meter of cotton
cloth or twelve pounds of potatoes. Where there is talk of an increase
in real incomes of 40% note must be taken of the actual level of
consumption prevailing among the working class. Even a skilled worker,
taking home about 1,000 rubles a month, is not able to buy the quantity
or variety of goods available to the employed worker of comparable
skill in the advanced capitalist countries. For example, he will need
about 150 rubles for a pair of shoes (not of very good quality) and
over half a month’s pay to acquire a bicycle. [7] No doubt he will be adequately fed, with the help of
cheap meals in the factory, but his standards are still creeping up
rather slowly – and far from fast enough to satisfy his aspirations.
To counter this, Khrushchev has to emphasize the importance of
“social income” not included in the wage and maintain the dogma of an
actual increasing pauperization of workers and peasants under
capitalism. In fact income levels so far attained, or even to be
reached in seven years, if all goes according to plan, hardly make good
the claim to have built “socialism,” let alone to be on the threshold
of communism. Abundance has not yet come for the Soviet working class,
nor is it around the corner as long as inequalities of an injustifiable
kind exist and the bureaucracy itself, through its domestic and foreign
policies, stands in the way of a more rational utilization of resources.
Consumption has risen, and will rise, there is no doubt about that.
Continued advance will have a particularly great impression, as in the
past, on the peoples of the underdeveloped countries, there is no
doubt about that either. Nevertheless, as the working class in the
Soviet Union imposes an improvement in its living conditions, as it
grows in skill and self-confidence, so it will desire more and faster
improvement, an end to bureaucratic privileges and an actual, not a nominal, place
as the leading force in the state and in society.
Even the realization of the promises on consumption could not
forestall this deep-running social process, but only speed it up.
Moreover, the antagonism between accumulation and consumption continues
to have profound consequences for Soviet economic development and
social relations.
In relation to consumption a word needs to be said about housing.
Despite the pace of new construction – which opens up further
possibilities for inequality in the distribution of “the good things of
life” – there is still a chronic shortage of house space. In many towns
the actual level of overcrowding is hardly less than in 1928 and the
further expansion of the economy, requiring movement into the towns, as
well as prospective increases in population, mean that a good deal of
new housing construction will be needed actually just to keep pace with
demand.
The target figure set is “to bring about a change in housing
distribution, that of providing a separate flat for each family,” and
not on a very lavish scale either. No wonder that Soviet citizens, to
escape the squalor and overcrowding of their home life, spend a good
deal of their recreational time on the streets or in other public
places. [8] How much better off
they will be in respect to housing in seven years largely remains to be
seen, but it is doubtful whether what is achieved will measure up, in
respect to quantity and quality of living space for the ordinary
family, to the demands of socialism. [9]

In any case housing and its corollary, the furniture and domestic
equipment industries, will absorb considerable resources, and
consequently limit the expansion possible in other sectors. It will
certainly be impossible to cut back on the housing program without
raising the ire of the Soviet people.
 
The Peasantry and the Plan
Since the slashing exposure of the defects of Soviet
agriculture which he made in the stocktaking that followed Stalin’s
death in 1953, Khrushchev has been associated with a succession of
spectacular policy changes. The virgin lands campaign, the planting of
corn, the promises about meat and milk production, the sale of
machinery by the Machine Tractor Stations to the collective farms, new
policies on purchasing and on prices – these represent so many gambles
designed to extricate agriculture from its stagnation, increase urban
food supplies and win the good will of the peasantry. Khrushchev’s
personal reputation is more closely tied up with these than perhaps
with any other part of government policy of recent years and his clash
with the Malenkov-Molotov faction seems to have been a result in large
part of their doubts about such innovations.
To draw up a full balance sheet of Khrushchev’s policies will be
possible only at the end of the Seven Year Plan. Results in agriculture
take time to prove themselves, especially when they concern measures of
such immense scope. It can be taken that the main lines of approach to
agriculture have been established for the next few years and will only
be disturbed by an untoward
event or by their failure to do what is expected of them.
So far Khrushchev has been favored by the context within which he is
operating. In 1953 agriculture was in a serious impasse. The peasantry
was resentful, food shortage endemic and bad harvests could still spell
disaster. According to Khrushchev, Malenkov was responsible for a gross
overestimation of grain production and Beria for the sorry state of
livestock production. As compared with 1910-14, the period 1949-53
showed scarcely any increase in sown areas, crop fields and grain
returns “though,” Khrushchev asserts, “in numerical strength the
population, and especially that of the industrial centers and cities,
had considerably increased, and the state’s grain requirements were
immeasurably greater than those of Czarist Russia.”
No doubt to shed contempt on his predecessors – the great culprit,
after all, being Joseph Stalin, who was said never to have visited a
collective farm – Khrushchev overcolors the picture and depicts his own
retrieval of the situation as all the greater by comparison. [10] There has been no miracle,
but by dint of great efforts – including much time and energy on his
own part – the peasant has been cajoled and encouraged into producing
more.
Khrushchev is able to claim big increases in output over the past
five years, part of which is attributable to a measure of luck. [11] But big concessions have had
to be made to the peasants. Furthermore, as far as grain production is
concerned, a considerable contribution has been made by the once virgin
lands. Not only has the supply of such areas diminished, but those in
cultivation are subject to lower yields and the risks of drought. [12] In other words, it is from
the collective farms that the great additions to output necessary to
fulfill the Seven Year Plan must largely come, by higher yields per
acre and by increasing the number and improving the quality of farm
animals. This involves immense new investments in agriculture, an
increase in the supply of agronomists and technicians and improvements
in farm management and cost controls.
Emphasis on technique and organization will be inadequate unless the
peasants can be won for complete confidence in, and co-operation with,
the ruling power. But the collective farm peasantry has a will of its
own. Besides, the twenty million or so peasant households by no means
form a homogeneous group. There are rich peasants, such as the cotton
farmers of Central Asia with their cars and good frame houses; and poor
peasants, even around Moscow, who prefer to migrate to the cities. [13] Differences in income and
influence run through the collective farms as well. Concessions to the
strong peasants may not suit those on the poorer farms, and so on. [14]
A big problem is that of the collective farmers’ private plots.
These plots were conceded after the first mass collectivization drive
of the 1930’s had fanned revolt in the villages. Since the war they
have diminished in size but still provide an important addition to the
family income of the peasants, as well as some office and factory
workers. Peasant individualism, still strong because of mistrust of the
regime, plus the general low level of living has caused the private
plots to be worked to the utmost, while the work on the collective
farms has been half-hearted. The peasants’ own plots and animals
continue to provide an important addition to the food supply, and
wistful gazes are cast at the contrasts between the intensity of work
put in them compared with that in the collective. On the one hand the
plots are necessary, and at least have to be recognized – the market
for private produce has now been made completely free; i.e., no more
obligatory deliveries. At the same time, no occasion is lost to point
out that it is really to the advantage of the peasants (the peasant
women in particular) to merge their fields and animals with the
resources of the collective farms.
As part of the progress towards communism, it is argued, not only
the private plots but also the collective farms themselves must be
merged into an integral form of state property. [15] To speed up matters, some officials, who earned
the appropriate rebukes, have put pressure on the peasants to surrender
their private plots. For the moment the problem still remains on the
agenda. The peasantry as a whole appears to take the concessions
offered it with both hands, but to be reluctant to accept changes which
might mean a weakening of its position. It understands what Khrushchev
means by material incentives, because the bureaucracy itself –

including that on the farms – enjoys these in full measure and it wants
to do likewise. When it comes to Khrushchev’s theoretical propositions
it is not so interested – unless they can be linked with real
improvements too; and there is obviously still plenty of skepticism.
But this represents not only the legacy of Stalinism in the village, it
also flies in the face of the claim to have built socialism. The
peasant question in Russia has still not been solved; and this fact
makes problematical the achievement of the target figures set for
agricultural production.
It is, however, more than a question of increasing the food supply –
much as that is imperative to meet the expectations of urban consumers
– it is also one of social and political power relations. Relatively,
too, the proportion of the population engaged in agriculture in the
USSR is excessive; it represents a factor of backwardness which bears
down upon the per capita income figures of the population as a whole.
It means, further, that the peasantry remains a powerful social force.
It has to be reckoned with, maneuvered this way and that and used,
where necessary, as a counterweight to the working class.
The bureaucracy, despite Khrushchev’s muddled theoretical effusions,
remains quite empirical in its approach to the peasant. It makes
sweeping concessions at the same time that it reminds the peasants of
the leading role of the working class (your “elder brother,” Khrushchev
recently told the peasants of Ryazan, completely reversing the sequence
of class development). Behind the abstraction “the working class” lurks
the will of the bureaucracy intimating to the peasants, “Play ball with
me and I’ll play ball with you; if not, concessions may shrink.”

 
The Challenge to Capitalism
What remains when the layer of propagandistic
exaggeration and theoretical distortion surrounding the record and
future prospects of the Soviet economy is stripped off is a testimony
to the capacity of planning to transform a backward country into an
industrial giant. During the 1970’s – if targets are reached – per
capita output will begin to overhaul that of the United States, and the
Soviet Union will have become the foremost industrial country.
Economists and politicians in the capitalist countries, while casting
doubt on this or that portion of the plan targets, are still digesting
the significance of this prospect.
The current appears to be flowing swiftly in favor of Khrushchev and
Company. But the deep undertow which the rate and extent of the changes
taking place in the USSR generate in fact makes it ever more difficult
for them to keep their feet. They cannot master the forces which they
have unleashed; behind their confidence is an acute awareness of storms
and stresses in prospect both at home and abroad as a result of Soviet
successes. Hesitation and switches in policy, wide divergences of
interest and outlook within the ruling group and the main themes of
propaganda and policy indicate such awareness.
“The Soviet Union is no longer in capitalist encirclement,”
announces Khrushchev, the theoretician. “We shall be able to repel any
attack by any enemy,” proclaims Khrushchev, the practical man. “The
triumph of socialism is not only complete but final,” the theoretician
goes on; “the question of building Socialism is one country has been
decided by the course of the historical development of society.” “As
long as capitalism exists there may always be people who, contrary to
common sense, will want to launch out on a hopeless venture” (i.e., war
against the Soviet Union), says the man-in-charge.
Such confusion of thought, like the attribution to Lenin of the
theory of “socialism in one country,” is only to be expected from one
who is primarily concerned with protecting the position of the caste he
represents and who selects bits and pieces from Marxism as occasion
demands.
The facts show that the nature of Soviet society is still
transitional. The targets set for the next seven years are a clear
refutation of the claim to have built socialism. The “abundance” of
which Khrushchev speaks is still ahead and looks suspiciously like an
output per head no greater than in advanced capitalist countries today.
For the present it is still a “socialism” that can guarantee materially
little more than the necessary minimum for the mass of the people, and
with the minimum in some spheres low indeed.
On the political side the claim is no better grounded. To the
question, “Who rules?” the official doctrine replies with a tissue of
sophistries. The working class is promised benefits, told to be
inspired by the economic achievements of the USSR and to give active
participation in carrying out plans; that it has entered into its
heritage and now rules the state no one can believe. The elaborate
pretense of nationwide discussions of theses sent down from the Central
Committee of the CPSU enables the popular pulse to be felt and minor
changes to be made. In practice firm and narrow limits are set to
dissidence – imposed by the antagonisms inherent in a society in which
indefensible disparities in income and power still exist. In short,
decisions are made at the top, there is no real democracy in the sense
of responsibility from the top to the bottom.
Of course, since 1953, and more rapidly since 1956, there has been a
rationalization of procedures made necessary by social forces and made
possible by economic improvement. The arbitrary repression of the
Stalin era would now be intolerable. The old strict curbs on
consumption by the masses can now to some extent be dispensed with.
Life is easier, tension has relaxed. The coercive apparatus is no
longer a blind power, striking into the ranks of the bureaucracy
itself. It is now a conscious force, subdued and less obtrusive
(“socialist legality”). Nevertheless, tense conflicts are still fought
out behind closed doors, revealed as and when the victor deems
expedient and in such a way as to leave the defeated no possibility of
stating their case. The “anti-party group” then provides a convenient
scapegoat for anything which has been going wrong and members of the
lower echelons of party and state hasten to add their obloquy to that
already heaped on once powerful figures.
The ways of “liberalization” are indeed mysterious to behold – but
not impossible to explain, once it is understood that there has been no
real shift in power, only a change in the balance of forces. The ruling
bureaucracy retains power through all mutations and has no intention of
relinquishing it or sharing it. But the very economic expansion which
it is obliged to promote strengthens the hand of the working class and
undermines its own position.
The external policy of the Soviet leadership is composed of a
complex combination of strength and weakness, of bluster and caution,
of desire for peace and fear of war, of a special theory of capitalist
“collapse” with anxiety for a deal with the capitalist states.
Completely missing is any reliance on the working-class movement in
the capitalist countries to overcome capitalism and take power. The
Seven Year Plan is spoken of as “a powerful moral support for the
international workers’ and Communist movement.” At the same time the
“socialist” and capitalist systems are to expose their wares and the
peoples are to “choose.” How and under what conditions is not made
clear. If the statements of Mikoyan are to be taken at their face value
a new version of “Marxism” has been adopted in which the capitalists
are going to improve the lot of their workers in order to prevent them
from wishing to emulate the USSR. Fresh from his American trip, Mikoyan
went on the Congress platform to say that improving living standards
would increase the power of attraction of “the land of Soviets” and, he
added, this “will be indirectly instrumental in improving the condition
of the working people in the capitalist countries, for it will inspire
them to still more effective struggle against their exploiters and will
make it easier for them to wage this struggle as it will compel the
capitalists to make concessions to the working class and to the
peasantry and to do something to improve their lot.”
A little more crass than the platitudes of Khrushchev, and perhaps
closer to the real nature of Soviet international policy, Foreign
Minister Gromyko, for instance, considered that the continued economic
advance of the USSR “changes the correlation of world forces and puts
the policy of peaceful coexistence on a new and still firmer
foundation.” Nevertheless, he went on to speak of the new military
treaties directed against the USSR, the feverish efforts to increase
the number of nuclear and missile bases aimed at the USSR and the
unwillingness of the Western powers to reach an agreement on nuclear
weapons and the use of outer space. He described this as representing
the hopes of “certain influential circles” that “it may somehow be
possible to turn back the wheel of history ...” Gromyko was confident,
however, that “the ground was slipping away from under their feet” and
realization of the need for peaceful coexistence was growing and such
trends would be met halfway by the Soviet government.
Such is the overt policy of the USSR. It can only mean a willingness
to reach an understanding with capitalism which, in fact, would entail
its indefinite existence. “Peace-loving” capitalists are to be
supported against warmongers. Agreements are to be reached on nuclear
disarmament and other matters. Trade between the “world socialist
system” and capitalist countries will be welcomed, in accordance with
the reinstated principle of the international division of labor. [16] It is a reasonable deduction
that working-class initiative to overthrow capitalism is not favored,
for that would rear up powerful social and political forces which the
bureaucracy could not control and which would reverberate throughout
Eastern Europe, the USSR and China.
If the latter possibility throws up innumerable undesirable
possibilities, a deal with capitalism, brought about by a measured
mixture of flexibility, firmness and bluff, can only have advantages,
the bureaucrats reason.
Above all, diminution of the foreign threat would enable full
concentration on economic tasks and would bring considerable prestige
to the ruling group itself. Reduction of armaments would be a positive
advantage of great importance to the USSR, though not to the capitalist
countries. More resources would become available which could then be
deployed as circumstances warrant between investment, consumption and
aid to underdeveloped countries. This would also mean fewer risks of
strain as the plan proceeds.
Likewise, there can be no doubt that a political understanding with
the main capitalist states would permit fuller participation in the
international division of labor. The USSR would thus be able to obtain
equipment for which otherwise heavy investment will have to be made and
from which results, in the shape of consumer goods adequate to satisfy
the appetite of the population, might not otherwise be forthcoming for
six or seven years. While it is true that the USSR demonstrates mastery
of the most advanced techniques in some spheres, in others there is
still backwardness – freer intercourse with the capitalist states could
help here too. Likewise, it might be expedient to import some consumer
goods directly from the manufacturers in the capitalist world who
possess many advantages in efficiency and price, not to speak of
quality.
Such is the attractive vista which peaceful coexistence presents.
Meanwhile, it is hoped, the balance of advantage will tilt steadily in
the direction of the USSR and its allies of the “socialist camp.”
There are, however, a number of omissions from this estimate of
future prospects. Even Khrushchev and Gromyko know full well that there
are, in the West, sections of the ruling class who would prefer to see
an attack on the USSR despite the frightful risks and undoubted heavy
costs of a nuclear war. There is no guarantee that “the peace-loving
forces” will win – if it is left to the capitalists. That goes likewise
for the Communist parties – in the USA a discredited fragment, in
Western Europe a declining force for a whole decade.
The growing challenge of Soviet economic strength is just as likely
to increase hostility in the capitalist ruling classes as to impress
them with the need for a deal; and if they make a deal they, in turn,
will require concessions ...
The effect, too, of the changing relationship of world forces will,
as Khrushchev suggests, stimulate the colonial liberation movement.
Eventually, and perhaps the time is not distant, the colonial
revolution will pass beyond the control of the national bourgeoisies,
so far largely supported by the Moscow bureaucracy. At the same time,
the all-round weakening of capitalism which can be expected, and to
which the growth of the Soviet economy contributes, provides the basis
for the intervention of the working class outside, and against, the
control of the official Communist parties. The repercussions this would
have within the USSR have already been indicated.
 



MARX AND AMERICA: A Study of the Doctrine of Impoverishment
by Earl Browder
Duel, Sloan and Pearce, New York. 1958. 146 pp. $3.
This work evidently impressed the university audience to whom it was first presented in lecture form as well as publishers on both sides of the Atlantic. The thesis of the book – Marxism has been refuted by the unique development of American capitalism – is hardly a novelty. Nor does Browder bring to light any fresh evidence or arguments in support of it. Apparently what this book proposes to add to the great mass of anti-Marxist literature is the author’s reputation.
Browder was Secretary of the Communist Party of the US from 1930 to 1945. He was therefore at the head of the party during the period of the wartime alliance of the US and the Soviet Union when CP policy veered to the extreme right. After the war he became the scapegoat for this policy which was dubbed “Browderism” although it was imposed by the Kremlin on every Communist party in the world. Cut off from the Stalinist apparatus Browder, like so many before him and since, failed to retrace his steps to Marxism. Instead he took the road from Stalinism to Social Democracy. In this sense claims of cold-war propagandists that America’s former Number One Marxist has himself disclosed Marx’s errors have no validity. Browder, as Secretary of the Communist Party, was no more a Marxist than he is today.
Browder’s book, however, is worth some detailed examination because it offers Marxists an opportunity to deal with some of the characteristic arguments of the anti-Marxist crusaders. Despite his claim to “fifty years of study” Browder obviously never understood the methodology of Marx’s political economy. He assumes that because Marx took England as his main source of data, as capitalism developed in other countries it would follow a “pre-determined pattern.” Marx’s pregnant sentence, which he quotes, “The country that is more developed industrially only shows to the less developed, the image of its future,” has been fully confirmed in the sense in which Marx intended it. Basic uniformities in economic and social structures are bound to arise as industrialization develops. But Marx protested strongly in his own time against those who tried to change his sketch of the “origin of capitalism in Western Europe into an historical-philosophical theory of Universal Progress, fatally imposed on all peoples, regardless of historical circumstances in which they find themselves” and warned against the belief in an “open sesame of an historico-philosophical theory of which the supreme virtue consists in its being supra-historical [i.e. beyond the pale of history].” [1]
Again, Marx speaks of the “specific economic form in which unpaid surplus labor is pumped out of the direct producers (which) determines the relation of rulers and ruled” and forms the economic base “showing infinite variations and gradations in its appearance,” even though its principal conditions are everywhere the same. “This is due,” Marx points out, “to innumerable outside historical influences and so forth, all of which must be ascertained by careful analysis” (my emphasis – TK) [2]
All this could hardly be clearer. There is not even any need to paraphrase Marx’s words: they so obviously mean what they say. When the question arose of applicability of his analysis to Russia, Marx did not say to his Russian disciples: here’s the blueprint, it will all happen just so in Russia as in England.
He learned the Russian language and steeped himself in economic and historical literature so that he might form an impression of the peculiarities of Russian development. He undoubtedly would have set about a study of America in just such a way.
Browder does not argue that all the laws of capitalism have been inoperative in the USA. He just makes the assumption. Or rather he does try to prove that Marx was wrong about wages and about impoverishment. He also throws in a critique of Lenin’s theory of imperialism for good measure. At present we shall only be concerned with the question of wages and, to a lesser extent with the theory of impoverishment.
Browder takes the wage theory put forward by Marx in Wage-Labor and Capital, composed in 1847, and compares it with that of Value, Price and Profit which dates from 1865. Both of these works were designed for audiences of working men; they were simplified expositions, not scientific treatises. It would certainly be a mistake to look for Marx’s fullest and deepest thinking in either of them on that account. Moreover the first was prepared at a very early stage in Marx’s investigation of capitalist economy. Neither was published during his lifetime. Lucid and valuable as they are for the student, they need to be used with a certain reserve and related to Marx’s fuller treatment in Capital.
The result of Browder’s comparison is that he finds that whereas in 1847 Marx adhered to a “subsistence” theory of wages, in 1865 he made a decisive break with it and accepted that wages were a variable quantity, containing, as Browder puts it, “a social increment above subsistence.” In America the subsistence element has become a quite minor part of the total wage compared with the “social wage” (Browder’s term). This has meant, too, that the idea attributed to Marx that the workers were going to become poorer and poorer under capitalism has been proved ridiculous. Marx consequently becomes an eccentric old gentleman, comparable with Newton, but responsible only for ideas which have provoked others to find out the real truth about capitalism.
That Marx’s thought should have evolved between 1847 and 1865 can surprise only Browder. That he can have been unconscious of the changes he was making, if he did make any, seems farfetched; so does Browder’s claim to have made the discovery that Marx had two, irreconcilable wage theories.
In the first place, Wage-Labor and Capital shows that Marx already was aware that wages could move upward as capitalism developed. He wrote:
“If capital grows, the mass of wage labor grows, the number of wage workers grows; in a word, the domination of capital extends over a greater number of individuals. And if we assume the most favorable case: if productive capital grows, the demand for labor grows. Consequently the price of labor, wages, goes up.” [3]
Marx makes it clear that wages will be determined by supply and demand and the “price of the necessary means of subsistence,” which would be the axis around which the average wage level for “simple labor power” would turn. While some workers might fall below this level, where the demand for labor power was high, wages would rise above it, and they would be higher for labor which was trained and skilled. The “necessary means of subsistence” will have to be adequate to keep the worker an efficient source of labor power, and will vary with the skill and effort, physical or nervous, which he furnishes – unless the labor market is overstocked.
Already in Wage-Labor and Capital Marx speaks of “our needs and enjoyments” as having a “social nature” and therefore changing with time and place. This is surely the “historical and social element” which was later made more explicit and figures in all Marx’s subsequent discussions of wages.
In the first volume of Capital it is stated that “The value of labor-power is determined by the value of the necessities of life habitually required by the average laborer. The quantity of these necessaries is known at any given epoch of a given society, and can therefore be treated as a constant magnitude” – that is for the succeeding analysis. [4] Here, too, the assumption is made that “the price of labor-power rises occasionally above its value, but never sinks below it,” not, as Browder states, “that the wages of labor are constantly at their lowest level.” [5]
In fact Capital improves considerably upon the discussion in Value, Price and Profit. For example, Browder makes a point of emphasizing that Marx there stated that “although we can fix the minimum of wages, we cannot fix their maximum.” If that means that the upper limit cannot be deduced by analysis in terms of money units, that there is a range of indeterminacy, so well and good. But Capital sets limits to this maximum in the statement that “the rise of wages ...is confined within limits that not only leave intact the foundations of the capitalistic system, but also secure its reproduction on a progressive scale.” Marx goes on to say “that the very nature of accumulation excludes every diminution in the degree of exploitation of labor, and every rise in the price of labor, which could seriously imperil the continued reproduction, on an ever enlarging scale, of the capitalist relation.” [6] That remains a fact of life in the United States, as well as in every other capitalist country.
When Marx reverts to wage questions in Capital, Vol.III, there is certainly none of the “slurring over” of the social element which Browder claims. It is asserted by Marx that the minimum level of wages is determined “by the physical minimum required by the laborer for the conservation of his labor power and its reproduction.” “The actual value of his (the laborer’s) labor-power differs from the physical minimum; it differs according to climate and condition of social development; it depends not merely upon the historically developed social needs which become second nature. But in every country and at any given period this regulating average wage is a given magnitude.” [7] Marx then goes on to reiterate a more fundamental point, that the absolute level of surplus value is determined by the excess of the unpaid portion of the working day over its paid portion. Here, and not in the actual level of real wages, is the nub of the Marxist critique of capitalism.
Historically considered, the possibilities which the American environment have provided for “the ruthless development in geometrical progression of the productivity of human labor” [8] – the historical mission of capitalism – have resulted not only in a higher real wage, but also in the creation and appropriation of surplus value on a scale without parallel elsewhere. That surely is the basic fact about American capitalism. The basis for its explanation is fully present in Marx’s writings: they need, of course, to be understood and applied with a full realization of the dialectical complexities of the interacting components of the capitalist mechanism. But there is no special manna which falls from on high upon American workers in the shape of Browder’s “social wage.” Nor has the despotism of capital been loosened simply because American workers in the main do not resemble the “starvelings” or “criminals of want” of the song. But, if this is no longer physically the case, exploitation and alienation are just as characteristic of their position as it is of the underpaid worker of Asia or Africa.
Nor does “impoverishment” begin below the subsistence line of mere physical existence. It can begin anywhere. The American worker deprived of his car or his fruit juice by unemployment or a falling real wage is just as much impoverished. And where his forefathers fought for bread he fights to meet the payments on the home or the refrigerator.
Certainly there is plenty to suggest that under capitalism productivity would rise, and that the results of that would become built into customary living levels. At the same time, employers would try to beat down wages and the inability of capitalism to attain stability would result in the existence of a reserve army of labor at or below subsistence level for the time and place. On the other hand, in periods of prosperity Marx was equally definite that real wages would go up and that workers would live better. He was also definite that while the law of supply and demand “completes the despotism of capital,” when the workers become conscious of this fact they would, by trade unions and other means “try to organize a regular co-operation between employed and unemployed in order to destroy or weaken the ruinous effects of this natural law of capitalistic production on their class.” [9]
There is no fatalism here. And when a few pages further on Marx expounds the “absolute general law of capitalist accumulation” – concerned with the “industrial reserve army,” he adds, “Like all other laws, it is modified in its working by many circumstances, the analysis of which does not concern us here.” On the following page he adds, “in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the laborer, be his payment high or low, must grow worse.” There seems no point in adducing further quotations or seeking for metaphysical meanings. A number of recent discussions may, however, be referred to by the reader wanting to look at the state of the controversy. [10] At least it can be said that those who like Browder take it for granted that Marx had a dogma of impoverishment, in terms of a declining real wage, always and everywhere, can only be considered to argue in bad faith. In any case it is unsafe to draw general conclusions from an altogether exceptional phase of prosperity. Nor can the net effects of capitalism for the working class, even in America, be assessed according to consumption levels. The intensity of work, the degree of exploitation, the dehumanization of the worker on the job, the degradations of a commercialized society – these have to be put on the other side of the scales. So do the effects of the wars of the twentieth century.
 

