

1877: Year Of Violence
by Robert V. Bruce
Bobbs-Merrill, New York City. 384 pp. $5.00
According to the publisher’s blurb, the author spent “over two years of intensive research and a year and a half of writing,” to complete this book. He should be commended for the research. The facts speak more eloquently than the author whose understanding of the events is shallow and whose interpretation is colored by a definite class bias.
The class prejudice of the author is most marked in the use of a derogatory terminology. Contrast, for example, the sensitivity of labor historian Samuel Yellen who wrote in his introduction to his book: American Labor Struggles, “except in a few instances, I have used the word ‘crowd’ rather than ‘mob’ because of the dubious application of the latter by newspapers.” With Bruce it’s the other way around.
In his summary chapter, Bruce projects his interpretation of the 1877 events onto the railroad strike of 1894, and says
“With the outbreak of the Pullman Strike in 1894, memories of ’77 came rushing back. Many of the old ingredients were there: railroaders on strike in twenty-seven states and territories; a call for a general strike at Chicago; tramps, hoodlums, depression unemployed and teenagers stirring up trouble; fine July weather bringing out crowds; dozens killed in rioting.”
It is from this kind of an amalgam that the author derives the title of his book which comes enclosed in a lurid dust jacket depicting a raging conflagration with figures of the “mob” dancing about in the flames. The year 1877 was indeed a year of violence – of frightful, murderous violence, directed against the working people by the minions of capital; and of workers goaded beyond endurance to militant resistance.
With the end of the civil war the Northern capitalists set out to garner the fruits of victory. There was an entire rich continent to ravage and they set about systematically to pillage and plunder its wealth. Some of America’s greatest family fortunes – Rockefeller, Morgan, Vanderbilt, etc., etc., – date from that era. The stockjobbers, land-grabbers and money changers bought up city officials and state legislatures; they named Governors, Congressmen and Senators; the federal government in Washington was at their beck and call.
In 1876 the northern capitalist class, ruling through the Republican party, betrayed the Negroes in the South and terminated Reconstruction for a deal with the Democrats which landed Hayes in the office of US president. The greatest concentration of capital at the time was in the mushrooming railroad industry. The railroad barons spread their greedy tentacles over the whole of American economic life. They swindled the investor, squeezed the farmer and trampled on the worker.
The American capitalist class, engaged in the bloody process of primitive accumulation, were insatiable in their greed and merciless in their disregard of the most elementary human rights. Beginning with the economic crash in 1873 the railroad tycoons repeatedly slashed wages and worsened conditions to maintain a high rate of dividend payments on generously watered stock. The rest of the employers followed suit.
The author records that: “By late 1873 even skilled craftsmen could be hired for board alone.” When the railroad bosses announced another ten per cent cut for June 1, 1877, it was more than flesh and blood could stand. A spontaneous strike movement erupted and soon swept through all the major railroad centers. Police, special deputies, company thugs, vigilantes, militia and finally federal troops, were called upon to smash the strike. Lacking organization and leadership the strike was broken.
From an historical point of view the 1877 strike movement established a number of memorable firsts. It was the first strike to achieve national scope; the first in which federal troops were used as strikebreakers; the first in which the anti-labor injunction was introduced as a strikebreaking weapon. Despite the author’s bias the book contains much factual material of interest to the student of American labor struggles.
 



THE AMERICAN COMMUNIST PARTY: A Critical History (1919–1957)
by Irving Howe and Lewis Coser
Beacon Press, Boston. 1958. 593 pp. $6.75
In the past year, three books of uneven value have appeared dealing with one or another aspect of the history of the American Communist party. The two in addition to the book under review were The Communist Party vs. the CIO by Max M. Kampelman and The Roots of American Communism by Theodore Draper. All have made contributions in the field of research by assembling material to establish the record of the origin, development, degeneration and disintegration of the American CP. That is their positive side – of undoubted value to future historians and to those seeking in the record an answer to the “what” and “how” of this historical development. On the negative side is a fundamental weakness: the failure to answer adequately the decisive question of “why?”
On the basis of empirical evidence uncovered in his investigation of CP trade-union policy Max Kampelman arrives, in passing, at the correct conclusion that the frenetic twists and turns of the “party line” were a result of the function of the American CP as an agency of the Soviet foreign office, completely subservient to the bureaucracy in the Kremlin. However, when he attempts to generalize from the record, Kampelman reverts to the professorial jargon of the bourgeois “political scientist.”
Why did the CP fail in what he terms its “power struggle” with the conservative trade-union leaders? Because, says Kampelman, “The traditions of the American labor movement are quite hostile to the philosophy of Communism. The philosophy of the American labor movement, insofar as it is possible to speak of its philosophy, is one of humanism. This explains why it is that the American labor movement has not considered itself as representative of narrow class or sectional interests, but rather of the broad mass of the population.”
“This explains why”! This explains nothing of why the American CIO trade-union leaders could at one stage welcome members of the CP, at another stage tolerate them, and at still another split the CIO in order to eject them from its ranks. [1]
Draper’s book, comprising a study in depth of the formative years of the American CP, is a model of historical research. However, when he attempts to generalize from the record in his concluding chapter he arrives at the erroneous conclusion that the cause of the decline and fall of the American CP can be traced to the original sin of having sought and accepted the advice and guidance of the Communist International in its early formative period. This, according to Draper’s thesis, later led irrevocably to the abject subservience of the American CP to the Stalinized Comintern – a variation of Boris Souvarine’s fallacious theory that Russian Bolshevism carried the seed which later sprouted into the monstrous growth of Stalinism. [2]
The Howe-Coser volume is the most ambitious of the three, purporting to be a “critical history” of the American CP from 1919 through 1957. The reader has a right to expect of the authors of a “critical history” that they seriously grapple with the theoretical problems involved in an analysis of Stalinism. Judged from this standpoint the book is shallow, superficial and pretentious. More important, the authors are decidedly lacking in the precious quality that so distinguishes the Draper volume – honesty.
The authors do not once formulate specifically their theoretical premise. On the contrary, in their concluding chapter entitled, Toward a Theory of Stalinism, they disavow any intention of doing so. “In this final chapter,” they assert, “we propose to examine Stalinism as a political movement in the West. We shall not venture upon an extended discussion of the new form of society it has brought to Russia, and shall offer only a few comments on its special role in Asia. This limitation renders a complete analysis impossible, but it may well be that the time for such an analysis has not yet come.” This is intended to disarm the unwary reader.
Consider! The authors propose to “examine Stalinism as a political movement in the West” by severing the umbilical cord which binds it to the Kremlin in Russia, which they define, in passing, as “a new form of society.” But discussion of this new form they will not even “venture upon,” because, you see, “the time for such an analysis has not yet come.” This, of course, does not deter the authors from engaging in a “hidden” polemic, which runs like a thread throughout the entire book, against the analysis of Stalinism elaborated by Leon Trotsky.
The authors do have a theory, even if it is not stated explicitly: bureaucratic collectivism. And they do have a method appropriate to that theory: eclecticism. They borrow their basic premise from the bureaucratic collectivists. They borrow a little from Trotsky. A little from Souvarine. And more than a little from the bourgeois school of “social psychology.”
Stated briefly, the theory of bureaucratic collectivism holds that besides the socialist alternative to capitalism, there is another alternative, unanticipated by the Marxists – a completely new kind of society with a ruling class that owns property indirectly through control of the state. Its original proponents equated the “collectivism” of Hitler in Germany with that of Stalin in the Soviet Union as variations of the “drift toward the total state.” In this country, in opposition to the Trotskyist position of defense of the Soviet Union against imperialist attack, the main “theoretician” of bureaucratic collectivism, James Burnham, together with Max Shachtman, led a split from the Socialist Workers party in 1940. Irving Howe supported bureaucratic collectivism then and judging from this book continues to do so. Burnham later broke with the socialist movement and presented his anti-Marxist theory in a book, The Managerial Society. He finally landed in the camp of the McCarthyite intellectuals where he remains to this day.
So discredited has the theory of bureaucratic collectivism become that the authors do not so much as mention it by name. It has now been metamorphosed into the theory of the “new class”; and one of those to whom the book is dedicated, Milovan Djilas, is author of a volume by that name. Stalinism, the authors assert, “was a counterrevolution that established a new kind of ruling class, one that neither owned nor could own property but instead controlled the state in whose legal custody property resided.” Again: “The new society that crept into existence in Russia during the late twenties and early thirties was neither capitalist nor socialist, but an enemy of both.” And again: What Trotsky and others failed to understand was that Stalinism “was a movement which, in opposition to both capitalism and socialism, embodied a particular expression of the twentieth-century drift toward the total state,” etc., etc.
It is true that the authors do not “venture into an extended discussion” of bureaucratic collectivism. Instead they repeatedly assert that which is incumbent upon them to discuss. The book is interlarded with such arbitrary assertions, seemingly made on the assumption that they have never been challenged. But the authors know better. They are well acquainted with the searching polemic written by Leon Trotsky against the theory of bureaucratic (“new class”) collectivism, published in the volume In Defense of Marxism (Pioneer Publishers, 1942). They know but choose to ignore it. You see, now is not the time.
Consider the supercilious pretentiousness of the authors, who write an entire chapter, Toward a Theory of Stalinism, without once referring to the monumental pioneering work on the subject written by Leon Trotsky in The Revolution Betrayed. No, neither the youth seeking socialist answers to the great problems of the day, nor the thousands of ex-CP members and periphery searching for the answers to the “why” of American CP degeneration, will find them in this book.
* * *
Footnotes
1. See my review of The Communist Party vs. the CIO in the fall 1957 International Socialist Review.
2. See review of The Roots of American Communism by James P. Cannon in the summer 1957 International Socialist Review.
 



The Communist Party vs. the CIO
by Max M. Kampelman
Frederick A. Praeger, Inc., New York. 1957. 299pp. $6.
Following the Twentieth Congress of the Communist party of the Soviet Union the leaders of the American CP undertook a re-evaluation of their past policies, including their trade-union line, in the light of the de-Stalinization campaign. The expulsion of the CP-influenced unions, which split the CIO in 1949, came up in particular for reassessment. With the breast-beating acknowledgment of past “error” characteristic of their orgy of “self-criticism” following Khrushchev’s revelations, the American Stalinist tops hastened to assume their share of the blame of the CIO split.
Writing in the April 22 Sunday Worker, labor-columnist George Morris affirmed:
“A serious examination of the trend in the left, especially since World War II, I am sure, is bound to lead to the conclusion that the split in the CIO, that came to a climax in 1949 might have been avoided. The blame for the split cannot be placed entirely on Philip Murray and the CIO’s right wing. For some time before the split it was apparent that the left forces – influenced strongly by the narrowness and leftism in the ranks of the Marxists forgot that the key to the success that marked the CIO’s first ten years was left-center unity.
“That unity was breached – and the left itself contributed to that breach by its narrowness, over-estimation of its strength, refusal to retreat and compromise some when that was imperative – especially on the presidential race and on the Marshall Plan.” (Morris’ emphasis.)
The Morris version was corroborated by CP National Secretary Eugene Dennis in his report to the enlarged meeting of the Communist party National Committee held in New York City, April 28 – May 1, 1956, published under the title: The Communists Take a New Look. In a chapter headed: The Left and the Split in the CIO, Dennis purported to “deal” with what he called “a few tactical mistakes,” that contributed to the split.
“The split in the CIO,” he declared, “was precipitated through a number of issues on which the Left could have maneuvered and reacted more flexibly. But the Left’s fight-back policy suffered from all the sectarian tendencies that hampered its united front work in the mass trade unions led by the more conservative and Right-wing reformist and Social-Democratic leaders.”
This, in a nutshell, is the “New Look” Stalinist version of the 1949 split in the CIO. Needless to say, the Dennis report was “adopted” by the CP National Committee.
Could the Communist party have avoided a split through the application of more “flexible” tactics? The author of The Communist Party vs. the CIO disputes this. Although it terminates with the CIO split in 1949 and deals primarily with the period 1939-49, the book reads like a polemic in advance against the shallow “New Look” version of the conflict put forward by the CP leaders in 1957.
The main point is that the basic issue in dispute was over foreign policy – and this could not be reconciled or compromised. Not that the Stalinists didn’t try. At the 1948 CIO convention that laid the ground for the split, the CP contingent tried to compromise on the Marshall Plan by proposing that its funds be allocated through the machinery of the United Nations. To no avail. By that time nothing less than complete capitulation would have sufficed; i.e., a definitive break with the Kremlin and all-out support to the cold-war foreign policy of the US State Department. Nothing less would have satisfied the “labor statesmen” who headed the CIO with Philip Murray in their van. This was a price the CP could not and did not pay. And that is why they found themselves outside the CIO they had helped to build and lead.
The author points out that the Communist party’s “inflexible loyalty to the immediate interests of the Soviet Union eliminated any resilience within its group and made it impossible for the Communist party, and for Communist-led unions, to withstand the ebb and flow of American attitudes toward the Soviet Union.” The “ebb and flow of American attitudes toward the Soviet Union,” is a fastidious euphemism for the servile adaptation to the “ebb and flow” of State Department foreign policy by the “loyal” labor bureaucrats. This fundamental conflict between one group of labor bureaucrats owing allegiance to the Kremlin (which they identify with the Soviet Union) , and another, dominant group, subservient to the foreign policy of the capitalist rulers of America, is pin-pointed in this account of the internal conflict which culminated in the CIO split.
The meteoric rise of the CIO in the thirties coincided with the worldwide shift of the Stalintern to the Peoples Front policy. Following Hitler’s advent to power in 1933 the previous “Third Period” policy of building independent revolutionary trade unions was abandoned. The unions affiliated to the Trade Union Unity League in this country were dissolved and their members sent into the AFL. In fact, “unity within the AFL” was the line of the CP until the spring of 1937 when the CIO was well on its way.
The CP had a corps of trade-union militants and organizers trained in the unions of the TUUL and unemployed organizations who were thrown into the organizing drives of the formative period of the CIO. Many of these quickly rose to positions of prominence in a number of the new unions. Above all, with their new Peoples Front line of support to Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal, the CP followers found a common language and arrived at a common policy with the other union leaders who directed the CIO.
Another shift in line occurred following the Hitler-Stalin Pact which led to the outbreak of World War II. The fight for “peace” and fulminations against the imperialist warmongers characterized the slogans of the 1939 shift of the Stalintern. Hitler was pictured as a peace-loving vegetarian, and Churchill and Roosevelt were cast in the role of imperialist warmongers. Their central slogan: The Yanks Are Not Coming! While this led to a sharpening of relations with a section of the top CIO leadership, the author explains:
“However in 1939, the foreign policy of the Communist Party seemed in harmony with the general ‘isolationist’ position which permeated America and the labor movement as well. Opposition to war, therefore, and opposition to steps leading to war, was an easy cause to sell. Sharp differences between Communists and anti-Communists thus did not express themselves through foreign policy debates.”
Another mitigating factor was the special role of John L. Lewis, who turned against Roosevelt and came out in support of Willkie in the presidential race of 1940. At this period the CP contingent in the CIO were the most vociferous supporters of Lewis. Later, after Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union and America’s entry into the war, they reserved their choicest epithets for the leader of the coal-miners union who dared to call strikes against the wage-freeze during wartime.
When Hitler attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941, the CP line underwent another turn about. And with America’s entry into the war they became the most rabid jingoists. They were ready, willing and eager to sacrifice the most elementary needs of the workers in pursuance of what they called the “war effort.” So unrestrained were the CP leaders in advocating the most drastic union sacrifices that they often encountered opposition from conservative trade-union bureaucrats. The author lists a few of their more flagrant strikebreaking actions:

They “enthusiastically endorsed the principle of permanent selective service.”
They were “actively in favor of the labor conscription program and the National Service Act recommended by Roosevelt in January 1944,” despite the official opposition of the CIO.
In the famous Montgomery Ward strike suported by the CIO, Harry Bridges rejected “repeated requests to cooperate and not act as a strikebreaker,” but “he ordered his members not to strike and wrote a letter to President Roosevelt on December 22, 1944, repeating the no-strike pledge.”
They jammed a resolution through the Minnesota state CIO convention on September 8, 1944 “condemning” the 18 Minneapolis Teamsters Union officials and Socialist Workers party leaders jailed under the Smith Act.

It was their reply, comments the author, “to those civil-liberties-oriented organizations and individuals who had protested the Smith ‘peacetime sedition’ act and the federal governments indictment of the eighteen Trotskyite leaders under the law. This law was the same law applied later against the eleven Communist leaders in 1948-50 ...
The CP’s wartime crimes against the workers alienated many of the best militants in the union movement and played no little part in the isolation and discreditment which facilitated the expulsion of the CP-dominated unions by the Murray faction in 1949.
The edifice of wartime betrayals was crowned at the war’s end by the CP slogan of the permanent no-strike pledge. Advocacy of the permanent no-strike pledge was justified by the “theory” that the pacts signed at Teheran and Yalta by Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt, had ushered in the era of peaceful coexistence. Teheran and Yalta, the CP spokesmen explained, had outmoded the class struggle and therefore any further need for employing the strike weapon had been eliminated. It wasn’t long before history again corrected the Stalinist theoreticians; instead of “peaceful coexistence” Churchill’s Fulton Missouri speech in 1946 ushered in the period of the cold war.
The cold war heated up the atmosphere inside the CIO. “All ties of ‘unity’ within the CIO,” remarks the author, “strained and eventually broke as the war came to an end and tension developed between the United States and the Soviet Union.” The labor lieutenants of the American capitalist class, who could commit the worst betrayals of the worker-members of the CIO, gagged at “unity” with the Stalinist opponents of Wall Street’s foreign policy. The Marshall Plan and Truman Doctrine were two of the main pillars of the cold-war structure. Given the character and connections of the two contending groups in the leadership of the CIO, a showdown was inevitable.
As a way out, the Stalinists toyed with the idea of setting up a “third” union federation. This is disclosed by evidence attributed to Michael Quill, head of the Transport Workers Union. Quill relates that he went to see William Z. Foster, national chairman of the CP, to persuade him to abandon the Progressive party campaign for Henry Wallace in 1948.
“I expressed to him fear,” Quill is quoted as saying, “that this move will split the unions, and weaken our position locally and nationally against the employers. He said the Communist Party ... decided that all the unions that it can influence within CIO are to go down the line behind Wallace, if it splits the last union down the middle, but he said, ‘We have also decided to form a Third Federation of Labor in the United States carved out of the AFofL and the CIO in order to implement the Henry Wallace movement’.”
This would seem to be confirmed by the Dennis report to the CP National Committee which states:
“A contributing factor to the split in the CIO, the slowness in taking measures to try to overcome this division – was no doubt the practical abandonment of the Left’s initiative in the fight for trade union unity. This went hand in hand with speculation in certain quarters about the desirability of eventually establishing a ‘third’ labor federation” (My emphasis.)
His examination of the record leads Kampelman to the conclusion that:
“There is little evidence to prove that the goal of the Communists in the trade union movement is to achieve economic revolution or the overthrow of capitalism. There is, however, overwhelming evidence to prove that the goal of Communists in the trade union movement is support of Soviet strategy in foreign affairs, regardless of what that strategy happens to be at any particular moment. Communist unionism, therefore, does not so much represent a trade union philosophy in any meaningful sense of the term as a system of power.”
The author accurately traces to its source the bewildering twists and turns which have cut off the American CP from the main stream of organized labor. The chief value of his book, however, resides in the facts he presents rather than in his conclusions. While exposing the CP errors, he attributes to their expellers from the CIO virtues which they do not possess. He does not give a correct evaluation of the role of the established union officialdom as transmitters of imperialist influences into the labor movement. But this role alone explains the duality of the Murrays – why they were able to cohabit for a time with the Stalinists in leading the CIO and then why they moved to throw them out when the needs of the capitalist rulers so dictated.



Negro boilermakers in the shipyards of San Pedro, California, have resorted to court action in an effort to compel the leaders of the AFL Boilermakers Union to end the practice of segregating colored workers in Jim Crow auxiliary locals. The Negro boilermakers are demanding and fighting for equal rights.
The struggle for equal membership rights in the Boilermakers Union has been going on for a number of years. The tremendous expansion of the wartime shipbuilding industry on the Pacific Coast caused an influx of large groups of workers previously shut out of the industry. The narrow-minded, case-hardened craft union bureaucrats feared this influx of workers drawn from the most oppressed sections of the population. They cast about for methods to preserve their positions and privileges which were based on the tight little “job trusts” which existed prior to the war.
One of these methods was the establishment of auxiliary, or “B” type locals, subordinate to the “regular” local. Those workers placed in auxiliary locals were relegated to the status of second-class citizens and deprived of full membership rights in the union. They included the most exploited sections of the working class – women, unskilled and semi-skilled workers. Adding insult to injury, the craft union bureaucrats further restricted the colored workers to all-Negro Jim Crow auxiliaries.
Their intentions were all too obvious. As war production was curtailed, as layoffs mounted and unemployment rose, the bureaucrats intended to rid themselves of an embarrassing problem by simply dissolving the auxiliaries. These callous labor skates play the game of the employers by pitting men against women, white against black, skilled against unskilled, employed against unemployed. It is to the great credit of the Negro workers that they have taken the lead in the fight against a policy which divides the working class against itself and for the unity of all workers in the struggle for job security and a decent standard of living.
 
Jim Crow Practices
The awakening Negro masses are engaged in this struggle all along the line. In the armed forces, in industry, in politics, the fight for equal rights is being pressed with great vigor by the Negro masses determined to end the pernicious system of Jim Crow with its injustice, its humiliation, its degradation. The advanced white workers, in the trade unions are on the side of their Negro brothers in this fight. They know that Jim Crow is among the most injurious weapons of reaction. Anyone within the labor movement who practices, encourages or even tolerates Jim Crow is playing the game of the worst enemies of labor.
While large sections of the labor movement, particularly in the CIO, have learned this lesson, there are still many unions, in the AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods, who bring shame and discredit on labor by indulging in Jim Crow practices. One of the worst offenders is the AFL Boilermakers Union. In the fight for full membership rights in the union, all class-conscious workers are on the side of the Negro boilermakers. However, we do not think that the courts, an institution of the class enemy which upholds the poll tax laws, which bolsters Jim Crow and lynch law in the South; which functions primarily as an instrument to preserve the present social system perpetuating race discrimination and capitalist class rule, can resolve the problem. Nor can any reliance be placed on a government which maintains Jim Crow in the armed forces and thereby encourages its extension to civilian life.
The reactionary officialdom of the Boilermakers Union have seized upon the California court action and are attempting to divert the issue by attacking the Negro boilermakers for resorting to the capitalist courts to resolve an “internal” union dispute. The demagogic labor skates are seeking to cover their own responsibility by appealing to the understandable hatred of the workers for the courts which stand on the side of the employers.
 
Bureaucrats Responsible
The appeal to the courts for a redress of their grievance was an act of desperation to which the Negro boilermakers were driven by the bureaucrats who allowed them no democratic means of conducting their struggle within the union. It is these miserable labor fakers who are guilty of breaching the class solidarity of the workers. It is they who have broken ranks and by their whole policy are undermining the unity of the working class and thereby weakening the labor movement. It is they who, by their actions, are inviting government-employer intervention into the internal affairs of the union. Such intervention, as union militants know, invariably leads to hamstringing the unions and reducing their effectiveness as organizations of working class defense.
Because it obscures the real issue and confuses many militants sympathetic to their cause, court action does not serve the best interests of the Negro workers. Their most effective appeal is to the court of labor. Deprived of the right to carry their fight within the particular union, the straggle should be extended to the broader arena of the entire labor movement.
The pressure of those unions which have abolished discrimination, of those militants within the union who recognize the reactionary character of Jim Crow, must be brought to bear against the Jim Crow bureaucrats from all sides. The public opinion of the labor movement must be mobilized against them. They must be made to feel the weight of this opinion and stand pilloried and exposed before the bar of labor. It is in and through the labor movement that this fight can and will be carried to a successful conclusion.
 



As the war in Europe approaches a climax, the campaign for
additional instruments of labor repression is intensified. The
Roosevelt administration is using all the pressure tactics at it’s
command to jam a slave labor law through Congress before the military
collapse of Germany. All the tricks of “psychological warfare”
are being employed to whip up sentiment for a National Service Act
and batter down the opposition. The brass hats are conducting an
all-out drive to regiment labor under control of a military caste.
They look upon the war as a heaven-sent opportunity to straitjacket
the unions and are fearful lest “V-E Day” arrives before
they can succeed in fastening the American working class in the
totalitarian fetters of forced labor.
Spearheaded by the brass hats, a number of administration
spokesmen have appeared before closed hearings of the Senate Military
Affairs Committee to urge the immediate enactment of the May-Bailey
labor conscription bill. This bill provides fines and imprisonment
for workers who leave their jobs “without permission,”
and who refuse to take jobs when directed by their draft boards to do
so. It places the entire male working population between the ages of
18-45 under full control of the Selective Service system. As
Selective Service is an auxiliary of the military service, the bill
would actually place labor under direct control of the brass hats.
Strong opposition has developed to placing civilian labor under
direct military control. A substantial section of the employers fear
that the concentration of too much power in the hands of a military
caste would threaten their prerogatives. This fear was voiced in an
editorial by David Lawrence in the United States News on Feb. 9.
“It is difficult to see,” said Lawrence,
“how the Congress, if it enacts the pending manpower bill, can
hesitate to remove all ’profit from any enterprise where there
is forced labor. If forced labor is to be construed as service to
one’s country, let it be clearly for that purpose alone, and
then, logically, management and ownership must be conscripted, too.
It will be a surprise if the AFL and the CIO, who are opposed to the
‘forced labor’ bill, do not insist on such legislation to
cover management and ownership. There would be widespread sympathy
for such a proposal.”
 
Employer Objections
The employer opposition exemplified by Lawrence does not object to
-the principle of compulsory labor for private profit. But they favor
the extension of the existing “work-or-fight” and
“work-or-starve” decrees, administered through the War
Manpower Commission and Selective Service, as the means for hog-tieing
labor. In essence their opposition boils down to the demand
that the WMC be granted statutory authority to enforce the executive
orders issued by Roosevelt chaining workers to their jobs at frozen
wages. These decrees have already imposed a “limited”
form of compulsory labor on a substantial section of the working
class. This attitude was summed up by Ira Mosher, head of the
National Association of Manufacturers in a letter to the N.Y.
Times.
“The NAM program,” wrote Mosher, “requires
more effective functioning of the existing WMC machinery and
regulations. It requires adequate statutory authority for the WMC
respecting the establishment of employment ceilings in all
industries, the use of controlled referrals and compulsory releases.
It calls for immediate application of the work-or-fight principle,
within the present framework of the Selective Service authority and
machinery.”
The brass hats are resisting any change in the May bill which
would deprive them of direct control over the administration of the
proposed slave labor act. Having already concentrated tremendous
power in their hands, they are reaching out for full control of the
economic and political life of the country. They hope to crush all
opposition to the imperialist aims of Wall Street’s war under a
military dictatorship. They are prepared to use any means to
accomplish their purpose. Having been reduced to the argument that
the immediate enactment of the May bill is now necessary to “boost
the morale” of the soldiers, they deliberately set about
manufacturing “evidence” to support their spurious
contention.
 
“Evidence” on Order
In the midst of the Senate hearings on the May bill, an editorial
appeared in the Paris edition of an army newspaper, The Stars and
Stripes, endorsing the May bill. According to one of its writers,
this “marked the first time any service publication had taken
sides on an American political issue.” The N.Y. Times
reported: “Some members of the staff of the paper were so
incensed at the publication of the editorial that they proposed to
call a meeting tomorrow to protest the use of the soldiers’
publication for political purposes. They contended that the paper
should be edited only for soldiers and not on behalf of any project
which might interest high-ranking officers of the War Department.”
The editor of the publication admitted he was “asked in
messages from a War Department officer and from Under Secretary of
War Robert P. Patterson whether Stars and Stripes had
commented on the May bill.” “The text of the editorial,”
he added, “had been cabled at Mr. Patterson’s request to
Washington so it would be in his hands for Senate hearings on the
May-Bailey bill.” In a footnote to this incident the N.Y.
Times reveals that: “The editorial was written by the
editor, Lieut. Col. Arthur Goodfriend, formerly an advertising
writer, who received his promotion from major yesterday.” This
is how Patterson got his “evidence” that the soldiers’
are clamoring for the May bill and also how the “editor”
got his promotion.
This whole incident is typical of the fabricated evidence used to
support the demand for labor conscription. The inspired Stars and
Stripes editorial was picked ip by the N.Y. Times and
ballyhooed as conclusive proof that the “fighting men
themselves” are demanding the immediate enactment of the May
bill. “This factor of morale,” editorialized the Times,
“is a consideration which we cannot afford to overlook. It is a
factor about which we are entitled to believe that Mr. Patterson and
General Marshall and Admiral King and Secretary Stimson and Secretary
Forrestal, all of whom support this (May) bill, are better informed
than are those manufacturers and trade unionists who are opposing
it.” Indeed, they are not only “better informed”
after the fact, but before!
“This factor of morale” is as fraudulent as the
“manpower” and “munitions” shortage which was
used as the main pretext a few weeks ago for demanding a forced labor
law. The advocates of labor conscription dare not reveal the true
aims of such legislation. It is a strikebreaking, union-smashing
device, designed to regiment labor under a Prussianized military
caste. The May bill is still before the Senate Military Affairs
Committee. Labor must voice its uncompromising opposition through
resolutions, mass meetings and demonstrations, to halt this attack on
labor’s rights and labor’s freedom.
 



The capitalist press last week gleefully announced that all
“organized” resistance to compulsory labor legislation
had ended, with the endorsement of a “substitute”
manpower bill by top union officials. The labor leaders ended their
“resistance” by joining with the National Association of
Manufacturers and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in support of the
employer’s “manpower program.” This substitute
measure was offered by Senators Kilgore and Wagner in place of the
May-Bailey slave labor bill, now before the Senate. It empowers the
War Manpower commission to enforce the job-freezing, compulsory labor
decrees, issued by Roosevelt over the past three years. If enacted
into law, the Kilgore-Wagner bill would tighten and extend these
drastic labor controls into the “post-war” period.
The Kilgore-Wagner “substitute” aims to put “teeth”
in the existing manpower regulations by granting the WMC statutory
authority to impose “legal” sanctions against the
workers. The ‘teeth’ are sharpened to chew the labor
movement to pieces. One of the sharpest of these “teeth”
would “legalize WMC’s ruling that employers must do all
their hiring through the United States Employment Service or other
designated agencies.” This provision would give the capitalist
government “legal” authority to grant or withhold
employment, to move workers from one plant to another, from one area
to another, or to keep them frozen to their jobs.
 
Roosevelt’s Actions
The Roosevelt administration has sought to concentrate this power
in its hands for some time. On Dec. 5, 1942 Roosevelt issued an
executive decree instructing the chairman of the War Manpower
Commission to take all “lawful and appropriate” steps,
“to assure that all hiring and recruitment of workers for jobs
in any plants, facilities, occupation or areas designated by the
chairman shall be conducted solely through the United States
Employment Service or under arrangements be approves.” Under
this decree WMC Chairman McNutt later issued an order effective July
1, 1944, instructing employers to “hire all male help”
through the offices of the U.S. Employment Service.
Under the Roosevelt-McNutt “controlled referral”
plan, workers who refused to accept jobs in plants and areas
designated by the WMC would be unable to get jobs elsewhere. In
addition, McNutt declared, they “might be deprived of
unemployment compensation.” The “plan” was a
“work-where-you’re-told-or-starve” measure. It was
“denounced as illegal by Representative William J. Miller,
Republican of Connecticut, who contended it invoked a national labor
draft without Congressional sanction. ‘No wonder Mr. McNutt
refused to ask for passage of a national service act,’ he said.
‘He does not need such a law if he can get away with present
practices’.” (N.Y. Times, June 3, 1944).
James L. McDevitt, President of the Pennsylvania State Federation
of Labor, also at that time denounced the Roosevelt-McNutt “plan”
as a forced labor scheme. It “had everything that a labor draft
called for,” he said. That is, “everything” except
a legal cover. The Kilgore-Wagner “substitute” endorsed
by the top officials of the AFL and CIO is designed to provide this
legal cover. While the Roosevelt-McNutt plan applied only to male
workers over 17 years of age, the Kilgore-Wagner bill covers both men
and women in all age groups. In this respect it is more sweeping than
the May-Bailey bill which applies only to male workers in the 18–45
age group.
The capitulation of the union leaders to the “labor program”
of the employers was prepared in a series of secret conferences
organized to work put a “compromise” to the pending May-
Bailey bill. In an exclusive dispatch from Washington, published over
a month ago on Jan. 11, a staff writer of the N.Y. Herald-Tribune
reported:
“The collapse of organized resistance to a modified
national service hill, with the condition, however, that the military
shall not have the final say on the assignment of men to war jobs,
will be announced soon as a result of an agreement reached with
organized farm, labor and industry representatives, the N.Y.
Herald-Tribune learned tonight.”
 
Secret Agreement
The agreement, “was reached in secret White House meetings,”
under the “aegis of the recently created War Mobilisation and
Reconversion Advisory Board. The Board is composed of representatives
of business, agriculture and labor. The labor representatives are
William Green, AFL, Philip Murray, CIO and T.C. Cashen, Railroad
Brotherhood. The secret agreement provided that the administration of
the proposed forced labor legislation be turned over to the War
Manpower Commission instead of the Selective Service which is under
direct control of the brass hats. It was presented to James F.
Byrnes, Director of War Mobilization and Reconversion, who withdrew
“his previous opposition to transferring the important
assignment power from the military to the War Manpower Commission.”
The above reported “conference” was one of a number
of secret meetings which has now resulted in the open support by
“labor, agriculture and industry,” for the Kilgore-Wagner
“modified” national service bill. An interesting
sidelight on this behind- the-scenes betrayal of labor was Philip
Murray’s statement to the Senate Military Affairs Committee,
whining that Byrnes had double-crossed his “advisory hoard.”
“We respectfully submit,” said Murray, “that this
Senate committee should inquire why the advisory committee was not
consulted In advance of the presentation to a Congressional committee
of the May-Bailey bill.”
This deal to endorse forced labor legislation was engineered
behind the backs of the union membership. It was conceived behind
closed doors and hidden from the eyes of the union membership until
the labor bureaucrats sprung it in public. They neither consulted nor
advised the rank and file. This incident again confirms the truth of
our contention that. the struggle for the defense of the unions must
be conducted against the bureaucracy for the restoration of internal
union democracy.
This complete collapse of all resistance by the union
officialdom to forced labor legislation has simply served to embolden
reaction. Immediately following the labor bureaucrat’s
endorsement of the Kilgore-Wagner bill, the brass hats announced the
formation of forced labor battalions. From now on workers who quit
their jobs “without permission” are to be inducted into a
works corps and forced to work at army pay in government-owned
munitions plants. The struggle of the workers against forced labor
will have to be carried forward under the leadership of the union
militants. There can be no compromise on this issue.
 



The demand for a National Service Act, conscripting labor for work in private industry, has been raised periodically since the United States entered the war. From the beginning the question has been enveloped in a fog of duplicity. The arguments advanced by the proponents of labor conscription have varied from time to time, have often been contradictory, and have tended to conceal rather than reveal the true aims of such legislation. Those supporters of Wall Street’s war who “oppose” labor conscription have contributed their share toward obscuring the issue. One group of contenders extols the advantages of “voluntary” labor as a means of “furthering the war effort,” the other insists that “compulsory” labor is necessary. “Voluntary versus compulsory labor.” Thus is the question put. An examination of the status of labor since the outbreak of war will reveal that “voluntary” labor under wartime capitalism is a myth.
Immediately following Pearl Harbor, the labor bureaucrats “voluntarily” surrendered the right to strike in exchange for compulsory arbitration of labor disputes by the tripartite War Labor Board. Composed of an equal number of representatives of the unions, employers and the “public,” i.e. the government, the WLB functions as an administration agency to police the unions. Compulsory arbitration deprived the unions of their independence of action. The no-strike pledge deprived the unions of their most effective weapon of defense.
With the union thus shackled, Roosevelt proceeded to freeze wages by executive decree, establishing the Little Steel formula ceiling on wage increases. The union bureaucrats now “voluntarily” accepted the wage freeze in exchange for Roosevelt’s fraudulent promise to take the profits out of war and “stabilize” the cost of living. The WLB was converted into an instrument to enforce the wage freeze. While profits soared to the highest levels in history, the wage freeze effectively reduced labor’s share of the national income. Rising prices, constantly forcing the cost of living upward, resulted in a gradual reduction of real wages and a lowered standard of living for the workers.
In “normal” times, the employers depend upon a large reservoir of unemployed workers to keep wages down. During periods of war, the army of unemployed is absorbed in the military forces and expanded war production. The employing class then utilizes political means – its control over government – to prevent competition between individual employers which would increase wages and thus reduce profits. The capitalist government, functioning as the executive arm of the employing class, begins to regulate hours, wages and conditions of employment. The government aims to eliminate competition between individual employers in the interests of the employing class as a whole.
Although the Little Steel formula established an arbitrary limit on wage increases, it did not eliminate geographical wage differentials, nor existing differentials between industries. The natural movement of labor is to industries paying higher wages and providing better working conditions. This movement, if permitted to follow its natural course, would inevitably undermine the government’s wage-freezing policy. That is why Roosevelt was soon forced to issue a number of decrees aimed at controlling the movement of labor, in order to bolster the wage freeze.
 
Manpower Priorities
A category of manpower priorities was devised to channel labor into the most strategic war industries. Industry was classified as: (1) essential; (2) necessary; (3) non-essential. The system of occupational deferments for men employed in “essential” industry was an effective goad for those subject to the provisions of the Selective Service Act. The “work-in-essential-industry-or-be-drafted” principle assured an adequate supply of labor to “essential” industry as a whole. It provided no solution, however, to the problem of wage differentials between different industries and different localities. Within the confines of the “work-or-fight” rule, labor could continue to seek the best employment. To plug this gap, the War Manpower Commission was established to tighten the government’s control over the movement of labor. Under the broad powers granted the WMC by Roosevelt and with the aid of subsequent executive decrees, workers were frozen to their jobs at frozen wages.
The first steps in this direction were taken for certain “critical” industries. In September 1942, Paul V. McNutt, WMC chairman, issued a decree freezing the workers in the lumber and non-ferrous metals industries in 12 western states. Later the order was extended to cover a number of geographical areas. In December 1942, it was applied to over 700,000 workers in the heavily industrialized Detroit area. In January 1943 a similar order covered 175,000 workers in the St. Paul-Minneapolis area. Finally, the job freeze was made national in scope in April 1943, applicable to all workers in “essential” industries covering approximately 27,000,000 farm, industrial and government workers. Selective Service officials ordered those who quit without “permission” to be reclassified and inducted into the army.
For those not subject to the “work-or-fight” penalty – women, men disqualified for military service, over-age, etc., – the compulsion is economic. The power to grant or withhold employment is the power over life and death. In a sweeping decree issued by Roosevelt on December 5, 1943, the War Manpower Commission was given control over the US Employment Service. The executive order declared that the USES was to become the clearing house for “all hiring, re-hiring, solicitation and recruitment of workers.” This decree also provided that:
“No employer shall retain in his employ any worker whose services are more urgently needed in any plant, facility, occupation or area designated by the WMC Chairman.”
To reinforce the December 5 decree, an executive order was issued which went into effect July 1, 1944, placing all male workers over the age of 17 under the control of the US Employment Service. Entitled the Roosevelt-Mc-Nutt “controlled referral” plan, the executive order compels workers to take jobs in industries and areas designated by the USES. Those who balked, declared McNutt, would be refused a certificate of availability without which they would be denied a job and in addition, would be “deprived of unemployment compensation.” This “work-where-you’re-told-or-starve” decree together with Roosevelt’s December 5 decree empowering the War Manpower Commission to shift workers from one “plant, facility, occupation or area,” to another, provided the basis for the “Allentown Plan” recently inaugurated by the WMC.
In Allentown, Pa., the WMC recently compelled employers engaged in “non-essential” production to discharge hundreds of workers, some of them holding years of seniority. These workers were forced to apply to the US Employment Service and were directed to jobs in war plants at lower wages. The penalty for refusal to take such jobs was denial of employment “for the duration of the war.” Officials of the WMC announce that the “Allentown Plan” is to be extended to other “critical” areas.
Thus we see that the legend about this being a war between “free labor” and “slave labor” is a piece of monstrous deception. Roosevelt has abolished “voluntary” labor, at least for an important section of the working population, by executive decree. The process of regimenting labor in the interest of the exploiting class began with the outbreak of war. It was accelerated under the pretext of wartime necessity. The demand for a National Service Act is part of this process.
 
The Austin-Wadsworth Bill
The campaign to conscript labor has been under way for a number of years. The first National Service Act was drawn up by Grenville Clark, Wall Street lawyer and behind-the-scenes lobbyist for the Big Business interests. It was submitted to Congress in 1943 under the sponsorship of Senator Austin and Representative Wadsworth. The Austin-Wadsworth bill provided for the conscription of all males between the ages of 18 to 65, and women between 18 to 50 for work in private industry. The penalty for violators was imprisonment. The bill died in the 1943 Congress but was revived after Roosevelt incorporated the demand for a national service law in his January 1944 message to Congress. “I have received a joint recommendation for this law,” declared Roosevelt, “from the heads of the War Department, the Navy department and the Maritime Commission.” From then on, the brass hats, under the direct inspiration of Wall Street bankers, spearheaded the drive for a national service law.
The ballyhoo to conscript labor continued throughout 1944. With the approach of the national presidential election campaign however, the Roosevelt administration began to soft-pedal its labor conscription agitation. The issue was kept simmering in the pages of the NY Times which continued to devote space to periodical statements by War and Navy Department spokesmen. The “Citizens Committee for a National War Service Act,” organized by Grenville Clark, with himself as chairman, maintained a legislative lobby.
Neither of the two capitalist parties included the demand for a national service law in their political platforms. Nowhere in all of their campaign oratory, did the Democratic and Republican candidates even dare raise the issue.
The votes had hardly been counted, however, when “labor’s friend” in the White House, elected by labor’s votes, let loose a blast that: “Workers who quit critical war jobs were costing American lives on the battlefronts because it was necessary to ration shells hurled at the enemy.” This was the cue the forced labor advocates were waiting for. A full-fledged munitions “shortage” developed overnight. It seemed that the munitions “shortage” was due to a suddenly discovered manpower “shortage.” The manpower “shortage” was due, of course, to “workers who quit critical war jobs.” The rabid labor-hating head of the Army Service Forces, General Somervell, opined: “They have taken a furlough ...” It wasn’t long before the whole pack was in full cry for a compulsory labor draft to eliminate the deplorable state of affairs which made it necessary “to ration shells hurled at the enemy.”
In commenting on the alleged “munitions shortage” the weekly magazine, Business Week, circulated primarily among corporation executives who demand factual reporting and not inspired propaganda, revealed:
“There have been no munitions shortages at the front, for all the talk, other than those caused by bogged roads and enemy action. Supreme headquarters would not have started this all-out drive if it had not been altogether confident on supply.”
The much-ballyhooed munitions and manpower shortage was simply part of the psychological warfare designed to facilitate the enactment of additional repressive labor legislation.
 
A Major Offensive
A week later the German counter-offensive caught the American command napping and smashed through for sizable gains. This was a heaven-sent opportunity for the chair-borne command at home to launch a major offensive against the American working class. In his fourth term message to Congress, Roosevelt called again for passage of a National Service Act. Included in the message was a joint letter from Secretary of War Stimson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal, stating that Roosevelt’s Chiefs of Staff, General Marshall and Admiral King, joined them in urging “the passage of a national war-service law.”
In response to administration pressure, Chairman May of the House Military Affairs Committee, introduced a “work-or-fight” bill providing for the creation of army labor battalions. Spokesmen for the Army and Navy objected in the preliminary hearings to a conscripted “works corps” stating they preferred “the penalties against those who refused to obtain or remain in essential war jobs to be civil ones (fines and imprisonment) rather than inductions into special Army or Navy service units.” In an unprecedented move to speed enactment of the law, Roosevelt dispatched a message to the House Military Affairs Committee urging immediate, favorable action on the May-Bailey bill.
“While there may be some differences on the details of the bill,” wrote Roosevelt, “prompt action now is much more important in the war effort than the perfecting of details.” Upon receipt of the message, Chairman May abruptly terminated the hearings saying: “We’ve discussed this matter long enough. It’s now time to act.” The bill was altered to meet the objections of the brass hats and submitted to the House with a recommendation for its adoption. The Bill provided that men between the ages of 18-45 who left their jobs “without permission” of their draft boards would be subject to a fine of $10,000 or 5 years imprisonment, or both. The same penalties would apply to workers who refused to accept jobs when ordered by their draft boards. The administration of the act was placed in the hands of Selective Service. Thus it was proposed to give the brass hats direct control over a substantial section of the working population. In essence, the bill “legalizes” and extends the compulsory controls established by the previous executive decrees.
 
The May-Bailey Bill
The provisions of the May-Bailey bill are so purposefully vague and ambiguous that a wide latitude of “interpretation” can be applied by the agency administering the measure. In the House debate, members of the committee who approved the bill were unable to explain its provisions. Representative Brown of Ohio, declared:
“The bill is filled with inconsistencies. Very frankly, I am not certain what it contains. I do not know what many of its provisions mean, and I am not alone in this position, because the members of the Committee on Military Affairs who reported this bill seemingly could not agree among themselves as to what many of the sections of the measure really mean.”
One of the questions on which the members “seemingly” disagreed was whether or not it was an anti-strike bill.
Representative Brown pointed out that:
“Section 2 prohibits any voluntary stoppage of work by any individual. That could be taken to apply to strikes. But, when the question was asked whether or not this would prevent a man from striking, some on the committee said ‘Yes,’ some said ‘No.’ Before our committee some said, ‘We will let the local draft board pass upon the question as to whether or not it is a legal strike’.” (Congressional Record, January 29, 1945)
The “local draft board,” that is, the brass hats who control Selective Service will decide whether or not a strike is “legal.” But to a brass hat there is no such thing as a “legal” strike.
Unable to justify or explain its provisions the supporters of the May-Bailey bill resorted to the following “clinching” argument: “Our military leaders want it, and if they want it who are we to object.” The pages of the Congressional Record are sprinkled with that type of “logic.” Representative Howard Smith of Virginia, author of the Smith “Gag” Act and co-author of the Smith-Connally “anti-strike” law orated that the only question involved was whether,
“notwithstanding our objections, you can give a vote of no confidence to the Chiefs of Staff of the American armed forces. That is the question involved here and no other question.”
Representative Kilday of Texas:
“I say to you I take my stand with General Marshall and Admiral King. Those who prefer to accept the vague insinuations of Philip Murray and the AFL may take their stand where they please.”
Representative Sikes of Florida:
“Regardless of all the objections which can be raised, there remains one fact which outweighs them all. The Commander in Chief and the Chiefs of Staff have stated that the United States must have a manpower draft – now.”
Representative Arends of Illinois:
“Who am I to loudly voice my opinions from a military angle against those of General Marshall.”
And so on, and so forth.
The political deputies of Wall Street cloak their reactionary program with the military prestige of the general staff.
“One of the consequences of the war is the emergence of the Military Staff as the spearhead of reaction. The ruling capitalist circles demand unquestioning subservience to the military caste. The intervention of the brass hats in various spheres of civilian life is an integral part of the growing regimentation of the American people. It is part of the enormous strengthening of reactionary tendencies in American life and politics and the unmistakeable trend toward totalitarianism.” (Resolution of the Socialist Workers Party on The US and the Second World War.)
Under constant prodding by the administration, which utilized all the pressure tactics at its disposal, the May-Bailey “limited” service bill was railroaded through the House of Representatives by a vote of 256 to 165. Administration spokesmen demanded immediate action to speed the bill through the Senate. Meanwhile, the military situation in Europe had undergone a radical change. The Russian offensive broke through on the eastern front and was rolling toward Berlin. Allied counter-attacks on the western front pushed the Nazis back into Germany. The pretext of military necessity advanced by the supporters of the May-Bailey bill lost its plausibility. It became obvious that the much-touted “win-the-war” measure could have no effect on the outcome of the war in Europe.
 
Turn in the Military Situation
The sharp turn in the military situation undoubtedly strengthened the opposition to granting the brass hats direct military control over labor. Administration stalwarts on the Senate Military Affairs Committee attempted to work out a compromise which would turn the administration of the act over to the War Manpower Commission. But the brass hats refused to compromise. They insisted on retaining the provision empowering Selective Service to administer the act. Whereupon the Senate committee announced it would hold “closed hearings” on the bill. Appearing as witnesses before the Senate committee the brass hats again altered their tactics. They dropped the pretense of a “munitions” and “manpower” shortage, which had been thoroughly exposed as a fiction, and insisted that the May-Bailey bill was needed to “boost the morale of the men in the armed forces.” To prove that the soldiers were demanding the adoption of the bill, an inspired editorial appeared in the Paris edition of the army newspaper, The Stars and Stripes, endorsing the measure. However, this too-clever scheme was quickly exposed. The board of the paper kicked up a fuss against the editorial during the course of which it was disclosed that the editorial was prompted by high officials of the War Department. The incident shows to what lengths the brass hats are ready to go to forward their plans for dictatorial control.
Dropped also was the pretense that the May-Bailey bill was needed as a “win-the-war” measure. It suddenly developed that a national service law was required primarily for the period AFTER the defeat of Germany. The January 27, 1945 issue of Business Week reported to its clients that:
“The main purpose for which the Army wants a national service law is to give it a firm hold on workers after Germany goes under.”
The same magazine had reported in a previous issue that:
“Another virtue of manpower legislation from the point of view of planners in the Army, Navy, and Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion is that it would serve to check worker migration during the period after the end of the war in Europe and before the end of the war in Japan.”
Coming at a time when the war in Europe is entering its final stages, the insistent demand for additional instruments of labor repression has ominous significance for the American working class.
When the war in Europe ends there will be little justification for maintaining the present high rate of inductions into the armed forces. The “work-or-fight” penalty which uses the threat of induction as its compulsion will be weakened. In addition, the cutback in war production will close many plants and will result in a lower income for wage earners by reducing hours, shortening the work week and eliminating overtime pay. The pressure for wage increases will grow. As the “moral” pressure of “full-production-for-the-war-effort” is dulled, class conflicts will sharpen. The “voluntary” no-strike pledge will prove inadequate to keep wages frozen. Nor can Roosevelt and his brass hats count too much on their labor lieutenants to “hold the line” against the workers. That is why they want a national service law as an additional weapon to prevent the labor movement from regaining its independence of action.
 
Division Among the Capitalists
The division among the capitalists over the May-Bailey bill reflects a conflict of interest between different sections of the employing class. Conflicts of interest exist between agriculture and industry, commercial and industrial capital, between “essential” and “non-essential” industry, etc. This clash was revealed some time ago in the dispute over reconversion policies which was resolved by the removal of Donald Nelson as head of the War Production Board and the consolidation of military control over production. Many employers, zealous of their prerogatives, fear the too great concentration of power in the hands of a military caste. Business Week (January 20, 1945) reports:
“Civilian officials admit privately that the generals are having things all their own way. Byrnes (Director of War Mobilization and Reconversion) taking on operating responsibilities for the first time has thrown his weight on the side of the military. His deputy for war production is not a civilian but an army officer – Maj. Gen. Lucius Clay, formerly director of procurement for the Army Service Forces, one of the strongest and most impassioned advocates of the military viewpoint.”
The military bureaucracy, on the other hand, are determined to retain control over “reconversion” policies.
“With materials destined to be more plentiful after V-E Day, WPB priority control would lose its potency. At that point, it would be an easier job to control the economy through manpower.” (Business Week, January 13, 1945)
It is significant that the greatest employer opposition was directed against the provision giving the brass hats direct control over manpower. These capitalists insisted that the existing instruments of compulsion were adequate to control labor and asked “only” that these instruments be sharpened and made more effective.
The attitude of the capitalist opposition to the May-Bailey bill was summed up in a letter to the NY Times, written by Ira Mosher, President of the National Association of Manufacturers.
“The NAM program requires more effective functioning of the existing WMC machinery and regulations. It requires adequate statutory authority for the MWC respecting the establishment of employment ceilings in all industries, the use of controlled referrals and compulsory releases. It calls for immediate application of the work-or-fight principle, within the present framework of the Selective Service authority and machinery.”
The NAM program thus calls for tightening the drastic job freeze decrees issued by Roosevelt and their rigid enforcement. It asks that the War Manpower Commission be granted statutory authority by Congress to strengthen its power to apply “legal” compulsion. Under the hypocritical guise of defending “voluntary” labor, this employers’ association presents a plan for perpetuating and extending the system of forced-labor-by-executive-decree which Roosevelt has put into effect over the past three years.
The labor bureaucrats of the AFL and CIO have endorsed the NAM program. These treacherous skates have step by step paved the way for reaction by voluntarily agreeing to the surrender of labor’s rights. Functioning as labor lieutenants of the capitalist class, they have joined the conspiracy against their own rank and file.
“From the outset the labor bureaucrats proceeded to prove by word and deed, how indispensable they are in harnessing the workers to the chariot of war. They declared a moratorium on labor’s right to strike. They espoused the policy of compulsory arbitration. They installed labor representatives on the employer-dominated War Labor Board – thereby lending their prestige to the anti-labor actions of the WLB. They accepted and circulated Roosevelt’s counterfeit ‘stabilization’ promises as good coin; they acquiesced in the freezing of wages; and as part of the War Manpower Commission’s ‘labor-management’ committee they shared the responsibility for the job freeze.” (Resolution of Socialist Workers Party on The US and the Second World War.)
 
The Labor Bureaucrats
After rendering yeoman’s service in helping to strait-jacket the unions, the labor fakers now join with the employers in urging a “compromise” manpower bill which would extend the job freeze after “V-E Day.” If this “compromise” measure is adopted, the labor skates can be counted on to make the welkin ring with shouts of “victory.” Every time the bureaucrats win one of their “victories” the labor movement loses part of its shirt. While these trade union officials seek to cover their treachery by effecting a rotten compromise on the question of forced labor, the Stalinists openly avow their support of every union-smashing, strike-breaking, slave labor measure advanced by the political and military agents of Wall Street. The Stalinist traitors function as the very spearhead of reaction inside labor’s ranks.
The drive for additional measures of labor repression to be applied after Germany is defeated completely exposes the fraud of Roosevelt’s “peace, security and jobs-for-all” program in the “post-war” period. If capitalism could guarantee a decent standard of living for the masses on the basis of “peacetime” production it would have no need of strengthening its machinery of repression. But decaying capitalism, it is clear, cannot mitigate the class antagonisms; it can only sharpen them. It cannot raise, or even maintain, the present
standard of living but must drive the living standards of the workers to ever lower levels.
The resolution of the SWP on The US and the Second World War points out this precise tendency:
“The colossal war expenditures will raise the national debt of the United States above the astronomical figure of $300-billion. This unprecedented debt is accelerating the process of inflation. The cost of living continues to rise, additional and more burdensome taxes are imposed on the masses, the workers’ standard of living is depressed to ever lower levels. Despite the favored position of the United States the war will have a ruinous effect on American economic life. Unemployment, that capitalist-bred social plague, will scourge the land. The arch-reactionary measures of repression against the labor movement adopted under the pretext of war necessity will be extended to the ‘post-war’ period. The drive toward totalitarian rule will continue under the demand for a ‘strong’ government in Washington.”



The stabilization witch-doctors are celebrating the “second anniversary” of Roosevelt’s wage-freezing hold-the-line order. To commemorate the event, a quartet of administration “stabilizers” have issued a report urging that the wage-freeze be continued and extended into the “post-war” period.
According to their report, the hold-the-line order, issued in April 1943, has given rise to a condition of universal happiness and prosperity. Wages have gone up, prices have risen only imperceptibly, the cost-of-living has been “stabilized,” and the “people” are rolling in wealth. This cheerful dish was cooked up by the heads of the Office of Economic Stabilization, Office of Price Administration, War Food Administration, War Labor Board, and released with the blessing of the chief “stabilizer” in the White House.
In addition to enjoining the luscious fruits of “stabilization,” we are assured that the “people” are accumulating “huge savings in other forms, such as bank deposits and life insurance policies.” “Over the past two and a half years,” the stabilizers inform us, “they have saved close to 25 per cent of their income after taxes.” And all this, of course, stems directly from Roosevelt’s hold-the-line order, which fixed the Little Steel formula as a ceiling on wage increases.
How do these soothsayers arrive at such fantastic conclusions? Simply by lumping together under the one mystic symbol of “the people” such diverse elements as corporations and peddlers, farm laborer and landlord, capitalist and wage earner. In the “first anniversary” report released a year ago, for example, the “stabilizers” boasted that: “Corporation profits, both before and after taxes, rose in 1943 even above the record-breaking levels of 1942.” In 1944, corporations profits and capital reserves soared to the highest levels in history. But no hint of this fact was permitted to mar the pretty picture painted by the “second anniversary” report.
 
The Real Beneficiaries
This nimble sleight-of-hand performance is intended to conceal the fact that the real beneficiaries of Roosevelt’s hold-the- line order are the Wall Street plunderbund. These are the “people” whose “pocket-books and checking accounts are bulging with money.” With their snouts buried deep in the public trough they grunt their approval of Roosevelt’s “wage stabilization” policy.
The “anniversary” report constitutes a brazen rejection of labor’s demand for wage increases to catch up to the rising cost of living. The original hold-the-line order was issued on April 8, 1943 during the first coal miners’ strike to bolster the War Labor Board’s sabotage of the miners’ struggle to gain a wage increase. It has since become a major weapon of the administration in staving off union demands for an upward revision of the Little Steel formula. It is again being used to strengthen the hand of the coal operators in their current negotiations with the miners.
While the cost of living has continued to rise, wages have remained frozen. Exorbitant taxes on the workers’ income has reduced take-home wages. Rising prices further reduced real wages and steadily lowered the workers’ standard of living, With the administration “holding-the-line” against wage increases, the dollar patriots amassed fabulous profits out of war contracts, the Price Control Act has been riddled with loopholes. The Food Trusts engineered one price-squeeze after another: the most recent is the “meat strike” of the packers aimed at removing price ceilings on beef. The record of the OPA has been one of constant appeasement of the price-gougers.
This is the REAL record of the past two years under the “hold-the-line” order and no amount of statistics juggling can alter it. Roosevelt and his “stabilizers” insult the intelligence of the people by publishing such tommyrot as is contained in their “anniversary” report. Housewives will be amazed to learn that food prices have “declined” by 3 per cent over the past two years! These statistics jugglers have the gall to expect such a statement, which contradicts the experience of every housewife in the country, to be believed on their say-so.
The proposal to extend the wage-freeze into the “post-war” period is an ominous move to drive the living standards of the workers to still lower levels. Cutbacks of war production are again becoming prevalent. The elimination of overtime and downgrading, shortening of the work week, etc., will further reduce take home wages. To defend its living standards, labor must regain its independence of action in the fight against the wage-freeze.
 



The signing of a “Peace Charter” by representatives of organized labor and industry is being widely acclaimed by the kept press, Wall Street bankers and industrialists, administration wage-freezers and forced labor advocates. For this “charter” contains a “code of principles” lifted out of the bible of Big Business. It affirms the “right” of capital to exploit labor and renounces lahor’s resistance to such exploitation.
Specifically, it proposes to extend into the “post-war” period the wartime policy of unconditional surrender to the employing class. Small wonder that the dollar patriots and their political agents hail the “statesmanship” of labor leaders William Green and Philip Murray, who joined with the head of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Eric Johnston, in formulating the “peace pact for post-war prosperity.”
The pact proclaims that:
“The rights of private property and free choice of action, under a system of private competitive capitalism, must continue to be the foundation of our nation’s peaceful and prosperous expanding economy.”
To this basic capitalist principle the “charter” adds:
“The inherent right and responsibility of management to direct the operations of an enterprise shall be recognized and preserved. So that enterprise may develop and expand and earn a reasonable profit, management must be free as well from unnecessary governmental interference or burdensome restrictions.”
 
Aid Wall Street
This sweeping declaration of the “rights of private property” constitutes a blanket endorsement of Wall Street’s “postwar” plans to plunder the wealth of the country.
These plans have already been embodied in legislative form. They provide for the “free enterprise” disposal to the monopolists of billions-worth of government- owned plants, equipment, land and surplus commodities at a fraction of their value. They provide generous cash payments for war contractors upon the termination (cutback) of their war contracts. They protect the “property rights” of the corporations during the “reconversion” period by guaranteeing a “reasonable profit” while the plants are shut down.
Under the “peace pact” signed by Murray and Green, the corporations have the “right” to operate the plants – constructed and paid for out of the public treasury – at a “reasonable profit,” or shut them down. This is the “free choice of action” which the capitalist claims as his sacred right and which the misleaders of labor endorse in their “charter.” Such endorsement of the “principle” that property rights take precedence over human rights is a gross betrayal of everything the labor movement stands for.
What did the “labor statesmen” get in exchange for putting their seal of approval on the holy “rights” of private property? The labor commentator for the N.Y. Post observes that the “peace charter” contains no mention of 60,000,000 jobs or “full employment.”
“Nor,” he , adds, “does it give labor any concessions beyond recognizing the right to collective bargaining – which, incidentally, now is protected by a federal law.”
In short, the labor leaders got exactly nothing! As far as labor is concerned it was all give and no take. Moreover, the recognition of the right “to organize and to engage in collective bargaining,” granted under the National Labor Relations Act, is meaningless without the right to strike.
 
The Right to Strike
And the “peace pact” proposes to eliminate strikes by the “peaceful” disposal of “differences between management and labor.” How is this to be done? The CIO had a very decided opinion on this question which it expressed in no uncertain terms. In a. pamphlet published by the national office of the CIO in 1940, the answer to this question was given in the following clear and unambiguous terms:
“The right to organize and bargain collectively implies the right to strike, since strike action is frequently the only way organized workers have of enforcing collective bargaining. Though collective bargaining is guaranteed by the National Labor Relations Act, employers often refuse to obey the laws of the U.S. Strike action is then the only way by which they can be forced to recognize unions and bargain with them in good faith.”
The events since 1940 have confirmed the correctness of this position. The alternative is to pursue the course followed by the union heads since Pearl Harbor of compulsory arbitration of union demands and grievances by an “impartial” employer-dominated Board. It is this latter course which Green and Murray have written into their “peace pact” with the bosses.
The union officials’ endorsement of the “rights of private property” and compulsory arbitration elicited warm statements of approval from the camp of Big Business. Winthrop W. Aldrich, chairman of the board of the Chase National Bank, declared: “I heartly approve of what has been done.” It is “a great step forward.” Chase National, a Rockefeller financial institution, is one of the two largest private banks in the world.
Charles E. Wilson, president of General Electric Company, said: ‘“The important thing is that these fine words be translated into action.” The new “economic stabilizer” Davis and WLB chairman Taylor added their praise. Thomas E. Dewey, Republican candidate in the last presidential election, “hailed the labor-employer charter” as a “notable” achievement. Roosevelt, who is using every means at his disposal to jam a forced labor law through Congress, expressed himself as being “very pleased.”
But the workers, who were neither advised nor consulted in its adoption, will have their word to say about this “charter” of docile surrender to the employers. As the militant ranks are beginning to demonstrate in ever greater numbers – the continuing strike wave in Detroit and the strike vote of the miners are tokens – they are not going to submit willingly to any “charter” which binds them to exploitation without resistance and keeps them from effective action in defense of their welfare.
 



Cutbacks in war production are mounting behind a veil of military censorship intended to conceal the full extent of layoffs due to war contract cancellations and plant shutdowns. The boss press, which, a few weeks ago was screeching for a labor draft to meet an alleged manpower shortage, has fallen in with the hush-hush policy of the administration and its brass hats. “No news stories, no headlines,” observes one labor commentator. “But every day hundreds more are told ‘No more work after Monday, all men with less than two years seniority are permanently laid off’.’’
Production of aircraft, ships, tanks, munitions, etc., is being sharply curtailed. It is reported that in the one aircraft center of Buffalo, New York, “the Bell Aircraft Corp, is closing its two fighter plane plants now employing 15,000. The Curtiss-Wright company there will lay off 900 men by next Sunday, And its executives predict a steady cut in jobs until 1946.”
The Army has announced that “it has decided not to complete twelve new tank plants,” which were scheduled to reach the peak of operation in the latter part of the year. In addition, the Army Ordnance division has ordered a cutback in munitions affecting production schedules and facilities in sixty plants. The munitions cutback, estimated at nearly $200,000,000 represents “a reduction of about 10 percent in the entire artillery ammunitions program.”
 
Shipyard Workers’ Jobs
Meanwhile, the Navy has cancelled contracts for 72 out of 84 combat vessels. The Maritime Commission is cancelling orders for tankers and cargo ships. The Commission’s shipbuilding program will be virtually completed by the end of the year. “About 750,000 shipbuilding workers will lose their jobs by New Year’s,” concludes the labor reporter for the New York Post.
These are but a few of the items that have crept into the press despite the hush-hush imposed by the government. This policy is designed to lull the workers into a false sense of security. By making it appear a though cutbacks and shutdowns are merely local or isolated incidents, the employers and their agents in Washington hope to ward off a national movement of labor to defend its living standards.
The administration is repeating the tactics employed last year. Their “conspiracy of silence” was blasted then by the dramatic sit-in of the Brewster Aircraft workers, who converted an “isolated” cutback into a militant demonstration that attracted national attention. The Brewster sit-in caused a flurry of Congressional activity whose sole result was the adoption of “demobilization” legislation protecting the interests of the employers.
Here is how one reporter summed up the net outcome of government action at that time.
“The only demobilization legislation so far approved by Congress provides for the termination of war contracts, but does nothing about taking up the slack in production and providing full employment after the war. It does nothing either about providing decent unemployment benefits for the workers necessarily made jobless.”
This was written on June 3, 1944, almost a year ago. In the ensuing year the government has done nothing, literally NOTHING, to cushion the shock of “demobilization” to the workers. The whole record proves that the political agents of Big Business have no intention of doing anything – unless they are jolted out of their callous indifference by the independent action of the labor movement.
 



The Ford-operated Willow Run B-24 bomber plant at Detroit Michigan, built by the government and widely publicized as the most efficient mass production unit in the world, is slated for the scrap heap. Thousands of workers are being laid off as the working force of 22,000 is reduced in preparation for a complete shutdown scheduled for August 1.
It is estimated that the shutdown of this one plant will affect several hundred thousand workers in related industries.
The cutback at Willow Run, for example, led immediately to the dismissal of 4,000 workers employed by the Buick Aviation Engine Plant at Melrose Park, Illinois, producing engines for the B-24 bombers.
The Willow Run plant cost the government $96,450,000 to build and equip with the most modern machinery. In addition, $26,000,000 was spent on a housing project for the workers and their families. A highway from the city of Detroit to the plant costing $20,000,000 was constructed at government expense. To appreciate its size, it is only necessary to point out that the Willow Run plant has an airport bigger than the huge La Guardia Field in New York.
Protesting the announced intention of shutting down Willow Run, a union spokesman demanded to know: “If we can’t make bombers, why can’t we make bathtubs, or any one of the other many items which have become scarce since war production started?” The plant is capable of producing tractors, farm equipment, pre-fabricated houses, household equipment, etc., in large quantities. It was built with funds provided by the public treasury. If it is no longer needed for war production, why can’t it be used in the public interest to manufacture civilian goods now so urgently needed by the people?
But that would violate the sacred “principle” of “free private enterprise” which guides administration policy and decrees that government-owned plants and equipment shall not be used to “compete” with private industry. The employers and their political agents in Washington cannot tolerate any “confusion” on this point. To avoid such embarrassing questions, J.A. Krug, chairman of the War Production Board, indicated “that since the announcement that Willow Run would end its output of Liberators had caused so much confusion, the Army may announce cutbacks henceforth from Washington instead of locally.”
 
WPB Policy
Krugg told a press conference that the Army made a mistake in telling the workers of the plan to padlock the Willow Run plant, but, he said: “I don’t think they’ll try it again.” The method advocated by WPB chairman Krug of dealing with the “reconversion” problem is to tighten the lid on information relating to cutbacks and plant shutdowns. By keeping the workers in ignorance of the plant shutdown program of the government this spokesman for Big Business hopes to avoid a repetition of the militant sit-in demonstration, staged by the Brewster Aircraft workers last year.
The capitalist “planners” have altered their technique. The Brewster shutdown was effected at one swoop throwing 13,000 workers out of a job overnight. At Willow Run, they decided to get rid of the workers gradually by laying off a few thousand at a time – but made the “mistake” of informing the workers of their intention to shut the plant down. Hereafter, according to Krug, the method will be to reduce the working force and conceal the fact that the plant is to be padlocked.
In this way, they hope to avoid the occupation of the plants by large groups of workers driven to protest the callous disregard of labor’s welfare by Wall Street’s “demobilization” representatives in Washington.
 



Responding to the fervent appeals of the labor haters Roosevelt has renewed his demand for legislation conscripting workers for profit. He dispatched a message to the House Military Affairs Committee, urging immediate action on the May-Bailey Bill now before that body. Along with his statement, Roosevelt enclosed a message from the top ranking brass hats, Admiral King and General Marshall.
The Commander-in-Chief and his Chiefs of Staff threw their weight behind the vicious May-Bailey forced labor measure in an effort to head off the growing opposition to labor conscription. Upon receipt of Roosevelt’s communication, Chairman May of the Military Affairs Committee, co-author of the May-Bailey bill, abruptly terminated the hearings and announced: “We’ve discussed this matter long enough. It’s now time to act.”
However, resistance developed to this attempt to railroad the bill through committee and hearings were reopened for further testimony. The technique worked out by the forced labor advocates was to rush the measure through under cover of an emotional barrage laid down by Roosevelt’s “psychological warfare” division. This barrage reached a frenzied peak in the period following the military reversal in Europe.
Rumors were spread of the possibility of buzz-bomb attacks on east coast cities. Race tracks were shut down and conventions banned; travel and hotel rooms were rationed; rumors were circulated of wholesale shutdowns of all sports, gin mills, night clubs, etc.
 
“Psychological Warfare”
Editorials in the capitalist press shrieked about “our boys” dying because of a shortage of munitions. Hysterical accusations were hurled at workers charged with leaving their war jobs. The impression created was that the workers were retiring to Palm Beach and Miami to attend the races, loll on the warm sand, drink champagne and stroll along the boardwalk with a buxom blonde on each arm.
In commenting on “Washington’s psychological warfare,” the magazine Business Week remarks:
“Responsible officials discount – but do not deplore – such rumors. They regard them as ‘salutary speculation,’ which can be expected to hasten the transfer of workers from civilian to war industry and to create in the civilian mind a general receptivity to any further restrictions which may be necessary.”
No wonder Roosevelt and his henchmen decided that further open hearings on a slave labor act might prove embarrassing!
The arguments advanced by Roosevelt in support of a national service law were riddled to pieces. Testimony before the House Military Affairs Committee proved that there was neither a “munitions” nor a “manpower” shortage. The champions of slave labor were compelled to fall back on their only remaining argument: “The brass hats want it, and if they want it who are we to say no?”
In answering the contention that “workers can produce better under a voluntary program,” a representative of the Chief of Staff replied:
“The present system is itself coercive, but it is not impartial. All this (May-Bailey) bill asks is a legalization of what now is being done administratively, but more universally and hence in a more democratic way.”
It is true that Roosevelt has frozen workers to their jobs at frozen wages by executive decree. The argument is advanced that if the present system of coercion is made “universal” it would thereby become “democratic.”
To the mind of a brass hat, universal coercion and repression equals “democracy.” Therefore, they consider the system of Prussianizing American life under the domination of a military caste as the most “democratic” form of government. In plain language, what Roosevelt and his brass hats are demanding is the “legal” establishment of a military dictatorship. And they want to put it across before the people awaken to their real intentions.
 
Roosevelt’s Haste
This impatience was exhibited in Roosevelt’s letter to the Military Affairs Committee which stated: “While there may be some differences of opinion on the details of the (May-Bailey) bill, prompt action now is much more important in the war effort than the perfecting of details.” Among the “details” which Roosevelt considers so unimportant is one providing that anyone who leaves a job “without permission” shall be “subject on conviction to the penalties provided by the Selective Service Act, which run to $10,000 in fines and five years’ imprisonment” or both. This is just a minor “detail” to labor’s “friend” in the White House.
Committee members said, “they would apply corresponding provisions to those who are directed by their local boards to take essential jobs and fail to do so.” For quitting a job, or failing to take a job when directed to do so, a worker can be fined $10,000 or sent to jail for five years, under the provisions Of the May-Bailey bill. There is another provision prohibiting unions from enforcing closed shop contracts. Still another would bring strikers within the provisions of the measure. But Roosevelt brushes aside these savage penalties and unions wrecking provisions as petty “details” and demands that a forced labor bill be adopted forthwith.
With the exception of the strikebreaking Stalinists, all sections of the labor movement are on record against driving the workers to forced labor for the benefit of the profit-hungry bosses. The union bureaucrats have So far confined their opposition to purely verbal objections voiced by the top leaders. No serious attempt is being made to mobilize the many-millioned ranks of organized labor against the conspiracy to railroad a slave labor bill through Congress.
The union militants must take the lead in making the voice of labor heard in unalterable opposition to any and all forms of forced labor.
 



Following on the heels of a national campaign to whip up sentiment for labor conscription, Roosevelt submitted his annual message to the new Congress demanding immediate enactment of forced labor legislation. Roosevelt’s lengthy message can be boiled down to the following specific proposals: (1) a National Service Act to be adopted ‘at the earliest possible moment;’ (2) immediate legislation providing for the conscription of those now classified as 4-F (3) universal peacetime military training for American youth; and (4) amendment of the Selective Service Act ‘to provide for the induction of nurses into the armed forces.’
These four measures were the only concrete legislative proposals made by Roosevelt. In essence they embody the domestic program of the fourth term administration. These measures are intended to supplement Roosevelt’s job-freeze decrees, to place practically the whole working population under the control of a military caste, to Prussianize American life, and to straitjacket the labor movement.
 
Wall Street Plan
The plan to conscript labor for work in private industry was conceived in Wall Street. It was originated by Grenville Clark, a notorious Wall Street lawyer. It was embraced by Roosevelt and is being spearheaded by his brass hats. It was kept hidden during the recent election campaign to enable the treacherous labor bureaucrats to deceive the workers. It is advanced now at a “psychological” moment when rumors of tremendous casualties are causing great foreboding.
Those solely and directly responsible for the recent military reverses are attempting to fan this alarm into an emotional blaze against the labor movement. They have whipped up an hysteria under cover of which Big Business aims to enslave the workers by chaining them to their jobs at wages, hours and working conditions dictated by the employers. Roosevelt is the instrument through which these aims are being advanced.
In introducing his forced labor proposal, Roosevelt departed from his usual deceitful window-dressing. A year ago, when he first proposed a forced labor law, Roosevelt made it part of a “5-point program.” The “program” called for laws to take “undue profits out of war,” to place a ceiling over food costs, and to re-enact the “stabilization” statutes.
“These five measures taken together,” declared Roosevelt, “form a just and equitable whole, I would not recommend a national service law unless the other laws were passed, to keep down the cost of living, to share equitably the burdens of taxation, to hold the stabilization line and to prevent undue profits.”
In view of what has occurred, the 5-point program sounds like a hideous jest. War profits have soared to the highest levels in history. An increasing load of taxes has been burdened on those least able to pay while the corporations have accumulated billions in tax reserves and refunds. The cost of living has continued to rise, due largely to skyrocketing food prices. The only point of Roosevelt’s “program” that has been rigidly enforced is the wage-freezing Little Steel formula.
 
“The Great Liberal”
In his latest proposal for labor conscription Roosevelt failed to utter “a mumbling word” about his abortive 5-point program or of his equally defunct 7-point “stabilization” program. Nor did he bother to sugar-coat the bitter slave labor pill. He bluntly demanded a national service law that would assure “the right numbers of workers in the right places at the right times.” Roosevelt demands that the workers be degraded to the level of oxen driven to labor in field and factory. Be wants them shifted from place to place without regard to their desires. He wants them kept in abject submission to a profiteering taskmaster who sole concern is to squeeze the last ounce of profit out of the blood and bone of his wage slaves. This is the man the labor “statesmen” dub “the greatest liberal of them all!”
Under the impetus given by Roosevelt a number of forced labor measures have already been introduced into Congress. The most vicious of these measures are the bills designed to conscript 4-F’s into labor battalions. It is this type of legislation which Roosevelt demanded Congress enact “immediately” pending “action by Congress on the broader aspects of national service.”
A Scripps-Howard staff writer indicates what the brass hats have in mind for the 4-F conscript:
“He would be in uniform, doing hard work without benefit of high civilian pay – but also without the benefits voted by Congress to men in the armed services. He would be in a stigmatized service.”
 
Anti-Union Bills
Undersecretary of Navy Bard testified that the object of 4-F legislation is to make “work battalion” service so unattractive “that practically no one in his right mind would be interested in joining it.” Chairman May of the House Military Affairs Committee, author of a 4-F bill, stated that he would oppose any “compulsion” on 4-F conscripts to “join unions if assigned to closed shops.”
Another Roosevelt Democrat, Representative Colmer of Mississippi has introduced a bill providing that “strikers in essential industry or workers with bad absentee records” be drafted into labor battalions. Other Democrats and Republicans criticize the 4-F bills for not going far enough. They want a full-blown national service act that would conscript all men and women between the ages of 18 and 45.
Both the AFL and CIO are on record against labor conscription. It was labor’s vote that elected Roosevelt. By their unconditional support of the fourth term candidate the labor “statesmen” freed Roosevelt from any restraint in carrying through the program of Big Business. Hillman, Murray and Co., boasted of their great “election victory” and hailed the election of a “progressive” Congress. Yet not a single voice in Congress has been raised to defend the labor movement against this drive to paralyze the unions and enslave the workers.
 



The advocates of a forced labor law are trying to rush legislation through the House Military Affairs Committee before the widespread opposition to labor conscription can be mobilized against the measure. Top ranking spokesmen of the Roosevelt administration have appeared before the committee urging speedy enactment of a national service law. The N.Y. Times, authoritative spokesman for Wall Street, has been clamoring editorially for more speed.
The bulk of the capitalist press has been calling on Roosevelt for “leadership” in pushing the legislation through Congress. The ruling capitalist circles seek to take full advantage of the atmosphere of hysteria created following the recent military reversal in Europe in order to strike this new blow at labor. They fear that a sober analysis of the so-called “manpower” and “munitions” shortage, used as a pretext for demanding forced labor laws, will expose the labor draft ballyhoo as a fraud.
 
Proposed Penalties
Meanwhile, witnesses appearing before the Military Committee who favored a national service law differed over the type penalties to be imposed. Representatives of the Army and Navy, “wanted the penalties against those who refused to obtain or remain in essential war jobs to be civil ones (fines or imprisonment) rather than inductions into special Army or Navy service units.” Both the Army and Navy, their spokesmen said, “had all the special and limited service men they could use.” In opposing a conscripted “works corps,” Undersecretary of the Navy, Bard admitted “such a group would be a ‘landing place’ for strikers.” Members of the committee supporting the stand of the brass hats have drafted amendments providing for “civil prosecution, with penalties ranging to $10,000 in fines and up to five years’ imprisonment.”
Colonel Keesling, legislative representative of Selective Service and author of the May bill now before the House Military Affairs Committee, is spokesman for those who favor the establishment of “labor battalions.” A year ago he sponsored a bill advocating that 4-Fs and men over 38 “who left their jobs” be “inducted and assigned to such tasks as kitchen police, hospital work and fatigue duty.” This type of duty is customarily assigned to prisoners.
Now Keesling proposes that those inducted under his “law” and assigned to “workers battalions” should “receive uniforms sufficiently distinctive to remove confusion as to who was serving regularly and who was being punished.” Such uniforms would probably be adorned with a distinctive “P” painted on the back to denote “prisoner.” One Congressman referred to the Keesling proposal as “Keesling’s Koncentration Korps.”
The forced labor advocates are vying with each other in proposing the most savage penalties against the workers who ‘violate’ their compulsory labor laws. They differ only as to the kind and degree of punishment to be inflicted. They are having a field day in thinking up more brutal forms of exploitation.
Representative Lacarde, Louisiana, introduced a bill “to establish an Army Agricultural Corps,” which would “place thousands of farm and dairy workers in uniform.” “In my district,” said Lacarde, “had it not been for prisoner-of-war labor, we would never have been able to save the rice, sugar cane and other food crops; and this year this problem will be more acute than ever.” Therefore, Lacarde wants American workers drafted into a “corps” to supplement “prisoner-of-war” labor for the greater profit of Louisiana’s absentee landlords.
 
Anti-Labor Measures
Representative Russell of Texas introduced a measure to solve the “manpower shortage” by extending the standard work week from 40 to 48 hours, thus eliminating the payment of overtime after 40 hours. Representative J. Parnell Thomas wanted to be sure that a national service law contained a provision “for making strikers go back to work.”
Representative Colmer, Mississippi, submitted a bill to set up a labor corps.
“The Colmer corps,” comments PM, “as a component of the Army, could be marched into war plants, furnishing labor service for private contractors, or to any other jobs deemed related to the war effort.”
Members of the Military Affairs Committee insist that no one inducted under a national service law, “should be obliged to join a union,” no matter whether or not the plant is under union contract.
Without exception, every labor draft measure is a blow aimed at the heart of the labor movement. Lewis G. Hines, legislative representative of the AFL, who testified against the proposed forced labor legislation accused high administration officials of using psychological warfare to enslave labor. Referring to the campaign whipped up after the German breakthrough in Belgium, Hines declared, “This is the psychological time for this kind of legislation. You’re not kidding us. It’s the Army and Navy trying to take control.”
The Washington reporter for Justice, official organ of the AFL International Ladies Garment Workers Union, reached the same conclusion some time ago. He wrote: “They call it mobilization for total war. But it is also the scheme of military dictatorship,”
Union spokesmen have compiled abundant evidence that the. so-called manpower shortage is a fraud. According to the January report of the War Manpower Commission, of the 14 “critical” war industries in only one, foundries, is manpower given as a problem. (Foundry jobs are notoriously low-paid.) “Design changes, stepped-up programs and lack of facilities are given for the others.” In some lines plants have not yet left the blueprint stage. Others are just nearing completion. The estimate of a “shortage” of 300,000 is not based on present requirements but on future needs after additional plant facilities have been constructed.
The demand for a national service act, spearheaded by Roosevelt and his brass hats, has the aim of regimenting labor, shackling the unions, and Prussianizing American life. So far, the only group in the labor movement who have come out openly in support of a forced labor law are the Stalinists. They have joined the strikebreakers and union-busters in calling for the immediate adoption of labor conscription.
 



From its very inception, the scheme to draft labor for work in private industry was designed to prevent the Workers from defending their standard of living. The outbreak of war, the drafting of millions of young workers into the armed, forces; the boom in war production created a “tight” labor market. The natural drift of labor is to industries paying higher wages and providing better working conditions. Competition between employers in a tight labor market would inevitably mean higher wages and a more equitable distribution of the national income.
During “normal” periods, the employers depend upon a large reservoir of unemployed workers to keep wages down. During periods of war, the army of unemployed is absorbed in the military forces and expanded war production. The employing class then utilizes political means – its control over government – to prevent competition between individual employers which would increase wages and thus reduce the rate and mass of profit appropriated by the owners of industry.
The capitalist government, functioning as the executive arm of the employing class, seeks to establish a monopoly over hours, wages and conditions of employment. The government aims to eliminate “competition” between individual employers in the interests of the employing class as a whole. Thus workers are frozen to their jobs at frozen wages while the cost of living rises and profits soar. The employers’ share of the national income rises at the expense of labor. The result is a gradual lowering of labor’s standard of living.
But the workers do not “voluntarily” submit to the imposition of a lower standard of living. As prices and profits continue lo rise, real wages fall. Demands for wage increases become more persistent. Finding themselves stymied by Roosevelt’s wage-freeze and the no-strike policy of their own leadership, the workers try to solve their problem by shifting to industries working longer hours, paying higher wages and providing better working conditions. To prevent the workers from taking advantage of “competitive” wage rates in different industries, different geographical localities, etc., the government issues decrees imposing penalties on workers for leaving their jobs for other employment without “permission.”
 
Job-Freeze Penalties
Thus the job-freezing schemes of the Roosevelt administration aim to establish government control over the movement of labor, over wages, hours and working conditions. These schemes are enforced by compulsion upon workers for violating Roosevelt’s job-freezing executive orders. These penalties fall into several categories. Workers are punished by being deprived of employment, by imprisonment or by being drafted into the armed forces. An analysis of the development of the job-freeze under the Roosevelt administration shows how the government has been using its powers of compulsion on an ever-extended scale to chain workers to their jobs by executive decree.
Workers were first frozen to their jobs only in certain industries. In September 1942, a decree was issued freezing workers in the lumber and non-ferrous industries under penalty of drafting those who left their jobs without permission. The decree was then extended to cover certain geographical areas. The industrial city of Detroit was the first area in which 700,000 workers were frozen to their jobs. Later St. Paul and Minneapolis (175,000 workers) were included. When, in April 1943, the decree was applied to 27,000,000 industrial, agricultural and government workers, considered “essential” to the “war effort,” it became national in scope.
The job-freeze was enforced through the War Manpower Commission and the Selective Service system. For those falling within the draft age the penalty of being inducted proved an effective instrument of compulsion. For women, men beyond the draft age, 4-F’s, etc., the compulsion was economic. Employers in “essential” industries were given the right to penalize quitting workers by refusing to grant them certificates of availability without which they were debarred from taking other employment for sixty days.
 
Labor Conscription
Finding these penalties “inadequate” to regiment the entire working population the forced labor advocates began whooping it up for labor conscription. The first National Service Act was drawn up by Grenville Clark, Wall Street lawyer and behind-the-scenes manipulator of the political agents of Big Business. Clark’s labor draft plan was embodied in legislation submitted by Senator Austin in 1943. It provided for conscripting all adult males between the ages of 18–65 and women between 18–50 for work in private industry. The penalty for violators was imprisonment. In this way those workers who could not be coerced by the threat of being drafted would be subject to the threat of imprisonment. The bill died in the 1943 Congress and was not revived until Roosevelt came out for labor conscription legislation in his message to Congress in January 1944.
Senator Austin, co-author of the Austin-Wadsworth National Service Act, reintroduced his forced labor bill immediately following Roosevelt’s message. Spokesmen for the Roosevelt administration spearheaded by the brass-hats began a nationwide agitation for labor conscription. But the slave labor bill was so raw that the labor bureaucrats were compelled to speak out against it. The only section of the labor movement that endorsed it were the Stalinists. Despite powerful support from the capitalist press, radio, manufacturers’ associations, etc., the pressure of the people was strong enough to stem the reactionary drive for forced labor legislation.
Blocked in their legislative drive the forced labor advocated have since executed a series of flank attacks to attain their objective. All sorts of schemes were advanced to fix penalties on 4-F’s and men over draft age who “left their jobs without permission.” These schemes found a sympathetic ear in Roosevelt. Failing to accomplish his plan by legislation, Roosevelt used his tremendous war powers to strengthen the job-freeze shackles by executive decree and put over his program piecemeal.
 
Roosevelt’s Decrees
Thus Roosevelt issued a decree which went into effect July 1, 1944, placing all male workers over the age of 17 under the control of the Government’s United States Employment Service. Under the Roosevelt-McNutt “priority-referral” plan workers would be compelled to take jobs in industries and areas designated by the USES. Those who refused, said McNutt, would be “deprived of unemployment compensation benefits,” and wouldn’t be able to get a job without a certificate from the USES.
Again, in December 1944, following a frenzied campaign around fake “ammunition” and “manpower shortage,” Roosevelt issued another decree instructing Selective Service to induct all those within draft age who left their jobs without permission of their draft boards. Spokesmen for the administration have announced they are now planning to bring the 4-F’s and older men within Roosevelt’s recent “work or fight” decree.
As the resistance of the workers to the wage and job-freeze mounts, Roosevelt resorts more and more to methods of compulsion to hold the wage-freezing line. Rule by executive decree is substituted for legislative action in dealing blows against the labor movement. The wage freeze was imposed by executive decree. The job-freeze likewise. Roosevelt is consistently moving in the direction of regimenting and enslaving the working people through the use of his executive powers. And this conscious agent of capitalist reaction is touted as the foremost “friend of labor” by the treacherous labor lackeys who boast they reelected him to office!
 



The Senate Military Affairs Committee concluded closed hearings on
the May-Bailey slave labor bill last week by reporting out a
“substitute” measure incorporating the principle of
compulsory labor for private profit. The Kilgore-Wagner “substitute”
was adopted by a vote of 13 to 4 shortly after the committee had
received a memorandum from Roosevelt stating: “I hope that
legislation embracing the principle of the May bill can be speedily
enacted.”
Under this prodding from the “Commander-in-Chief” the
Kilgore-Wagner substitute was amended to make it conform to the type
of legislation demanded by Roosevelt and his brass hats.
“These changes, committeemen agreed, brought the
substitute bill sponsored by Senators O’Mahoney, Kilgore,
Wagner, Chandler, Ferguson and Ball, closer to the principles of the
May-Bailey measure.” (N.Y. Times, Feb. 22)
One of the amendments provides that “violators of WMC
regulations and orders would be liable to fines up to $10,000 or jail
sentences up to a year.” Another provides that workers “who
quit essential agricultural jobs without draft board permission would
be subject, to fines ranging to $10,000 and prison terms up to five
years.”
 
CIO Endorses Bill
In its original form, the Kilgore-Wagner bill would concentrate
control over hiring in the hands of the War Manpower Commission. The
WMC would be given authority to establish manpower ceilings in
industry, to move workers from one plant or one area to another, to
keep workers tied to their jobs at frozen wages. Employers would be
forbidden to hire a worker unless he could show a certificate of
availability. By its power to refuse to grant certificates to
“recalcitrant” workers, the WMC would exercise
“work-where-you’re-told-or-starve” compulsion over
labor.
The additional amendments add the “work-where-you’re-told-or-
go-to-jail” penalties of the May- Bailey bill to the
Kilgore-Wagner substitute. As announced in The Militant last
week, the latter measure was endorsed by the heads of the AFL and CIO
in a “compromise” deal with the employers. “This
(Kilgore-Wagner) bill is a long step in the right direction,”
declared Philip Murray in a statement to the Senate Military Affairs
Committee.
An editorial in the CIO News “explains” that
the CIO officialdom
“... supports the bill introduced by Senators
Kilgore, Wagner and Ferguson because, as Pres. Philip Murray states,
‘this bill reinforces the methods and machinery which have
proven effective during the war, and proposes means for strengthening
them,’ and because it is ‘designed to mobilize the entire
civilian manpower and womanpower of the United States immediately,
and not merely males between the ages of 18 and 45’.”
 
Roosevelt’s Strategy
Murray’s statement is an open endorsement of the principle
of forced labor for private profit. The “methods and machinery”
which he urges be, “strengthened” are the instruments of
labor compulsion embodied in the drastic manpower decrees issued by
Roosevelt and administered by the WMC. Under these decrees the WMC
recently initiated the infamous “Allentown Plan” which
has since been spread to other areas.
In Allentown, Pennsylvania, where the “plan”
originated, the WMC ordered the discharge of hundreds of workers who
were then instructed to apply to the U.S. Employment Service for
assignment to other jobs. Those failing to obey “would be
denied employment for the duration of the war.” In a majority
of cases, workers were forced to accept employment at lower wages.
Will Allen, Washington correspondent of Justice, official
organ of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, who has
closely followed the development of the forced labor campaign,
contends “that the real labor conscription threat is embodied
in the Allentown Plan rather than the May-Bailey bill.” He
states that the strategy of the Roosevelt administration is to use
the threat of the “more drastic” May- Bailey bill to jam
through a “compromise” measure. This “compromise”
worked out in secret in a behind-the-scenes deal is incorporated in
the “substitute” Kilgore-Wagner bill. Allen discloses
what the forced labor advocates are after by declaring:
“What they’re after – in terms of
administration strategy – is a Congressional act legalizing the
Allentown Plan. Why is that? Because the Allentown Plan draws its
authority from an Executive Order which went into effect July 1, and
not from an Act of Congress. The Allentown Plan interferes with the
rights of private citizens engaged in pursuits having no connection
with the war. The Allentown Plan enforces involuntary servitude ...
which is a direct violation of the Constitution of the United
States.”
“The Administration,” Allen continues, “is
anxious to find a legal cover – to be provided by Congress –
to sanction the dubious legality of its previous efforts to force
labor conscription on the country. The Administration has known for a
long time that labor conscription by Executive Order is on legally
shaky ground ... as witness how long it has waited since July 1 to
put it into effect in the Allentown Plan.” (For information on
the origin and development of the Allentown Plan, see The
Militant, Feb. 24, 1945).
This is the treacherous “compromise” that Murray,
Green and Company are urging the workers to support. “Urge your
Senator,” pleads the CIO News editorial, “to vote
for the Kilgore-Wagner-Ferguson bill.” The union militants must
arouse the workers to reject this injunction. Urge the workers to
adopt resolutions, organize demonstrations, utilize every means, to
make known labor’s uncompromising opposition to any and all
forms of forced labor.
 



A few days after the Advisory Board of the Office of War
Mobilization and Reconversion made public a resolution complaining
that they were not being called upon for “advice,”
Roosevelt announced he had ordered the board to “study”,
the question of a guaranteed annual wage. The demand for a guaranteed
annual wage was part of the steel wage case before the War Labor
Board and has become part of the CIO program.
the WLB rejected the demand but recommended a “study”
of the question to determine whether industry could “afford”
to give such a guarantee. In a letter to Roosevelt, the chairman of
the WLB disclosed that the fear of unemployment which has led to the
demand for a guaranteed annual wage, “is contributing also to
the pressure for a change in the national wage stabilization policy.”
By shunting the demand for a guaranteed wage to the WMR advisory
board, Roosevelt aims to kill three birds with one stone.

To divert the attention of the workers from the struggle
against the administration’s wage-freezing “stabilization
policy.”
 
To aid the “labor statesmen” in lulling their own
membership with the illusion that something is being done about the
problem of “post-war” security.
 
To quiet the clamor of the WMR “advisory board,”
which has been completely ignored by director James F. Byrnes, whose
anti-labor decisions have been made without benefit of their advice.

The popular demand for a guaranteed annual wage expresses the
profound desire of the workers for a decent standard of living for
all those able and willing to work. In essence, it represents a
revulsion against the insanity of the profit system which dooms
millions of workers to dire want, while factories remain idle and
food moulders in warehouses or rots in the fields. The working masses
are haunted by the memory of the pre-war depression which condemned
millions to idleness, hunger and despair, through no fault of their
own. They seek some measure of protection against a recurrence of
such conditions.
In ordering the study, Roosevelt blandly announced that “he
had been talking about a guaranteed annual wage for about ten years.”
To whom had he been talking about this for “ten years?”
Obviously, to himself – if it took ten years to get around to
the point of asking that a “study” be made of the
question.
And what ten years! The economic crisis raged during his w^ole
period of office. There were still ten million unemployed during the
war boom year of 1940. It was not until war production and the draft
absorbed the available labor force that unemployment was reduced to a
minimum.
During the ten years in which Roosevelt claims he “talked”
about a guaranteed wage, one-third of the people, by his own
admission, were ill-fed, ill-clothed and ill-housed. Millions of men
and women were on, the dole while factories stood idle. Under the
planned sabotage of the “New Deal,” cotton, corn and live
stock were plowed under in order to create an economy of artificial
scarcity. These measures “guaranteed” only poverty and
insecurity for the masses. But while all this was going on,
Roosevelt, according to his latest revelation, kept “talking
about a guaranteed annual wage.” How consoling!
Roosevelt’s demagogic gesture in burying the demand in the
WMR advisory board is intended to head off the. independent action of
the workers in the fight for economic security. The fight for a
guaranteed annual wage is essentially a political struggle. If meant
seriously, it requires first of all that labor break with the
political parties and agents of the employing class and take the road
of fighting for its own program under its own political banner.
 



The recent meeting of the national executive board of the CIO took
place at a time when unfolding events pose the most critical problems
for the labor movement. The war against Germany is entering its final
stages. The employers are girding for a showdown assault on the
unions. The political agents of Big Business are pressing for
additional repressive labor legislation. Wages remain frozen while
the cost of living continues to soar. Reconversion to civilian
production raises the specter of mass unemployment.
These are but a few of the problems that call for a bold and
aggressive policy to defend the workers’ standard of living
against employer-government attack. Faced with these problems, the
top leadership of the CIO proceeded to reaffirm its policy of
unconditional surrender to the corporations and their political
henchmen!
The CIO union heads voted to “continue intact our
no-strike pledge” after the end of the war in Europe. They
voted to retain the CIO representatives on the wage-freezing,
employer-dominated War Labor Board. They voted, once again, to send a
delegation to the White House to beg their “friend” for a
handout. With their heads buried ostrich-like to shut out the sight
and sound of rising rank-and-file revolt against the policy of
retreat and capitulation, the CIO leaders voted to continue the same
course which has led the unions into their present blind alley.
But so strong has the swelling opposition to this policy become
that it found its echo on the hoard. Emil Rieve, president of the
Textile Workers Union, and George Baldanzi, vice-president, cast
their votes against the policy resolution. Thomas and Addes of the
United Automobile Workers Union voted for the resolution after their
proposal asking “consideration” for withdrawing the CIO
members from the WLB had been defeated. The textile and auto workers
have been in the forefront of the struggle against the wage-freeze
and employer provocations.
 
Propose Conference
Taking cognizance of the current union-busting drive, the CIO
policy resolution deplores the fact that “there are some
employers and others who seek to take advantage of our present war
situation and endeavor to provoke labor by threatening the existence
of unions, the discharge of leading members of the union, cutting
wages and other divisive methods.” To correct these evils the
CIO heads propose that Roosevelt convene a tripartite conference of
industry, labor and government, to formulate “a policy that
will meet the needs of our nation.”
All this chatter about “meeting the needs of the nation”
is so much gibberish. The employers always identify THEIR needs with
those of the “nation.” And their needs have been
adequately met by Roosevelt’s policy of freezing workers to
their jobs at frozen wages. Their needs have been taken care of by
labor’s no-strike pledge and by the War Labor Board. Why should
they participate in a conference to “formulate policy?”
It is their policy which the administration has put forward and the
labor leaders have been faithfully carrying out.
It is labor which has a crying need for a new policy to “meet
the needs” of the workers. Such a policy will never materialize
out of a “conference” with the employers and their
government agents. The CIO ranks look in. vain to their top
leadership to formulate a policy that will defend their interests.
The cowardly surrender policy of the national executive board has
made it abundantly clear that the CIO militants will have to forge a
new leadership in the process of struggle for a program of action
that can solve their problems.
 



The textile community of New Bedford, Mass., has been up in arms
against the attempt of the War Manpower Commission to apply the
forced-labor “Allentown Plan’’ to the workers of
that city. Several weeks ago, the WMC ordered the discharge of over
100 textile workers with the announced intention of forcing them to
take jobs in the Fisk and Firestone tire fabric plants.
Under the “Allentown Plan” employment ceilings on
certain “non-essential” industries are reduced. The
workers discharged are directed to the U.S. Employment Service for
assignment to other jobs. “If the workers refuse the jobs,”
explained one WMC official, “the USES bars them from any
employment by refusing them job referrals.” The “plan”
is a work-where-you’re-told-or-starve scheme based on the
compulsory labor decrees of the Roosevelt administration.
With one or two exceptions, the workers discharged from the New
Bedford textile mills have refused to accept jobs in the tire fabric
plants. Antonio England, New Bedford director of the CIO Textile
Workers Union, declared they refused because “of exhaustive
stretchouts in both plants and because of exhaustive speed-ups.”
The workers of the Fisk and Firestone plants have been trying to
better their working conditions but the War Labor Board has
pigeon-holed their grievances.
“Now when others who know about these disputes,”
added England, “are asked to go towork in the fabric mills
anyway, they resent it. To them it appears that the government, by
means of the manpower ceilings and the offer of jobs in the tire
fabric plants only, is coming to the aid of the management in this
controversy.”
“The WMC,” comments a Scripps-Howard reporter, “as
well as the Army (which is behind the scenes), doesn’t look at
it that way.” Their attitude is that’ “the workers
should gladly give up their jobs in the civilian goods mills and
accept employment in the fabric plants, even if it should mean a
temporary hardship.”
These political and military agents of the employers never
hesitate to call for additional sacrifices from the workers. But when
George Baldanzi, executive vice-president of the Textile Workers
Union, offered to supply all the workers needed if the “tire
cord plants were taken over and operated by the government without
profit,” the professional patriots shut up like a clam!
Because of the vigorous opposition of the unions, supported in
this case by the city administration and the local textile
manufacturers, the government agents are determined to make a test
case in New Bedford. They have refused any concessions.
The Kilgore-Wagner bill, now before the Senate, is designed to
“legalize” the “Allentown Plan." In presenting
it, Senator Thomas, chairman of the Military Affairs Committee,
declared that the bill aims “to enact a statutory basis for two
basic types of regulation: First, employment ceilings under which
employers could be required to release workers, and second, hiring
controls under which workers so released or otherwise available for
new jobs could be channeled to suitable jobs where they were most
needed.”
 



The Senate last week adopted the Kilgore “labor service”
bill, giving the War Manpower Commission statutory authority to
enforce the compulsory labor regulations and controls now imposed by
executive decree.
“Passage of the Senate measure,” reports the
N.Y. Times, “came with a rush, a few hours after
President Roosevelt, meeting with Congressional leaders, again had
urged prompt action.”
The bill “legalizes” the forced-labor Allentown Plan
which has met increasing opposition from labor’s ranks in those
areas in which it has been applied. It is a “work-or-starve”
substitute for the “work-or-jail” May-Bailey bill
previously passed by the House. Widely touted as a “voluntary”
manpower mobilization plan, the Senate bill employs the threat of
starvation to force workers into jobs designated by the War Manpower
Commission.
The compulsory features of the Kilgore bill are embodied in two
provisions. One gives the WMC authority to establish employment
ceilings under which employers could be required to release workers.
The other compels workers to seek employment through the
WMC-controlled U.S. Employment Service.
“Under the bill,” explained Senator Kilgore,
“no man can get a job without a certificate issued by the U.S.
Employment Service showing that he has honorably cleared his last
job, it having been finished, or having good reason shown before an
appeal board. No employer can employ him.”
When asked what would happen if workers released under a WMC
employment ceiling refused to accept a job assignment, Kilgore
replied: “If ceilings have been fixed, and they have been
certified out of their jobs, they will have a difficult time making a
living.” The Senate debate revealed that the real differences
which divided the supporters of the Kilgore bill from the proponents
of the May- Bailey measure was whether starvation or jail was a more
effective method of labor compulsion. The workers were repeatedly
referred to as “bums” and “loafers” who had
to be driven to work by the whip of forced labor.
 
Plenty of Coercion
Kilgore exploded the fiction that his bill was a “voluntary”
labor plan by insisting that it did not rely upon “mere
voluntary cooperation.” “There is an abundance of
sanctions contained in the bill,” he insisted, “which
will be more effective upon the loafer than jail sentences! All that
a man in jail can do is eat three meals a day.” Kilgore’s
contention is that his hit-them-in-the-belly plan is a more effective
means of coercion than the May-Bailey send-them-to-jail scheme.
These are the alternatives which Congress has been debating. They
are embodied in the respective measures adopted by the House and
Senate. Both bills now go to a joint conference where the congressmen
will continue to bicker over the relative merits of jail versus
starvation for workers who “violate” their forced labor
laws.
Although expressing a preference for the May-Bailey bill,
Roosevelt has indicated that the Kilgore measure would be acceptable.
All he demands is speed. In his haste to get a forced labor law
enacted before the military collapse of Germany, Roosevelt has
intervened time and again to urge speed and more speed. “Prompt
action is much more important,” he urged, “than
perfecting of details.”
The drive for additional repressive legislation for use after
the end of the war against Germany is an ominous threat to the labor
movement. It is part of the “postwar” plan to smash the
unions. With the termination of the imperialist war in Europe, the
employers and their government are preparing to intensify their war
against the American working class.
 







The anti-union offensive puts labor’s
officialdom on the griddle. What happened to the theory that no
conflict of interests divides bosses and workers?
 




THE leaders of American labor are in a blue funk.
Something has gone awry. The time is out of joint. For years now they
have preached and practiced the virtues of labor-management
cooperation; they extolled the partnership of labor and capital which,
they affirmed, was the capstone of the American way-of-life.
A few years ago, David J. McDonald, president of the United Steel
Workers, literally transported by the vision of capital and labor
marching arm-in-arm ever onward and upward scaling new heights of
prosperity and well-being, entered into a pact of “mutual trusteeship”
with Benjamin Fairless, former head of United States Steel Corporation.
It was arm-around-the-shoulder “Dave” and “Ben” in those days. To
the steel workers, the mutual trusteeship pact became known as the
“hearts and flowers” clause. “Dave” and “Ben” toured the steel plants
breaking bread with humble stewards, committeemen, plant foremen,
superintendents and local union officials, spreading the message of
sweetness and light. What nostalgia those halcyon days must evoke in
McDonald today with its nightmare reality of class war!
That class war is the reality today is admitted by the most ardent
exponents of labor-management cooperation. But it is a most peculiar
kind of war. The employers and their government have launched a savage
assault on the unions. Monopoly capital has mobilized all the class
forces at its command to beat the labor movement into submission. Yet
the union leaders cling tenaciously to the doctrine of class
collaboration.
According to the view expounded by the “labor statesmen” the United
States occupies a unique position in world society. While class
divisions, class antagonisms and class struggle may be the reality in
other lands and among other peoples, this country is presumed to be
immune to such affliction.
How then explain the class war against labor? Is it some temporary
aberration that has driven the capitalist class into committing so
blatant an act of folly? It would seem so judging by the explanation
given by Walter Reuther, president of the United Automobile Workers and
vice-president of the AFL-CIO, in a recent speech:
“The National Association of Manufacturers and big
business,” Reuther contends, “are waging a class struggle in America,
precisely as Karl Marx wrote it would be waged. They are working
overtime to prove that Karl Marx was right.”
And, Reuther added, if the American labor movement
permitted itself to be sucked into responding in kind, “then we are
going to do really serious damage to America and the cause of freedom
in the whole world.” Under conditions of class war, right here in the
US, labor confronts the ineluctable alternatives: either fight or
retreat and capitulate. Which alternative does Reuther offer?
The “cause of human freedom in the whole world” is a noble and
worthy goal. But what of the cause of human freedom in these United
States now being threatened with crucifixion by the war of capital
against labor? Karl Marx and all the great revolutionary leaders who
followed him taught the workers a simple truth: the main enemy is the
capitalist class in your own country! There is much validity to what
Reuther says—the American capitalist class is certainly “working
overtime to prove that Karl Marx was right.”
Words can scarcely be found to describe the dismay of the labor
bureaucrats at this turn of events. Grown fat and soft while baking in
the sunshine of “labor-management cooperation,” these summer soldiers
have no stomach for a fight. Confronted by the reality of class war
they flounder about in hopeless confusion. Appalled at the bankruptcy
of a policy which has led the labor movement into a dead end, fearful
of engaging the enemy in open struggle, they can only offer—more of
the same.
Yet, exercising the prerogatives of “leadership,” and enjoying the
privileges and perquisites of office, they are obliged to explain to
their bewildered followers where and why they went wrong. If Marx was
wrong and Reuther and Meany right, how explain the fact of class war in
a country presumably free of class distinctions and immune to class
struggle? The “labor statesmen” are hard put to find a plausible
explanation, but they do try.

 
THE August 29 AFL-CIO News devotes a
long article to the problem, printed under a five column banner head
reading: “Class War Being Forced on US Workers.”
“If,” the article begins, “there is one word which
characterizes the plight of the American worker during the 12-month
span from Labor Day 1958 to Labor Day 1959, it is ‘uncertainty.’
“Labor-management tensions, which have always varied
in their intensity, now seem to be reaching a critical point where the
American worker is being pushed into a class war not of his making, not
of his choice.
“Determined and powerful forces have singled out the
working man and his trade union as a class. If they are successful, the
hard-won security which the workingman hoped was in his grasp, the
ability to provide his family with a few of the better things of life,
may be at an end.
“The knowing American worker sees his security
threatened on the economic front, the legislative front, the political
front and at the bargaining table.”
Who are these “determined and powerful forces”
threatening the American worker on every front? The article explains:
“One year ago these forces were noisy but their influence was limited.
Today, almost as if puppets on string from an invisible hand, men of
power and wealth have joined this band of extremists to demand that
labor be weakened, its effectiveness undermined.”
There you have it! The source of the trouble is a “band of
extremists” who are manipulating “men of power and wealth” like puppets
on a string. The summer issue of the AFL-CIO Industrial Union
Department Digest is more explicit. An article entitled: The
Anti-Labor War, affirms that, “Today’s resurgent right-wing
intellectuals have declared a kind of class war.” It is these
right-wing intellectuals who “have declared the class war and laid down
its theoretical framework,” and “our business leaders have not lagged
in putting the theories to the test.”
How can anyone make head or tail out of this nonsense? If it means
anything at all it suggests that the real rulers of this country, the
men of wealth and power, are being deceived into putting to the test
the patently un-American class-war theories of a bunch of extremist
crackpots instead of hewing to the genuine American class collaboration
theories of our “labor statesmen.”
Does Eisenhower take to the air to demand that Congress adopt the
anti-labor Landrum-Griffin “killer” bill? Obviously he was being misled—as we are assured by no less an authority than Louis Hollander, a
high ranking official of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers union.
The August 15 issue of the ACW newspaper, The Advance,
publishes a speech by Hollander made to some “12,000 joint board
delegates and local union officers on August 11 shortly after he
returned from Washington where he conferred with AFL-CIO leaders on
labor legislation.”
“It is,” opined Hollander, “a cause for sorrow that a
national war hero of our country, twice elected President, should have
been so deliberately misled by evil men as to accept at face value
their false and misleading statements and then carry this message to
the people, all the time believing and trusting sincerely in those
double-dealers he has been persuaded to take into his confidence as
advisors.”
The question that literally leaps to the fore is: Who is
misleading whom? Eisenhower, the National Association of Manufacturers,
the men of wealth and power, the big business interests and their
flunkies in government remain true to their class. When their class
interests are served thereby, they have no compunction about embracing
the so-called “theories” of the labor bureaucrats and utilizing their
services to bamboozle the workers. If the union leaders had
one-hundredth the class integrity, class solidarity, class loyalty, of
the exploiting class, labor would not now be buffeted from pillar to
post in demoralized confusion before the blows of capitalist reaction.
 
HISTORY subjects all social theories to the acid test of
events. Judging by this test, what has been the result of the theory of
class collaboration as applied in practice by the labor leaders? The
above cited article from the AFL-CIO News reviews the
events of the past year.
“Do you recall last Labor Day?” the writer
nostalgically asks his readers. “The critical 1958 congressional
elections were only two months away. In six states the so-called
right-to-work law was on the ballot.
“Organized labor carried its message to the people.
The people responded. Not only did they elect a Congress overwhelmingly
committed to the cause of trade unionism but they crushed the ‘work’
law in five out of six states.”
The 1958 election result was touted as a resounding
victory for labor; an irrefutable confirmation of the theory of class
collaboration! The new Congress had the largest Democratic majority
since 1938. The union leaders boasted that 221 incorruptible “friends
of labor” had been elected to the House of Representatives alone. There
was great rejoicing and no little self-congratulation in the ranks of
the “labor statesmen.” That was less than one short year ago.
“Unionists had every right,” says the AFL-CIO
News article, “to expect that this victory at the polls would
be translated into a legislative victory. It was one of the
greatest disillusion-merits of modern history.” (Our
emphasis)
And what is the lesson to be drawn from this experience?
“If the critical period from Labor Day 1958 to Labor Day 1959 has
taught trade unionists anything,” the article concludes, “it is that
their unions will remain strong and free as long as they fight for
them.” But fight how? With what weapons? Against whom? Of this there is
no hint. On the contrary, the labor leaders have made it abundantly
clear that they have no intention of altering the course which has led,
irrevocably, to “the greatest disillusionment of modern history.”
Incorrigibly committed to the preservation of the “free enterprise”
system, the union leaders refuse to believe that the responsible “men
of wealth and power” with whom they had so blissfully cohabited have
turned against them. The elaborate structure of labor-management
cooperation, so painfully constructed over the years, was erected on
the cornerstone of their most cherished conviction: the identity of
interest between capital and labor.
This doctrine was primary and fundamental to their entire view of
the world they lived in. True, there were recognized differences,
friction often developed, occasional spats, and more than one sham
battle. But these were considered in the nature of family quarrels,
subordinate to the cementing principle which bound them together.
The outlook of the present union officialdom has been conditioned by
some 20 years of mutually beneficial relations with the captains of
American industry. These were years of unprecedented prosperity and
expansion for American monopoly capitalism. Forgotten were the savage
union repressions of the twenties and the fierce class battles of the
early thirties which gave rise to the modern labor movement. The men of
wealth and power had presumably mellowed. The unions became an accepted
institution of American life.
True, there always remained some recalcitrant employers who never
became reconciled to the new state of affairs and the benighted
Dixiecrat South. But these were looked upon as the lunatic fringe of
the capitalist class. It is apparently this “band of extremists” to
whom the labor leaders now refer as the ringleaders of the class war.
 
THE ninth annual meeting of the Industrial Relations
Research Association, held in Cleveland, Dec. 28-29, 1956, dealt with
the changes that had occurred in the American labor movement over the
past 20 years. George W. Brooks of the International Brotherhood of
Pulp, Sulphite and Paper Mill Workers union, submitted a paper to the
meeting entitled: Observations on the Changing Nature of American
Unions. It begins:
“The most important factor affecting labor unions is
the attitude of the employer. This is particularly true in the United
States, where workingmen depend exclusively upon the union (among forms
of labor organization) for the articulation and achievement of their
aspirations. Here, to a far greater degree than elsewhere, the employer
is the source of all good things.
“This sound working rule has acquired during the past
20 years a firm ideological base, a virtually complete acceptance of
that set of beliefs which may be roughly described as ‘capitalism.’
This ideological structure is buttressed by a specific faith in the
capacities of American management, shared alike by trade union members
and trade union leaders.
“It must not be supposed,” adds Brooks, “that the
trade union leader has always led his members into these beliefs,
although this has no doubt happened in some cases.”
This change in the attitude of the employers, according
to Brooks, was reciprocated by a corresponding change in the attitude
of the union leaders.
“Some observers,” he remarks, “have professed
inability to understand why, in the light of the attitudes of unions a
quarter of a century ago, the union representative was so ready to walk
through the open door. The question reflects a misunderstanding of what
was happening a quarter of a century ago, and not of what is happening
now. Before the passage of the Wagner Act, unions were traditionally
anti-employer. But the earlier ideologies were not theirs by choice.
They were forced upon the unions by systematic employer anti-unionism
...
“When anti-unionism was abandoned in the forties and
fifties by significant segments of American industry, a new world was
created for the unions. For it now turned out that the imperative
requirements of the union—the regular flow of new members and dues—could be underwritten by the employer with considerably more
reliability than was possible under earlier arrangements. Unions were
in many cases relieved, almost suddenly, of work that used to occupy 90
percent of their energies. Even the task of organizing was simplified.
For in our expanding economy, most of the expansion is in the form of
new plants by established firms.
“The outstanding changes for the union, in its own
mind,” remarks Brooks in summarizing this section of his paper, “is its
success. This colors every action and attitude of the leadership. Labor
leaders see their achievements mirrored in the new attitudes of
management. They have every reason to believe that the trends of the
last 20 years are all to the good, and that their systematic
encouragement will lead to more good.”
Needless to say, the labor leaders have done everything
they could to further the “systematic encouragement” of the partnership
between the union bureaucrats and corporate management. In an article
published in the June issue of Harpers magazine, Bernard D. Nossiter,
labor writer for the Washington Post and Times Herald,
describes how the partnership has functioned.
The partnership pattern, says Nossiter, “varies greatly from one
industry to another. Even where it is the most advanced, the liaison
between the supposedly rival institutions is far from solid. It is more
often a furtive and uneasy alliance between the top bureaucrats of the
unions and the corporations—an arrangement that neither party can
publicly admit and that most of the participants insist is just gossip.”
From the body of evidence recently assembled, Nossiter maintains
that: “The tacit collaboration between management and union officers
has been thriving all through the period of postwar prosperity.”
“Like any couple,” he points out, “the corporate and
union partners have their spats. Moreover, the need to conceal their
illicit if pleasurable goings-on requires them periodically to denounce
each other. And, as in the most harmonious affairs, there is a master
and his mate. The company executives get the most money, as shown by a
glance at the relative incomes and capital gains of such pairs as Roger
Blough, chairman of United States Steel and David McDonald, president
of the United Steelworkers; or Jack L. Smead, president of Consolidated
Freightways, and James R. Hoffa, president of the Teamsters Union.”
Because of past experience, Nossiter expressed his
skepticism about the current steel industry dispute. In his article,
written before the union was forced to strike, he says:
“The current goings-on in the steel industry would
seem to belie this analysis. The union and the companies have been
verbally belting each other with apparent enthusiasm as their wage
contract runs to an end on June 30. But appearances can be deceiving.
Economists can recall that the industry forced a strike in 1946 to pry
loose a price increase from OPA. Many suspect that the periodic
outbursts of industrial warfare are a cover under which the companies
only appear to resist wage increases. Then, after a comparatively brief
strike to work down the inventories steel customers have built up in
fear of a stoppage, the companies reluctantly settle for a substantial
increase in wages and fringe benefits. Finally, as John Kenneth
Galbraith, of Harvard, has pointed out, the companies use this
settlement as an excuse to boost prices enough to cover the wage
increase several times.”
This technique, he adds, “has become so well publicized
in Washington this year, however, that a new script may have been
written for the 1959 bargaining.”
The current dispute is being conducted along the lines of a “new
script” all right. But this time it is written in Wall Street and
Washington without the collaboration of McDonald.
In a chapter entitled: How the Partnership Works, Nossiter
explains how the “union captains perform different services for their
corporate colonels, depending on the degree of concentration in the
industry. However,” he affirms,
“... they all work with each other, regardless of
whether the industry is concentrated or competitive. The trucking
industry has rushed to defend both Beck and Hoffa. In coal, the
incorruptible Lewis will be memorialized by both miners and operators.
New York’s garment manufacturers have learned to love David Dubinsky,
president of the Ladies Garment Workers Union; on the Pacific Coast,
Harry Bridges has no bigger booster than the Pacific Maritime
Association unless it is the ILWU stevedores;” etc., etc.
“Some observers,” concludes Nossiter, “see in this
harmony a new age of enlightenment. The reality is a little less
appealing. These union leaders, in varying degrees, perform important
services for their industry’s employers. They discipline dissidents and
prevent wildcat strikes. In expanding industries, they fight for wage
gains which enable the industry to obtain a more than off-setting
increase in prices. In competitive industries like trucking and ladies
garments, they make it harder for new firms to start up and compete
with established companies. In big industries, the rising wage-price
structure makes the capital requirements for potential new firms almost
prohibitive. In many industries, union leaders argue vigorously for
technological change, persuading the membership to accept the machines
that will put their less fortunate colleagues out of work.”

 
NOSSITER’S thesis is that “Big Business” and “Big Labor”
have entered into collusion to mulct the public by restricting
production and raising prices. In exchange the union leaders are given
concessions with which to placate their membership and buy their
acquiescence. For these concessions the union bureaucrats perform many
useful services for the corporations. His remedy is to call upon the
government to protect the public from this “unholy alliance” by
exercising some form of control over wages and prices in what is
delicately referred to as “concentrated industries,” and by extension
to economic planning.
From his study of the tendency in American capitalism toward
increased monopolization, Nossiter concludes that “the march toward
rationalization—an industrial structure with fewer corporations and
considerable private planning—appears unlikely to be halted. All over
the globe,” he observes, “men are planning their material arrangements
to overcome the obsolete problem of material want.” In economically
backward countries, in the more advanced capitalist countries of
Europe, in what he calls the “Communist nations,” men “have turned from
reliance on impersonal market forces to some conscious and public
planning of investment, prices and wages.”
As for this country:
“More of this goes on in the United States than is
generally understood. Tax laws play a potent part in investment
decisions. The planning of a General Motors, United States Steel, or a
Standard Oil (New Jersey) plays a decisive part in the Nation’s
economy. The question now posed is whether these private corporations
will be allowed to continue making decisions of vast public consequence
without some kind of informed public surveillance.”
Nossiter is not too optimistic about the ability of
government to regulate and control the monopolies in the interest of
“the public.” All past attempts to do so have failed. “The critics,” he
remarks, “point to the long history of Federal regulation. They note
that in time, the ‘independent’ commissions become willing vassals of
the industry they are regulating.”
Although the lessons of history and experience speak against it,
Nossiter suggests that a new beginning be made in the form of
“non-coercive” restraint through public pressure. One of the foremost
proponents of this type of intervention, the liberal bourgeois
economist John Kenneth Galbraith, lays down “three principles” for this
type of intervention:
“(1) Limited: It should apply only to firms and
unions in concentrated industries which have a decisive share of the
market power.
“(2) Simple: Perhaps a government panel should
require these corporations and unions to justify in advance each
proposed price and wage increase. The panel would then make specific
recommendations in the light of agreed-upon national goals.
“(3) Conciliatory factfinding: At least at first we
might rely on panel findings to mobilize public opinion to serve as a
restraint on union and corporate managers. If this did not work, then
sanctions or penalties would be in order.”
Several liberal Democrats in Congress have already
introduced bills embodying Galbraith’s “three principles.” Senator
Estes Kefauver, chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Antitrust and
Monopoly, has introduced a bill to establish a Department of Consumers.
These steps are supported by a small group of liberal Congressional
Democrats and Republicans, some of whom have been demanding that
Eisenhower set up a “fact finding committee” to settle the steel
strike. “Some of these legislators,” remarks Nossiter, “may be longer
on intelligence than influence.” It is to this coterie of bourgeois
liberals that Nossiter attributes a “quiet revolution in economic
thought,” which has “three leading ideas” as follows:
“(1) Oligopoly, not competition, has become the
dominant mode of American economic life. In their search for profits,
oligopolists tend to restrain production and employment and raise
prices.
“(2) The traditional antagonism between unions and
management in oligopolistic or concentrated industries is disappearing.
Conscious and unconscious collusion takes its place, lifting wages for
some and prices (including stock prices) for others.
“(3) The public interest in economic affairs has long
been established in theory and practice. Business enjoys outright
subsidies like tariffs and tax gimmicks, and makes large sales to
government. Unions are also supported by government through complex
codes guaranteeing organizing and bargaining rights. Therefore it is no
real departure to insist on a public interest in the key wage and price
decisions.”
 
THERE is merit in the considerable factual evidence
adduced by Nossiter to support the charge of collusion between the
union bureaucrats and corporate management. But his conclusions are
totally false and the proposed remedy completely ineffectual. The basic
fallacy of the liberals of all persuasions is their view that
government is an impartial, independent and benign arbiter of the
social conflicts that arise in class society; that government stands
aloof, or should so stand, from the clash of economic interest between
the contending class forces unless and until the “public interest” is
involved. Government must then intervene, paternalistically at first,
as advisor and mediator, but with all of the coercion of state power if
need be to uphold the interest of the “public”; i.e. the whole people.
It is this view that afflicts the liberals with a peculiar form of
social and political astigmatism which enables them to assign equal
responsibility to capital and labor for the present state of affairs.
How can anyone, for example, familiar with the events of the past
decade, justify government intervention in the unions on the basis of
the argument that: “Unions are also supported by government through
complex codes guaranteeing organizing and bargaining rights.”
This statement may have had the appearance of validity under the
Wagner Act in the days of the “New Deal.” Closer examination, however,
discloses that the labor codes of that era performed the function of
(a) “guaranteeing” only those rights labor had won through its own
independent struggles, and (b) permitting the government to gain a grip
on the unions and open the process of destroying their independence.
But the result of government intervention since Taft-Hartley has left
no room whatever for any illusions. Government intervention plainly
revealed its true purpose—to virtually arrest the organization
expansion of the unions and to straitjacket their bargaining rights.
The recently enacted Landrum-Griffin-Kennedy so-called “labor reform”
law extends the punitive provisions of Taft-Hartley.
Thus, government intervention in union affairs, at least since 1946,
no longer even gives the appearance of being either impartial or
benign. While it is true that government regulation of industry has
been a farce, government intervention in the unions has served to
shackle labor, to undermine its independence, to weaken its capacity to
defend the workers standard of living, to circumscribe its ability to
expand, to strengthen the stranglehold of the monopolists on the
economic life of the country.
Far from acting as an impartial arbiter between capital and labor,
government has acted as a tool of big business, a creature of the
monopolists. How could it be otherwise? Those who exercise economic
control, those whose planning “plays a decisive part in the Nation’s
economy,” wield the nation’s political power. Sometimes they do it
directly, as through Eisenhower’s millionaire cabinets; sometimes
indirectly through some form of coalition between the labor lieutenants
of capitalism together with assorted varieties of liberals.
Where labor has its own political organizations, as in Europe, it
enters into coalition arrangements with the capitalists, often through
direct participation in the cabinets. In this country, the partnership
takes the form of a coalition within the framework of the Democratic
party. In periods of social crisis the labor “statesmen” are directly
drawn into the government apparatus as in the period of the economic
collapse under the New Deal and in the tripartite boards under the War
Deal. These periods terminated with the end of the war and the great
class battles of 1945-46.
The enactment of the Taft-Hartley law in 1947 signified the
beginning of the close of an era. Government “paternalism” toward labor
gave way to punitive restrictions and onerous regulations. The postwar
period of expansion and prosperity made it profitable for the
monopolists to continue the policy of labor-management cooperation, the
results of which have been amply described above. But the process of
increasing prices three-fold on the basis of granting a wage increase
cannot continue indefinitely.
The privileged position occupied by American capitalism in the
postwar world market is drawing to a close. American capitalism faces a
shrinking world market, a world in which the colonial peoples are in
open rebellion against imperialist domination, a world in which the
tremendous technological advances in the Soviet Union and growing
strength of the Soviet bloc together with the increased competition
from rehabilitated Germany and Japan has further narrowed the field for
American capitalist exploitation. The ominous future has been further
adumbrated by the recurrent pattern of recessions each one going deeper
than before.
There is no stability for American capitalism upon which rests the
entire structure of the world capitalist order. Under the
circumstances, monopoly capitalism seeks to assure class stability at
home by depriving the unions, the only mass organization of the
American workers, of the possibility of independent action.
 
IN a series of notes on trade union problems, written by
Leon Trotsky before his assassination, the tendency of monopoly
capitalism to fuse with the state power and the conditions under which
the reformist labor bureaucracy was permitted to retain its privileges,
were brilliantly analyzed.
“The intensification of class contradictions within
each country,” wrote Trotsky, “the intensification of antagonisms
between one country and another, produce a situation in which
imperialist capitalism can tolerate (i.e., up to a certain time) a
reformist bureaucracy only if the latter serves directly as a petty but
active stockholder in its imperialist enterprises, of its plans and
programs within the country as well as on the world arena. Social
reformism must become transformed into social-imperialism in order to
prolong its existence, but only prolong it and nothing more. Because
along this road there is no way out in general.”
There has been no more ardent supporter of State
Department foreign policy than the American labor bureaucracy. This has
not spared it the blows of reaction at home, for, as Trotsky points out:
“Monopoly capitalism is less and less willing to
reconcile itself to the independence of the trade unions. It demands of
the reformist bureaucracy and the labor aristocracy who pick the crumbs
from its banquet table, that they become transformed into its political
police before the eyes of the working class. If that is not achieved,
the labor bureaucracy is driven away and replaced by the fascists.
Incidentally, all of the efforts of the labor aristocracy in the
service of imperialism cannot in the long run save them from
destruction.”
The current antics of the American union bureaucrats
indicate that they have no intention of abandoning their policy of
class collaboration despite the savage employer-government anti-labor
offensive. They propose to adapt themselves to the
Landrum-Griffin-Kennedy measure just as they adapted themselves to
Taft-Hartley. They hope to ride out the storm and resume where they
left off with business as usual.
However, the union bureaucrats confront a serious dilemma. The
stability of the bureaucracy rests on its ability to extract some
concessions for services rendered. Failure to do so threatens
disaffection in the ranks and engenders opposition moods and movements.
Therefore, they must make a show of resistance.
A show of resistance by the union tops threatens to unleash a stormy
movement from below. A case in point is the militant challenge to the
leadership of Teamster Local 85 in San Francisco recently. Because
Hoffa has been made the target of reaction he has been compelled to
seek rank and file support by advocating militant union action and
loosening the bureaucratic grip over the drivers. Taking advantage of
the situation the drivers in Local 85 took command of a strike struggle
and in the face of the hostility of the leadership, the press and the
employers, won a significant victory. This is of enormous symptomatic
significance. Other examples can be cited, such as the independent
labor mobilization to defeat the Ohio Right-to-Work bill last year, etc.
Whether through capitulation or resistance, cracks and crevices will
be opened up in the bureaucratic crust for trade union militants to
begin the organization of a left wing opposition. A genuine left wing
formation will emblazon on its banner the Marxist sign of the class
struggle. For only by transforming the unions into revolutionary
instruments in the struggle for state power will American labor be able
to avoid the holocaust of imperialist war, depression and fascist
barbarism.



IF ONE THING can be said to be most characteristic of the modern American labor movement, it is that its major leaps ahead have been impelled by dire necessity. It was not until the concluding quarter of the last century that the American working class, driven by the stormy economic development of this country following the Civil War, surged tumultuously forward to overcome its previous limited, local and isolated character, establishing a federation of unions on a national scale. Scarce 70 years old, the American Federation of Labor was born in 1886, the year of the Haymarket massacre in Chicago and a high point in the resistance of the capitalist class to the eight-hour day.
After the AFL – the product of the most bitter class struggles – became dominant among workers organized along craft lines, its conservative leadership, concerned primarily with maintaining the position of a layer of relatively privileged workers, lagged behind economic developments and became a barrier to the organization of the millions of workers in the mass production industries. It required the deepest economic crisis in American history, plus the irresistible pressure of the mass of unorganized workers in the giant mills and factories of the twentieth century, plus a split in the AFL to pave the way for the appearance of the Congress of Industrial Organizations. Now, after 20 years of division, the leading bodies of the AFL and CIO have reached an agreement, subject to the formality of ratification by their respective conventions, to merge into one national federation.
Does the merger, assuming it goes through, foreshadow another gigantic leap forward by the American working class?
The answer to that question, as well as the related one of the direction and goal of such an advance, will not be found in the stated aims of the union leaders who agreed to the merger. But it can be found by analyzing the split, why it could not be healed before, and why merger now looms as a certainty.
 
A Victory for the CIO?
The contention by some not-too-bright commentators that the merger agreement constitutes a “victory” for the CIO does not hold water. The CIO entered the negotiations under unfavorable conditions. It was smaller than its rival, with no prospect of overtaking it, was beset by factional strife and bedeviled by centrifugal tendencies following the no-raiding pact with the AFL. It comes into the combined organization as a subordinate industrial “department,” with the old-line, craft-union leaders – in some instances the same and in others little different from their counterparts of the 1930’s – in a commanding position.
Couldn’t a comparable merger agreement have been gained years ago under more auspicious circumstances for the industrial union group? Matthew Josephson, in his biography of Sidney Hillman [1], discloses that in October 1937 a committee representing the AFL and CIO met to discuss reunification.
“The principal demands of the CIO,” he pointed out, “were that the Federation declare its support hereafter of industrial unions for workers in certain specified industries; establish a CIO Department that was to be autonomous within the AFL; reinstate the CIO unions with full rights; and work out and ratify this program at a joint convention of affiliates of both labor bodies.”
These demands of 1937 were included in essence in the agreement of 1955. But in 1937, when unity looked promising, the conference was blown up by John L. Lewis, who questioned the authority of the AFL committee to conclude an agreement.
“The terms of affiliation tentatively agreed upon,” asserts Josephson, “at a time when the CIO claimed the larger membership, might well have resulted in the industrial-union faction becoming the preponderant force.”
But John L. Lewis was not too much concerned about “unity” in the year 1937. He was convinced that the CIO would absorb most of the AFL and elbow the remnant into a corner. Lewis spoke of a CIO movement of 20 to 30 million members. And it seemed, in 1937, that nothing could stop the phenomenal growth of the new unionism. At the time of the unity meeting with the AFL in October of that year the CIO claimed 3,700,000 members to 3,400,000 for the AFL. Since the original group of unions constituting the CIO in 1936 included less than one million members, Lewis’ optimism appeared more than justified.
 
A Beneficent Split
The split of the CIO from the AFL involved far more than an academic disagreement over the relative merits of industrial versus craft unions. The forms of organization that suited the needs of the American working class in 1886 were hopelessly inadequate 50 years later. The advance of technology had outmoded the craft union in the mass production industries. Since the turn of the century the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) had preached and organized industrial unions. The socialist and later the communist movement were vigorous advocates of the industrial form of organization. These efforts had great effect on the advanced elements in the mass production industries. But the leaders of the AFL remained unmoved. Neither argument nor experience convinced them.
Preliminary skirmishes in the early Thirties demonstrated over and over again that only the industrial form of organization combined with militant methods of struggle could successfully topple the hitherto impregnable citadels of the open shop in auto, steel, rubber, etc. But the old mossbacks ruling the AFL remained unmoved. They feared the influx of millions of mass production workers organized along industrial lines and had no heart to lead the kind of battles required to bring the arrogant and powerful lords of industry to terms.
The more astute labor leaders, who participated in forming the CIO, repeatedly warned that unless the conservative union leadership took the initiative in promoting the industrial organization of workers in factory, mine and mill, it would be done under more radical auspices. They were more in tune with the times. The industrial organization of the American mass production worker had been too long delayed. This invested the movement with an explosive character. The stock-market crash heralded the depression which plunged the country into the profound social crisis that generated the pressure soon to erupt with volcanic force.
The split in the AFL eliminated a formidable obstacle to the successful organization of the industrial unions of the CIO and gave tremendous impetus to union organization in general. In the true sense of the word, it was the most progressive union split in American labor history. In the relatively short period of 20 years the American labor movement took a great leap forward, adding some 12 million members to its ranks, tremendously increasing its social weight in the nation and creating a potential force of incalculable power. The split in the AFL was an inevitable prerequisite to this advance.
Another signal result of the split was the sharp break from AFL political policy which, following the line laid down by Samuel Gompers, had kept the American workers politically atomized and impotent. The deep-going social crisis of the Thirties was shaking the capitalist system to its foundation. Such labor leaders as Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, Dubinsky of the Garment Workers, Zaritsky of the Cap and Millinery Workers, etc., looked upon the reform administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt as the only alternative to social revolution.
 
Break from Gompers’ Policy
Heading unions composed largely of foreign-born workers with a strong socialist tradition, they were keenly sensitive to the radical mood of the workers. They set out deliberately to “contain” the turbulent militancy of the CIO within the capitalist two-party system. Hillman, the outstanding “labor statesman” of the period, had proclaimed the CIO as “the beginning of the real labor movement.” By that he meant that organized labor in this country for the first time on a national scale was to engage not only in economic but in political action. But unlike the labor movement of Europe which functioned through its own political parties, Hillman and his colleagues gave a peculiar American twist to their creation which they named Labor’s Non-Partisan League.
Hillman’s biographer explains that
“... the name ‘Labor’s Non-Partisan League’ was chosen to indicate, as Hillman explained later, that it was ‘non-partisan’ only in that it sought the support of the two wings of labor, but not at all with regard to the re-election of the New Deal President.”
To bolster the “non-partisan” character of the League, George Berry of the AFL Printing Pressmen’s Union, was designated chairman. Hillman’s new approach to labor politics, his biographer points out, was motivated by the fact that
“Many of the union members, especially in New York and Chicago, had grown up in the tradition of supporting the Socialist Party, and shunning our Tammany Halls. What Hillman advocated now was a distinctly opportunistic approach. The new League, unlike LaFollette’s Progressive Party of 1924, was to function mainly through one of the two major parties, and particularly the Democratic Party, in order to ensure Roosevelt’s re-election.”
The object of the LNPL was to mobilize the labor vote for Roosevelt. The tremendous prestige of the CIO was utilized by its leaders for this purpose. While doing so, the CIO leaders disclaimed any support to the Democratic Party as such, thus keeping up the pretense of “independent” political action.
Where necessary to corral the labor vote for Roosevelt, Hillman and his cohorts did not hesitate to go a step further. Matthew Josephson tells about the
“... decision of the CIO leaders to launch the American Labor Party in pivotal New York State as a local affiliate of LNPL. The thought was to channel the ‘regular’ Socialists into the Roosevelt camp. This was done in hasty fashion on July 16, 1936, principally on the initiative of Hillman, David Dubinsky of the Ladies’ Garment Workers, and Alex Rose of the Millinery Workers. Joseph P. Ryan, the conservative leader of the International Longshoremen’s Association, brought to the American Labor Party the support of the AFL’s Central Trades and Labor Council of New York City, which he then headed; while George Meany also helped the new party through the AFL’s state body. The new grouping included the right-wing faction of the Socialist Party in New York, but also enjoyed the support of Governor Herbert Lehman, A.A. Berle, and Mayor La Guardia – all in all a remarkable amalgam of AFL and CIO unionists, as well as Republican Fusionists, New Deal Democrats and Socialists.”
The “remarkable amalgam” that launched the ALP in New York City to garner the socialist vote for Roosevelt in 1936 was typical of the labor-liberal-Democratic coalition which, together with the Dixiecrat wing, kept the Democratic Party in power under Roosevelt and Truman until 1952.
The CIO leaders, all established bureaucrats of long standing in their own unions, were determined to steer the new union movement into the channel of political class collaboration. None were prepared to carry through the logic of the class struggle from the economic to the political field. Instead of preaching reliance of the workers on their own organized strength, the new “labor statesmen” advocated increased reliance on the New Deal administration in Washington.
They assiduously fostered the myth of Roosevelt as the great “friend” of labor in general and the CIO in particular. They built him up until he became the most influential leader in the labor movement; and Sidney Hillman became his right-hand man. All paid homage to Roosevelt, including the Stalinist lickspittles who were then in their Peoples Front period. All, that is, except the political maverick John L. Lewis after he had demanded payment from Roosevelt for labor’ support, especially in the bloody Little Steel strike of 1937 and was rebuffed by Roosevelt’s callous “plague on both your houses” statement. The rift between Lewis and Roosevelt continued to widen thereafter until it led to an open break in 1939 and Lewis endorsed the Republican candidate Wendell Willkie in 1940.
 
Vying for Roosevelt’s Favor
The defeat suffered by the CIO in the Little Steel strike was due primarily to the policy of depending on Roosevelt instead of on the militant methods of struggle devised by the workers in the course of their successful battles in auto, rubber, etc. Although a severe setback, it did not halt the forward momentum of the CIO. In the two years from its first conference in October 1935 to the unity conference of October 1937, it grew from the 900,000 members claimed by the original founding unions to 3,700,000.
In the following two years only 400,000 members were added. The CIO lost its crusading spirit. The limited aims of its leaders had been largely accomplished. Both federations settled down to intensive competition, relying primarily on NLRB collective bargaining elections for new members, fighting and raiding each other’s jurisdictions, and competing for the favor of the New Deal administration. As Leon Trotsky pointed out in his penetrating study, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay,
“The struggle among the tops between the old federation and the new is reducible in large measure to the struggle for the sympathy and support of Roosevelt and his cabinet.” [2]
This contest between the labor leaders for the favor of the administration in Washington continued throughout the Roosevelt and Truman regimes and was even extended into the Eisenhower administration. It was this rivalry and the uncertainty over which would emerge as the dominant group that undoubtedly proved a great obstacle to the earlier unity negotiations. The odds seemed to favor, the CIO. It was the more dynamic movement; it had greater attractive power; it had developed a more effective medium for political organization and action; it had a more progressive policy on social questions and greater appeal to minority workers; it appeared to have the inside track with the Roosevelt administration.
 
The AFL Buries Gompers
Another barrier to unification between the AFL and CIO, and not the least, was the prevailing difference over political policy. The CIO’s decisive break from the Gompers policy of the AFL, which the establishment of LNPL signified, was no passing phase. The CIO leaders were irrevocably committed to the new policy. They were quick to see the advantage of maintaining the political fiction of “independence” in garnering the labor vote for Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. They were also astute enough to discern the advantage of dealing with the regular Democratic Party machines which their organizational independence gave them. The AFL, on the other hand, persisted in maintaining the old policy. Where the CIO lined up solidly behind Roosevelt and the Democratic Party, the AFL continued to declare its “neutrality” as between the two capitalist parties. Their policy of “no politics” in the union applied, of course, only to the rank and file. The leaders were in politics up to their ears. In national elections Hutcheson of the Carpenters regularly appeared as head of the Republican “labor” committee and Tobin of the Teamsters as head of the Democratic “labor” committee.
The LNPL, on the other hand, as Hillman so carefully explained, was “non-partisan” only in the sense that it sought to rally both winos of labor in support of Roosevelt and the Democratic Party and not at all in the sense of being neutral in relation to the two capitalist parties. There could be no compromise on that score.
It was not until the year after adoption of the Taft-Hartley Act that the AFL broke decisively with the Gompers policy by setting up their own version of the CIO Political Action Committee which they dubbed Labor’s League for Political Education. It was only in 1952 that the AFL for the first time officially endorsed by convention action a candidate for the presidency. That was the Democrat Adlai Stevenson. Even after that they went through one more experiment in “non-partisan” politics by sanctioning the entry of Plumbers chief Martin Durkin into Eisenhower’s millionaire cabinet as Secretary of Labor. The experiment turned out badly as was inevitable. The AFL break with the Republican Party was signalized by Durkin’s demonstrative resignation over the dispute on amending the Taft-Hartley Act.
The Republican Party took power as the unabashed representative of Big Business after 20 years of the labor-Democratic coalition. The Eisenhower administration could not make even those piddling concessions the top AFL bureaucrats asked as the price of their support, or at least neutrality. The experience destroyed any hope the AFL “labor statesmen” might have had of weaning Eisenhower from his dependence on Big Business.
An incidental consequence of the dispute was the disclosure that it was Sinclair Weeks, Secretary of Commerce and former head of two large corporations, who was making labor policy for Eisenhower’s millionaire club. In an interview published in US News and World Report, April 9, 1954, Weeks summed up the administration’s labor policy in a one-sentence reply to the question: “What are you really trying to do with all these (Taft-Hartley) amendments?” Answer by Weeks: “To make the labor unions safe for democracy.”
“To make the labor unions safe for democracy!” That was the slogan under which the labor-hating cabal was pushing its union-smashing “right to work” laws through the legislatures of the various states. The lesson was not lost on the union leaders. In 1954 they went all out for the Democratic Party candidates. Collaboration between AFL and CIO political units was closer than ever before. Despite a few exceptions like the split in the California AFL where the majority supported the Republican candidate for governor, this was an indication that the unity negotiations then in progress had the best chance of completion since the split 20 years ago.
 
The Taft-Hartley Act
There can be little doubt that the most compelling motive driving the two federations toward merger was politics. The tremendous growth of the unions following the split continued throughout the war. With the end of the world conflict, Big Business decided to test the mettle of the unions. In the strike movement of 1945-46, it became convinced that the organized employers could not stem the growing power of organized labor without the direct aid of the government. They seized the first opportunity after the 1946 elections to mobilize their friends in Washington for adoption of the anti-labor Taft-Hartley Act which was jammed through Congress by a majority vote of Democrats as well as Republicans.
The Taft-Hartley Act effectively halted the expansion of the trade unions. This was admitted by George Meany in an interview in US News and World Report, Nov. 6, 1953:
(Q) “Have your organizing efforts the last few years been as successful as they used to be?”
(A) “Oh, no!”
(Q) “What has impeded that?”
(A) “The Taft-Hartley Act.”
(Q) “Could you tell us just how that has happened?”
(A) “Well, because any employer who wants to resist organization and is willing to make his plant a battleground for that resistance can very effectively prevent organization of his employees. There’s no question about that at all. Any employer who is willing to spend the money and the time and the effort can, under Taft-Hartley, resist organization indefinitely”.
Meany neglected to add that the same can be said about any employer wishing to rid himself of an established union. The labor leaders have expressed over and over again the fear that the employers will utilize the union-busting provisions of Taft-Hartley during an economic depression or at any time they consider favorable. Fear of Taft-Hartley was especially noticeable in the union press and at union conventions during the 1954 recession. It undoubtedly contributed greatly to the pressure for merger.
Taft-Hartley practically froze union membership. It settled the question that was implicit from the beginning in the split: Which would prevail? A labor commentator writing in Fortune magazine (April 1953) observed,
“US labor has lost the greatest dynamic any movement can have – a confidence that it is going to get bigger. Organized labor has probably passed its peak strength ... Since 1946 the working population has expanded but union membership has remained stationary.”
In a report published a few years ago, the union leaders disclosed that an enormous amount of money and energy had been expended in raiding each other but at the end the gains were balanced by the losses. It was their most effective argument for the AFL-CIO no-raiding pact that proved to be the prelude to the merger agreement.
Under Eisenhower the Taft-Hartley Act has become even tougher – not through amendment but through administrative interpretation of its onerous provisions. In addition, under Taft-Hartley the various states responded to the go-ahead sign for adoption of restrictive labor legislation under the misnamed “right to work” laws. These measures have proved to be particularly harsh on the conservative AFL building trades unions. Seventeen states have already adopted such legislation, the latest being Utah where a “right to work” law has been pushed through the state legislature and is now before the Republican governor for signature.



TAFT




The Ohio Republican Senator died in 1953 but his infamous anti-labor law is still on the books.



The several attempts made recently on a state level to repeal such union-wrecking laws have failed. At its recent meeting in Miami the AFL Executive Council admitted that there “is little likelihood of getting these states to repeal their laws.” They announced that they would concentrate on the national level to change the provision in the Taft-Hartley Act giving state “right to work” laws precedence over the federal statute. Twelve of the 17 states having such laws are in the South. The labor reporter of the New York Times, writing from Miami on Feb. 6, said there was not too much optimism about getting such a change through Congress as “AFL officials recognize that they can count on scant help from the dominant Southern Democratic bloc in getting rid of the ‘right to work’ laws.”
The leading labor spokesmen agree that the unions are on the defensive; that the anti-labor legislative offensive of the employers has the unions backed up against the wall; that organized labor will have to fight on the political field if it is to survive. “We are never going to repeal the Taft-Hartley Act until we put into Congress men and women friendly to the ideals and principles of this great labor movement,” George Meany declared in 1951.
Similar declarations have been made on innumerable occasions by the top leaders of the AFL and CIO. Small wonder then that the first question reporters put to Meany and Reuther when they announced the merger agreement was, “Does the merger herald the formation of a national independent labor party sponsored by the united organization representing over 15 million members?”
Both “labor statesmen” hastily and emphatically disclaimed any intention of sponsoring such a political party of labor.
 
Their Real Political Aims
But what then were the aims of the leaders who concluded the merger agreement? The diplomatic statement of aims issued over the signatures of Meany and Reuther is a compendium of meaningless generalities about “service to the public,” “democratic ideals,” building “a better nation and a better world,” etc., etc. What of the Taft-Hartley Act and the “right to work” laws which threaten the very existence of the unions?
Both agreed that action on the political field was the only effective remedy. But what kind of political action? Meany answered the question in an article written for Fortune (March 1955) just before the merger agreement:
“I do not think the membership of the AF of L is thinking now in terms of a national political party sponsored by labor. Yet if the action of the two major parties leaves us no alternative in our efforts to safeguard and raise the diving standards of the workers, labor will go as far as it must down that political road.”
If Meany in this way makes a concession to history, Reuther on the other hand maintained at the CIO convention last December that a party of labor was distinctly un-American. In this he stands to the right of such arch-conservative labor leaders as Dave Beck of the Teamsters, who, in a speech at a National Press Club luncheon, reported in the Oct. 21, 1953, New York Times, declared
“Those who seek to put the chain of the Taft-Hartley Act and other anti-union legislation around labor, will live to see the day when American labor will follow England’s and tie progress to political action.”
Whatever lip service this or that top labor bureaucrat may occasionally pay to the idea of building a labor party in order to frighten the Democrats or to soothe the feelings of union militants fed up with the capitalist parties, it is plain enough that the real political objective of the Meany-Reuther combination is a triple one:

to shape the labor vote into a more cohesive and active block, capable of putting the Democratic Party back into the White House in 1956,
to win a voice in Democratic machine politics,
to gain as a payoff at least some concessions of New Deal coloration.

Clearly, insofar as the top bureaucracy wields political control over the rank, and file, the labor movement is in for another experience of coalition politics with the Democrats. What fruits can be expected in the event of victory can be gauged pretty well from 1948. The Truman election was proclaimed as the greatest of all labor victories. The CIO leaders even split the organization by expelling the so-called “communist-controlled unions” so as not to embarrass the Truman administration, then deep in its cold war adventure. Yet they got neither repeal of Taft-Hartley nor amendment of its worst provisions. All they succeeded in doing was to pave the way for the Eisenhower victory in 1952.
The political course of Meany and Reuther has even more ominous implications when fitted into the drive of American imperialism toward a third world war. They have already signified their willingness, even eagerness, to act as traveling representatives of the State Department in meeting criticisms and objections abroad to Wall Street’s global moves and aims, especially objections that take the form of working-class revolutions and colonial uprisings. That means, of course, a similar perfidious role at home.
The top AFL and CIO bureaucrats hope to make big political gains through the Democratic Party. Their own illusions play a role in this, but more important is their function as labor lieutenants of the capitalist class. This impels them again and again to try to prevent the American working class from taking the road to independent political action.
The need to form a cohesive labor bloc, organized for electioneering on a precinct level, in order to wield greater influence in the Democratic machine, is, however, not without its political dangers to the AFL-CIO top bureaucrats. The logic of their own course can take them much farther than they expect. In addition a united labor movement can bring to the rank and file a new realization of the strength of the American labor movement and a new growth of self-confidence. The consequences of this can shake the whole structure of American politics.
The narrow, limited aims and objectives of those who support, defend or engage in apologetics for an outlived social system do not determine the course of history. When objective necessity required more effective forms of organization, the American working class smashed fall barriers and the CIO appeared. Today the American working class has gone about as far as it can within the limits of the policy, leadership and organizational forms so far developed. Objective necessity has now posed before the American workers the need to organize their own political party.
How soon this need will find organized expression on a mass scale cannot be foretold; but one thing is certain, when the American workers lose patience with the timid, conservative, class-collaborationist, coalition politics of the Meanys and the Reuthers – as they surely will under the impact of a crisis like the one that gave birth to the AFL 70 years ago or the one that gave us the CIO 20 years ago – the result will be a major political explosion. Fifteen million organized workers represent a potential power of irresistible magnitude. Armed with a correct program and able leadership, nothing can stop them from fulfilling their historic destiny.
 
Footnote
1. Sidney Hillman: Statesman of American Labor, 1952.
2. See Fourth International, Feb. 1941.




From Brian Pearce
To the Editor:
My friend Cliff Slaughter has shown me a copy of the Fall 1965 number of International Socialist Review, containing a translation by me, made several years ago, of a 1923 speech of Trotsky’s. It is, of course, always pleasing to see one’s work in print, and acknowledged by the publication of one’s name. How odd, though, to put it as mildly as possible, that I should first learn of the appearance in your journal of this translation of mine through the channel mentioned. If you did not have my home address, you could easily have sent me a copy of ISR care of the Oxford University Press (which I see you have managed, in a footnote, to bring into the act).
I hope no reader assumes I had any previous knowledge of the introduction you have provided, which contains the expected elements of fantasy and sensation-mongering. Your reference to alleged allusions in Trotsky’s speech to certain writings of Lenin’s which were in fact not made public in the Soviet Union until 1956 is beside the point; while, obviously in order to make it seem relevant, you have omitted to mention the writings by Lenin in January–March 1923 to which it is plain Trotsky is referring – On Cooperation, Pages from a Diary, Better Fewer But Better, and How We Should Reorganise the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspectorate. It is in the last named of these articles that Lenin writes:
“With the exception of the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, our state apparatus is very largely a survival of the old one, and has least of all undergone serious change. It has only been slightly repainted on the surface, but in all other things it is a typical relic of our old state apparatus.”
I don’t know about you, but I first read these articles in Volume Nine of Lenin’s Selected Works, as published here in 1937 by Lawrence and Wishart, the British Communist Party’s publishers. They were, I thought, so well known to Marxists of all varieties that I did not think it necessary to even hint at them in the footnotes I supplied to Trotsky’s speech.
Please publish this letter in your next issue, and, if you like, put in bold type this last paragraph:
Since I left the British Trotskyist organisation, four years ago, the Socialist Labour League has been scrupulously correct in printing the date of any translation of mine they publish, from among those I did for them (and you) in 1957–61, so that no misapprehension can arise as to continued political association with them on my part. You, however, have not followed their good example. Any reader who may by this means have been misled into supposing, from the use made of my name in International Socialist Review, that I have any sympathy with your “tendency” should rest assured that this is emphatically not so.



 


Yours sincerely,
Brian Pearce
October 20, 1965
 




Reply
It seems apparent that the fit of pique which moved Brian Pearce to dispatch his letter before even extending the courtesy of a request for an explanation is prompted by two major considerations:

To make it known publicly (for the first time to our knowledge) that he had severed his organizational connection with the Socialist Labour League some four years ago, and
 
That the appearance in the ISR of his translation of the Trotsky material might mislead our readers into concluding that he was in sympathy with our “tendency” in the international Trotskyist movement.

As for the first, we are happy to make known the fact of Pearce’s departure from the SLL which, up to now, has been a well kept secret by his “friend” Slaughter and Co. in the leadership of the SLL. We trust that this does not mean that Pearce is thinking of turning against the Trotskyist movement as have other prominent figures who could not stomach the internal regime or sectarian policies of the infantile leftists of the SLL.
As for the second, we have no hesitation in correcting any misapprehension on the part of any of our readers, that the appearance of the Pearce translation be in anyway interpreted as indicating any sympathy with our tendency in the international movement. In publishing the translation from the material made available to us we were motivated solely by our desire to provide our readers with a hitherto unpublished English translation of an important historical document.
As for our alleged lack of “scrupulosity” in neglecting to append the date of translation, the simple fact is that there was no date on the manuscript. As for the introduction to the translation we are at a loss to understand how there could be any ambiguity on that score. The introduction was preceded by an 18 point bold face subhead clearly establishing that it had been written by the editors and we take full responsibility for its content.
Pearce’s allusion to “fantasy and sensation-mongering” in the introduction, based on the tendentious contention that Trotsky had in mind only the published articles of Lenin, seems to us to be one-sided and pedantic. The material now available, as well as the relations at the time between Lenin and Trotsky, confirm that all of Lenin’s “notes” on the dangers of bureaucratism and the role of the Stalin faction were known, certainly to Trotsky as well as to other members of the Bolshevik Central Committee. The “alleged allusions” in Trotsky’s speech to which Pearce takes exception in our editorial comment appear to us to be unmistakable in the light of the now known facts.
In conclusion, it is unfortunate that superficial, technical or factional considerations should arise in connection with the publication of something by Trotsky, not hitherto available to the English-speaking public. On our part, we consider the important thing is to make such material available; and in this connection the ISR intends to continue to do what it can to provide such material no matter what the name of the translator or his political affiliations.



 


Tom Kerry
Editor



 



In the years before the formation of the CIO, when craft
unions dominated the American labor movement, not only the employers
but the bulk of organized labor itself was militantly Jim Crow. White
workers sought deliberately to keep Negroes out of jobs. The trade
unions constituted a hostile barrier to the employment of Negro labor
in the organized sectors of industry and trade. Where obvious
self-interest dictated the necessity of organizing Negro workers, they
were usually shunted off into second-class Jim Crow locals.
Under the circumstances, the Marxist contentions that the future of
Negroes lay with the labor movement and that the only road for workers,
white and black, was solidarity in the struggle against their mutual
capitalist enemy, appeared like lunacy to the majority of Negroes.
The CIO brought a great change. Today about a million and a quarter
Negroes are established in the labor movement with
approximately half-a-million in the CIO. Compared to the pre-CIO days
the present situation represents a great advance. But it is necessary
to recognize that only the first steps forward have been taken. Negroes
still suffer heavy discrimination in industry and in the unions.
A wartime study, published in 1944, disclosed that some 30 national
unions, AFL, Railroad Brotherhood and independent, either excluded
Negroes through constitutional provision and ritual or accorded them
only segregated auxiliary status. Exclusionist provisions by unions
affiliated to the AFL violate its national constitution. Yet, numerous
attempts to invoke disciplinary action have been sidetracked by the AFL
hierarchy with the hypocritical assurance that the problem can best be
solved by “education.” This beneficent approach to its Jim Crow
affiliates is in sharp contrast to the AFL leaders’ ruthless expulsion
in 1936 of unions comprising the Committee for Industrial Organization
for “violating” the AFL constitution because they sought to unite all
workers in a given factory or industry in a single organization.
 
The Indispensable Cornerstone
The unions which launched the CIO had to deal, from the
beginning, in a forthright manner with the Negro question. Fortunately,
the most powerful of the group, the United Mine Workers, International
Ladies Garment Workers and Amalgamated Clothing Workers, had gained
insight and experience through intensive organizing campaigns in the
early ’30s. Thousands of Negro workers had been recruited without
discrimination and comprised a substantial section of their membership.
The inclusion of all workers regardless of race, color or creed, was
immediately recognized as the indispensable cornerstone of any lasting
union structure in the basic mass production industries. This was
especially true in steel and auto, two of the main citadels of
corporate resistance to unionization.
The United Steel Workers and United Automobile Workers are the
largest and most influential in the CIO. Each contains a large
proportion of Negro members. Their attitude on the race question exerts
great influence on the policy of the CIO and its affiliates. While no
comprehensive survey of the entire CIO can be given within a brief
article, it is possible to give a fairly accurate indication of the
situation of Negroes in the CIO and to draw certain conclusions from
the experience of its major unions.
 
How Negroes Got into Unions
How the Negroes got into industry and the unions is
essential to an understanding of where they are today. Prior to World
War I the rapidly expanding steel centers of the North relied on
immigrants from Europe for an ever-increasing supply of cheap labor.
Negro labor was concentrated in the South, particularly in the
Birmingham region. The war shut off immigration and subsequent
restrictive legislation dried up that source of supply.
The steel industry then turned to the South for its cheap labor
supply, recruiting thousands of Negroes for its northern mills. In the
two decades from World War I to the launching of the CIO, Negro labor
in basic steel more than tripled. In the 30’s between forty and fifty
thousand Negroes were employed in basic steel production. This was a
factor to be reckoned with in the calculations of the CIO leaders. It
would have been impossible to organize basic steel without tacit
support from the Negro labor force.
Very few Negroes were employed in the automobile industry prior to
World War I. The 1910 census figures show only 569 Negroes in a total
labor force of 105,759 automobile workers. An acute labor shortage
during the war attracted thousands of southerners, white and colored,
to the automobile industry center in Detroit. This mushrooming industry
continued to absorb Negro labor so that by the middle 30’s between
twenty and thirty thousand Negroes were employed in auto plants.
An additional factor that made the race question a key issue in the
organization of auto was the Ford Motor Company’s potent bid for the
sympathy and support of Detroit’s Negro community. Ford made a practice
of hiring Negroes to the extent of 10% of his labor force. These jobs
were distributed primarily through Negro ministers who in turn were
expected to bolster the ferocious anti-union policy of the Ford Motor
Company and deliver the Negro vote to Harry Bennett, head of the
notorious Ford Service Department. Although Ford rarely departed from
the accepted racial occupation pattern of confining Negroes to the
dirtiest, heaviest and most dangerous jobs, the fact that he hired so
many colored workers established his reputation as a “friend” of the
Negro. He tried to use this reputation to the very last to prevent
organization but failed. By the time the UAW leadership tackled Ford,
it had already demonstrated in action its adherence to the CIO policy
of non-discrimination and thereby gained the active support of
prominent Negro spokesmen who played an important role in critical
stages of the 1941 strike which brought Ford into the UAW fold.
 
Basic Racial Patterns Unchanged
Although the CIO has organized Negro workers without
discrimination, it has done little to alter the racial occupation
patterns imposed by capitalist operation. Unionization found the
Negroes concentrated in the heaviest, dirtiest, most dangerous and
poorest paying jobs. By and large, that is where they remain. This is
true of steel, auto, mining, textile, tobacco, etc. The Negro is
unskilled, semi-skilled, common laborer, while the white is mechanic,
machine-tender, skilled maintenance and white-collar worker.
The persistence of this inequality must in large measure be laid at
the door of the CIO leadership. Negroes were able to penetrate industry
in large number only during periods of acute labor shortage. It is in
such periods that the greatest advances can be made. The CIO organized
the Negro worker without discrimination but neglected to take advantage
of the wartime opportunity for eradicating the discriminatory
employment practices of the bosses. The wartime policy of national
unity, equality of sacrifice and the no-strike pledge left employers
free to exercise discriminatory practices in the field of hiring,
transfer and promotion.
Most union agreements in the mass production industries contain
departmental or occupational seniority clauses. Plant seniority clauses
are very rare. While department seniority protects the Negro worker in
case of layoffs within the department, it makes no provision for
upgrading or promotion to more desirable or higher paying jobs in other
departments. This tends to freeze Negro workers in the least desirable
departments.
The wartime labor shortage provided CIO leaders with their greatest
opportunity to lead Negro workers out of this blind alley. Despite the
acute shortage many employers refused to hire Negroes, others persisted
in maintaining the traditional racial occupation pattern of industry
while a few made token moves infringing on this pattern by upgrading
Negroes to hitherto all-white departments. To the credit of many
national and local CIO leaders it must be said that in the latter case
they moved with vigor to quell any Jim Crow strikes or demonstrations
designed to exclude Negro workers. Usually a threat of drastic
disciplinary action was enough to send the “rebels” back to work.
 
Negroes Took the Initiative
Where the employer took the initiative or could be
induced to hire or upgrade Negroes into all-white departments the CIO
threw the support of the union, if necessary, to make it stick. But
such cases were rare. In the over-all struggle for equal opportunity of
employment the Negroes themselves took the initiative through the
March-On-Washington Movement. This promising movement proposed to
substitute mass action for ineffective pleas, petitions and pious
wishes. With active support from the CIO it would have been invincible.
But the CIO leaders remained aloof. They were unalterably committed to
a policy of collaboration with the Roosevelt administration and would
do nothing to embarrass their “friend” in Washington.
However, the mere threat of a nation-wide march on Washington
sufficed to compel Roosevelt to issue the executive order establishing
the Fair Employment Practices Committee. Inadequate as it was, the FEPC
represented the greatest concession wrested from the government in the
struggle for Negro rights during the war. It demonstrated the
superiority of militant methods of struggle over the moral preachments,
appeals to patriotism, legislative lobbying and “education” practiced
by the liberals and labor leaders.
Bolstered by the FFPC, the Negroes made some notable advances during
the war. The number of Negroes employed in industry increased. Jobs
hitherto reserved to whites were opened up to Negro workers. These
gains were most marked in the section of industry organized by the CIO.
But the number of Negroes who succeeded in breaching the Jim Crow
occupation pattern was too small to make any appreciable alteration in
the basic pattern. Today the racial occupation pattern remains
essentially what it was before the war.
Meanwhile, the presence of Negro members in significant numbers,
their active participation in union affairs plus the exigencies of
internal union politics has made them an important factor in the key
unions of the CIO. In most steel locals, for example, Negroes function
as officials, executive board members, stewards, committeemen, etc. The
same is true in auto and other CIO unions with substantial Negro
membership. It is above the local level, however, where the top brass
is further removed from direct contact with the ranks, that Jim Crow
rears its ugly head.

 
The “Jim Crow in Reverse” Argument
While a Negro is usually appointed in each district of
the steel union, it is the practice to assign him a special department
where his duties do not bring him into direct contact with the employer
as a representative of the national organization. In the UAW repeated
demands have been made for Negro representation on the International
Executive Board. The Board is composed of regional directors and
executive officers who represent the national organization in
negotiations and disputes with the corporations.
The demand for Negro representation has been met by Reuther and his
close associates with the charge that this constitutes “Jim Crow in
reverse.” The specious argument is made that advancement to top union
positions must be made solely on the basis of “ability.” This is
poppycock. There are Negro leaders in the UAW as able as any now
occupying top positions in the union. Underlying the “Jim Crow in
reverse” argument is an unwarranted concession to white chauvinism.
This concession to prejudice sterns from the pattern adopted by the
United Mine Workers Union in organizing the coal miners of the deep
South. In setting up mixed locals in which Negroes constituted a
majority, it was arranged for the president to be a white and the
vice-president a Negro. The president was the official who represented
the men in meetings with the employers. By this system, corporation
executives were spared an affront to their Jim Crow prejudices.
When the UMW organized steel the same system was adopted for the
mixed locals of the South and extended into the North—with harmful
consequences. Prejudiced white workers are quick to sense the attitude
of the leaders. Supervisory personnel are emboldened to practice
discrimination in a hundred insidious and devious ways. Rising
unemployment sharpens the competition for jobs. Exacerbated friction
can lead to dangerous explosions. The complacent attitude of
International Presidents like Reuther and Murray who feel they have
discharged their obligation by giving lip service to the struggle for
Negro equality and by using a few Negroes as window-dressing to display
their “good will” acts as a spur to chauvinism. At this juncture, Negro
representation on leading bodies of CIO unions—and not for show-case
purposes—is the minimum required to demonstrate the seriousness of
union leaders in the struggle against industrial Jim Crow.
 
In the Taft-Hartley Era
Labor is now living in the Taft-Hartley era. The
business unionism of Gompers and Green and the mossbacks of the AFL
Executive Council is a relic of the past.. Every major struggle
involves the unions in conflict with the government which functions as
the executive agency of the capitalist ruling class. Politics has
become a life and death matter for the unions. And the Negro question
is, above all, a political question. If the union leaders were unaware
of it before, the so-called Republican-Dixiecrat coalition has forcibly
reminded them of the fact.
The CIO campaign to organize the South ran smack into the Negro
question in all its political and social ramifications. Lacking a
correct policy on this crucial problem, the drive has bogged down. The
Southern drive was undertaken with a view toward breaking the political
monopoly of the Dixiecrats by exerting the pressure of organized labor
on the Democratic Party. The Southern Negro is extremely sympathetic
toward the CIO. But he is disfranchised, along with a large proportion
of white workers, and in addition is subjected to an atmosphere of
intimidation and terror. A policy based on an appeal to support “good”
Democrats against “bad” Democrats cannot arouse much hope or
enthusiasm. For in the South, even the “best” of the liberal Democrats,
as witness the campaign pronouncements of a Claude Pepper, are Jim Crow
practitioners.
The Republican-Dixiecrat coalition is a political fusion of northern
capital and southern demagogy. Northern capital bolsters Southern
reaction. Southern reaction upholds Taft-Hartleyism. As long as labor
adheres to the fraudulent two-party system, monopoly capital can’t
lose. To organize the South while supporting the Democratic Party is a
more formidable task than Hercules faced in cleaning the Augean
stables. And Philip Murray is no Hercules!
 
Education, Organization, Leadership
The CIO top brass is fond of emphasizing that Jim Crow
will be conquered through education, organization and leadership. That
is true in the abstract. But the heart of the question is, what sort of
education, what type of organization and what kind of leadership?
In steel, the Murray machine initiated an educational campaign
through the establishment of a Civil Rights Committee. The committee
calls various conferences to promote ... Truman’s civil rights program.
The emphasis at these conferences is on legislative lobbying, letter
writing and CIO-PAC types of political action. The sum total of
Murray’s educational program consists in covering up and whitewashing
the Truman administration’s failure to deliver on its election promises
and drumming up support for the election of Trumanite Democrats next
fall. This sort of “education” is worse than useless.
Effective education in the struggle against Jim Crow must lay bare
the real function of racial discrimination, must expose its capitalist class
character and the role it plays in dividing and weakening the working
class in its struggles for emancipation from exploitation and wage
slavery.
Effective organization must be based on the recognition of the class
division in capitalist society, the knowledge that Democrats and
Republicans alike represent the interests of the ruling capitalist
class, and the necessity for an independent working class party to
carry forward the struggle of exploited labor, black and white.
Effective leadership can be provided only by those who recognize the
revolutionary implications of the struggle for Negro equality and are
prepared to lead such a struggle to the very end.
The entrance of Negroes into industry during the first World War
coincided with the beginning of the decline of capitalism as a world
system. Encompassing a brief span of 30 odd years this period has been
marked by major convulsions: wars, depression, colonial revolts and
socialist revolutions. It required a major split in the American labor
movement and the tumultuous rise of the CIO before Negroes gained
admission to the unions on a near-equal basis. The same period
witnessed a gigantic growth of union membership to some 16,000,000
strong. These tremendous historical events are a harbinger of what is
to come.
Taft-Hartleyism and Jim Crow are twins. Decaying capitalism, which
exudes the poison of racial discrimination from every pore, is bent on
using its political monopoly to destroy the labor movement. Necessity
will drive the American working class onto the political arena to
engage the enemy in mortal combat. They will learn the truth enunciated
by Marx: Labor with a white skin cannot emancipate itself where labor
with a black skin is branded. Working class solidarity, fertilized in
the womb of the CIO, will see its fruition in the conquest of political
power and the establishment of a workers and farmers government. The
death knell of Jim Crow will have sounded!



By a vote of 589 to 287, a regular membership meeting of the CIO National Maritime Union rejected a proposal of the Stalinist-controlled National Council to make available “the full resources” of the union to secure the release of Secretary Ferdinand Smith, held on Ellis Island for deportation as an “undesirable alien.” The proposal to support Smith was submitted by N.Y. Port Agent, Paul Pallazi, as part of a “package” which included a number of other propositions. This has been a customary Stalinist practice in the NMU. A number of proposals are lumped together in one package and presented on a take it or leave it basis. By this device, members who favor one proposal are compelled to vote for others with which they disagree. But this time the device backfired. The whole package was rejected by a vote of two to one.
The Stalinists have made the Smith case a factional issue in the fierce internal struggle. Included in the Palazzi “package” for example, were a number of proposals of an outright factional character. Under the circumstances even those who were in favor of voting support
to Smith, despite their opposition to the Stalinists, were unable to do so. If the Stalinists persist in their course Smith will become a pawn in the internal struggle for power in the union. In that case the broader issues will become submerged to the detriment of the fight against political persecution and government interference in the internal affairs of the unions.
 
Curran Statement
The issue of defending Smith against government persecution has been mixed up with the question of his status as an official of the union. A statement issued by NMU President Joseph Curran urging non-support lays primary stress on the charge that Smith holds office “illegally.” The Stalinists are charged with conspiring to keep him in office in violation of the union constitution which provides that officers must be citizens or have proof of having filed legal intention of becoming a citizen.
This dispute dates back to the year 1944. Ferdinand Smith was on an election tour of the country for Roosevelt when the N.Y. World Telegram published the fact that he was a non-citizen. The matter was taken up by the national officers of the union and Smith resigned his office of National Secretary. He made a trip by ship to Mexico to establish legal entry as part of the process of getting his citizenship papers.
Upon his return he claimed to have complied with the constitutional requirement of filing intention to become a citizen. He ran for office in a special election and was re-elected. Since that time Curran has repeatedly charged that Smith was in office illegally. Curran repeated the charge in his report to the NMU convention in the fall of 1947. The officers-reports committee contends that Smith refused to submit evidence of constitutional compliance when questioned at that time.
One of the charges on which Smith is being held for deportation is “illegal entry.” The Stalinists maintain that he has complied with the law and they have announced their intention of running him as a candidate for re-election this summer. The whole case is fouled up in a maze of technicalities around the phrase “legal entry,” and “legally filing intention to become a citizen.”
 
Two Questions
There are actually two separate questions involved. One is whether Smith holds office in violation of the union constitution. That is strictly an internal question that must be decided only by the membership on the basis of the laws of the union. The other is the question of government persecution of political opponents. To mix the two can only serve the purpose of confusion.
The Stalinists are now singled out for persecution by the government because they are the most vulnerable and discredited section of the labor movement. As long as they preached the Stalin line of national unity, labor-management co-operation and the permanent no-strike pledge the Stalinists were tolerated and even encouraged. Now that the Kremlin’s line has changed they bear the brunt of the attack by the strikebreaking Truman administration.
But it would be a fatal mistake for union militants to become blinded by their justifiable hatred of the Stalinist zig-zag artists. If the government is permitted to establish a precedent without serious challenge the entire labor movement will suffer.
The deportation delirium unleashed by U.S. Attorney Genera! Palmer after World War I led immediately and directly to the smashing of the maritime unions, by the government in 1921. The Palmer “red raids” ushered in the period of the open shop and the company union. The present deportation drive coupled with the union-busting Taft-Hartley Act aims to achieve the same purpose.
 



MARITIME: A Historical Sketch and A Workers’ Program
By Frederick J. Lang
Published for the Socialist Workers Party by Pioneer Publishers, New York, 1943. 171 pages. Paper $1
In the short space of time since this book went to press, its major conclusions have received new confirmation by the revelations in the US Senate of some of the facts concerning the shipowners’ and shipbuilders’ feeding at the public trough in World War II. Although this Senatorial debate took place after the publication of this book, the superiority of the Marxist method of the author is shown by the fact that this book anticipates in all essentials the facts since revealed and, indeed, provides the background and analysis for understanding them.
Packed within the 171 pages of this book is a wealth of documented material on the class relation of the government to labor and capital in one important industry in the United States. The fusion of monopoly capitalism with the state has gone further in the maritime industry than it has in other fields, but the same development is being tremendously accelerated in all the “key” industries. The worker no longer confronts the individual employer in a dispute, nor even an association of employers in a particular industry. What he faces in addition is the “state,” that “apparatus of repression of one class by another” which guarantees the continued existence of the profit system.
This role of “government” is carefully sketched by Lang from the early days of the maritime industry until today. Long after the operators of the shipping industry had demonstrated their complete inability to develop a merchant marine worthy of the name, the government kept pouring millions of dollars of public funds into the coffers of the “shipowners” in order to keep up the pretense of “private initiative.” Following the last war, a Senate investigation of the shipping industry revealed so monstrous a plundering of the public treasury that the more “respectable” of the robber barons were “shocked.” This financial scandal completely discredited the US Shipping Board, forerunner of the present Maritime Commission, and hastened its demise.
The root of the evil was held to be the indirect, or mail subsidy. In 1936 a Merchant Marine Act was adopted, which substituted the “direct” for the “indirect” subsidy. Those who framed the law declared that they did so with an eye toward preventing a repetition of the Shipping Board scandal. The Maritime Commission was the agency created to administer the law.
 
The Latest Revelations
How successful they were in their avowed purpose is revealed by the recent debate in the Senate – in March – over the question of confirming the renomination by President Roosevelt of Admiral Land as chairman of the Maritime Commission. Opposition developed in the Senate led by Senator Aiken of Vermont.
Senator Aiken’s opposition expressed the fear that repetition of the Shipping Board scandals, multiplied and extended to other industries, would tend to discredit the entire capitalist ruling class. This is indicated when in the course of his speech in the Senate he says:
“Government spending to promote United States shipping, I regret to say, undoubtedly comprises some of the most unsavory pages in our history of Government expenditures. Many of the present members of the Senate are conversant with the nauseating revelations brought forth by the Black senatorial committee a few years ago. I fear that the conditions which exist at this time are even worse than those which prevailed at the time when the Senate created the Black committee.”
Senator Aiken submitted charges against the Maritime Commission which were supported by voluminous evidence supplied by the office of the Comptroller General. Substantially, the evidence proved that the Maritime Commission was emulating its predecessor. With this important difference – while Shipping Board expenditures during World War I totalled a mere three billions of dollars, appropriations for expenditure by the Maritime Commission already total over nineteen billions of dollars. Not a bad banquet in these days of rationing!
And who would be sitting in dispensing the choice cuts? We’ll let Senator Aiken tell us:
“I am informed by the Comptroller General that a number of officials of various steamship companies and of a large steel company have been or are now employed by the War Shipping Administration in rate-making and policy-making positions. Is it any wonder that the Maritime Commission and War Shipping Administration functions appear to be operating as much, it not more, for the benefit of private interests as they are in the interests of the public?”
Senator Aiken then expresses “alarm” at the probable reaction of the people when they learn the truth about the fraudulent “equality of sacrifice” hoax.
“If this policy of the Maritime Commission,” remarked Aiken, “so patently designed to relieve a single group from payment of taxes and moneys due the United States Government, were the only instance of its kind, I should not be so alarmed for the future of my country; but what I have stated applies to only a single factor of a single department of the government. Probably it could be multiplied many times.”
The Pacific Shipper (April 12, 1943) multiplied it at least once in an editorial protesting publicity given the “modest” profits of the shipowners, and saying, “future historians should note how much fuss has been raised over shipping profits in the Red Sea trade, running into millions, and how little over the wartime profits of the railroads, running into billions.”
The attitude of the majority of the Senate was best expressed by Senator Bailey, chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, the committee which acts on all important matters concerning the merchant marine.
In reply to the charges brought by Aiken, he said:
“I believe there still remains in the constitution the fifth amendment which says a man’s property cannot be taken without paying him just compensation. I sometimes think we forget that that amendment is in the constitution, but when I say my prayers at night, if I am feeling very blue, I sometimes thank God for the fifth amendment, and remind myself that it is still in effect. We can take it away in a moment by action based on foolish thinking, and by appeals against profits, and by an attitude of envy of men who do well. I will have no part in it. I am in favor of just compensation because – well, because it is God’s justice to begin with, and it is provided for in the constitution, which I would support even if I were not sworn to support it.”
In the same debate, Senator Clark (Missouri) made the following comment referring to vessels subsidized by the government:
“The government put up the money to build the ships. The government put up the money to operate the ships.”
The question arises: Just who is being compensated for whose property? Shipyards are constructed at government expense. In these shipyards, ships are built with public funds. The completed ships are turned over to private operators and the government pays for their operation. The government insures the vessels with public funds. The operators are then guaranteed a fat profit for the operation of the vessels and the government further provides that a major part of this profit can be set aside in tax free reserve fund, to be divided up at a more opportune moment, or to be used to “purchase” the government-owned ships at bargain prices after the war. Such has been the attitude of “government” toward the shipowners for many years. It is not surprising that the author of Maritime uses quotation marks around the word “shipowners” when he refers to this class of parasites. And what is true of maritime can, as Senator Aiken remarks, “be multiplied many times.” The Senate voted 70 to 5 to approve the policy of the Maritime Commission and refused to sanction an investigation of Aiken’s serious charges.
 
The Story of Maritime Labor
In sharp contrast to the government’s paternal attitude toward the profit system, is its attitude toward maritime labor. This book traces in detail the rich experience of the seamen with government “paternalism.” Whenever the seamen were atomized, as they were after the US Shipping Board had smashed their unions in 1921, the government maintained a hands-off policy. But when the seamen had regrouped their ranks and organized into strong unions, the government became very much concerned about their “welfare.” With the termination of the 1936-37 strike it became apparent that the private operators were no longer able to “discipline” the organized seamen. Government then intensified its active intervention on behalf of the shipowners. With the outbreak of World War II, and particularly with the entry of the United States after Pearl Harbor, the seamen were confronted with the apparatus of government in every aspect of their activity. The shipowners left their “private” desks and flocked to Washington to occupy “government” desks in the offices of the Maritime Commission and the War Shipping Administration. Nineteen billion dollars makes plenty of fat and while putting it on in thick layers they found time to strip some from the bones of the seamen.
A considerable section of this book deals with the question of union leadership. Two main divergent tendencies developed in the maritime unions – the “anti-politicals” and the Stalinists. Functioning as agents of the foreign office of the Kremlin, the Stalinists adapted their policies to the exigencies of Stalin’s line. With slight variations, they followed every zig-zag along with their compatriots in other sections of the trade union movement. Lang describes this process in great detail. The “anti-politicals” abjured “politics” for pure and simple trade unionism tempered with a healthy distrust of government intervention.
With the outbreak of war, fighting the government became unpopular. Along with other sections of the labor movement the maritime leaders gave up the right to strike “for the duration.” It would be, difficult to get an adequate definition of the phrase “for the duration” from those who entered into such agreements with the government. Does it mean until the present phase of the war is terminated? Does it mean until the government officially declares the war at an end? Or does it mean as long as the “emergency” lasts? In view of the fact that the phrase is always used in the most general sense, it might be profitable to probe the matter a little more deeply.
The “anti-politicals” – leading the Seafarers International Union and its West Coast affiliate, the Sailors Union of the Pacific – hope to maintain the independence of their unions throughout the war by giving political support to the government and by maneuvering with the government apparatus. They believe that they can thereby preserve the integrity of their unions during the war so that “after the war” the struggle with the shipowners can be resumed where they left off when war began. This policy has led to a continuous series of retreats that have weakened the union, and strengthened the government apparatus of repression. The government knows what it wants and is determined to achieve its goal. That goal is the elimination of the independence of the unions, i.e., their integration into the government apparatus or the destruction of all union organization in the industry. Because of the existence of a number of factors which makes it almost impossible to achieve a central leadership of the seamen, the latter is the more likely variant. Considering its future perspective in world affairs, American imperialism cannot tolerate the existence of independent unions in the maritime industry.
American imperialism has set for itself the task of dominating the world market. Only the markets of the world can provide an outlet for the tremendous productive capacity of American industry. Of equal importance is the necessity of making every nook and cranny of the entire world available for the export of American capital. With the termination of the present phase of the war, the rivalry between the erstwhile “partners” in the United Nations bloc will develop into major conflicts. Already, with just a hint of a victorious conclusion to the present phase of the military struggle, ominous disagreements develop beneath the surface of a fictitious unanimity. Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox, announces that the United States is building a “seven ocean navy” and is seeking bases all over the world. Military administrators are being trained to rule in territories occupied by the armed forces. The existence of world capitalism literally rests upon the armed might of American imperialism. There will be no “peace” for the peoples of the world under a social system in the last stages of disintegration and decay. Two world wars in one generation is eloquent testimony to the permanent crisis of world capitalism.
If World War II is but the continuation of World War I, then the “post-war” world under capitalism will be an armed camp between battles. With this vista before us, giving up the right to strike “for the duration” can only mean the surrender of that right for as long as American imperialism endures. We can be sure that is the definition the ruling class applies to the phrase “for the duration.” The seamen have an historical example to go by. In World War I, the British seamen gave up their right to strike “for the duration of the war.” They never regained that right. For, after the termination of armed hostilities on the European continent, British imperialism was compelled to carry the war to a far-flung colonial empire. Armed intervention against the Soviet Union protracted the “period of emergency.” In the US the “period of emergency” terminated with the smashing of the seamen’s unions by the government. With the colossal task that confronts American imperialism of trying to keep an entire planet in subjection the “period of emergency” can only terminate with either the crushing of the working class or the elimination of the system that breeds wars.
It is sheer folly for the anti-politicals to imagine that “after the war” the weapons which they now surrender will be returned. Nor is it any the less foolish to fail to utilize other weapons that are available. What some of these are is presented in the form of a program of action in the concluding chapter of Maritime. The methods of pure and simple trade unionism are hopelessly outdated. Every struggle, even for the most elementary demands, finds the workers confronted with the government sitting as the executive committee of the ruling class. Every struggle is immediately transformed into a political struggle. To refuse to recognize this fact and draw the proper conclusions is to invite disaster.
Frederick Lang’s Maritime will serve as a model of the practical application of Marxist theory to the problems of the day. As such it is required reading for all students of the labor movement as well as for all seamen, who will find in it a veritable mine of material on the maritime industry. Pioneer Publishers is to be congratulated for having added Maritime to its list of publications.
 



 The following is an excerpt from Tom Kerry’s answer to an article by David Fender entitled Remarks on the Antiwar Movement, which appeared in Discussion Bulletin, Vol. 26 No. 9, October 1967.
*   *   *
Just what is the character of the formation that has arisen in the course of development of the antiwar movement and what is our relation to it? It can be said at the outset that even if we grant there is nothing unique about some aspects of the antiwar movement, the formation itself is decidedly unique; i.e., nothing like it has been seen before in this country. When comrades cast about to find some analogous experience in the history of the party they find none to serve as a secure mooring upon which to anchor our tactical approach.
Obviously, the so-called “classical” form under which the united front tactic was applied in the past does not appear relevant to the existent formation. If not a united front then what is it? A coalition, a bloc, an alliance, a confederation, or some combination of these, just what is it? Unfortunately, like with some other things, language does not keep pace with the historical development. There just is no new word, that I know of, to adequately define this new phenomenon, it would certainly simplify matters if there were, terminology-wise (in Madison Avenue jargon) if not otherwise.
For the simon-pure sectarian this poses no problem. Looking back in history, he “discovers” that the united front tactic as projected by the Bolsheviks was intended to apply to agreements between mass organizations. Finding no replica of the past in present day reality he washes his hands of the whole mess and takes refuge in the limbo of infantile leftism there to await the day when history finally catches up with doctrinaire prescription. A prime example of this type of sectarian approach is Gerry Healy, general secretary of the British Socialist Labour League.
Writing a series of two lengthy articles in The Newsletter, Jan. 7 and Feb. 11, 1967, under the general title: The Real Meaning of the United Front, Healy explains why the SLL will have no part of any “united front” antiwar movement in Great Britain. “The united front tactic,” he affirms, “was developed in order to deal with a situation where you had a mass communist party and a mass reformist organization,” Here we have stated the alleged “classical” formula for the united front tactic. (I say “alleged” because it is an extremely oversimplified definition, but let it pass for the moment.)
Healy then proceeds to elaborate on this theme. The united front, he avers, “was essentially conceived of as a tactic governing relations between mass organizations and not groups or small parties who did not represent the mass of the working class,” As the Labor Party, which includes the trade unions, is the only mass working class organization in Great Britain, you can readily see how this effectively rules out any “united front” antiwar action. A rather dreary outlook. But hold, there is yet hope! In a second article in The Newsletter, under the title: How NOT to Defend the Vietnamese Revolution, (a very appropriate title, I thought) Healy offers a straw to cling to:
“If,” he blandly assures his constituents, “the Socialist Labour League was a mass organization it would endeavour to involve the Labour Party in a joint campaign against the war in Vietnam, but this is not the case.”
And in the meantime?
“The Socialist Labour League,” he concludes, “is, therefore, forced to confine itself to a propaganda political preparation for the struggle in defence of the Vietnamese people.”
If everyone will just be patient enough to mark time until Healy’s SLL develops into a mass communist party so that he could then enter into a united front pact with the mass reformist Labor Party the whole problem will be neatly solved. What tripe! We expect the Vietnam war to go on for a long time – but not THAT long!
Meanwhile, the British working class is not reconciled to waiting for Healy’s “mass communist party” to materialize. Their impatience was expressed at the recent Labor Party conference, voting a resolution, 2,752,000 to 2,633,000, calling upon the Labor Government to “dissociate itself completely,” from U.S. policy in Vietnam. The N.Y. Times, Oct. 7, reports that:
“The audience cheered a number of highly critical speeches on Vietnam. Alan Campbell McLean, a Scottish delegate, compared the United States action in Vietnam to the German bombing of Stalingrad in World War II. He said that American troops had ‘no legal or political or moral right’ to be in Vietnam.”
The vote is indicative, but not truly representative of the feelings of the British working class who, in their overwhelming number support the sentiment expressed by the majority resolution voted by their representatives at the Labor Party conference. This is good so far as it goes. True, it is no substitute for effective action. But it does present the antiwar forces in Great Britain with an opening to press for implementing actions by the trade unions and Labor Party constituency groups. And it is at least one thousand times more effective “propaganda” than all of Healy’s ultraleftist gibberish.
Healy’s defense of the “classical” form of the united front against “revisionist” corruption is a prime expression of the tendency of infantile leftism to use the cover of “Marxist nomenclature” to cloak a policy of abstention from the real struggle. Or, as Lenin put it: “The surest way of discrediting and damaging a new political (and not only political) idea is to reduce it to absurdity on the plea of defending it.” This is precisely what Healy does to the idea of the United Front.
Let us examine the idea of the united front from the viewpoint of “terminology” or “nomenclature” if you will. It may come as a surprise to many comrades to learn that the “nomenclature” came some time after the idea had been long in practice. In a speech to the Executive Committee of the Communist International held in November 1922, Zinoviev pointed out that: “The slogan of the United Front [was] first formulated by our Executive in December 1921,” when a united front campaign was launched on an international scale.
The theses on the united front were formally adopted by the Fourth Congress of the Comintern. (Comrades will find the text of the theses, which were drafted by Trotsky for consideration by the Feb. 1922 plenum of the ECCI, on page 91 in volume 2 of The First Five Years of the Communist International.) But, as pointed out above, the idea of the united front had been part of the tactical arsenal of Bolshevism for some time before.
Lenin’s important treatise on communist (Bolshevik) tactics, Left Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder, published in 1920, never once employs the term, united front. Yet, in this classical polemic against the disease of ultraleftism, is contained a rich exposition of the united front idea as applied throughout the whole history of Bolshevism dating back to its very inception at the turn of the century. Consistent with his whole method, Lenin pinpoints those social, class and political divisions which capitalism engenders, which make necessary the application of the united front tactic, although he does not call it that:
“Capitalism would not be capitalism if the ‘pure’ proletariat were not surrounded by a large number of exceedingly motley types intermediate between the proletarian and the semiproletarian (who earns his livelihood in part by the sale of his labor power), between the semiproletarian and the small peasant (and petty artisan, handicraft worker and small master in general), between the small peasant and the middle peasant, and so on, and if the proletariat itself were not divided into more developed and less developed strata, if it were not divided according to territorial origin, trade, sometimes according to religion, and so on. And from all this fol1ow the necessity, the absolute necessity, for the vanguard of the proletariat, for its class-conscious section, for the Communist Party, to resort to manoeuvres, agreements and compromises with the various groups of proletarians, with the various parties of the workers and small masters.
“The whole point lies in knowing how to apply these tactics in order to raise, and not lower, the general level of proletarian class consciousness, revolutionary spirit, and ability to fight and win, Incidentally, it should be noted that the victory of the Bolsheviks over the Mensheviks demanded the tactics of manoeuvres, agreements and compromises not only before but also after the October Revolution of 1917, but such manoeuvres and compromises, of course, as would assist, accelerate, consolidate and strengthen the Bolsheviks at the expense of the Mensheviks. The petty-bourgeois democrats (including the Mensheviks) inevitably vacillate between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, between bourgeois democracy and the Soviet system, between reformism and revolutionism, between love-for-the-workers and fear of the proletarian dictatorship, etc. The proper tactics for the Communists must be to utilize these vacillations, not to ignore them; and utilizing them calls for concessions to those elements which are turning toward the proletariat—whenever and to the extent that they turn towards the proletariat- in addition to fighting those who turn toward the bourgeoisie. The result of the application of correct tactics is that Menshevism has disintegrated, and is disintegrating more and more in our country, that the stubbornly opportunist leaders are being isolated and that the best elements among the petty-bourgeois democrats are being brought into our camp.” (All emphasis by author.)
In another section, Lenin declares that:
“the whole history of Bolshevism, both before and after the October Revolution, is full of instances of manoeuvring, making agreements and compromises with other parties, bourgeois parties included.
“To carry on a war for the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie, a war which is a hundred times more difficult, protracted and complicated than the most stubborn of ordinary wars between states, and to refuse beforehand to manoeuvre, to utilize the conflict of interests (even though temporary) among one’s enemies, to refuse to agree and compromise with possible (even though temporary, unstable, vacillating and conditional) allies is not this ridiculous in the extreme?” (Emphasis by author.)
Lenin uses the terms bloc, alliance, agreements, etc., interchangeably throughout his work, in content synonymous with the tactic of the united front, though the latter term had not yet come into common usage. And nowhere does he suggest that the tactic was intended to apply only where there existed rival mass communist and mass reformist parties. In fact, prior to 1917, there were no such mass formations in Russia. Further, even in the early 1920’s, after the first spontaneous revolutionary surge in Western Europe failed to conquer power and the Comintern, under the prodding of Lenin and Trotsky, was constrained to sound the call for a temporary retreat, such mass formations existed in only a few countries.
Yet, when the Comintern launched its campaign for application of the united front tactic, it was specifically designated as an “international campaign.” For example, in the above mentioned speech by Zinoviev to the Nov. 22, 1922 meeting of the ECCI, he declared: “The United Front was really the first international campaign which the International attempted on a large scale.” As such it was to be applied in consonance with the relationship of forces in each country, taking all subjective and objective factors into consideration.
Tactics are always concrete. Or, as Lenin observes in his work on “Left Wing” Communism: “Tactics must be based on a sober and strictly objective appraisal of all the class forces of the particular state (and of the states surrounding it, and of all states the world over) as well as of the experience of revolutionary movements.” (Emphasis in original.)
So much for Healyite historiography. To return for a moment to our young critic from afar. He is upset no end about the interchangeable application of the terms “coalition, united front and bloc,” and what is worse, of “even combining them – ‘broad united front type coalition’ (!).” (The parenthetical bang is his, not mine.) He considers it highly improper to take such liberties with “traditional” Marxist nomenclature. The word “coalition,” we are scolded, is “traditionally” applied exclusively to “coalition politics.” Does this mean that we are no longer opposed to coalition politics? Or as he puts it with another of his loaded “questions”: “Is it still proper for us to denounce coalition politics?” Off hand, I would say yes, it is. For, if memory serves me, it seems that The Militant does just that in almost every issue and no one, to my knowledge, has yet registered an objection.
Where is it written that the word “coalition” must be expunged from our political lexicon unless it applies exclusively to “coalition politics?” Why this ritual genuflection to linguistic dogma? According to my copy of Webster’s Collegiate dictionary, the word coalition is defined as, “a temporary alliance for joint action.” The same can be said of our “traditional concept,” the united front. It seems to me that the word “coalition” as defined by Webster, an acknowledged authority on such matters, is quite appropriate.
I am afraid that our critic suffers from the affliction that Trotsky once diagnosed as “philological scholasticism.” What a dismal method, this juggling of words, this twisting and distorting of words, phrases and sentences to laboriously set up spurious straw men to serve as a substitute target for the real thing; this use of the loaded question which is no real question but is designed to absolve the questioner of responsibility for an affirmative statement; etc., etc., etc. And all in the name of “clarity, precision and firmness.”
Which of these terms shall we employ in defining our tactic within the antiwar movement? Any and all, either separately or in combination, interchangeably or together, so long as we are certain that our objective appraisal of the phenomenon is correct. The forms it assumes are complex because the movement is unique. There does not exist in this country a mass communist party and a mass reformist party so the so-called “classical” form of the united front tactic obviously does not apply. That is, it is not based on formal agreement between formally constituted organizations, mass or otherwise.
The antiwar formation is composed of diverse organizations, groups and individuals, always shifting, rarely the same, knit together at moments of action in a temporary coalition for a limited objective. After each major action the centrifugal tendency inherent in so heterogeneous a formation threatens to make it fly apart. The cement that holds it together is common opposition to U.S. administration policy in. the Vietnam war. How long it will endure in its present form is anyone’s guess.
Neither of the two “major” contending working class tendencies, Stalinism and Trotskyism, are in a position to establish their unchallenged hegemony over the movement. The organized Social Democrats remain outside and hostile. It is this “stalemate” which permits accidental figures with little or no organization following or support to play so prominent a part in the leadership of the movement. What is amazing about this patchwork formation is that it is held together at all. I believe that the SWP-YSA can claim a large part of the credit for this achievement. For despite the meagerness of our forces, our influence has exercised an important and often a decisive role in holding it together. And I speak of our influence not only in the organization but in the political sense, which is testimony to the correctness of our general line, both as regards slogans advanced, single issue character, and thrust toward massive national demonstration actions in the streets.
And so far as tactics are concerned, it is our concept of the united front tactic that has prevailed, as against those who sought to narrow and cripple the movement by imposing a programmatic character upon it. For when it comes to that question there is no one with whom we can come to agreement outside of a narrow circle of our sympathizers and supporters. The correctness of our line has been abundantly confirmed by experience. There is no reason to alter it in any of its basic essentials- let along throwing it overboard as our philological critic exhorts us to do And I have not a single doubt that we will have the necessary tactical flexibility to meet whatever exigencies may arise in the future.
New York City October 16, 1967
 



In his article, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay, published in the of February 1941, Leon Trotsky shows that
“There is one common feature in the development, or more correctly the degeneration, of modern trade union organizations in the entire world: it is their drawing closely to and growing together with the state power.”
Trotsky further shows that unless the trade unions struggle militantly for their independence from government interference they will suffer the fate of the unions in the fascist countries. Furthermore, if the government succeeds in strangling the unions, the responsibility for the catastrophe will rest solely upon the labor bureaucrats who “do their level best in words and deeds to demonstrate to the ‘democratic’ state how reliable and indispensable they are in peace time and especially in time of war.”
The maritime industries in Great Britain and the United States provide a fertile field for study of this process.
During and after the First World War, the relationship of the maritime industry to British economy made it imperative for the ruling class of Great Britain to insure a docile personnel in the British merchant marine and a servile leadership in the unions; for the transportation system which interlocked the distant possessions and which was the key to Britain’s world strength likewise constituted the point most vulnerable to union pressure. In return for a check-off system through which the shipowners collected 90 per cent of the union dues, the bureaucrats heading the union demonstrated how “reliable and indispensable” they were to the state power. By accepting joint shipowner-union control of the hiring halls and by accepting the Continuous Discharge Book, which acts as a blacklist, they broke the militancy of the British seamen.
In the United States during the last war, contrary to England, most of the foreign trade was carried in foreign bottoms. There was no merchant marine to speak of. Wall Street possessed no large colonial empire as did London to give the merchant marine strategic importance. Nor did the American bourgeoisie as a whole feel it urgent to build a large merchant marine as auxiliary to the war fleet. The “isolationist” outlook, rooted in the exploitation of a rich internal market, had not yet conceded first place to the views of the “interventionists” who for some decades had looked forward to American domination of the world through construction of an invincible sea power. In that period, internal transportation, especially the railroads, had approximately the same relation to American economy that water-borne transportation had to British economy. Therefore it was the railroads that were taken over by the US government. It was the railway unions which suffered imposition of the machinery of collaboration, making it impossible for them to exercise any degree of independence to this day.
In the Second World War, however, American imperialism has taken as its aim the domination (and policing) of the entire world. Today the maritime industry bears the same strategic relationship in maintaining and extending the economic base of American imperialism that it bore for England in the last war. Hence it has become imperative to Wall Street to end the independent role of the maritime unions either indirectly by tying the trade union bureaucracy to the state apparatus, or, failing that, openly by attempting to smash the unions in a head-on assault.
It is true, of course, that the two methods can be combined. Every inch gained through the “appeasement” policy of the trade union bureaucrats places the government in a stronger position for the open collision. So long as the present relationship continues, the Administration naturally favors the velvet glove.
 
The Mechanism of Strangulation
The most important device developed by the British ruling class in drawing the maritime unions into the stranglehold of the state power is the “labor-management-government” board. Prior to the outbreak of World War II, maritime unionists in this country had to rely more or less upon the experience of the British workers for their knowledge’ of the anti-union role played by this device. Upon entry into the war, however, the whole process of labor-management collaboration was greatly speeded up in the United States.
The trade union bureaucrats as a whole have vied with one another in demonstrating how “reliable and indispensable” they are in foisting this collaboration upon the workers. The Stalinists, however, occupy a special position. During the fatal honeymoon with Hitler which paved the way for the attack upon the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, they advanced the slogan, “The Yanks Are Not Coming,” and put up a measure of resistance to the anti-union drive for collaboration. With the attack, however, they switched over in line with Stalin’s foreign policy and today are among the loudest in the chorus for more and more labor-management committees and bigger and better labor-management-government boards.
Harry Bridges, who heads the CIO longshoremen of the West Coast and who has long been known as a wheel-horse of the Stalinists, advanced a “plan” after the switch in the Stalinist line, to establish a government board to assume direction and control of the maritime industry. The Stalinist propaganda machine hailed the “plan” as the work of a creative genius. A “labor-management-government” board was actually established under the “Bridges plan” as it has become known in the industry. Sufficient time has now elapsed to arrive at some conclusions concerning the workings of this board and its role in tightening the government vise upon the maritime unions.
In a speech to the Industrial Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club, April 8, 1942, at San Francisco, Harry Bridges declared:
“The International Longshoremen’s and “Warehousemen’s Union, a large part of which embraces the loading and discharging of practically all ships entering Pacific Coast ports, proposed to its employers and to the government a plan to have the entire longshore industry on the Pacific Coast operated exclusively under the control of a joint management-labor-government board. We devised the program, and, we pushed for its adoption.
“In proposing the establishment of such a board, the union agreed to set aside any and all provisions of its entire collective bargaining contract, if any such provisions or the contract in any way blocked an all-out war effort.” (Our emphasis.) To make clear that he fully recognized the extent of the concessions he proposed, Bridges added:

“It should be remembered that our collective bargaining agreement covering nearly all longshore work on the Pacific Coast, was the result of maritime and general strikes of 1934, and 1936-37, and represented all the gains of our union as a result of those struggles and many negotiations and arbitration procedures.” (Our emphasis.)

The Pacific Coast Maritime Industry Board was established in March 1942. F.P. Foisie, president of the Pacific Coast Waterfront Employers Association and a member of the Board, gave the following account of the character of the Board:
“The Board was set up by administrative order of Admiral Land, under authority of the President’s Executive Order which created the War Shipping Administration. Under this authority, all American owned shipping has been taken over by the Government. Shipping (shore and ship) is in a fair way to follow. “The members of the Board are appointed by and removed at the pleasure of the War Shipping Administration.
“Its authority, as well as appointment, derives from the Government. Because organized labor and organized employers are represented, It partakes of the nature of a tripartite war board. England leads the way for us in setting this pattern.” (Our emphasis.)
The Stalinists may trick the. workers into believing that the “Bridges plan” sprang full-blown from the brow of the Olympian ’Arry, but the bosses are entirely familiar with the origin of the idea and place the credit for “creative genius” where it belongs – with the British ruling class!
 
Shipowners Appoint and Remove
“The members of the Board are appointed by and removed at the pleasure of the War Shipping Administration.” What is the composition of this august body into whose hands such power is given ? At the time of the formation of the Maritime Industry Board, the War Shipping Administration was composed of a majority of $l-a-year men, who prior to their appointment occupied official positions in various shipping com-, panics. We quote from the April 24, 1942 issue of the West Coast Sailor which gives a partial list of the personnel of the WSA:
Admiral Land (Chairman); Wm. Radner, General Counsel (formerly counsel for the Matson Navigation Co.); J.E. Gushing, Pacific Coast representative (formerly president, American-Hawaiian S.S. Co.); A.R. Lintner, representing Seattle area (formerly manager, American Mail Lines); H. Robson, Director General (formerly executive vice-president, United Fruit Co.); Ralph Keating, Director of Allocations and Assignments (formerly United Fruit Co.); M.L. Wilcox, Director of Operations (formerly United Fruit Co.); B. Jennings, Director of Operations (formerly with the Oil Tanker Co.); D.S. Brierly, Director of Maintenance (Maritime Commission “career” man); Dan Ring, Director of Personnel (Maritime Commission “career” man); and Capt. H.L. McKay, Director of Forwarding (US Navy Retired).
(Since this list was compiled a number of changes have been made in the personnel, but the changes were insignificant, as one ex-shipowner was substituted for another.) The WSA then, an aggregation of shipowners and career men, “appoint and remove at their pleasure” the personnel of the Maritime Industry Board. However, in order to further the deception that the Board is an “impartial” body, the WSA appointed two representatives from the union, two from the Waterfront Employers, and an “impartial” chairman, Dean Wayne L. Morse of the University of Oregon. It was to foster the illusion of impartiality that Mr. Foisie remarked: “Because organized labor and organized employers are represented, it partakes of the nature of a tri-partite war board.” Or, a “labor-management-government” board.
 
Board Imposes Speed-Up
When the order creating the Board was made public, Dean Wayne Morse made a speech in which he said: “I want, the country wants, the armed forces have the right to expect, a longshore speedup, and more speedup, and then some more.” Echoing this sentiment, Bridges declared “in this period the unions must be converted into instruments of the speedup.” Thus the function of the Board was clearly defined by the “Government” in the person of Morse, the “impartial” chairman, and by “Labor” in the person of Harry Bridges. As for thel shipowners they responded with a fervent “Amen!”
Has the Board fulfilled the function assigned to it by the “labor-management-government” spokesmen?
When the War Labor Board was established, Dean Wayne Morse was promoted to that Board as a representative of the “Public.” Professor Paul Eliel, who had previously functioned as assistant to Morse, took his place as chairman of the MIB. On June 10, 1942, approximately three months after the MIB was established, the Daily Commercial News (San Francisco) published a statement by Eliel which read in part:
“Longshore output in Pacific Coast docks, spurred on by rulings and findings of the Pacific Coast Maritime Industry Board, has increased at least 10 per cent in the last three months, Professor Paul Eliel, chairman of the board estimated last night. He described the estimate ‘as conservative’ and said much better showings were made in individual cases.”
In an editorial in the Pacific Shipper for July 6, 1942, the following comment appeared:
“Since Pearl Harbor, the Pacific Coast longshoremen have increased loading and discharging speed and efficiency on an average of between 10 and 15 per cent, while records have been set in the handling of individual ships. Considerable responsibility for this increase has been due to the function of the Pacific Coast Maritime Labor Board under the direction of Paul Eliel, professor of economics from Stanford University.”
As both the sources quoted represent the shipowners’ viewpoint, the estimates must be considered conservative. An increase in longshore output means a quicker turn around, less time in port for the ship, and a corresponding increase in profit. The shipowners were all for it!
But it is a peculiar thing about bosses, that war or no war, their appetite for profits is hard to satisfy. On July 13, 1942, just one week after the Pacific Shipper had annnounced an increase in longshore output of between 10 and 15 per cent, Mr. F.P. Foisie, president of the Waterfront Employers Association, made a speech to the Industrial Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, in which he discussed the Maritime Industry Board, its accomplishments and failures. After grudgingly crediting the MIB with speeding up the longshoremen by setting aside provisions of the agreement which presumably “interfered with the war effort,” Mr. Foisie added:
“The bald fact is that the notorious inefficiency of cargo handling in our Pacific Coast ports continues almost unabated. Recent betterments are slight and spotty. Efficiency lost during the past seven years has not been restored. That fact is common knowledge to all concerned.
“No adequate comparison is possible between the handling of commercial cargoes before the war and the war cargoes since. But the restrictive rules in the labor agreement limiting production remain in effect; and proposals to remove them are steadily opposed. The Board guarantees to restore any and all restrictive rules at the end of the war if the Union will abandon them for the duration. The responsibility for this refusal rests squarely on the Union leadership. The argument advanced is that the morale of the men will suffer.
“In addition to restrictive rules, restrictive practices which are fastened on the industry by job-action of the last eight years have also been continued in full vigor. These restrictive practices are evident on much if not most of the work and witnessed daily; feet still drag; loafing is widespread; leaving the job and the dock while on pay is common; early quitting and late starting Is general; use of unnecessary men; the list is long. The facts are evident.
“The longshore members must shoulder the responsibility for these restrictions on the outturn of work. Pay for work not done is hurtful of labor’s own long-range interests. Efforts of union officials to correct these conditions thus far have been futile. The habits are set and those union officials who attempt to impose penalties on their men (except for union offenses) run the risk of being crucified. This loss of control by the union over its wayward members is the result of past teachings of job-action and contract violation. The union seems incapable of disciplining its men and must either pass discipline to the joint control of union and management, or it will become the responsibility of the Maritime Industry Board itself.”
After gratuitously commenting that “A goodly share of the longshoremen, men of character and quality, do excellent work,” Foisie hastens to add,
“but they suffer a steady browbeating on the job from ne’er do wells, a relatively small group who raise all the hell, and make wretched the lives of everybody around them, on the job, in the dispatching hall, and at union meetings. Nothing but the restoration of discipline and discharge – wholly missing from this industry since 1934 – will do the least bit of good.” (Our emphasis.)
“There can be little doubt that reasonable efficiency can be restored and increased only when a measure of discipline is returned to the industry, restrictive practices abandoned, and restrictive rules set aside for the duration. That these will come I have no doubt, tout apparently they will not come until the war needs are brought home to us more vividly. This is the major chore for the Board to undertake, and the time is right.” (Our emphasis.)
For the spokesman of the shipowners, Paradise Lost is dated 1934 AD – Paradise Regained, a return to pre-1934 conditions on the Pacific Coast waterfront. Merely that, and nothing more! And that task Foisie assigns to the Maritime Industry Board when he says: “This is a major chore for the Board to undertake, and the time is right.”
Foisie’s speech received considerable attention in the local capitalist press which featured those sections of his address containing the gist of his complaints against the longshoremen. The response of the “impartial” chairman, Mr. Paul Eliel, was both prompt and immediate. The San Francisco News revealed:
“Mr. Eliel called into conference the other board members – Henry Schmidt and Cole Jackson, representing the ILWU; Mr. Foisie and Frank Gregory, representing the employers – to outline steps to correct conditions and to study disciplinary action. An agreement, he said, probably would be reached within a few days.”
Germain Bulcke, now president of the Longshore Local 1-10 San Francisco, was quoted in an interview with a newspaper reporter:
“Mr. Bulcke said in order to give more weight to penalties, it was decided that they would be imposed by the Maritime Industry Board instead of the union.”
The skids were being greased and the longshoremen were due to take another ride!
The ILWU, Local 1-10 publishes a mimeographed sheet which is called the Longshoremen’s Bulletin. A considerable section of the Bulletin of July 14 is devoted to a discussion of .the; provocative speech made by Foisie on July 13 at the Commonwealth Club. The Bulletin, edited by a Stalinist hack, presents a consistent Stalinist line on all questions. We quote:
Monday night’s meeting opened with the reading of a communication from Paul Eliel, Chairman of the Pacific Coast Maritime Industry Board ...
The communication stated in effect that a thorough discussion had been held with the Board and all Union) officers and that all hands agreed:

“That the time has now arrived where the Board can no longer rely on urging and education as a means of assuring that its orders are carried out. During the past weeks a considerable number of instances have been called to the attention of the Board indicating that some members, at least, of Local 1-10 have neither appreciated the seriousness of the present situation and the necessity of complying with the orders of this Board, nor have they properly assumed their obligations as American citizens.
“As a result, such members of the Local – undoubtedly a small minority – have continued to ignore the Board’s orders and have failed completely to carry out their part of the pledge made by the organization to let no obstacles stand in the way of increased production in ship loading.
“The Board further decided to inaugurate a system of recommending specific penalties in all instances in which the orders of the Board were being ignored or where longshoremen were failing to do their share in carrying out-your organization’s production program.”

In the same issue of the Bulletin, Henry Schmidt, a member of the Board representing the union, in commenting on the above communication, “stated that 99% of the members are behind the Maritime Board’s production plan, and that the small minority provides ammunition for the shipowners to attack the ILWU as a whole.”
What we have here is an American example of the technique employed in England to destroy the independence of the union by transferring the prerogatives of the union membership to the “labor-management-government” board! First the spokesman for the employers charges that, “those union officials who attempt to impose penalties on their men (except for union offenses) run the risk of being crucified,” and that “the union seems incapable of disciplining its men,” and must therefore surrender this right to the “joint control of union and management, or it will become the responsibility of the Maritime Industry Board itself.” (What touching concern the president of the Waterfront Employers Association displays for “those union officials” who “run the risk of being crucified” for disciplining the “wayward members” of the union!)
On the basis of Foisie’s charges a meeting of the Board is hastily called by the “impartial” chairman “to outline steps to correct conditions and to study disciplinary action.” After which a communication is dispatched to the union which “stated in effect that a thorough discussion had been held with the Board and all Union officers and that all hands agreed,” with the substance of Foisie’s contentions and proposals regarding the matter of discipline. It’s as simple as one, two, three!
 
Union Majority Against Board
The waterfront unions on the Pacific Coast that emerged out of the great strike struggles of 1934 and 1936-37 succeeded in establishing a strong tradition of internal democracy. That tradition still prevails. Never before have they experienced the slightest difficulty in disciplining a minority of their own membership in carrying out a policy that was voluntarily adopted by the majority. Now, we are asked to believe that the longshoremen have suddenly lost their ability to impose discipline upon a “small minority” which Schmidt estimates as being 1 per cent of the membership! How is that possible? The answer is – it isn’t possible; the charge is nothing but a vile slander against the longshoremen.
The campaign to remove the power of the union membership to discipline its own “wayward members” is nothing but a confession that the majority of the members of the Longshoremen’s Union do not support the instrument of collaboration with the bosses known as the “labor-management-government” board. Therefore, they are not inclined to “discipline” those members who violate the decisions of the Board. It thus becomes necessary for the Stalinist leadership, the employers, and the “impartial” chairman to usurp the right of the union to discipline its own members, and place that power in the hands of the Board, for the “protection” of the union officials and, incidentally – of the profits and privileges of the shipowners!
About a week after Foisie had made his speech to the Industrial Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club, Professor Eliel appeared as guest speaker and while he did not refer directly to Foisie’s remarks, it was generally understood that his address was in the nature of a reply to Foisie. His speech was a mixture of defense and apology: “The Board cannot in four months recast the entire structure of industrial relations in Pacific Coast ports which has developed over more than 20 years of struggle and conflict.” Just give the Professor time!
On the matter of “discipline” he informed his audience that already the Board “has obtained union acceptance of limitations on authority of (union) gang stewards,” and added: “The restoration of authority to employers is essential.” The latter statement has a familiar ring! Foisie in his speech had insisted that:
“Nothing but the restoration of discipline and discharge – wholly missing from this industry since 1934 – will do the least bit of good.”
Eliel assured his listeners that the Board had already recorded some achievements in the direction of “restoring the authority of the employers” which he, together with Foisie, regarded as “essential!” After all, the Professor does owe his appointment to the War Shipping Administration which has the authority to “appoint or remove” members of the Maritime Industry Board. The War Shipping Administration is composed in its majority of $l-a-year shipowners. “Whose bread I eat, his song I sing!”
The Industrial Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco as a “luncheon club” provides a convenient sounding board for employers, labor fakers, impartial arbitrators, etc. Closely following on the heels of Mr. Eliel, Roger D. Lapham, formerly head of the American-Hawaiian Steamship Co. and now a representative of the employers on the War Labor Board, and Dean Wayne Morse, formerly “impartial” chairman of the Maritime Industry Board and now representing the “public” on the WLB, appeared as guest speakers. Mr. Lapham inveighed against: “Labor leaders (who) must learn that their high, wide and fancy decade is over,” and “Labor leaders (who) still demand privileges and favors because they have given up the right to strike.” Mr. Morse flayed the unions with the following:
“If union and Government agencies cannot settle jurisdiction disputes or if their orders are not carried out, legislation, or even treason proceedings may be instituted to insure that war production continues.” (Our emphasis.)
Following these two examples of government “paternalism” toward the workers, the editor of the Daily Commercial News delivered a broadside demanding that “restrictive working rules and practices must go!”
The Daily Commercial News is the same paper which on June 10 printed a laudatory report on the increase of ten per cent in longshore output. Now, on August 3, following the line laid down by Foisie, the paper published a frontpage editorial demanding the elimination of “restrictive rules and practices” in the longshore agreement. Among the specific “restrictions” mentioned in the editorial was this one:
“Pacific Coast Longshoremen, still working a straight-time six hour day, have placed limitations on the amount of cargo that can be handled in a sling load.”
An accompanying article protested that
“... the present six-hour day in the Pacific Coast longshore industry, granted during the depression for the purpose of spreading the work, means that out of every 24 hours of work time, longshoremen are eligible for 18 hours of overtime.”
It must be pointed out here, that the limitations on the hours worked had been eliminated by the Board. What is involved in the six-hour day is not a restriction on production but a “restriction” on the profits of the employer, who had to pay overtime after six hours. The Board hasn’t gotten around to dealing with the six-hour day yet, but as the Professor indicated – give ‘em time!
Actually, what is involved in the campaign against “restrictive rules and practices” is an attack upon the whole union agreement and the union which enforces it. A union contract, or agreement, by its very nature is “restrictive”! It “restricts” the right of the employer to inflict his will upon the worker without check or restraint. The union is the instrument through which the terms of the union agreement are enforced. A union agreement from which the “restrictive rules and practices” had been removed would change the union into a “company” union. And that is, as Mr. Foisie points out, a “major chore for the Board to undertake.”
How are the longshoremen led against their will into the swamp of collaboration? Here deception plays an important role. Illusions are deliberately fostered by the ruling class, their lackeys and labor lieutenants, to keep the workers in subjection. One of these illusions is that the power of the Government – with a capital G – is all pervading and cannot be successfully challenged. Another is that the government (which, as Karl Marx proved, functions as the executive committee of the ruling class) stands above the contending class forces in society. For example, the Maritime Industry Board is embellished and bedizened with all the trappings of government authority. The “impartial” chairman, Professor Eliel, represents in his person the august might of the national government. The employers aren’t fooled by this pretense, but unfortunately, most of the workers are. Thus there is a noticeable difference in the attitude of the lackeys and labor fakers when they address the workers and when they speak to the bosses or their representatives in government office.
 
The Role of Deception
In the Longshoremen’s Bulletin of July 14, for example, Eliel is quoted as hoping “that the longshoremen will comply with orders of the Board” since he “doesn’t want to see the day when the Board will have to command longshoremen to obey.” One can scarcely imagine the Professor assuming such arrogance in addressing the shipowners! In the same issue of the Bulletin the “editor” who manages to display a rather perverted sense of humor under the pseudonym of “Snoose McGoose,” has the following comment to make:
“Snoose McGoose says: ‘Get in and do your stuff for Uncle Sam and your Alma Mater or the professor will start swinging the big stick – no fooling’.”
One can scarcely appreciate the irony of threatening the longshoremen with the Professor’s “big stick” unless he is familiar with the history of the violent struggle that gave birth to the maritime unions on the Pacific Coast: a struggle in which the maritime workers faced the guns, knives and tear gas shells of the hired gunmen of the shipowners, the cops of every port on the coast, and finally the California State Militia; a struggle which reached such a degree of intensity that the workers of the San Francisco Bay Area, both organized and unorganized, laid down their tools and mobilized in a general strike in support of the waterfront workers against the boss terror. It is the workers with this experience and this tradition that the Stalinist hack who edits the Bulletin has the gall to threaten with the Professor’s “big stick.” It is to these workers that the sanctified Professor has the arrogance to say he “doesn’t want to see the day when the Board will have to command longshoremen to obey.”
The Professor’s “big stick” is supposed to be symbolic of government authority. His is the “Voice” of Government! In the Bulletin of September 15, Bridges is quoted as saying:
“Under the Board set-up we have as much say-so as the employers. We must trust our representatives and back them up. If they by any means fail us we have the power to have them removed. They are working for you and the Government and are Government employees.”
Thus is the illusion fostered!
The union has two representatives, the employers two, and one – the chairman – is “impartial.” Therefore, says Bridges, “we have as much say-so as the employers.” On any issue, however, which might separate the two labor representatives from the two boss representatives, the “impartial” chairman exercises a decisive voice. A glance at the record of this chairman’s “impartiality” will reveal that the longshoremen are far from having “as much say-so as the employers.”
During the 1934 strike, Paul Eliel was a director of the Industrial Relations Section of the San Francisco Industrial Association. It was this association which organized the employers of San Francisco and set up a committee to assume full control of all strike-breaking activities. In his book, Waterfront and General Strikes, San Francisco, 1934, Eliel reveals that as “representative of the Industrial Association” he went to the Teamsters’ Union on June 8, the day after it passed a resolution refusing to handle “hot cargo” and threatened the officials that
“... their refusal to handle this freight would precipitate a crisis and necessitate the hauling of the freight by other means unless a settlement of the longshore difficulty could be effected” (p.45).
The teamsters refused to concede. Their support greatly strengthened the striking longshoremen. As Eliel explains:
“Had it not been for this stand of the Teamsters’ Union the strike of longshoremen would undoubtedly have collapsed within a week or ten days at most” (p.50).
The “crisis” which Eliel had threatened in his attempt to inveigle the Teamsters into breaking the longshore strike was precipitated by the Industrial Association on July 5, 1934, when it tried to open the port of San Francisco, using scab teamsters to haul the freight. Two strikers were killed and 109 injured in the resulting police attack. This “crisis” has become known as the “battle of Rincon Hill.”
Eliel’s strike-breaking activities as director of the Industrial Relations Section of the Industrial Association are not generally known, since he kept under cover and other individuals signed the statements issued to the public. Having failed to smash the unions by direct attack, Eliel has assumed the mantle of an “impartial” chairman and with a new sponsor, Harry Bridges, “brilliant” producer of the “Bridges plan” and with the Stalinists cast in a supporting role, is now playing a return engagement.
 
The Role of Intimidation
Another method used in compelling passive acquiescence in the decisions of the Board is a mixture of intimidation and fraud. It has become a practice for bureaucrats of all varieties in the labor movement to attempt to silence any opposition to their false policies by accusing them of “being against the war” or in case of a persistent opposition of being “agents of the Axis.” Too often, they are successful in silencing opposition merely by the utilization of this technique of intimidation. The Stalinists in the leadership of the longshoremen’s union use variations of this technique. For instance, in the September 16 issue of the Bulletin the editor lists three distinct types of opposition within the union against the Board:
“First, those who are afraid they are going to lose all their conditions and are not going to get them back. These fellows start whispering campaigns through selfish motives, making such cracks as – ‘why have a hiring hall now? what’s the use of paying dues? why, the Blue Book days are right around the corner.’
“Well, to these fellows we say – the Blue Book days are a thing of the past and all who, by insidious propaganda, spread this filth are (if they don’t know it) playing up the Axis alley.”
(The “Blue Book” referred to above was the name given to the Longshoremen’s Association of San Francisco and the Bay District, a company union formed by the shipowners during the 1919 stevedore strike in San Francisco. Many of the longshoremen were forced to belong to this company union in order to get work on the docks prior to 1934.)
“The second group we have to contend with is those who want to win the war providing George does it and that they don’t have to make any sacrifices.”
The editor then comments on this group in the following manner:
“If we all took this attitude it wouldn’t be long until we’d be eating sauerkraut with chopsticks and our work week would be from then on with no pay whatsoever.”
“A third group in America is the Jap and fascist sympathizers who want this country and the United Nations to lose this war – and they will do everything to aid the Nazi cause.
“These people we must smoke out – get them into the open and deal with them. They are not potential fifth columnists – they are saboteurs and every move they make is dangerous.”
Therefore, according to the Stalinist frame-up technique, any opposition to their policy of capitulation and surrender to a boss-controlled Board falls into one of these three categories.
Categories one and three, those who are accused of being either actual Axis agents or of objectively aiding the Axis by their opposition are given short shrift. The second category, those who “want to win the war” but “don’t want to make any sacrifices” are considered worthy of further “education.” What, you object to making “sacrifices”? Well, just listen to this:
“Recently in the Caribbean a tanker was torpedeed at midnight. The force of the explosion was so great that all provisions were blown out of the lifeboat. Only a half-filled water keg was salvaged and a whiskey glass of brackish water every twelve hours was all that was allowed each man for 24 days.
“A couple of fish hooks were found in the boat and the men cut flesh from their bodies to bait the hooks to catch fish which they ate raw.”
Nothing is too fantastic for a Stalinist hatchet man to use in trying to convince the longshoremen that in order to “win the war” it is necessary to give the shipowners their pound of flesh.
The following announcement appeared in the November 5 issue of The Victory Hook, official publication of the Maritime Industry Board:
“Walking bosses were given full authority this week to fire longshoremen whose conduct on the job helps Hitler and the Axis.
“The Coast Agreement still is in full force to protect workers from unfair discharge, but the walker can take immediate action in cases of Insubordination, drunkenness on the job, early quitting, leaving the job without providing replacement, walking off the job during the middle of the night, or similar offenses. He can also act against men who refuse to obey orders of the Pacific Coast Maritime Industry Board.
“With assent of union members, the Board instructed the walker to discharge offenders at once, or notify the gang boss to discharge the men.
“The name and brass number of, the man is to be given to the Board at once, and the man will not be dispatched from the hiring hall until he has appeared before the Labor Relations Committee.” (Our emphasis.)
Thus “passive acquiescence” in obeying orders of the Board proved to be a transitional stage to forced acquiescence. The Bridges leadership is proving in action how “reliable and indispensable” it is in the drive to smash the union hiring hall.
Thus it is evident that the “labor-management-government” representatives on the Board are experiencing some difficulty in getting the longshoremen to peacefully surrender the conditions gained through bitter struggle against the shipowners and their agents. In Foisie’s speech of July 13, we find an enlightening commentary on the reason for most of the difficulty:
“Industries which have a ‘history of long established union-management co-operation know there Is nothing to fear from Invasion of management by labor. Quite the contrary. The dividing line between the two tends to thin out. Where there la a background of conflict the soil Is not good out of which to grow full blown the flower of union-management co-operation; but the Board’s ‘cultivation’ is beginning to bear fruit.”
Foisie here testifies to a phenomenon that Marxist students of the labor movement have long observed: that it is extremely difficult to convince those workers whose organization was forged in the fires of the class struggle that there is an identity of interest between the employer and his wage-slave. The picket line does make poor soil “out of which to grow full blown the flower of union-management co-operation.” The longshoremen learned part of their lesson in 1934. They have no confidence in the shipowners whose thugs and gunmen they faced in the struggle to organize their union. They have little fear of the state government, whose militia they confronted in the same struggle, and less of the city government which flung its police force against the ranks of the striking maritime workers. All these they met and vanquished. Unfortunately they still entertain exaggerated illusions about the federal government, illusions diligently fostered by their own leadership. Whether they will permit these illusions to carry them as far as the British unions along the road of surrendering their independence and undermining and weakening their organization is yet to be determined. The last word has not yet been spoken – far from it! A sharpening of the class struggle, an upsurge in the labor movement will probably see the Pacific Coast longshoremen again occupying an advanced position – despite and against their present misleadership. No, the soil is not good and despite the “Board’s cultivation,” the tree is likely to bear a fruit that the shipowners will not find very palatable.



Labor’s Giant Step: Twenty Years of the CIO
by Art Preis
Pioneer Publishers, 1964. 538 pp. $7.50.
There have been in recent years a spate of books published decrying and bemoaning the decline in prestige and influence of the American trade union movement. The liberal “friends” of labor are especially distraught over the absence of that crusading spirit which characterized the explosive birth and development of the CIO in the middle 1930’s. They tend to “identify” with the movement of social reform which developed parallel with the rise of the CIO, little dreaming that it was precisely the liberal reform program, policy and practice embraced by the labor leaders which sapped the energy and devitalized the fighting spirit of the ranks.
Other critics go further. They proclaim the labor movement a putrefying corpse and write off the American working class as the historical agency of social transformation. Such sentiments are nothing new. With greater justification the Cassandra’s of the “roaring 20’s” wept over labor’s lost cause and predicted in sepulchral tone that the American workers would never, but never, succeed in unionizing the mass production industries in this country.
The great merit in Art Preis’s book is that he takes as his point of departure the profound wisdom of the sage who opined: “Ours not to weep but to understand!” To understand means to comprehend and relate the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. It is only thus that correct lessons can be derived from the history of labor’s struggles. In the telling some sacred cows are gored, some hoary myths are laid. How can it be otherwise?
The twenty year period covered by Labor’s Giant Step encompasses some of the most bitterly fought class battles in the history of the American labor movement. When the class struggle reaches such peaks of intensity it lays bare the anatomy of class society and discloses the true relationships between capital and labor and, more to the point, between labor and government, which functions as the executive arm of the employing class. It is no surprise therefore, that Preis applies his scalpel to the most pernicious myth of all – the legend of Franklin Delano Roosevelt as the friend and champion of labor and the scourge of the moneylenders who ruled the Temple of Mammon in Wall Street – and Washington.
 
Myth of Roosevelt
Roosevelt’s “New Deal” was a rescue operation designed to pump new blood into the sclerotic veins of American capitalism. In order to assure mass acceptance of the real and tangible subsidies doled out to business and agriculture Roosevelt felt constrained to make some concessions to the unemployed and to the organized segment of the American working class. The most highly touted was Section 7-A of the National Labor Relations Act.
Under Section 7-A the workers were ostensibly guaranteed the “right” to organize and bargain collectively through unions of their own choosing. The workers soon learned that this concession was more fictitious than real. To win this “right” labor was compelled to struggle on a massive scale. In practically all of the key union battles of the early period of the “New Deal” the central demand was for “union recognition.” Invariably, Roosevelt’s intervention aimed at undercutting, compromising and weakening labor’s struggle for union recognition – sometimes through government “mediation” and when that failed, by force.
All this is part of the record. Despite Roosevelt’s role the labor leaders continued to cling to his coat-tails and along with them the Stalinists, especially after Moscow laid down its People’s Front line at the Seventh World Congress of the Communist International in 1935. Time and time again the more advanced sections of the working class tried to break through the class collaborationist political barrier erected by the conservative labor and Stalinist leadership. They failed. And therein lies the real tragedy of the historic movement sparked by the CIO.
 
Unfinished Task
It remains one of the unfinished tasks of Labor’s Giant Step from virtual non-organization to the building of what is numerically the largest and potentially the strongest organized labor movement in the world. In the short span from the rise of the CIO in the early 1930’s to the outbreak of World War II the American working class proved unable to overcome its political immaturity. It did develop to a high degree its spirit of union consciousness. Thanks to the restraining influence of its leadership it failed to develop a comparable degree of political consciousness.
The wartime reaction and post-war period of prosperity-reaction served to further retard the political development of the American workers. While gaining many concessions in trade union battles with the employers they still remain captive to the class collaborationist policies of the conservative bureaucrats who head the union movement. But, it would be the most colossal error to prematurely pronounce a requiem over so lively a corpse. As Mark Twain observed when he was informed that his obituary had been published: “The news of my death has been greatly exaggerated.”
The lesson Art Preis teaches is that of the enormous potential that is lodged in powerful loins of American labor. Since the rise of the CIO the American working class has suffered no major defeat. While its native militancy has been temporarily damped its explosive quality has not been impaired. Those who absorb the lesson Preis teaches and are able to probe below surface appearances can already discern the embryonic stirring of the molecular process that erupted with such volcanic force to accomplish Labor’s Giant Step in the few short years of the middle 30’s.
This is the book of a man who has lived, breathed and acted the events he describes. It is an indispensable antidote to the poison of pessimism that permeates the literary output of the prophets of despair.
 



The myth of Stalin’s infallibility was assiduously
cultivated by the ruling bureaucratic caste in the Soviet Union until
his death in 1953. The parvenu bureaucracy, which had usurped
the state power, required a supreme arbiter to adjudicate its disputes
and to reconcile any differences that might arise among members of the
ruling group. During his lifetime Stalin had the last word and final
decision.
By the time of Stalin’s death the world had undergone considerable
change. The Soviet Union was no longer the sole custodian of
“socialist” state power, upon whose authority the whole structure of
Stalinist monolithism was erected. The social overturns in Eastern
Europe and above all, the conquest of state power by the Chinese
Communist Party [CCP], introduced a schismatic process that gave rise
to “polycentrism”—that is, the conflict of interests inherent in the
existence of separate national states, albeit national states resting
on the foundation of socialist property forms and property relations.
With other times, came other needs. Stalin’s heirs found it
expedient to initiate the process of deStalinization. The myth of
Stalin’s infallibility was thoroughly demolished in the famous speech
by Nikita Khrushchev at the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union in 1956. Recently, under the inspiration of the Maoists,
there has been a concerted attempt to refurbish the Stalin myth. But
this is a hopeless task. Not all the king’s horses and all the king’s
men can ever put humpty-dumpty Stalin back together again!
The Maoists need the Stalin myth to bolster an official mythology
which seeks to elevate Mao to the status of a deity whose supernatural
omnipotence—Mao’s thought—is invested with retroactive
infallibility to prove that he was always right in the past—
even as against Stalin. Past errors, where admitted, are attributed to
the shortcomings of others.
It would be instructive to unravel the strands of this deification
of Mao. In this article, however, we are concerned with a myth of a
different order, the concept that Mao broke with Stalin to lead the
Chinese revolution. This “theory” has been advanced in order to answer
the seeming enigmas: How explain that the Chinese Communist Party,
under a Stalinist leadership closely linked with the Kremlin, could
carry through a revolutionary action and take state power in seeming
contradiction to Stalin’s policy of class collaboration and peaceful
coexistence?
This widely current myth of a Mao-Stalin schism on revolutionary
strategy has unfortunately been taken up and elaborated in a recent
collection of essays edited by Tariq Ali, the Pakistan-born British
antiwar leader who has become a Trotskyist. [1]
“Stalin,” writes Ali, “had not believed that a
socialist revolution was possible in China; his disastrous policies had
resulted in the massacres of Shanghai and Canton. Perhaps he believed
that since most of the leading Communist cadres had been wiped out it
was now fairly safe for him to deal with Chiang Kai-shek. Stalin had
reckoned without Mao Tse-tung. It is not necessary to go into details
of how Mao organized the Chinese Communist Party and led it to victory.
What is important to note is that if Mao had followed Stalin’s advice
he would have disbanded the Chinese party and merged with Chiang
Kai-shek’s nationalists and in the process would, no doubt, have been
liquidated. Despite paying lip-service to Stalin, Mao in fact did
exactly the opposite. He fought the most protracted civil war in recent
history, with no material aid from Stalin. Unless, of course, one
counts a manual on partisan warfare which Stalin sent him as a gift and
which Mao handed to Liu Shao-chi with the inscription: ‘Read this
carefully if you want to end up dead.’ [Ali does not explain the source
of this story. But it is of such stuff that myths are woven.—T.K.]
“The success of Mao’s armies,” Ali continues, “came as
a shock to Stalin; right up to 1948 he had been persuading the Chinese
Communists to come to some sort of agreement with the nationalists and
this the Chinese steadfastly, and to their credit, refused to do. In
October, 1949, exactly thirty-two years after the Bolshevik revolution,
Mao’s peasant armies marched into Peking and proclaimed China a
People’s Republic.”
Tariq Ali concludes his essay on the Chinese revolution
with the assertion, “Mao’s stature as one of the greatest revolutionary
leaders of this century is beyond question.” But the actual record
which I propose to examine far from bears out this judgment. If Stalin
had not believed that a socialist revolution was possible in China, as
Ali correctly asserts, neither had Mao. And Mao persisted in this
disbelief to the very end. That is why he proclaimed China a People’s
Republic and not a Socialist Soviet Republic, as the Bolsheviks had
done in October 1917.
Tariq Ali wrote this article for the anthology before the
announcement of his adherence to the International Marxist Group, the
British section of the Fourth International. Earlier this year, in a
valuable eyewitness report from Pakistan, he published some trenchant
criticism of the attitudes of the Chinese leadership and the native
Maoists toward the mass upheavals against the military dictatorship in
that country. [2]
 
Milovan Djilas’ Conversations with Stalin
Considering the historic significance of the events and
the multitude of writings about them, there is remarkably little
evidence to support the theory that Mao broke with Stalin during the
Chinese revolution. Milovan Djilas reports a statement by Stalin in his
Conversations with Stalin published in 1962. It
concerned the postwar uprising in Greece, which Stalin insisted “must
be stopped, and as quickly as possible” according to the former high
Yugoslav official.
Djilas writes,
“Someone mentioned the recent successes of the
Chinese Communists. But Stalin remained adamant: ‘Yes, the Chinese
comrades have succeeded, but in Greece there is an entirely different
situation. The United States is directly engaged there—the strongest
state in the world. China is a different case, relations in the Far
East are different. True, we, too, can make a mistake! Here, when the
war with Japan ended, we invited the Chinese comrades to reach an
agreement as to how a modus vivendi with Chiang Kai-shek
might be found. They agreed with us in word, but in deed they did it
their own way when they got home: They mustered their forces and
struck. It has been shown that they were right, and not we. But Greece
is a different case—we should not hesitate, but let us put an end to
the Greek uprising.”
Djilas’ assertion is of dubious validity. The alleged
conversation occurred in February 1948 when sharp differences had
already arisen between Stalin and the Yugoslavs. Soon after this the
Kremlin launched a public attack on the Yugoslav leaders and the open
break occurred in June, 1948. It was not in character for Stalin to
confess his “errors,” certainly not to the Yugoslavs at that time.
Djilas did draw a generalization that is, on the whole, valid:
“As far as the pacification of the Chinese revolution
was concerned, here [Stalin] was undoubtedly led by opportunism in his
foreign policy. Nor can it be excluded that he anticipated future
danger to his own work and to his own empire from the new Communist
great power, especially since there were no prospects of subordinating
it internally. At any rate, he knew that every revolution, simply by
virtue of being new, also becomes a separate epicenter and shapes its
own government and state, and this was what he feared in the Chinese
case, all the more since the phenomenon was involved that was as
significant and as momentous as the October revolution.”
Since the book was written in 1961, however, thirteen
years after the event and at a time when the Sino-Soviet dispute had
erupted, it is hard to decide whether to attribute Djilas’ prescience
to foresight or hindsight. Stalin tried to guard against this “future
danger” by innovating a new state form standing somewhere between a
capitalist state and workers state, which he dubbed a people’s state,
or a people’s democracy or people’s republic. There was no difference
on this score between Mao and Stalin.
 
Maoist criticisms of Stalin
Aside from the Djilas revelation there is the evidence
of differences between Mao and Stalin cited by the Maoists themselves.
As part of the polemic between Peking and Moscow, the editorial
departments of Renmin Ribao (People’s Daily)
and Hongqi (Red Flag) published a
violent attack on Khrushchev’s 20th Congress speech, September 13,
1963. The article, republished as a pamphlet, was entitled On the
Question of Stalin. In sort of a bookkeeper’s approach to
politics, it totes up the pluses and minuses of Stalin’s career and
concludes that, on balance, the pluses outnumber the minuses:
“Stalin’s merits and mistakes are matters of
historical, objective reality. A comparison of the two shows that his
merits outweighed his faults. He was primarily correct, and his faults
were secondary.”
One “error” mentioned is the frightful blood-purges of
the 1930s which decimated Lenin’s Bolshevik Party.
“In the work led by Stalin of suppressing the
counterrevolution, many counterrevolutionaries deserving punishment
were duly punished, but at the same time there were innocent people who
were wrongly convicted; and in 1937 and 1938 there occurred the error
of enlarging the scope of the suppression of counterrevolutionaries. In
the matter of the party and government organization, he did not fully
apply proletarian democratic centralism and, to some extent, violated
it.”
How delicately put! The “error” of committing
fratricide, you see, was a “fault” of secondary rank and hardly worth
mentioning.
Stalin’s basic “error,” according to Mao’s pundits, was his failure
to master Mao’s thoughts. For, they explain:
“In struggles inside as well as outside the party, on
certain occasions and on certain questions he confused two types of
contradictions which are different in nature, contradictions between
ourselves and the enemy and contradictions among the people, and also
confused the different methods needed in handling them.”
What unadulterated tripe!
On the question of Stalin’s errors in China the authors are quite
vague. In one passage they remark that Stalin “had given some

bad counsel with regard to the Chinese revolution. After the victory of
the Chinese revolution,” they assert, “he admitted his mistake.” But
the nature of this “mistake,” when it was supposed to have occurred in
the Chinese revolution, and where Stalin admitted he was wrong, the
authors do not say. They hasten on to another subject.
One more instance is cited:
“Long ago,” they write, “the Chinese Communists had
firsthand experience of some of his mistakes. Of the erroneous ‘Left’
and Right opportunist lines which emerged in the Chinese Communist
Party at one time or another, some arose under the influence of certain
mistakes of Stalin’s, in so far as their international sources were
concerned. In the late twenties, the thirties and the early and middle
forties, the Chinese Marxist-Leninists represented by Mao Tse-tung and
Liu Shao-chi resisted the influence of Stalin’s mistakes; they
gradually overcame the erroneous lines of ‘Left’ and Right opportunism
and finally led the Chinese revolution to victory.”
This pamphlet was published in 1963, when Liu’s name was
still intimately coupled with that of Mao and before the “cultural
revolution” disclosed that Liu Shao-chi was an imperialist agent, a
diversionist and wrecker, as far back as 1924, the year the Chinese
Communist Party first cemented an alliance with the Kuomintang. But
that is another story. In what now reads as a monumental bit of irony,
the authors of On the Question of Stalin contend that the
Chinese Communist Party always disavowed the “cult of the personality”:
“While we attach importance [to] the role of
leaders,” they aver, “we are against dishonest and excessive eulogy of
individuals and exaggeration of their role.”
At any rate, this is the extent of the Maoist record of
Stalin’s “mistakes” in China. It hardly constitutes proof of a break
between Mao and Stalin on the question of the character or course of
the Chinese revolution of 1949. In fact, the authors of On the
Question of Stalin insist:
“But since some of the wrong ideas put forward by
Stalin were accepted and applied by certain Chinese comrades, we
Chinese should bear the responsibility. In its struggle against ‘Left’
and Right opportunism, therefore, our party criticized only its own
erring comrades and never put the blame on Stalin.” (Emphasis
added.)
Far from placing any “blame on Stalin” for “mistakes”
made in the course of the Chinese revolution, Maoist historians go to
great lengths to establish the fact that Mao was Stalin’s foremost
disciple. On the occasion of Stalin’s seventieth birthday, Chen Po-ta,
a leading exponent of the “cultural revolution” and militant
protagonist of “Mao’s thought,” composed a eulogy entitled Stalin
and the Chinese Revolution. It was published by the People’s
Publishing House, Peking, May 1953. Here are samples of Chen Po-ta’s
testimony on the question of Stalin’s “errors” and the relations
between Mao and Stalin:
“Under the leadership of Comrade Mao Tse-tung, our
party, by advancing along a devious path, finally overcame both the
objective difficulties and subjective errors and carried the revolution
to victory. This is because Comrade Mao Tse-tung’s views on the nature
and tactics of the Chinese revolution were based on the teachings of
Stalin and were identical with the views of Stalin.”
“Comrade Mao Tse-tung is Stalin’s disciple and comrade
in arms. He is Stalin’s outstanding disciple and has been able to lead
China’s revolution to victory because his method of work and his way of
reasoning are those of Stalin. He uses Stalin’s methods to learn from
Stalin ...”
And so forth and so on, ad nauseam.
It is quite obvious that the brief references by Mao and his
historians to “subjective errors” and “mistakes” do not refer to
Stalin’s basic line on the character and perspective of the Chinese
revolution. Because of the disastrous consequences of the zig-zag
policies followed by the Stalintern afier the death of Lenin, it became
standard practice to fix the blame on those individuals and groups
responsible for and identified with the carrying out of the “general
line.” Thus arose the system of scapegoatism. With each zig-zag new
leaders were created and old ones scrapped as “Left” or “Right”
opportunists, depending on the thrust of the new turn. No one dared
place the blame on Stalin—where it properly belonged. It was along
this “devious path” that Mao became head of the Chinese Communist Party
in January 1935.
The date is significant. Following the debacle of Stalin’s “Third
Period” insanity, which paved the way for Hitler’s march to power in
Germany, the Stalintern made a one hundred and eighty degree turn to
the People’s Front. The leaders of the national sections of the
Communist International were junked in wholesale lots, including the
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. That Mao was a People’s
Frontist from the beginning is testified to by Chen Po-ta in his
pamphlet, Mao Tse-tung on the Chinese Revolution,
written in 1951 and published in a revised edition in Peking in 1963.
After 1927 Mao repeatedly refuted the erroneous
‘Leftist’ ideological trend in relation to the question of the
character of the revolution. He considered that the Chinese democratic
revolution must be carried out to the end, saying:

“Only in this way can a socialist future of the
Chinese revolution be fostered. Misconceptions such as denying this
period of democratic revolution and considering that the opportune
moment for a socialist revolution in China has arrived are extremely
detrimental to the Chinese revolution.” (Resolution of the Sixth
Congress of the Fourth Army of the Red Army, drafted by Mao
Tse-tung, December 1928.)

Mao Tse-tung regarded the opinion then held by the
Communist International that the character of the Chinese revolution
remained bourgeois-democratic as completely correct. He said, “the
struggle which we have gone through verifies the truth of the opinion
of the Communist International.”
In the light of the concrete conditions in China, Mao
Tse-tung developed the teachings of Lenin and Stalin regarding the
continuous development of the bourgeois-democratic revolution into the
socialist revolution.
He said:
“We advocate the theory of the continuous development
of revolution, but not the Trotskyite theory of permanent revolution.
We stand for the attainment of socialism through all the necessary
stages of the democratic republic. We are opposed to tail-ism, but we
are also opposed to adventurism and ultra-revolutionism.”
The theory of the revolution in stages was not unique
with Mao and the Popular Front. It was developed as part of the
theoretical arsenal of the reformist socialists in Europe and was
advocated by the Russian Mensheviks in opposition to the course
followed by the Bolsheviks. The latter, under Lenin and Trotsky’s
leadership, refused to halt the revolution at its “bourgeois-democratic
stage” following the overthrow of the Czar in February. They pressed
forward to the socialist victory of October, along the line laid down
by Trotsky in his theory of permanent revolution.
The theory of the revolution in stages leads ineluctably to the
practice of class collaboration through coalitionism. If the bourgeois
democratic stage was to prevail for a prolonged period—as Mao
insisted it must—then the Chinese Communist Party would have to share
power, as junior partner, with the political parties of the
bourgeoisie, above all with Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang.
 
The theory of revolution in stages
Mao’s views on coalition government were elaborated in a
political report to the Seventh National Congress of the Chinese
Communist Party on April 24, 1945. The first Chinese edition in
English, entitled On Coalition Government, was
published in 1955. However, the text of this speech was published ten
years earlier in this country in December 1945 by New Century
Publishers, the Communist Party publishing house, with the title The
Fight for a New China, and with an introduction by William Z.
Foster. There are extensive changes, alterations, amendments and
deletions in the later Chinese editions compared to the 1945 text. The
citations which follow are from the earlier New Century edition.
In expounding the theory of the revolution in stages, Mao declared,
“Socialism can be reached only through democracy;
this is an accepted truth of Marxism. The struggle for democracy in
China still requires a prolonged period. Without a new democratic,
united state, without the economic development of a new democratic
nation, without the development of a broad private capitalist and
cooperative economy, without the development of a national, scientific,
popular and new democratic culture, without the emancipation and
development of the individuality of hundreds of millions of people, in
short, without the thorough, new bourgeois democratic revolution, to
establish socialism over the ruins of the colonial, semi-colonial, and
semi-feudal China would be a Utopian dream.”
How explain that “Communists” advocate the
establishment, for a “prolonged period,” of a bourgeois-democratic
state?
“Some people cannot understand why the Communists,
far from being antipathetic to capitalism, actually promote its
development. To them we can simply say this much: to replace the
oppression of foreign imperialism and native feudalism with the
development of capitalism is not only an advance, but also an
unavoidable process; it will benefit not only the capitalist class, but
also the proletariat.”
But, if the historical imperative dictates that the
course of development proceed through the stage of bourgeois democracy,
how explain the Russian revolution, which proceeded from the overthrow
of the semi-feudal Czarist regime to the establishment of the
bourgeois-democratic Provisional Government, to an abbreviated period
of Soviet dual power, to the establishment of the proletarian
dictatorship, all within the span of a few months? Mao advances a
theory of Russian exceptionalism.
“Some people wonder if the Communists, once in power,
will establish a dictatorship by the proletariat and a one-party
system, as they have done in the Soviet Union. We can tell these people
this: A new democracy of a union of democratic classes is different in
principle from a socialist state with the dictatorship of the
proletariat. China, throughout the period of her new democratic system,
cannot and should not have a system of government of one-class
dictatorship or one-party monopoly of government.”
As for Russia:
“Russian history determined the Soviet form of
society. There the social system in which man exploits man has been
abolished; a new democratic (socialist) political, economic and
cultural system has been established; all anti-socialist political
parties have been rejected by the people, who support only the
Bolshevik Party. But even in Russia, where the Bolshevik Party is the
only political party, the governmental authority is invested in the
alliance of workers, peasants and intellectuals, or in the bloc of
party members and non-party members, and not in the hands of the
working class, or Bolsheviks alone. In the same way, Chinese history
will determine the Chinese system. A unique form—a new democratic
state and regime or a union of the democratic classes—will be
produced, which will be different from the Russian system.”
“The carrying out of this program will not advance
China to socialism. This is not a question of the subjective
willingness or unwillingness of certain individuals to do the
advancing; it is due to the fact that the objective political and
social conditions in China do not permit the advance.” [3]
For how long?
“In the entire bourgeois democratic revolution stage,
over scores of years, our new democratic general program is unchanged.”
 
Relations between capital and labor
Mao paints an idyllic picture of the harmonious
relations that will exist between capital and labor in the “bourgeois
democratic revolution” stage.
“Under the new democratic state the policy of
harmonizing the relationship between capital and labor will be adopted.
The interests of the workers will be protected. An eight to ten-hour
day system, according to varying circumstances, will be established, as
well as suitable relief for the unemployed, social security, and the
rights of labor unions. On the other hand, the proper profits, under
reasonable management, of state, private and cooperative enterprises
will be assured. Thus, both labor and capital will work jointly for the
development of industrial production.”
One of the more persistent tenets of Maoist mythology is
the alleged uncompromising hostility that Mao always held toward the
imperialist powers, especially toward British and American imperialism.
It is no wonder that those sections of his speech in which he expresses
gratitude to these powers are carefully deleted from the revised
Chinese versions. For example, in expressing his gratitude to the
Soviet Union for its help, he adds:
“We are also grateful to Britain and the United
States, particularly the latter, for their immense contribution to the
common cause—the defeat of the Japanese aggressors. We are grateful
to the governments and the peoples of both countries for their sympathy
with the Chinese people and their help.”
But gratitude never cut much ice with the imperialist
bandits. Mao dangled more tangible material benefits to whet their
appetites. In the bourgeois-democratic stage, he pointed out,
“Large amounts of capital will be needed for the
development of our industries. They will come chiefly from the
accumulated wealth of the Chinese people, and at the same time from
foreign assistance. We welcome foreign investments if such are
beneficial to China’s economy and are made in accordance with China’s
laws. Enterprises profitable to both the Chinese people and foreigners
are swiftly expanding large-scale light and heavy industries and
modernizing agriculture, which can become a reality when there is a
firm internal and international peace, and when political and agrarian
reforms are thoroughly carried out. On this basis, we shall be able to
absorb vast amounts of foreign investments. A politically retrogressive
and economically impoverished China will be unprofitable not only to
the Chinese people, but also to foreigners.” [4]
In the light of subsequent developments it is no wonder
that the Maoists subjected the text of On Coalition Government
to extensive revisions. In his foreword to the American edition,
William Z. Foster indicated the setting in which the speech was made.
“On April 24, 1945,” he wrote, “the day on which the
great Chinese Communist leader, Mao Tse-tung, delivered the following
report to the Seventh National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party,
Allied unity was at a high point. On the following day the United
Nations Conference was to open in San Francisco. In Europe the Red Army
from the East and Anglo-American forces from the West were rapidly
bringing to an end the Hitler state and the Nazi armies. Rangoon and
Davao were about to fall to the Allies in the Pacific theater. American
Marines were writing a glorious chapter in military history in Okinawa.
The Soviet Union had already made clear its intention of joining the
war against Japan by abrogating its treaty with the Mikado.”
These military victories induced a condition of euphoria
in Stalinist circles throughout the world. Coalitionism, i.e., class
collaboration, was touted as the wave of the future. On the basis of
the pacts and agreements forged by the Big Three (Teheran, Yalta, etc.)
the class struggle was declared outmoded. Peaceful coexistence was to
reign supreme. With the exception of the Soviet Union, of course, the
struggle for socialism was postponed to the Greek Kalends. In Europe,
the French Communist Party entered a coalition government, disarmed the
Resistance and, along with de Gaulle, proceeded to restore the
bourgeois democratic order. The same process was duplicated in Italy.
In Eastern Europe, coalition governments were hastily rigged under the
umbrella of Soviet occupation forces.
To the consternation of the Stalinist pipedream of an era of
permanent peace and prosperity following the war, however, the
imperialist jackals resumed their scramble for spheres of influence,
markets, areas for the investment of capital, sources of raw material,
the super-exploitation of cheap labor and colonial dominion. The war
had changed nothing in the nature of the beast. It was not that the
wartime coalition was being “pried apart”—as the Stalinists cried—
it was coming apart at the seams by virtue of its inherent
contradictions. The class struggle, so cavalierly consigned to the
limbo of innocuous desuetude, soon asserted its lusty presence.
 
Dual power in the Chinese revolution
In China, the path to coalition government was bestrewn
with booby traps. The Chinese Communist Party headed a surging mass
movement that made it a power to be reckoned with. The Japanese
invasion of China in the 1930s sparked a recurrent and mounting wave of
nationalist feeling that infected all sections of the population. The
CCP rode that wave from the beginning. Stalin viewed a Japanese
military presence in China with considerable alarm. It was a dagger
pointed at the 3,000-mile Soviet eastern frontier and held the threat
of a war on two fronts in the event of a military conflict in Europe.
In Thirty Years of the Communist Party of China,
published by Lawrence and Wishart in 1951, Hu Chiao-mu, the
vice-director of the propaganda department of the CCP central committee
wrote that,
“... after the Japanese invaders had attacked China
the Chinese Communist Party was the first to call for armed resistance.
In January 1933, the Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Army declared
that, on the three conditions of ceasing the attacks on the Red Army,
safeguarding the peoples’ democratic rights and arming the masses, the
Red Army was willing “to stop fighting and make peace with all other
troops throughout the country for the purpose of jointly resisting
Japanese aggression.”
Needless to say, Chiang Kai-shek rejected the proposal.
The Kuomintang had less to fear from the Japanese invaders than from
the Red Army. Instead, Chiang mounted a series of major military
campaigns designed to encircle and destroy the Red Army. As a result of
these offensives the Red Army was compelled to undertake its “Long
March” to seek sanctuary in the remote Chinese hinterland. After
incredible hardships the Red Army reached North Shensi in October 1935.
Hu writes that before the retreat “the Red Army had expanded into a
force of 300,000 troops, but after reaching North Shensi at the end of
the Long March ... the Red Army totalled less than 30,000 troops.”
But the decrepit and corrupt Kuomintang government offered no
effective resistance to the Japanese invaders. Dissatisfaction grew and
along with mounting discontent a process of disintegration ensued which
led to splits and defections by dissident groups in the Chiang forces.
A number joined with the Red Army to carry forward the resistance. In
the process, the Red Army and the Chinese Communist Party underwent an
enormous expansion. Hu reports that by the time of the Mao speech at
the Seventh Congress in April of 1945, there had been created under the
leadership of the CCP, “nineteen Liberated Areas ... with a total
population of 95,500,000, a People’s Liberation Army of 910,000
(including the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Route Army and other
anti-Japanese people’s troops) and a people’s militia of 2,200,000 men
who were simultaneously engaged in production.” Even allowing for some
exaggeration, this was a force of considerable magnitude.
When the war in the Pacific ended with the unconditional surrender
of Japan on August 14, 1945, de facto dual power existed in China.
Unlike Russia in 1917, where the dual power was institutionalized in
the form of Soviets of workers, peasants and soldiers deputies on one
side, and the bourgeois government on the other, the dual power in
China took the form of rival armies engaged in military conflict. The
state, wrote Engels, consists of bodies of armed men. In China the Red
Army exercised state power in the “liberated areas” through the
administrative apparatus of the CCP and its “democratic allies.”
Hu Chiao-mu explains that the areas under Red Army control were
adminstered by a “coalition” whereby
“... the ‘Three-threes representative system,’ namely
the system whereby the Communists (representing the working class and
poor peasants), the progressive elements (representing the petty
bourgeoisie), and the intermediate elements (representing the middle
bourgeoisie and enlightened gentry) each contributed one-third of the
leading personnel of the government administration, was introduced in
all Liberated Areas.”
But the real power resided in the Red Army controlled by
the CCP.
This power existed alongside that of the National government ruled
by Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang under a system of “political
tutelage,” the political formula for Chiang’s one-party dictatorship.
Chiang’s regime was recognized as the legitimate “national government”
by the “Big Three,” Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin, in the Moscow
Declaration of October 30, 1943. In fact, upon the insistence of
Roosevelt, the Big Three was expanded to include Nationalist China and
became the Big Four, with the addition of Chiang Kai-shek.
The China White Paper, originally issued in August
1949 under the title United States Relations With China, With
Special Reference to the Period 1944-49, records that in the
fall of 1943:
“The United States insisted that China be included as
a signatory, together with the United Kingdom, the USSR, and the United
States, of the Declaration of Four Nations on General Security, signed
in Moscow on October 30, 1943, which recognized the right and
responsibility of China to participate jointly with the other great
powers in the prosecution of the war, the organization of the peace,
and the establishment of machinery for postwar international
cooperation.”
The Moscow Declaration provided the juridical
rationalization subsequently used to justify continued financial,
material and military support, to the Chiang Kai-shek regime.
 
Marshall’s attempt to mediate the dispute
With the end of the war, both sides invited the US
government to mediate the armed conflict which had erupted into
full-scale civil war. In December, 1945, Truman designated General
George C. Marshall as his personal representative to mediate the
dispute.
The United States urged Chiang Kai-shek to “democratize” his regime
and to broaden the base of the National government in order to include
representatives of various “democratic” opposition groups. Washington
favored participation of the CCP in such a “reformed” government. This
policy was based on the conviction that the Red Army could not be
eliminatedby military means. In his later testimony before a joint
session of the House and Senate committees on foreign affairs, February
20, 1948, Marshall observed:
“Considering the military aspects of the problem it
was clear from VJ Day in 1945 that the Chinese government was
confronted by a military situation which made it, in the opinion of
virtually every American authority, impossible to conquer the Communist
armies by force.”
The alternative to a mediated political settlement in
Marshall’s opinion would be a massive intervention by the armed forces
of the United States in which the US “would have to be prepared
virtually to take over the Chinese government and administer its
economic, military and governmental affairs.” This was excluded. For,
as Lyman P. Van Slyke observes in his Stanford University Press edition
of The China White Paper,
“Not only were America’s resources insufficient for
military intervention in [Marshall’s] opinion, but the American people
would not sanction such a course.”
This view was bolstered, not only by the attitude of the
American civilian population, but more importantly by that of the
American army. When the Truman administration sought to shift American
troops to Asia after the end of the war in Europe, there was a virtual
rebellion which took the form of a movement to “Bring the Boys Home,”
which received widespread support from an aroused citizenry in this
country. The time was not propitious for a massive American military
intervention in China.
Marshall arrived in China in January, 1946. The circumstances were
not auspicious. The United States had made commitments to the Chiang
regime beginning with the Moscow Declaration of 1943 and there was
burgeoning opposition to compromise by the rabid anti-communists in
Washington, among whom Chiang had his staunchest supporters. Van Slyke
writes,
“By October 1944, when General Joseph W. Stilwell,
who favored a tough quid pro quo policy toward Chiang, was
recalled at the Generalissimo’s insistence, General Patrick J. Hurley
had already arrived in China. He expressed clearly the goals of
American policy: to keep China in the war, to support Chiang and the
National government, to persuade Chiang to undertake certain reforms,
and to promote the unity and democracy to which all Chinese parties
proclaimed their dedication. It is clear now that these goals were
irreconcilable, for if there was no possibility of withdrawing our
support from Chiang, there was no way of getting him to make changes he
did not choose to make. America’s role as mediator was compromised for
the same reason. But this was far from clear at the time, except to
those who knew the situation in China most intimately.”
Marshall was confronted with two opposing views on how a
new “democratic” government was to be established. The CCP insisted
that a coalition of the various political parties determine the
conditions under which a National Assembly was to be convened and a
draft constitution adopted. While granting the National government a
substantial majority, they insisted upon certain safeguards in the form
of minority representation sufficient to veto any attempt on the part
of the majority to substantially alter the terms upon which agreement
was reached.
Chiang insisted that inasmuch as his Kuomintang government was the
only “legal” and recognized authority all other political parties
should enter the National government with the rights of minority
representation as defined by a new constitution adopted by a National
Assembly and by the legislative and executive organs created by it. He
remained adamantly opposed to granting the CCP minority veto power at
any stage of the process of establishing the “new” bourgeois-democratic
state.
Chiang’s position was publicly endorsed by Washington. In a
statement defining United States Policy Toward China,
December 15, 1945, Truman declared:
“The United States and the other United Nations have
recognized the present National government of the Republic of China as
the only legal government in China. It is the proper instrument to
achieve the objective of a unified China.”
It was on this rock that all subsequent negotiations
foundered.
Nevertheless, the extent of CCP representation in the post-civil-war
government was not the only question open for negotiations between the
warring sides, and in the last analysis, it was not the most important
question. It was overshadowed by the question of the fate of the Red
Army. Truman added in the same 1945 policy statement:
“The United States is cognizant that the present
National government of China is a ‘one-party government’ and believes
that peace, unity and democratic reform will be furthered if the basis
of this government is broadened to include other political elements in
the country. Hence, the United States strongly advocates that the
national conference of representatives of the major political elements
in the country agree upon arrangements which would give these elements
a fair and effective representation in the Chinese National government.
It is recognized that this would require modification of the one-party
‘political tutelage’ established as an interim arrangement in the
progress of the nation toward democracy by the father of the Chinese
Republic, Doctor Sun Yat-sen.
“The existence of autonomous armies such as that
of the Communist army is inconsistent with, and actually makes
impossible, political unity in China. With the institution of a broadly
based representative government, autonomous armies should be eliminated
as such and all armed forces in China integrated effectively into the
Chinese National Army.” (Emphasis added.)
General Marshall’s primary assignment in China was to
preside over the liquidation of the Red Army and this he failed to do.
But the reason does not lie in political intransigence on Mao’s part
toward reorganization of the Communist forces in the interest of
forming a “new” state. Marshall’s failure is fundamentally to be
explained by Chiang’s terms for formation of the postwar government.
The Generalissimo insisted on unconditional surrender. His terms would
have been virtually suicidal for the Communists to accept.
 
The Political Consultative Conference
When Marshall arrived in China in January 1946, he was
gratified to find that considerable progress had apparently been made
toward the achievement of his objective. Under prodding from the
Americans, both sides had agreed to the convening of a “Political
Consultative Conference” [PCC] in Chungking to begin the process of
forming a unified national government. A truce had been declared and a
joint “Order for the Cessation of Hostilities,” had been issued on
January 10 in the name of Generalissmo Chiang Kai-shek and Chairman Mao
Tse-tung. A number of basic documents were adopted by the PCC designed
to lay a foundation for the new state order. These included a Resolution
on Government Organization and a Resolution on Military
Problems. Examination of these two documents shows how far Mao was
willing to go toward the formation of a coalition government and also
the points on which Mao and Chiang ultimately could not reach agreement.
The Resolution on Military Problems is divided into four
sections “Section I” itemizes “fundamental principles for the creation
of a national army”:
“Point 1) The army belongs to the state. It is the
duty of the soldier to protect the country and love the people.”
“Point 3) The military system shall be reformed in
the light of the democratic institutions and actual conditions
prevailing at the time.”
“Point 5) Military education shall be conducted in
the light of the foregoing principles, and shall forever be dissociated
from party affiliation and personal allegiance.”
“Section II” sets forth the “fundamental principles for
the reorganization of the army.” “Point 1” provides: “Separation of
army and party.” “Subsection A” under “Point 1” states, “All political
parties shall be forbidden to carry on party activities, whether open
or secret, in the army.”
“Section III, Point 5) A military Committee shall be established
within the Ministry of National Defense to be charged with the double
duty of drawing up schemes for the creation of a national army and of
seeing to it that the schemes are faithfully carried out. Members of
the committee shall be drawn from various circles.”
“Section IV” covers the “practical methods for the reorganization of
the army.” Under
“Point 1) The three-man military commission shall
proceed according to schedule and agree upon practical methods for the
reorganization of the Communist troops at an early date. The
reorganization must be completed as soon as possible.”
“Point 2) The Government troops should be
reorganized, according to the plan laid down by the Ministry of War,
into ninety (90) divisions. The reorganization should be completed
within six (6) months.”
“Point 3) When the reorganizations envisaged in
paragraphs 1 and 2 have been completed, all troops of the country
should be again reorganized into fifty (50) or sixty (60) divisions.”
And in this way would be created the “new” democratic
army of the “new” democratic Republic of China.
The “Resolution on Government Organization” provides that,
“1) Pending the convocation of the National Assembly,
the Kuomintang, as a preliminary measure preparatory to the actual
inauguration of constitutionalism, will revise the Organic Law of the
National government in order to expand the State Council.”
It was around the question of the composition of this
“State Council” that an irreconcilable dispute subsequently occurred.
“Point 1” under “Section I” reads:
“There will be forty (40) State Councillors, of whom
the Presidents of the Executive, Legislative, Judicial, Examination,
and Control Yuan will be ex-officio members.”
“Point 3) The State Council is the supreme organ
of the Government in charge of national affairs.”
“Point 6) General resolutions before the State
Council are to be passed by a majority vote of the State Councillors
present. If a resolution before the State Council should involve
changes in administrative policy, it must be passed by a two-thirds
vote of the State Councillors present. Whether a given resolution
involves changes in administrative policy or not is to be decided by a
majority vote of the State Councillors present.” (Emphasis added.)
“Point C) Half of the State Councillors will be
Kuomintang members and the other half will be members of other
political parties and prominent social leaders. The exact number
of members of other political parties and prominent social leaders who
are to serve as State Councillors will form the subject of separate
discussions.” (Emphasis added.)
The Resolution on Military Problems was the
first to be implemented. An executive “Committee of Three” was
established to supervise the cease-fire and to begin the process of
“Military Reorganization and Integration of Communist Forces into
National Army.” The committee was composed of a representative of each
of the three parties underwriting the agreement: General Chan Chih
Chun, representing the National government; General Chou En-lai,
representing the CCP and General George C. Marshall, acting as chairman
and listed as “advisor,” representing the United States. The process of
“integration” was to encompass a period of eighteen (18) months. At the
end of this period it was envisaged that all troops would be under the
command of the Minister of War to be designated after the National
Assembly had established a new government.
The agreement to establish an “Executive Headquarters” to be
administered by the Committee of Three was signed by Chan Chun and Chou
En-lai on January 10, 1946. But trouble broke out almost immediately.
Manchuria had been invaded by the Soviet Union after it had declared
war on Japan in August 1945. To secure the territory for the National
government, the United States placed at the disposal of Chiang the
planes, ships and personnel to transport his armies to Manchuria. Red
Army units in the area also converged on the territory. An open clash
was inevitable.
Both sides had agreed to stay away from those areas occupied by
Soviet troops. But who was to exercise control in the remainder of the
territory? Soon charges and countercharges were hurled by each side
that the other was guilty of violating the terms of the cease-fire. The
Executive Headquarters of the Committee of Three was paralyzed since
the agreement provided that all of its decisions were to be by
unanimous consent.
Chiang demanded that the provision for unanimous decision be amended
to provide for majority rule. The Americans were all for it but the CCP
balked. In June 1946 the Generalissimo issued an ultimatum declaring a
15-day truce in the fighting in Manchuria and demanding that the Red
Army withdraw within that period or suffer the consequences. The
ultimatum was condemned by the CCP as a violation of the January
cease-fire agreement and contrary to the spirit of the PCC resolutions.
At this Chiang launched a general offensive against the major forces of
the Red Army concentrated in Northern China.
 
Cold war and a turn in China
Up to this point there had been no reason for a rift
between Mao and Stalin. Mao had faithfully adhered to Stalin’s
coalition line. But the events following the convening of the PCC in
January 1946, marked a definite shift in China toward increasing
friction, then open hostilities and later, resumption of full-scale
civil war. It was this turn of events, I believe, which in retrospect
led some to the conclusion that a “break” had occurred between Mao and
Stalin sometime in the period 1946-47.
The turn in China was in large part a reflection of the change in
the international situation. As has already been noted, the wartime
coalition between the imperialists and Stalin came apart with the end
of the war. The break was heralded by increasing friction and was
publicly proclaimed in Winston Churchill’s famous “iron curtain” speech
in Fulton, Missouri, March 5, 1946—the opening salvo of the cold war.
Churchill’s speech created a sensation. It was obvious that the
time, place and setting of the speech was arranged in collaboration
with Truman. In China, the turn toward cold war politics along with
increased US military aid hardened Chiang Kai-shek’s position that the
CCP enter the National government on his terms or not at all. Failing a
“negotiated” agreement which would lead the CCP into a suicidal trap
Chiang was convinced that Washington would have no alternative but to
support his preferred course of mounting an all-out military assault
and smashing the Red Army as a prelude to “national unity.” Yet, the
coalition charade continued until the end of the year.
It took the form of a dispute over the number of representatives to
be allotted the CCP on the State Council which was to convene the
National Assembly. Of the forty State Councillors fixed by the PCC, 50
per cent, or twenty councillors were allotted to the Kuomintang. Of the
balance, the PCC Resolution on Government Organization
provided that the “exact number” to be allotted to other political
parties would “form the subject of separate discussions.”
Chiang proposed that the CCP be allotted eight seats and that its
front organization, the Democratic League, would get four, or a total
of twelve. This number was just short of the one-third required to
block any “changes in administrative policy” under the State Council
setup. The CCP rejected this proposal. On September 21, 1946, Chou
En-lai wrote General Marshall:
“If the Kuomintang would agree to appropriate
fourteen seats of the State Council to the Chinese Communist Party and
the Democratic League, thus definitely ensuring a one-third vote to
safeguard the PCC common program from being infringed upon, the whole
issue of the State Council can be settled almost overnight.”
Under prodding from General Marshall the Generalissimo
was constrained to offer a “compromise.” On October 2, 1946, he wrote
Marshall:
“The Chinese Communist Party has been incessantly
urging the reorganization of the National government. This hinges on
the distribution of the membership of the State Council. The government
originally agreed that the Chinese Communist Party be allocated eight
seats and the Democratic League, four, with a total of twelve. The
Chinese Communist Party, on the other hand, requested ten for
themselves and four for the Democratic League with a total of fourteen.
Now the government makes a fresh concession by taking the mean and
offering one seat for the independents to be recommended by the Chinese
Communist Party and agreed upon by the government, so that, added to
the original twelve, it makes a total of thirteen seats.”
He couples this “concession” with the demand that the
CCP immediately produce their list of candidates for the State Council
and their list of delegates to the National Assembly and that
it proceed immediately to implement the PCC program for the
“reorganization” of the Red Army and its withdrawal to previously
“assigned areas.”
Thirteen seats was still short of the one-third “safeguard.” The
“compromise” proposal was rejected in a letter from Chou En-lai,
October 9, 1946, to Marshall, in which the demand for fourteen seats
“to ensure that the Peaceful Reconstruction Program would not be
revised unilaterally.” Back and forth, the controversy raged. Chiang
Kai-shek refused to be budged.
 
The US withdraws
While this exercise in parliamentary bickering
continued, the real battles were being waged by the opposing armies in
the field. Temporary military successes bolstered Chiang’s conviction
that a military victory was in the cards. Brushing aside the proposals
in the October 9 letter from Chou which set forth the terms on which
the CCP would participate in the forthcoming National Assembly, Chiang
proceeded full-speed ahead to convene the National Assembly, November
15, 1946. This body, in the absence of the CCP, adopted a “democratic”
constitution and proceeded to form a “new” bourgeois democratic state
with all of the parliamentary trappings attendant thereon. The split
became definitive. The CCP was frozen out. The question of state power
in China could be resolved only by force of arms.
General Marshall took his departure with a parting shot at Chiang on
January 7, 1947, exactly one year from the day he arrived. In a
“personal statement” Marshall observed:
“I think the most important factors involved in the
recent breakdown of negotiations are these: On the side of the National
government, which is in effect the Kuomintang, there is a dominant
group of reactionaries who have been opposed, in my opinion, to almost
every effort I have made to influence the formation of a coalition
government. This has usually been under the cover of political or party
action, but since the party was the government, this action, though
subtle or indirect, has been devastating in its effect. They were quite
frank in publicly stating their belief that cooperation by the Chinese
Communist Party in the government was inconceivable and that only a
policy of force could definitely settle the issue. This group includes
military as well as political leaders.”
Marshall returned to the United States to become
Secretary of State. His mission, which sought to resolve the state of
dual power by persuading the CCP to liquidate the Red Army contingent
upon the establishment of a coalition government with Chiang Kai-shek
failed because of Kuomintang intransigence.
On January 29, 1947, the US Department of State issued a press
release which read:
“The United States government has decided to
terminate its connection with the Committee of Three which was
established in Chungking for the purpose of terminating hostilities in
China and of which General Marshall was chairman. The United States
government also has decided to terminate its connection with Executive
Headquarters which was established in Peiping by the Committee of Three
for the purpose of supervising, in the field, the execution of the
agreements for the cessation of hostilities and the demobilization and
reorganization of the Armed Forces in China.”
On its part, the CCP continued to press its demand for a
coalition government, but this time excluding Chiang Kai-shek and the
Kuomintang “reactionaries.” (An editorial broadcast by the North Shensi
Radio as late as May 24, 1948, called for the “swift convening of a new
political consultation conference by all liberals, democrats and
independent groups and organizations and all social luminaries to
discuss and approve the calling of a People’s Congress to establish a
Democratic Coalition government.”)
 
The Communist Party chooses to fight
Meanwhile the cold war continued to heat up. On March
12, 1947, the White House called a joint session of Congress to hear
Truman request emergency authority to aid Britain against a new upsurge
of the Greek revolution. In this speech Truman laid down what has since
become known as the “Truman Doctrine”: Washington’s manifest destiny to
“defend” the “Free World” against “Communist aggression.” It was a
virtual threat of war against the Soviet Union.
This was followed on June 5 by a speech at Harvard by General
Marshall outlining a plan for the rehabilitation and stabilization of
capitalism in Europe. The details were worked out at a number of
conferences and the “Marshall Plan” was adopted by Congress in November.
These developments threw the Kremlin into a panic. It seemed that
once again the question of world war was placed high on the agenda. The
spurious “coalition” governments artificially imposed on the occupied
countries of Eastern Europe were summarily jettisoned and replaced by
“People’s Democracies” headed by the various Communist parties. An
international center was established in Belgrade designated as the
Communist Information Bureau, or Cominform. As its official organ, the
Cominform published a paper with the mouth-filling title: For a
Lasting Peace—For a People’s Democracy. In China, Mao hailed
these developments as a turning point in the struggle. In a speech to
the central committee of the CCP, December 25, 1947, on the Present
Situation and Our Tasks, he declared
“The revolutionary war of the Chinese people has now
reached a turning point.”
After commenting on the continued advances of the Red
Army in the civil war Mao observed
“The various new democratic countries of Europe are
consolidating themselves internally and uniting with one another. The
anti-imperialist forces of the people of various European capitalist
countries, especially in France and Italy, are growing. Within the
United States the people’s democratic forces are daily growing.”
(The latter refers to the movement by the American CP to
organize the Progressive Party to run Henry Wallace for president in
1948.) And most important of all:
“The Communist parties of nine European countries
have organized an information bureau and published a summons to battle,
calling on the people of the whole world to arise in opposition to the
imperialists plans of enslavement.”
While Mao is so given to hyperbole that he cannot
refrain from exaggeration, the essence of the matter was that a
critical division between the Soviet bloc and its imperialist
antagonists had developed.
Under the circumstances Stalin could only view with jaundiced eye
the prospect of a Nationalist victory in the Chinese civil war or even
a coalition regime in which the CCP was stripped of its armed forces to
become hostage to a puppet of American imperialism. Stalin was prepared
to go to considerable lengths to avoid the danger of a war on two
fronts inherent in the control of China by a hostile regime. In the
period from June 1946 to the definitive split in China in January 1947
and after, there was no valid reason, either from a political or
military view, for a “break” between Stalin and Mao. On the contrary,
the interests of the Soviet Union required a friendly ally on its
eastern frontier.
Given the choice of unconditional surrender or fight, the CCP
elected to fight. Once the war erupted in earnest, the inner decay of
the Chiang regime was quickly revealed. Documents in The China
White Paper offer eloquent testimony: On January 12, 1948:
“Observers report no improvement in the morale of the
Nationalist forces, now at a dangerously low ebb. Field Commanders and
troops are unwilling to fight, except as a last resort, and large-scale
defection of combat elements confronted with battle can be expected to
continue.”
On November 8, 1948:
“Within the past few weeks, the government’s military
power and economic position have so deteriorated that we seriously
question its ability to survive for long. There is just no will to
fight in Nationalist government armies and in high official circles
there is only befuddlement.”
From the same dispatch:
“Only a few days before Mukden fell, the government
had five well-equipped, supplied and trained armies in the Manchurian
field, the most formidable striking force at its command, and within a
few days these armies were lost. They were lost not from battle
casualties, but from defection, although among their commanders were
numbered officers long associated with the Gimo [Generalissimo], and in
whose loyalty he trusted implicitly. The troops at Hsuchou are far
inferior to the Mukden garrison, and their commanders are already
resigned to defeat. There is no reason to believe in their will or
ability to resist an offensive. And when they are gone, Nanking has no
defense worthy of the name.”
And again:
“There appears no reason to believe that the Gimo
has, or will consider, a negotiated peace with the Communists, even
should they agree to deal with him. This intransigence will prolong the
conflict as long as there are any who will stand by him. It remains to
be seen how many of his followers will remain when the news of Mukden
becomes generally known. Their members will be appreciably less when
the assault on Hsuchou begins. Whether he will have enough of a
following to attempt a defense of Nanking is problematical, even
doubtful, but it seems clear that once he has left Nanking in flight,
he will never again be a really effective political force in this
country.”
Chiang’s armies melted away before the advance of the
Red Army so that at the end some of the larger urban centers, including
the largest city in China, Shanghai, fell without a shot.
Unfortunately, because of the CCP policy to restrain the city workers
from rising in solidarity with the approaching Red Armies, Chiang was
able to evacuate the remainder of his armed forces to Formosa where he
quelled an incipient rebellion and established himself as ruler of
Taiwan.
* * *
The theoretical possibility of a Stalinist party taking
state power, even with its class collaborationist program and practice,
was not ruled out by Trotsky. In the Transitional Program,
adopted by the founding conference of the Fourth International in 1938,
Trotsky observed that
“... one cannot categorically deny in advance the
theoretical possibility that, under the influence of completely
exceptional circumstances (war, defeat, financial crash, mass
revolutionary pressure, etc.) the petty-bourgeois parties, including
the Stalinists may go further than they themselves wish along the road
to a break with the bourgeoisie.”
That, it seems clear to me, is what occurred in China in
the period of June 1946 to October 1949. Capitalism was toppled in
China in spite of Mao’s program and policies, not because of them..
Even a few months before taking state power, Mao held out the
perspective of indefinite coexistence with capitalism. “Our current
policy is to control capitalism, not abolish it,” he declared in July,
1949.
If there was a bourgeois-democratic stage in the third Chinese
revolution it can be said to have begun with the abolition of the
period of “political tutelage” and the convening of the National
Assembly on November 15, 1946. But, in line with the theory of
permanent revolution, the National Assembly failed—it did not even
try—to carry through the democratic tasks of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution. The carrying through of these tasks was undertaken by the
regime established by the Chinese Communist Party through a new
“Political Consultative Conference” of September 29, 1949—the regime
characterized as the “People’s Democratic State.”
This required no break with the Kremlin; the evidence is
overwhelming that Mao considered the conquest of state power by the Red
Army and the establishment of a “People’s Republic” a consequence of
the “teachings of Stalin” and, in the given international situation, in
conformity with the interests of the Soviet bureaucracy.
 
Footnotes
1. The New
Revolutionaries: A Handbook of the International Radical Left.
Morrow. 319 pp. S5.95.
2. Report on
the Political Situation in Pakistan, Intercontinental
Press, Vol.7 No.17, May 5, 1969.
3. This paragraph
is deleted from revised Chinese editions.
4. Deleted from
revised Chinese editions.



NEW YORK, Feb. 4 – The temperature was freezing cold as a mass picket line rallied by the Joint CIO Strike Support Committee marched up and down the pavement in front of the main office of the Western Union building this morning in New York City.
A solid phalanx of cops, standing shoulder to shoulder, extended the entire length of the block forming a barrier between the pickets and the building entrance.
Armed with clubs, the cops stood facing the marching pickets. At their back, between the police barrier and the building, a block-long passage remained open for the passage of scabs.
Cops swarmed all around the block. They were across the street in archways and building entrances. Squads of mounted police occupied the four corners and others rode their horses menacingly up and down the picket line. There were teams of cops in motorcycle and sidecar. There were cops of every size, shape and variety, provocatively swinging their clubs, itching for trouble. Suddenly it came!
A group of scabs slank through the passage behind the police line on their way to the building entrance. The pickets booed. A cop resented the attitude of the pickets and began pushing them around. Without warning, the mounted Cossacks charged into the line. Men and women were set upon by club-swinging, uniformed thugs bent on cracking workers’ heads.
The workers were completely unprepared for this brutal assault. They had been told by their Stalinist leaders that Mayor O’Dwyer was a “friend of labor,” and were led to believe that they were going to get the “cooperation” of the police.
At the very moment of the police-incited “incident” one of the Stalinist leaders of the striking CIO American Communications Association stood on top of the sound truck and boomed over the loud speaker:
“Reform the line and keep moving. Don’t cause any trouble. If the police don’t lose their heads there won’t be any trouble, etc., etc.”
The cold, calculating brutality of O’Dwyer’s police, who had massed for the express purpose of provoking an incident that would give them an excuse for clubbing pickets, was palmed off as the work of “hotheads.”
 
Workers Enraged
It was much easier for the Stalinists to paint O’Dwyer as the “labor-progressive-coalition” candidate during the recent mayoralty election than it is to conceal his present strike-breaking role from the pickets’ on the Western Union line. More than one picket questioned through gritted teeth: “Is this what we elected him for?” Others cursed in anger: “Unless we stop the scabs from going in, O’Dwyer’s cops will break our strike.”
“Unless we stop the scabs from going in the cops will break the strike.” This has become so obvious that it has found expression in the Stalinist-controlled Joint CIO Strike Support Committee. At a special emergency meeting of the committee one delegate declared that the workers are getting fed up with being pushed around by the cops, and that only the militant action of an aroused labor movement can halt the strikebreakers.
But the Stalinists, who had concluded a political deal in the recent mayoralty election with the Democratic Party and its candidate O’Dwyer, still cling to their foul-smelling alliance with Tammany.
Instead of mapping a militant program designed to really stop the scabs from crossing the picket line the Stalinists have planned another brief protest demonstration “to meet the labor injunction threat in the Western Union strike.”
 
Only One Way
The main purpose of such labor injunctions, however, is to give the cops a pretext to use violence against effective picketing. O’Dwyer’s cops have resorted to violence on a number of occasions even before the courts have given them the injunction pretext. There is only one way to meet such threats. That is the way of militant mass picket line resistance to all strikebreaking actions.
The outcome of the Western Union strike is of the utmost importance to the entire labor movement in the New York area. If the cops are permitted to break the strike, a precedent will have been established and a pattern laid down for police strikebreaking against other unions.
It is necessary to arouse the entire organized labor movement to the danger that threatens, to reveal its true source and to rally the unions for a fighting showdown with the corporation and its political agents in the city administration.
 



SAN FRANCISCO, June 8, 1941 – The Stalinist wrecking crew wrote finis to the once proud Maritime Federation of the Pacific, in a convention here last week. The degeneration and final liquidation of the Maritime Federation followed a pattern made familiar by the Stalinists in the labor movement of the world.
The Maritime Federation of the Pacific was established after the great 1934 strike as a united front of all Pacific Coast unions engaged in the marine transport industry. As such it functioned, in its early period, in the militant tradition of ’34 and presented a solid front in all disputes with the shipowners. Its first president was Harry Lundeberg, now secretary of the Sailors Union of the Pacific, and the sailors were among the most ardent advocates and supporters of the Federation.
It wasn’t very long, however, before the Stalinists began packing the Federation with various and sundry organizations only remotely connected with the marine transport industry, but under the domination of the C.P. This process continued until the convention of 1938 found the Stalinists in control and exercising their control to drive out the militant Sailors Union of the Pacific, the equally militant branches of the Marine Firemens Union and the Masters, Mates and Pilots.
From that time on the Stalinists traded on the waning prestige of the Federation and converted it into a mouthpiece for the latest zig-zag in the party line. Having exhausted its usefulness in that direction the Federation is now tossed aside like a squeezed lemon. Thanks to the unity howlers of the Communist Party, the maritime workers of the Pacific Coast find themselves more divided now than at any time in their history.
Every such “victory” registered by the Stalinist wrecking crew paves the way for working class defeat. The maritime workers will learn by bitter experience that it is necessary to rid themselves of the poison of Stalinism before they can unite their ranks against the blows now being prepared by the bosses and the bosses’ government.
 



The Sailors Union of the Pacific has put the finger on the Little White Father at Washington, D.C. And thereon, my friends, hangs a tale.
Two U.S. Maritime Commission ships, the Satartia and the Coldbrook, have been tied up in Seattle for a number of weeks because the Commission refused to hire crews from the union hiring hall. The Maritime Commission was appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt and is responsible to the President.
The Chairman of the Commission, Admiral Land, was appointed over the objections of the seamen and of the organized labor movement. Recently, one of the commissioners, Truitt, a vigorous opponent of union hiring halls, was reappointed by the President, again over the strenuous objections of organized labor.
 
President Ordered Finking
In a recent article in the Journal of Commerce dealing with the dispute in Seattle, the following statement appeared:
“The Commission, according to L.L. Bates, general manager of the Pacific Northwest Oriental Line, which has been engaged as managing agent for the new service, is acting under a presidential order ... that employment of crews through the shipping commissioner is required by law.”
In other words, the Maritime Commission is acting under direct orders from Roosevelt to hire crews through fink-halls.
Meanwhile, the partisans of the “third term for Roosevelt” movement, among whom the Stalinists are the most vociferous, have been telling the seamen that Roosevelt was their friend. It was the tories, the economic royalists, that were the main, nay, the only enemy. At the recent convention of the C.P.-controlled Maritime Federation of the Pacific, the convention went on record to support the third term for Roosevelt movement. The National Maritime Union now meeting in convention, will undoubtedly do likewise.
 
Roosevelt Called to Act
Very good! If it is true that Roosevelt is our friend, we the seamen will appeal directly to him to speak out in our behalf against the tories. Could anything be fairer than that? Since he appears to be reluctant to speak, we will make that request. If he is really our friend, he will presumably grasp the opportunity of at least saying something in our behalf.
In a statement issued by Harry Lundeberg, Secretary of the Sailors Union of the Pacific, he makes this request on behalf of the seamen of the west coast and says:
“As the situation now stands (in Seattle) there is only one out to settle this entire matter and that is that the President of the United States is the only man who can change the attitude of the Maritime Commission and it is entirely up to him ... we will see in the next day or two whether Roosevelt thinks more of the Maritime Commission or whether he has any feeling at all for the demands of the thousands of seamen of the Pacific Coast.
“On behalf of the membership of the Sailors Union of the Pacific, we told the Maritime Commission that the crumby tubs could stay tied up alongside of the dock until such time that the Maritime Commission was willing to use the same methods of employment as practiced by private shipowners on the Pacific Coast.”
 
A.F.L. Acts
The Houston convention of the American Federation of Labor went on record to support the position taken by the Sailors Union of the Pacific in this hiring hall dispute. In accord with the mandate of that convention and in reply to a request by Lundeberg, President Green wired the sailors that:
“I regret unyielding position which Maritime Commission has assumed regarding hiring seamen for government ships Pacific Coast. I have repeatedly appealed to Chairman Land to hire unlicensed personnel through union hiring halls. I will call on Secretary of Commerce Hopkins and at my earliest opportunity upon the President and urge action at earliest possible moment as you suggest.”
Franklin “I love labor” Roosevelt now has the opportunity of proving his devotion. Those drum beaters for the third term for Roosevelt, “our friend”, should rejoice that this opportunity has been provided.
 



WITH THE publication of the recent Chinese indictment
entitled: The Leaders of the CPSU are the Greatest Splitters of
Our Times, the split between Peking and Moscow becomes definitive.
The full text of the statement is published in the Feb. 7 issue of Peking
Review. The text goes beyond the title by characterizing the
Khrushchev leadership as the greatest splitters of all time,
by asserting that “the leaders of the CPSU are the greatest of all
revisionists as well as the greatest of all sectarians and splitters
known to history.”
The statement purports to be a historical review of splits and
splitters from the time of Marx and Engels up to the present day. Its
central thesis had been previously projected in a speech by Chou Yang,
vice-director of the Propaganda Department of the CPC Central
Committee, delivered on Oct. 26, 1963 to a scientific gathering at the
Chinese Academy of Sciences. To wit: That “revisionism” arose to plague
Marx and Engels at the very dawn of the socialist movement. So it was
at the beginning and so it will continue to the very end.
Chou Yang argues that inasmuch as every thesis must have its
antithesis, the promulgation of the Marxist revolutionary doctrine
[thesis] inevitably gave rise to its opposite [antithesis] revisionism.
Not only were the founders of scientific socialism fated to combat
revisionism but Lenin too, in his day, was compelled to enter the lists
against the revisionists. And, according to the dialectic of Chou, such
was the fate not only of Marx, Engels and Lenin, but “of Stalin too.”
“This phenomenon may seem strange,” Chou Yang opines.
“How can certain people who had previously been supporters of
revolutionary scientific socialism degenerate into
counter-revolutionary anti-scientific revisionists? Yet it is not at
all strange. Everything tends to divide itself in two. Theories are no
exception, and they also tend to divide. Wherever there is a
revolutionary scientific doctrine, its antithesis, a
counter-revolutionary, anti-scientific doctrine, is bound to arise in
the course of the development of that doctrine. As modern society is
divided into classes and as the difference between progressive and
backward groups will continue far into the future, the emergence of
antitheses is inevitable.”
With all due apologies to Chou, a nagging question still
persists in thrusting its way to the fore: What is the criteria for
determining who is and who is not a “Marxist-Leninist?” Chou has a
ready answer. The Khrushchev leadership has repudiated Stalin. “To
repudiate Stalin completely,” Chou affirms, “is in fact to negate
Marxism-Leninism, which Stalin defended and developed.”
According to the Maoist schema of historical development the split
was inevitable from the beginning. However, it is still necessary to
fix the exact moment in time and the precise issue which signalled the
dialectical transformation of Khrushchevite Marxism-Leninism into its
opposite, revisionism. The time and issue are pinpointed in comment
number two on the Open Letter of the Central Committee of the CPSU,
entitled On the Question of Stalin (Sept. 13, 1963). It reads
as follows:
“Stalin died in 1953; three years later the leaders
of the CPSU violently attacked him at the 20th Congress, and eight
years after his death they again did so at the 22nd Congress, removing
and burning his remains. In repeating their violent attacks on Stalin,
the leaders of the CPSU aimed at erasing the indelible influence of
this great proletarian revolutionary among the people of the Soviet
Union and throughout the world, and at paving the way for negating
Marxism-Leninism, which Stalin had defended and developed, and for the
all-out application of a revisionist line. Their revisionist line
began exactly with the 20th Congress and became fully systematized
at the 22nd Congress. The facts have shown ever more clearly that
their revision of the Marxist-Leninist theories on imperialism, war and
peace, proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat,
revolution in the colonies and semi-colonies, the proletarian party,
etc., is inseparably connected with their complete negation of Stalin.”
(My emphasis)
The aspect of the Sino-Soviet dispute about which this
article is especially concerned is the attempt to revive, regenerate
and reconstitute the “Stalin cult” on a world scale. The working class
of all countries—I repeat, all countries—have paid a
heavy price for the virus of Stalinism that has for so long poisoned
the wellspring of Marxist thought and revolutionary socialist action.
Millions of worker-militants who flocked to the liberating banner of
Leninism in the aftermath of the Bolshevik-led Russian October
revolution were corrupted, debauched and cruelly betrayed when the
Stalin faction seized the power, strangled the workers’ and peasants’
Soviets, emasculated Lenin’s party and extended its malignant sway over
the international communist movement.
To begin with, it is a gross exaggeration to assert that the heirs
of Stalin now occupying the Kremlin have “completely negated Stalin.”
For their own reasons and their own interests they have been
constrained to lift but one tiny corner of the veil that has for too
long shrouded the countless crimes committed by the genial butcher who
defiled the name of Lenin and besmirched the proud banner of
Bolshevism. Stalin was no Marxist-Leninist. He was a murderer of
Marxist-Leninists—including some thousands of devoted Stalinists. The
Chinese do a great disservice to their own cause in the struggle
against the Khrushchev brand of “revisionism” and to the regeneration
of Bolshevik-Leninism by attempting to lead a movement back to
Stalin. For nothing in the revisionist views today advocated by
Khrushchev were not at one time or another in the past promoted and
advocated by Stalin.
* * *
THERE is today a growing mood of discontent and
opposition to the flagrantly opportunist policies and practices of the
Khrushchev leadership being manifested in Communist party formations
throughout the world. A number of splits have already taken place and
more are looming on the horizon. The questions raised by the
Sino-Soviet dispute have been an important ingredient in this ferment.
In their Feb. 7 document, Peking openly calls for an extension of these
splits and encourages, promotes and supports the “schismatics.”
The back-to-Stalin gambit is designed to channelize the opposition
to Kremlin “revisionism” within strictly defined limits governed by the
needs and interests of the Maoist bureaucracy; to circumvent
untrammeled discussion of the many basic issues raised in the dispute
by insisting on establishing and maintaining the hierarchical order of
progression—Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalin-Mao. If successful it can only
serve to substitute a Mao cult of infallibility for the now defunct
Stalin cult in which all disputed questions of Marxist-Leninist theory
and practice will be subject to the ipse dixit of the cult
leader.
This tendency is already to be observed in the groups that have
split off from the various Communist parties and embraced Maoism. In
this country, for example, a small group which split from the American
Communist party several years ago, after coyly flirting with Maoism for
a period, has finally plumped for Peking as against Moscow. It modestly
calls itself the Progressive Labor Movement. In the recently published
winter issue of its magazine, Marxist-Leninist Quarterly,
there appears a programmatic statement by the National Coordinating
Committee of PLM which purports to meet the need of the American
working class for a “revolutionary theory.”
We are informed in an editorial note that:
“During the past year the Progressive Labor Movement
has been discussing the [Sino-Soviet] debate concerning correct
Marxist-Leninist theory for our movement and for the international
movement.”
We are availing ourselves of this opportunity to comment
on those aspects of the “debate” that concern us here: Stalin and
Stalinism. In making their Great Leap from Moscow to Peking the leaders
of PLM faithfully parrot the Maoist line on the merits and demerits of
Stalin. Along with Peking they flay Khrushchev for downgrading Stalin
in his 20th Congress speech bcause:
“It did not place both his enormous contributions and
his serious errors in their actual historical context, but offered
instead a subjective, crude, total negation of a great Marxist-Leninist
and proletarian revolutionist.”
In an almost verbatim paraphrase of the Chinese
statement On the Question of Stalin, the PLM article draws a
balance sheet of Stalin’s assets and liabilities and concludes that on
balance, Stalin’s contributions are “primary” and his errors,
“secondary.” What precisely were these errors?
“In the matter of Party and government organization,
Stalin did not fully apply proletarian democratic centralism.
He was in some instances guilty of abrogating it. There was a
great development of centralism without the absolutely essential
corresponding growth of proletarian democracy. This appears to
have fostered an inordinate growth of bureaucracy which often
resulted in reliance on administrative ‘diktat’ rather
than the full participation of the party membership and
people in making and carrying out policy.” (Emphasis added to
underscore the method of introducing qualifying phrases intended to
minimize Stalin’s “errors.”)
But let’s continue—the worst is yet to come! The PLM
statement then plunges into a learned dissertation on “contradictions,”
lifted bodily from Mao, to explain why Stalin fell into the “error” of
presiding over the monstrous frame-up trials and purges which converted
the Soviet Union into a veritable chamber of horrors.
“Stalin,” we are informed, “erred in confusing two
types of contradictions which are different in nature. Thus, he did not
differentiate between contradictions involving the Party and the people
on the one hand and the enemy on the other, and contradictions within
the Party and among the people. Consequently, he did not employ
different methods in handling these different types of contradictions.
Stalin was right to suppress the counter-revolutionaries. If he had not
he would have been derelict in his defense of the Soviet State. Thus,
many counter-revolutionaries deserving punishment were duly punished.
But, because contradictions within the Party and among the people were
not recognized as something totally different, something natural and
even essential to the Party’s theoretical growth and development, no
Communist method of principled inner-Party struggle, proceeding from
unity through struggle to a higher unity, was developed. Many
innocent people, or people with differences which could have been
worked out in the course of principled ideological struggle, were
wrongly killed.” (My emphasis)
Unfortunately, people who were “wrongly killed” are just
as dead as those killed “rightly.” When Stalin was alive all
were indiscriminately dubbed “counter-revolutionary” and summarily
executed. Those who now deplore such “secondary errors” were among the
first to applaud Stalin’s frightful atrocities as evidence of his not
being “derelict in defense of the Soviet State.”
Who now is to decide which were the innocent and which the guilty?
Who is to judge? As an aftermath of Khrushchev’s 20th Congress speech
on the Stalin cult a few of the “wrongly killed” were “rehabilitated”
and a few of Stalin’s crimes were disclosed. A few more rehabilitations
and disclosures at the 22nd Congress. Instead of pressing for a full
disclosure of all the facts of Stalin’s crimes and the rehabilitation
of all of Stalin’s victims, the Maoists demand that Khrushshev call a
halt to the “attack on Stalin.”
* * *
UNDER compulsion to settle accounts with their own
Stalinist past, the authors of the PLM statement, present us with a
bowdlerized condensation of the history of the American Communist
party. We are informed that the CPUSA was cursed with “revisionism”
from its very inception. We are further enlightened by the assertion
that the one golden era of the American CP was the period following the
expulsion of the Lovestoneite leadership in 1929 encompassing the early
years of the Great Depression. In the entire history of the CP one
doughty warrior against “revisionism” is singled out for special
commendation: William Z. Foster.
To buttress this contention a companion piece to the PLM statement
appears in the winter issue of Marxist-Leninist Quarterly,
a eulogy of Foster on the occasion of the 80th anniversary of his
birth, written by one Fred Carlisle. The PLM message to the American
working class urging the need for a “revolutionary theory” is thus
simplified: On the international arena: Back to Stalin. On the American
scene: Back to Foster!
Before proceeding further we must comment on the outrageous jargon
that is the hallmark of Stalinism and which has now been spiced by the
turbid Maoism of the Chinese. Words which had previously been endowed
with a precise definition in the Marxist vocabulary have been
transformed into verbal abstractions capable, as the occasion demands,
of being invested with the most diverse meanings. The term
“revisionism” is a case in point. To Marxists, revisionism has been
associated with the name of its most prominent advocate, Eduard
Bernstein, author of a book entitled Evolutionary Socialism.
Bernstein’s attempt to divest Marxism of its revolutionary content was
designed to provide theoretical justification for the adaptation to
capitalist parliamentarism of the right-wing bureaucracy, especially
the trade-union bureaucrats, who became a power in the Second
(Socialist) International during the prolonged period of imperialist
expansion and “prosperity” in the latter part of the 19th century up to
the outbreak of World War I.
The classic manifestation of revisionism was known as Millerandism,
after Alexandre Millerand, a French lawyer and socialist deputy in
parliament who in 1898 accepted an appointment as Minister of Commerce
in the cabinet of the capitalist government. Millerandism became
synonymous with parliamentary coalitionism. Millerand was the first
Socialist to accept a ministerial portfolio in a capitalist government.
His action engendered heated debate in the socialist movement of that
time, which was divided into right, left and center. The left wing
rejected coalitionism as a betrayal of socialism. The right wing chided
Millerand only because he had not consulted the party. The center
(Kautsky) introduced a motion at the International Congress held in
Paris, in 1900, typical of centrist straddling, “allowing that
socialists might, as an exceptional measure of a temporary kind, enter
a bourgeois government, but implicitly condemning Millerand by saying
that such action must be approved by the party.”
This compromise paved the way for the later coalition policy of the
Social Democracy during and after the outbreak of the First World War.
The lessons of the struggle in the Second International against
coalitionism constituted an important ingredient influencing Lenin’s
views on the nature of the revolutionary socialist party. Later, with
the formation of the Third (Communist) International, a conscious and
deliberate barrier was erected against the infiltration of reformist
socialist and centrist muddleheads by the imposition at the Second
Congress in 1920 of the 21 conditions for affiliation.
 
The People’s Front Variety
In the hey-day of Stalinism, coalitionism was dignified
by the name “people’s front” and was consecrated as the official policy
of all sections of the Communist International at the Seventh World
Congress in 1935.
Lenin considered coalitionism a betrayal of socialism and fought
against it the whole of his political life. To him it was the epitome
of revisionism and he wrote his polemical work, State and
Revolution, as a refutation of the parliamentary cretinism of
the coalitionists, and in the process elaborated and refined the
revolutionary essence of Marxism. Upon his return to Russia in April
1917, Lenin threatened to split with those Bolsheviks, including
Stalin, who favored participation with the Mensheviks in the coalition
government established after the February revolution.
One question: Do the Marxist-Leninists of PLM consider people’s
frontism, the most odious form of coalitionism, as revisionist? They
don’t say! However, they do extol William Z. Foster as the “best” of
the fighters against the “revisionism” of the American CP; Foster, who
preached and practiced people’s front coalition politics to the day of
his death. And what of Mao? Can they find anywhere in his voluminous
writings a forthright condemnation of people’s frontism? I don’t think
so!
In China, coalitionism was first imposed by Stalin in the revolution
of 1926-27. It there took the form of the Stalin-Bukharin formula of
“the bloc of four classes,” under which the Chinese Communist party was
subordinated to the rule of Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang. Under this
formula, the Chinese workers and peasants were first disarmed and then
butchered by the troops of Stalin’s erstwhile ally, Chiang Kai-shek. As
a result of this experience, Chen Tu-hsiu, then leader of the CPC,
broke with Stalinism along with a number of other prominent leaders.
All of whom were expelled from the Stalintern as
“counter-revolutionists.”
It was only after the Seventh World Congress of the CI enthroned the
People’s Front as the prevailing “universal truth” of Marxism-Leninism
that Mao Tse-tung was elevated to the position of party leader.
 
The Dialectic of Revisionism
According to the Maoist dialectic in which everything,
including theory, divides in two—not three or four but exactly in two
— the tendencies in the world socialist movement are neatly separated
into two compartments: revisionism and Marxist-Leninism. Revisionism is
elevated to the status of an abstract category in which the term
assumes a generic character in which is subsumed all that is not
accorded the sovereign title of Marxism-Leninism. Reformism,
sectarianism, dogmatism, opportunism, ultra-leftism, each or all are
included or may be inferred in the general term. What is revisionism
today can become Marxist-Leninism tomorrow and vice versa. It has
become, par excellence, a cult term. Only the initiates who are privy
to the thought of the cult leader can be sure of what it means at any
given moment. Instead of a precise word defining a specific tendency it
has been transformed into an epithet to smite those bold or foolhardy
enough to question or disagree with the latest revelation of the
“leader.”
From time to time differences of interpretation may arise between
even the most devoted disciples that might lead to serious doctrinal
disputations. The system cries out for a final arbiter around whom must
be draped the aura of infallibility. Just as the Catholic church
requires its pope to interpret holy scripture, so does every
bureaucratic formation in the labor movement require its “pope” to
resolve disputes that arise as a result of the inevitable conflict of
interest between individuals and groups within the bureaucracy. To
submit such disputes to the democratic process of discussion and action
by the masses would endanger the existence of the bureaucracy as a
whole. The bureaucrats fear this course as the devil fears holy water.
With the hothouse growth of the Soviet bureaucracy after Lenin’s death,
Stalin was elevated to the position of supreme arbiter of the parvenu
bureaucratic caste and invested with the divine afflatus of
infallibility.
In this sense the Chinese are correct in twitting Khrushchev about
his indiscretion in seeking to place sole blame on Stalin for the
crimes committed during his reign. There is, however, method to
Khrushchev’s madness. His condemnation of the “cult of the personality”
is calculated to absolve the bureaucracy of all responsibility for
Stalin’s crimes. His task is greatly facilitated by the fact that once
the supreme arbiter is firmly esconced upon this lofty perch the
illusion is created that the “personality” has achieved complete
independence from the bureaucratic machine that created him and that it
is the man who manipulates and rules over the machine instead of the
other way around. Khrushchev attacks the “cult of the personality” in
order to conceal the ugly visage of the “cult” of the bureaucracy which
continues to rule as before.
* * *
LET us scrutinize, in the light of this brief historical
review, the tendentious analysis of the Marxist-Leninists of PLM of
what went wrong with the American CP, when it happened and what to do
about it.
“From the earliest days of the communist movement in
the United States to the present,” we are informed, “revisionism and
its political manifestation, class collaboration, has been the chronic
weakness.”
Not so. While the PLM theoreticians are prone to use the
term “revisionism” in the generic sense indicated above, in this
instance they define its concrete political manifestation as “class
collaboration.” In the “earliest days” of the American CP class
collaboration was decidedly not its “chronic weakness.” In
the period following the Russian revolution of 1917 the dividing line
between the various tendencies in the socialist movement on an
international scale was their attitude toward the October revolution.
The revisionists who preached and practiced the doctrine of class
collaboration were solidly lined up in hostile antagonism to the
Bolshevik revolution. The earliest CP’s, both in this country and
abroad, were formed almost without exception out of splits over this
question in the various parties of the Social Democracy. In this
country the several Communist parties were established as a result of a
split in the American Socialist party led by the left wing. The left
wing split-off from the SP, together with the foreign language
federations, comprised the cadres of communism which then split into
contending parties each seeking recognition from the Communist
International.
 
Disease of Ultra-Leftism
The basic weakness was not class collaboration but
ultra-leftism. The tendency toward ultra-leftism was not at all
peculiar to this country but was a malady that afflicted a number of
the early communist groups in Europe. In fact, it was precisely against
this desease that Lenin polemicized in his now famous pamphlet: Ultra-Leftism:
An Infantile Disorder. Class collaborationists were not
welcome in the Communist International of Lenin’s and Trotsky’s day.
But let’s proceed with our perusal of the PLM statement for a clue
to this bowdlerized version of history.
“After the expulsion [in 1929] of Lovestone,” we are
told, “the party developed a militant pragmatic approach which appealed
to workers during the depression and produced a mass base for the CP.”
In the article by Carlisle, eulogizing Foster, we are
instructed that:
“During the 1929-33 years of deepest crisis,” the
American CP “came closer to being a correct Marxist-Leninist program
for the US than anything that had been developed during the past 70
years.”
This is incredible! The years singled out for special
approbation by PLM encompass what has gone down in history as the
“Third Period.” The Sixth World Congress of the CI was held in 1928
under the aegis of the Stalin-Bukharin bloc. Bukharin headed the
right-wing tendency in the CPSU which included such prominent leaders
as Tomsky and Rykov. For the whole period prior to 1928 the Stalin
bureaucracy proceeded on the Bukharin formula of a casual romp to
socialism in which “socialism” would be established “at a snail’s
pace.” The slogan at the time was: Kulak enrich thyself! The Left
Opposition, under the leadership of Leon Trotsky, had repeatedly warned
that the differentiation among the peasantry in the villages under the
Stalin-Bukharin policy was strengthening the grip of the Kulak (rich
peasants) on the peasant economy and solidifying their political
control over the middle and poor peasantry.
The program of the Left Opposition presented an extensive criticism
of the Stalin-Bukharin line and elaborated an alternative program of
planned industrialization in the economic sphere and a restoration of
workers’ democracy in the Soviets and the party. Needless to say, the
program, of the Left Opposition was suppressed and the adherents of the
opposition were slandered, expelled, jailed, and, in Trotsky’s case,
exiled from the Soviet Union. This did not forestall the development of
the crisis predicted by the Left Opposition. It erupted soon after the
Sixth Congress when the Kulaks engineered a strike against the Soviet
government which threatened to starve the cities into submission and
brought the Soviet regime to the very brink of disaster.
Recoiling in panic from the spectre of capitalist restoration
spearheaded by the Kulaks, Stalin responded with a sharp turn to the
left. In startling contrast to the previous line, Stalin decreed the
immediate liquidation of the Kulaks, the “forced march” to
collectivization and the first of his series of five-year plans of
rapid industrialization. These edicts were carried out in an atmosphere
of virtual civil war. The Stalin-Bukharin program adopted at the Sixth
Congress was quickly jettisoned.
Stalin broke with Bukharin, who was retired in disgrace, and
proceeded to purge the Bukharinists from their positions of leadership
in the various sections of the Comintern. In this country Jay Lovestone
was tagged as the scapegoat because he was identified with the Bukharin
line. Although commanding a majority at the March 1929 convention of
the American CP, Lovestone was summoned to Moscow where he was detained
while the Stalin machine engineered a switch in leadership.
Characteristic of Stalin’s machinations, Foster, who was then the most
prominent leader of the CP, was sidetracked, and a political nonentity
by the name of Earl Browder was tagged as leader of the CP. Being
absolutely dependent on Moscow for his authority, Browder was
considered a more pliable instrument of Stalinist manipulation and
Foster was shunted aside. Foster never forgave Browder for this
humiliation.
To buttress his “left turn” in the Soviet Union, Stalin proclaimed
the advent of the “Third Period” which was to herald the end of
capitalism on a world scale. In the world outside the Soviet Union the
tactics of the Third Period rested on the twin pillars of the theory of
“social fascism” and the “united front from below.”
The theory and practice of “social fascism” was a patent absurdity.
Lenin had previously characterized the reformist Social Democrats as
social chauvinists, or social patriots, etc. His intention thereby was
to pillory the reformists as socialist in words, but national
chauvinists in deed; or socialist in word, but bourgeois patriots in
deed. But what could the epithet “social fascism” mean? That the Social
Democrats were socialist in word and fascist in deed? But the Hitlerite
fascists aimed at destroying the Social Democrats by smashing the
independent unions upon which they were based, and made no bones about
it. Germany was the major arena in which the battle was to be fought
out. According to the theory of “social fascism,” the Social Democracy,
which commanded the support of the majority of the German working
class, was the “main enemy.”
The Third Period tactic of the “united front from below” was another
of Stalin’s unique contributions which wreaked havoc in the world labor
movement. The tactic of the united front was worked out and codified at
the Third World Congress of the CI which convened in Moscow from June
22 to July 12, 1921. Contrary to the hopes and expectations of the
Bolsheviks, the post-war wave of revolutionary actions subsided after a
number of serious defeats. The slogan advanced after the October
revolution of the “conquest of power,” was amended because of the
change in the objective situation. The Comintern modification was
summed up in the slogan “the conquest of the masses.” That is, to win
for the Communist parties the allegiance of a decisive section of the
working class in preparation for the next revolutionary wave.
The Social Democrats still commanded the support of a considerable
section of the European working class. The tactic of the united front
was designed to unite the workers in action against capitalist reaction
and for the defense of their interests. The tactic was devised to
compel the leaders of the Social Democracy to enter united front
actions on concrete issues in defense of the interests of the working
class as a whole. In the process of such actions it was considered that
the non-communist workers would be won over to the Communist parties as
they became convinced of the treacherous nature of their reformist
leaders. To forestall the expected attempt of the Social Democrats to
limit and derail the united front actions, it was insisted that each
organization maintain its independence. As Lenin phrased it: We march
separately but strike together.
Stalin took this concept and gave it his own twist—which converted
it into its opposite. If the Social Democracy and fascism were “twins,”
as he insisted, a united front agreement with the leaders became
impossible. To get around this dilemma Stalin concocted the “united
front from below.” That is, the workers adhering to the parties of the
Social Democracy were called upon to break with their leaders and join
in actions organized and led by the Communist parties. But if they were
prepared to go that far, why bother about applying the circuitous
tactic of the united front? It didn’t make sense. The result was that
there was no united front at all. On the contrary, in the name of the
“united front from below” the Stalinists preceded to split the labor
movement down the middle.
 
American Version of Third Period
In this country, and others, the Third Period lunacy
became a hideous caricature. Worker militants, members of the Communist
party together with their supporters, were yanked out of the existing
trade unions and herded into pure “revolutionary” paper organizations
under the leadership of the CP acting through the front of the Trade
Union Unity League. The trade-union bureaucrats were tickled pink. At
one fell swoop they had gotten rid of their most militant opposition
elements. Needless to say, the paper unions of the TUUL were 100 per
cent “revolutionary”—and 100 per cent impotent.
In this country the Third Period idiocy made little difference one
way or another. It was in Germany, the key to the whole international
situation, that it exacted a heavy toll. By splitting the organized
German working class, the “theory” of social fascism and the tactic of
the “united front from below,” paved the way for Hitler’s march to
power. So complete was the demoralization of the German workers that
Hitler’s hordes seized the power without a struggle.
The victory of Hitler in Germany marked the end of the so-called
Third Period. It led to a sharp rightward swing in which the “united
front from below” was transmuted into the “people’s front” at the
Seventh World Congress of the CI in 1935. If anything, the “people’s
front” line was an even crasser mutilation of Lenin’s united front
tactic.
Third Period Stalinism can be aptly characterized as “infantile
leftism” gone berserk. And it is this aberration that PLM now advocates
as a model for building a “new” Marxist-Leninist revolutionary
communist movement in this country. This, they contend, was the
“heroic” period of the American CP. This view goes far to explain the
pronounced tendency toward irresponsible adventurism which
characterizes their activity. You can never give birth to a movement —
progressive or otherwise—by propounding and following a course of
infantile leftism, but you can spawn a numerous crop of victims, which
is just about what the Stalinist Third Period line accomplished.
The PLM statement, cited above, attributes the development by the
American CP of its Third Period line to “militant” pragmatism. I must
confess that the distinction between “militant” pragmatism and the
non-militant variety, as philosophical categories, eludes me. The
implication is that under the leadership of Foster, the American CP
arrived at their line independent of the Kremlin. Unfortunately for the
authors of the statement, Foster says otherwise. In his History
of the Communist Party, published in 1952, Foster relates that
during a discussion in the CI on the “American question,” following the
March 1929 convention, Stalin criticized both the majority [Lovestone]
and the minority [Foster] for their “fundamental error in exaggerating
the specific features of American imperialism.”
“It would be wrong,” the Kremlin sage observed, “to
ignore the specific peculiarities of American capitalism. The Communist
Party in its work must take them into account. But,” he quickly added,
“it would be still more wrong to base the activities of the Communist
Party on these specific features, since the foundation of the
activities of every Communist Party, including the American Communist
Party, on which it must base itself, must be the general features of
capitalism, which are the same for all countries, and not its specific
features in any given country.”
Under this formula, Stalin cemented his monolithic
control over all sections of the CI. Policy originated in Moscow. And
woe betide those who pleaded “specific peculiarities” to warrant an
exception being made for their own section. From then on every twist
and turn in Kremlin policy was religiously echoed in every section
throughout the world, special national “peculiarities” to the contrary
notwithstanding. Foster got the message. When it came to twisting in
conformity with the latest edict from Stalin he was without a peer.
This earned for him in the radical movement the appellation, William
“Zig-zag” Foster. This is the peerless fighter against “revisionism”
whom the PLM statement commends to: “Young radicals [who] can learn
from and emulate the devotion to the working class and socialism of
such outstanding communists as William Z. Foster.”
 
Page From CP History
In his panegyric on Foster the self-avowed
Marxist-Leninist, Fred Carlisle, explains that the main authority upon
whom he relies for an evaluation of Foster is Foster himself. He
neglects to add that whole sections of his eulogy were lifted bodily
from Foster’s History of the Communist Party, for
which the original author is not credited. “Foster’s historical
analyses of these struggles,” Carlisle affirms, “are quite helpful,
being more accurate and objective than other available sources.” Irony
itself stands disarmed before such monumental naivete. At any rate,
among the many examples of Carlisle’s historical scholarship, we select
one which raises an important question—Lenin’s concept of democratic
centralism as contrasted with that of Stalin-Foster.
“In 1928,” we are enlightened, “James P. Cannon was
expelled form the CP for supporting Trotsky’s left-deviationist
doctrine. Upon his return from the sixth world congress of the
Comintern, which had turned down an appeal from Trotsky in exile,
Cannon began clandestinely distributing Trotskyite materials. Though
Cannon had been a member of their group, Foster and Bittelman preferred
the charges against him of disseminating Trotskyite propaganda,
advocating withdrawal from existing trade unions, abandoning the united
front and fomenting disruption. Eventually about 100 of Cannon’s
followers were also expelled and, under Cannon’s leadership, formed an
opposition league which later became the Socialist Workers Party,
affiliated to the Fourth International.”
The charge of “clandestinely” circulating “Trotskyite
materials,” is supposed to convey the impression that Cannon was
engaged in some sneaky, underhanded, criminal activity, warranting the
most drastic penalty. Precisely what was the nature of this contraband
which the sly Cannon was “clandestinely” distributing to leaders and
members of the American CP? The slander that it consisted of
“propaganda advocating withdrawal from, the existing trade unions,” and
“abandoning the united front,” etc., characteristic of the
Stalin-Foster Third Period insanity, is downright ludicrous. The
“materials” actually consisted of Trotsky’s article, Criticism
of the Draft Program, which had been presented for the
consideration of the delegates to the Sixth World Congress and which
they were bureaucratically deprived of reading because it was
suppressed by the Stalin-Bukharin machine. The article, which came into
Cannon’s possession through accident, was later published serially in
the first issues of The Militant, then the American
organ of the Left Opposition.
Does our learned historian even bother to ask himself the question why

Cannon found it necessary to distribute such materials “clandestinely?”
Cannon was a
member of the top political committee of the CP; he had gone to Moscow
as a delegate of the American CP to the sixth congress. Wasn’t he
entitled to submit whatever materials he possessed pertinent to the
decisions of that congress in a discussion presumably called for that
express purpose? But, no! By that time the Stalin pogrom
against Trotskyism raged throughout the communist movement. Trotsky’s
views were distorted, mutilated, or suppressed by the Stalin
bureaucracy. The most effective theoretical weapon in the arsenal of
the bureaucracy was the mailed fist—and they wielded it with abandon.
And all of this, of course, in the name of “democratic centralism.”
 
A Deadly Affliction
As he did with so many of Lenin’s contributions, Stalin
twisted the Leninist concept of democratic centralism into its
opposite, bureaucratic centralism. Under Lenin’s concept of democratic
centralism, as practiced in his lifetime, all a minority was obliged to
do was to accept the decisions of the majority after
democratic discussion and debate, leaving to the unfolding events to
determine who was right and who wrong. Stalin gave this concept just
one little twist and converted it into bureaucratic law that a minority
must agree with the majority.
It is a psychological impossibility to expunge from one’s head
views, opinions, and thoughts which might be at variance with the
views, opinions, and thoughts of others. The practice of bureaucratic
centralism inevitably led to the obscene spectacle of individuals
driven to public confession of their “errors” in order to avoid summary
expulsion or worse. All of this was embellished and dignified under the
heading of “self-criticism” which, as practiced by Stalinism, could be
more accurately defined as self-flagellation.
Trotsky once aptly characterized Stalinism as “the syphilis of the
labor movement.” To urge upon the American workers a return to
Stalin-Foster is to counsel a course which could only induce an
aggravated case of locomotor ataxia. And that is one
affliction we would not wish on our worst enemies.



Labor’s Giant Step: Twenty Years of the CIO
by Art Preis
Pioneer Publishers, New York, 1964. 550 pp. with index. Pre-publication price $5.00
Readers of International Socialist Review will welcome the announcement by Pioneer Publishers of a major publishing event. Labor’s Giant Step: Twenty Years of the CIO by Art Preis, is a unique contribution to the history of the American union movement. There is nothing like it in print – and with good reason. Major publishing houses, to whom books are marketable commodities to be sold for profit, shy away from authors whose concern for truth spares none of the sacred cows of our social system.
It has been my privilege to know and work with Art Preis for some 30 years. He is not one to mince words – not where the interest of the working class is concerned. Like a master surgeon he applies his scalpel to men and events to lay bare many a rattling skeleton in the closets of our myth-makers. Deified capitalist politicians and sanctified labor skates; zig-zag artists and twisters of the Stalinist and Social Democratic variety; pure and simple union fakers of the Gompers-Meany school; all are given their just due.
The real heroes of Preis’ book are the union militants and radicals who refused to knuckle under when the going got tough. The men and women who fought to preserve the crusading spirit, the militant methods of struggle, the democratic tradition, of the early and heroic days of the CIO. Many succumbed to the fleshpots of the union bureaucracy as the apparatus extended its sway over the ranks in the period of “stabilization” following the establishment of union power in the mass production industries. Others fought and are still fighting for the ideas and ideals that girded American labor”s first giant step toward emancipation from capitalist wage slavery.
For those who made possible its publication Preis’ book is a labor of love. When no major publisher could be found with guts enough to publish this work, many individuals answered an appeal for contributions to make its publication possible. Despite volunteer workers who gave freely of their time, energy and talents, we are informed that there is still a deficit of approximately $1,000 which will have to be met before publication date now tentatively set for September 15.
This short appreciation is not intended to be a review of the book. It is, rather, in the nature of an appeal for contributions to make up the deficit and for pre-publication orders to ensure enough income to pay the printer before it comes off the press. (The ISR will probably carry a review in its next issue.)
This is a big book of 550 pages. To give some idea of its scope we list here the chapter contents:

Part 1, Nine Chapters: The Rise of the CIO (1929–1940). Part 2, Five Chapters: Prelude to War (1940–1942). Part 3, Eight Chapters: CIO in the War (1942–1945). Part 4, One Chapter: The Post War Strike Wave (1945–1946). Part 5, Two Chapters: The New Offensive Against Labor (1945–1947). Part 6, Five Chapters: The Cold War in the CIO (1946–1950). Part 7, Four Chapters: The Korean War Years (195–1953). Part 8, Five Chapters: After the New Deal-Fair Deal Era (1953–1955).

Art Preis spent six years in writing Labor’s Giant Step and 30 years in acquiring the material. Born in Philadelphia, he attended the University of Pennsylvania, 1928–30, and Ohio State University, 1930–32. At Ohio State, he published an anti-war magazine, Free Voice, which was banned from the campus.
In 1933 he helped to found the Lucas County Unemployed League in Toledo, Ohio, which grew into the largest organization of its kind in the country. Throughout the Thirties he participated in scores of labor and unemployed struggles.
From 1935 to 1938, he was chairman of the Works Progress Administration (WPA) Union of Toledo which organized 23,000 workers in militant struggle. He was a charter member and legislative agent of an AFL teachers local in Toledo, founding chairman of Local 29, CIO United Office and Professional Workers, and a delegate to the Toledo CIO Council.
Since 1940, Art Preis has been a staff writer and labor editor of The Militant, for which paper he has reported many of the outstanding labor events of the past 22 years. A number of his longer articles on labor and the socialist movement have been published in the International Socialist Review and its predecessors, Fourth International and New International, including several chapters of Labor’s Giant Step.
We urge our readers to send their contributions to help publish Labor’s Giant Step: Twenty Years of the CIO, to Art Preis, 116 University Place, New York 3, N.Y. Send your advance orders now and save $2.50 on each copy to: Pioneer Publishers. (See announcement on back cover of this issue.)
 



The so-called “white backlash” was a prime subject of discussion at the recent AFL-CIO Executive Council meeting in Chicago following the Republican Party convention which nominated Barry Gold-water as its presidential candidate. Gold water’s bid for the racist vote in northern industrial areas, as well as in the Dixiecrat South, stirred the top labor brass into consideration of ways and means of combatting the “backlash” among white union members. Their major concern was to ensure the election of their “friend” Lyndon Baines Johnson, Democratic nominee. The interests of the workers, white or black, was a secondary consideration.
The “backlash” among white workers, as the union tops saw it, was all the result of a misunderstanding. It seems they had been deceived into voting for the unspeakable racist governor of Alabama, George Wallace, in his Democratic Party presidential primary campaign, by being deliberately misled into believing that the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 would result in replacing white workers with Negroes.
The union heads hastened to reassure the white workers that it just wasn’t so: That the Civil Rights Act would involve no fundamental alteration in the pattern of hiring, firing and upgrading under which the black worker is the last hired and first fired; under which labor with a black skin will still do the hardest, dirtiest and lowest paying work – if and when they can get it. That there would be no preferential consideration given black workers to compensate for centuries of discriminatory employment practices. That the two-to-one unemployment ratio would continue to prevail – with twice as many Negroes unemployed as against whites. Outside of a few paltry crumbs the Civil Rights Act would involve no real change in the employment pattern. This, in essence, is the sum total of the campaign envisioned by the labor bureaucrats to appease the “white backlash.” [1]
 
Rally for the Democrats
In furtherance of their campaign the union heads have called a civil rights conference immediately following the Democratic Party convention – in which some 250 union functionaries will sit as delegates – to discuss the “implementation” of the Civil Rights Act. In reality the conference will serve as a sounding-board and rally for the Johnson-Humphrey ticket. The union leaders hope, reports the New York Times of August 4, “that the meeting will also serve as a forum in which white backlash sentiment can be counteracted. For example,” the article adds, “the federation will show that the Civil Rights Act does not require white workers to be laid off to make room for Negroes – an erroneous interpretation of the law that has gained currency among white workers.”
A “showing” by the AFL-CIO heads that the Civil Rights Act “does not require white workers to be laid off to make room for Negroes,” might mollify some whites – but what about the black workers? This approach is an evasion of the fundamental responsibility of the union leadership. If the problem is viewed simply as a matter of determining how the existing number of jobs shall be shared among the component sectors of the working population, no amount of “education” can mitigate the conflict. Despite three years of economic boom there are not enough jobs to go around. With the acceleration of automation the total number of jobs will diminish. Increased competition between workers for an ever diminishing number of jobs can only exacerbate the clash, not only between white and black worker, but between employed and unemployed, young and old, male and female, etc., etc. Along this road the labor movement is doomed!
 
Real Program for Labor
The Transition Program of the Fourth International, drafted by Leon Trotsky and adopted by the Founding Conference of the Fourth International in 1938, taking cognizance of this tendency, warned against its dangers and offered a solution. It reads:
“Under the menace of its own disintegration, the proletariat cannot permit the transformation of an increasing section of the workers into chronically unemployed paupers, living off the slops of a crumbling society. The right to employment is the only serious right left to the worker in a society based upon exploitation. This right today is being shorn from him at every step. Against unemployment, ‘structural’ as well as ‘conjunctural,’ the time is ripe to advance, along with the slogan of public works, the slogan of a sliding scale of hours. Trade union and other mass organizations should bind the workers and the unemployed together in the solidarity of mutual responsibility. On this basis all the work on hand would then be divided among all existing workers in accordance with how the extent of the working week is defined. The average wage of every worker remains the same as it was under the old working week. Wages, under a strictly guaranteed minimum, would follow the movement of prices. It is impossible to accept any other program for the present catastrophic period ...” (Emphasis in original.)
If in 1938 “the time was ripe” to advance the demand for a sliding scale of wages and hours it is rotten ripe today. The sliding scale of wages was popularized in this country as the “escalator clause” providing an automatic increase in wages in line with the rising cost of living. The popular version of the sliding scale of hours is the demand of 30 for 40, i.e., a thirty-hour week at forty hours pay.
It is in the tradition of the American union movement to seek a reduction of the work week as a means of combatting unemployment. The militant struggle for the eight-hour day in the latter part of the Nineteenth Century comprises one of the glorious chapters in American labor history. During the labor upsurge of the 1930’s a number of unions fought for and won the 30-hour week. A number of unions today have succeeded in reducing hours below the standard 40-hour work week, mostly in the skilled trades. But these exceptions constitute only a very small minority of the working class.
 
Bureaucratic Subservience
What now cripples the struggle for the shorter work week is the slavish subservience of the union bureaucrats to the capitalist politicians of the Democratic Party. Shortly after the election of “their” candidate, John F. Kennedy, the AFL-CIO tops sponsored a bill in Congress calling for the reduction of the work week to 35 hours. No one took them seriously. Kennedy had come out against the proposal for a reduction in hours with no reduction in pay even before he was elected.
When Johnson took office after the assassination of Kennedy he seized upon the occasion of his State of the Union Message, Jan. 8, to repudiate publicly the demand for the 35-hour week. “I believe the enactment of a 35-hour week,” he declared, “would invite inflation, would impair our ability to compete and merely share instead of creating employment.” Instead he proposed the establishment of a committee – a typical Johnson device for sweeping such problems under the rug – to “determine on an industry-by-industry basis as to where a higher penalty rate for overtime would increase job openings without unduly increasing costs, and authorizing the establishment of such higher rates.” (Emphasis added)












George Meany



The 35-hour bill got short shrift in Congress – it was not even considered. This did not deter AFL-CIO president George Meany from going through the motions of submitting the proposal to recent Republican and Democratic convention platform drafting committees for consideration by the delegates. Both platforms studiously ignored the proposal. It did not even occur to the 250 union functionaries sitting as Democratic Party delegates to question the omission. However, they were thrown a bone in the form of a platform plank providing that:
“Overtime payment requirements must be increased to assure maximum employment consistent with business efficiency.” (Emphasis added.)
Even this meaningless gesture had previously provoked the New York Times into voicing editorial alarm.
“This proposal,” a July 27 editorial declares, “is no more realistic than organized labor’s demand for reducing the work week, which the Administration has rightly rejected. Increasing overtime pay from one and a half to double time would greatly increase costs, leading to a shrinkage in profit margins and cutbacks in production.” Then comes the clincher: “It would accelerate the introduction of automation ...”
 
Effect of Shorter Work Week
The view that the demand for a shorter work week with no reduction in take-home pay would be self-defeating because it would accelerate automation and increase unemployment is not confined to such obvious spokesmen for Big Business as the New York Times. It has been echoed by a variety of pundits ranging from economic commentators specializing in analytical studies of the social effects of automation to the Social Democrats and liberals. In the past period the advance of technology through the acceleration of automation and cybernation has resulted in a significant rise in labor productivity. The main beneficiaries have been the capitalist owning class whose “profit margins” have soared to stratospheric heights.
But the legal work week has remained relatively stable under the Wages and Hours Act adopted in 1938. Wage increases in the past few years, during a period when automated processes have been introduced on a wide scale and at a rapid pace, have been lower than in any postwar period. Unemployment has remained frozen at an (official) average of five percent throughout the boom period. Fewer and fewer workers are turning out ever greater quantities of commodities. Yet, even the hint that workers are entitled to share in the increased productivity of labor through a reduction in the work week, calls forth a stern rebuke and ominous warning: desist or you will be automated out of your job!
The implication is that if workers would exercise restraint they can somehow escape the massive replacement of men by machines which the advent of automation has brought in its wake. But that is precisely what has been happening under the present legal work week of forty hours. These admonitions and warnings calling upon the workers to refrain from pressing their demand for shorter hours and better pay are really nothing new. Since the dawn of the capitalist mode of production and exchange, employers have always raised the specter of dire catastrophe if hours of labor were reduced and wages raised. Yet, something new has been advanced.
 
Cybernation Utopia
To the clamor of the profit hogs and their pen prostitutes has been added the siren song of the prophets of the future cybernated social order. As against the demand for a shorter work week they advance the vision of a cybernated economic system in which only a relatively small handful of workers will be required to operate an automated machinery capable of producing a superabundance of all requisite commodities. Under this order, they argue, the wages system would become obsolete. Work would of necessity, have to be separated from income, for there would otherwise not be enough purchasers for the ever increasing product of the cybernated machine. To avoid total collapse, they contend, it will be necessary to provide a guaranteed income for all without regard to who actually performs the little work involved.
Most of these experts do a useful service in criticising and exposing the utter insanity of the present “free enterprise system.” Their analysis of the possibilities of abundance for all under a rational system of distribution of the product of modern technology serves to buttress the socialist critique of the capitalist system – that under capitalism, goods and services are produced, not to meet the needs of the people, but for profit. There can be no argument against the proposition that given time and an uninterrupted development of the tendencies inherent in the “cybernation revolution,” the amount of labor required to produce an economy of abundance could be reduced to a minimal quantity.
But the development does not take place in a vacuum. Nor can the question of time be dismissed as an unimportant factor. In addition to economics there is politics. And in politics time is of the essence. Even if it is presumed that the development takes place under ideal conditions, abstracting from the contradictions inherent in the private ownership of the means of production and distribution, a considerable span of time would be required to reach the stage envisioned. Meanwhile, millions of workers are unemployed and the number must continue to grow granted the fact that automation is displacing more and more workers. However, the problem of jobs is crucial to the struggle for Negro equality now! One-fifth of the nation does exist below the poverty level now. The mounting number of youth entering the labor force each year are not and cannot be content with the vision of a cybernated Utopia sometime in the distant future – they demand jobs now! These are the facts of social life that impinge upon the consciousness of the workers now employed. For among them, even the relatively privileged enjoying the protection of seniority rights, are haunted by the feeling of insecurity; of the constant fear of being automated out of their jobs. This is the real source of the “backlash” that pits one section of the workers against another and for which the American labor bureaucrats bear a direct responsibility.
 
Against Shorter Work Week
While it is readily apparent why the employers oppose the shorter work week it is difficult to understand the opposition of the liberal cybernation experts, among whom Robert Theobald ranks as one of the more advanced thinkers on the subject. Writing one of his major contributions in a special issue of The Nation, (May 11, 1963) Theobald observes that:
“Since World War II, the unions have ritualistically demanded a shorter workweek, but there has been little real drive behind the demand.”
He then goes on to add:
“In 1962, however, the AFL-CIO decided that one of their primary goals must be the achievement of a thirty-five hour week with no decrease in take-home pay. They argued that this reduction in hours was necessary to spread the available work.
“Unfortunately,” he argues in rebuttal, “such a change in hours would set up secondary effects which could largely prevent the increase in employment it was designed to achieve. There appears to be some evidence that the employer may be able to reschedule work to accomplish the same amount of production, in spite of a reduction in total work hours, without additions to the labor force; and that even if he cannot conveniently reschedule, he will often prefer to pay for overtime than hire more workers. In addition, some of those whose hours are reduced may ‘moonlight,’ that is to say, take a second job. The most important negative effect, however, would result from the fact that each employee who worked shorter hours for the same total pay would receive an effective increase in the amount paid per hour. Higher payments to labor, whatever the method by which they are achieved, tilt the balance further in favor of investment in machinery – thus leading to more emphasis on cybernation and the more rapid elimination of the labor force.” (Emphasis added)
This is an amazing conclusion for a man who insists that it is neither possible nor desirable to place any obstacles in the path of the “cybernation revolution,” which, as he points out in his article “is only beginning.” He is not only against shorter hours but any “higher payments to labor” which would “tilt the balance” by accelerating automation unemployment. The same argument could just as validly be advanced against the present forty-hour week – including the wholly reactionary “moonlight” argument against increased leisure for workers so reminiscent of the attitude of the parasitic exploiting class.
It is not the question of “leisure” which concerns us here, important as it is, but of advancing such demands as would serve to unify the working class against the disintegrating effects of capitalist exploitation. Although he should know better, Theobald proceeds on the assumption that the demand for a 35-hour week is a static demand, incapable of meeting the problem of a dynamic technological process – cybernation. The number 35 is no more final and fixed than the number 40 now generally in effect, nor the number 48 that preceded it, or the number 56 that had earlier been fixed as the standard work week.
 
Program for Labor Unity
The slogan of the sliding scale of hours as quoted above from the Transition Program of the Fourth International, is a dynamic demand. It means that for every increase in the productivity of labor which results in the displacement of workers by automated machine production there is a corresponding reduction of hours.
It is estimated that today with a 30-hour week long term unemployment would be eliminated. If this leads to an acceleration of automation, so be it. So long as the workers could find employment at reduced hours automation would not be viewed as a curse but welcomed as a boon. By incorporating the concept of the sliding scale of hours in the union contract – just as today a number of unions have incorporated in their contracts the sliding scale of wages (escalator clause) to protect the workers standard of living against the constantly rising cost of living – hours of work would be adjusted to the increased productivity of labor with no reduction in pay.
To those who advance the argument that the reduction of hours will be self-defeating because it would increase unemployment by accelerating automation we answer: the advance of technology will continue at an accelerated pace whether or not hours of work are reduced. Experience has already confirmed this fact. Without the protection of the sliding scale of hours, however, unemployment will mount, poverty will become more widespread, competition for a dwindling number of jobs will become more frenzied and fratricidal, the divisions among the working class will deepen, disunity and disintegration of the only progressive class in society will hasten the descent into barbarism.
That is the ineluctable end-product of the present policy of the labor bureaucrats whose whole course was summed up in one succinct phrase by John L. Lewis: Better pay for fewer workers. Ironically, the United Mine Workers union is among the first to experience a menacing “backlash” of unemployed miners against the union, many of them being former union members automated out of their jobs.
 
Role of Labor Fakers
Theobald is eminently correct in contemptuously dismissing the legislative demand for a 35-hour week of the AFL-CIO brass as a meaningless “ritualistic” exercise in futility. The labor statesmen knew in advance that the Kennedy-Johnson administrations were opposed and said so publicly. The labor fakers made no serious attempt to mobilize the unions for effective struggle around the demand. With rare exceptions the demand has been dropped from union contract negotiations. Subordination to the Democratic Party has rendered the labor statesmen impotent to lead the kind of economic-political struggle required to break the resistance of the employers and their political agents in Washington to the demands for a shorter work week.
When an economic demand becomes generalized and is directed at the government it becomes a political demand. The demand for a shorter work week is fundamental to interests of the working class. Such a demand can be won only by struggle – on both the economic and political arena. On the economic field by the mobilization of the organized power of the unions against the individual employers. On the political arena by the class organization of their own independent labor party. But the current crop of labor statesmen, concerned solely with the preservation of their privileged bureaucratic positions and the pelf and power that come with it, are physically, morally and intellectually incapable of leading such a struggle.
In the struggle for survival the question of leadership is decisive. The so-called “white backlash” is but one of the manifestations of reactionary capitalism in its period of decay. The Negro struggle for Freedom Now is shaking up the whole social structure. While it brings to the surface everything that is vile and reactionary in capitalist society it is planting the seed of a renascent militancy in labor’s ranks fertilized by the threat of automated disemployment. Rising consciousness will give organizational expression to the mood of discontent even now manifested in embryonic form in a number of unions in which dissatisfaction with the policies of the labor brass is mounting. A genuine left wing movement in the unions will place at the top of its list of demands the unifying slogan: a sliding scale of hours to provide jobs for all. Reinforced with the call for an independent labor party and committed to fraternal collaboration with the Negro Freedom Now movement the so-called “white backlash” among workers will become transformed into a united black and white lash to scourge racism, poverty, unemployment and insecurity out of existence along with the social system that breeds these infamies.
 
Footnote
1. In a sense, it parallels the line taken by the Dixiecrat supporters of Texas cousin Johnson, who seek to reassure their more benighted compatriots that the Civil Rights measure is no Reconstruction Act and that the occupant of the White House is no foraging Carpetbagger; that it is more shadow than substance, and all it seeks to do is paper over the more ugly manifestations of the Jim Crow system while leaving the white supremacist structure intact.

