

The Myth of the State
Ernst Cassirer
Yale University Press, 12s 6d
This was the last book written by Ernst Cassirer, a distinguished philosopher who fled from Hitler’s Germany to the United States. Cassirer argues that the Nazi ideology involved a regression to the myth-making mentality of primitive man. The Nazi triumph meant the destruction of that tradition of rationality which he believed to have been central in Western intellectual life since the days of the Greek philosophers.
Cassirer deploys impressive analytical powers in a long exposition of the development of rational political philosophy from Plato to Hegel. This is interesting for its own sake, but throws little light on the nature of Fascism. Cassirer lacks the ingenuity of Professor Popper, who can look into The Republic and see foreshadowed the Third Reich.
The author comes closer to his ostensible theme in his examination of some of the 19th century versions of ideas that were later to form part of the Fascist ideology – the hero worship of Carlisle, the race doctrines of Gobineau, the deification of the State derived from misreadings of Hegel.
But after all this, it is a disappointment to find that the author offers no detailed analysis of the political faith of the Nazi Party. Moreover, at no point does he pose the key questions of how and why these lunatic notions of race and leadership came to dominate the intellectual life of an advanced nation. Cassirer was deeply versed in the history of Western philosophy, and in addition was a lifelong student of the irrational forces embodied in myth. But he seems unable to confront the Nazi phenomenon squarely. Maybe it was too near to home. More likely, Cassirer represents one of the points of collapse of the great Enlightenment tradition of political rationality.
 
 


Power Behind the Screen
Clive Jenkins
MacGibbon and Kee. 21s.
This book deals with the interrelation of finance and personnel in the network of companies that operate the commercial TV system in Britain – with the big money in TV, how it is invested, how the profits are made and who gets them. A sinister and fascinating subject, that should have made a powerful socialist book. It is a disappointment to find that Mr. Jenkins has fluffed the apparently unfluffable.
Nearly a third of his pages are given over to lists of other directorships held by directors of companies in the ITV business. If it was thought worth printing all these lists in extenso, they might at least have been tucked away in an appendix. As it is, they are scattered through the book like hedges in a steeplechase.
The rest of the book is mainly a tissue of quotations about ITV, drawn from newspapers and interviews. As presented here, the debate is between, on the one hand, the prim deplorers of low cultural standards on the media, and on the other, the robber barons who claim not only to be virtuously loading their programmes with unprofitable culture and religion, but also to be democratically serving up only the rubbish the public wants. The voice of the viewer is not heard in Mr. Jenkins’s pages.
Mr. Jenkins wants to nationalise the lot, but leaves his lists and quotations to argue for him. Capitalists do not condemn themselves out of their own mouths, for they do not raise the relevant issues. Nor can we rely on Mr. Mayhew to put a socialist case. Mr. Jenkins has not written a book, but published a pre-book. Raw data is no substitute for analysis and reasoned argument.
 
 


Chris Harman has invited comment on his recent writings on the
world economy and there is certainly much for Marxists to debate. We
are confronted with a global economy, hugely uneven to be sure, but
which in 2007 was producing no less than 25 percent more goods and
services than just six years earlier. However, many on the left,
including Harman, believe that the basic tendency of the system
remains inflected towards stagnation in profits and rates of
accumulation – as it has been, in their view, since the 1970s. They
argue that the recent period of growth since 2001 has been based
mainly on the build-up of unsustainable levels of debt, notably,
rapid increases in household borrowing in the US based on soaring
house prices. It is certainly true that this increase in debt helped
finance a series of huge US trade deficits, which in turn boosted
fast export-led growth in China and other emerging economies.
At the start of 2008 a wider international downturn is in
progress. US house prices have collapsed, recession looms in the US,
the dollar has fallen further and a crisis of unpayable debt has
repercussed through the international banking system. What is now
crucial is whether the new centres of accumulation in China and the
rest of the industrialising world are large enough and dynamic enough
to limit the recessionary impact of credit crisis. No one can be
sure, but what happens over the next two to three years will be a
decisive test.
In this article I will argue three main points against Harman’s
vision of the world economy, and the theory on which it is based. [1]

Despite repeated phases of temporary downturn – and
massive increases in economic inequality – the basic story of the
world economy over the past 25 years has been one of rising profits,
and growth in output and levels of capital accumulation. Advances in
productivity have not undermined profitability as would be expected
according to Harman’s analysis.
 
Harman uses Marx’s declining rate of profit analysis in
rather an abstract way, focusing too much on the average rate and
giving insufficient weight to the countertendencies that Marx saw as
limiting or reversing the tendency for overall profitability to
fall.
 
He also makes too little use of Marx’s account of the
forces that drive accumulation in the capitalist system: its
tendency to expand geographically; to increase the mass and rate of
profits by opening up new branches of production; to build up the
quantities of capital deployed in the world’s productive system
and multiply the numbers of workers employed by capital. Harman’s
attention is not focused on the astonishing growth in recent decades
in the size of the system, and the momentum given to it by enormous
rises in the mass of extra profit generated. His analysis is limited
rather narrowly to rates of profit. He neglects trends in the rate
of formation of new capitals, relying here on an incorrect view that
concentration of capital in most strategic sectors of the world
economy blocks the entry of new firms into successful competition.
He therefore seriously underestimates the role that the current
dynamism of China and other large emerging countries can play in
limiting the recession now starting and in sustaining a further
phase of overall growth.

I do agree, however, with Harman’s broader perspective that
political crises, rooted in the economics of the system, will
continue and are likely to deepen. We face tightening ecological
constraints, intensifying contrasts between extremes of wealth and
poverty, and the social destructiveness inflicted by the never-ending
competitive restructuring of capital.



Figure 1: World real GDP growth









Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2007



An important measure of the performance of the world economy is
the annual percentage rate of growth in production. Figure 1 gives
the IMF’s estimate of world GDP growth (in real terms) since 1970.
It shows that in about half of the 36 years covered growth was above
or close to 4 percent a year. There were five periods of downturn,
but in only two years did annual growth fall to less than 2 percent.
The last two recessions followed each other quite quickly but were
shallower and briefer than the more serious contractions at the start
of the 1980s, and that of 1990–1. In the five years ending in 2006
growth averaged over 4 percent, and the same has turned out to be the
case in 2007, despite the serious financial crisis which started last
August. World population has increased since 1970, but the average
rate of economic growth per person has still averaged nearly 3
percent per year.
The distribution of all this extra output has, of course, been
extremely unequal. In most countries the upper income groups have
secured enormous increases in their wealth and income. About one
billion people live on the equivalent of $1 a day or less, which
represents a fall since 1980 from 27.9 percent to 21.1 percent of the
world’s population. But total world population has grown over this
period, which means that there are large numbers of people who have
seen a serious degree of improvement in their material situation. In
some areas, especially in Africa and the Middle East, there has been
a horrifying deterioration in living standards. [2]
But in China, for example, over the period since 1980, the numbers of
people living on less than $1 a day fell from 600 million to below
180 million, a decrease of more than 400 million people just in one
generation. [3] The bitter knowledge that
an even greater rate of poverty reduction might have been attained in
China (and elsewhere in the world) should not blind us to the
magnitude of this achievement by the toil of working people and
advances in productive techniques.
Thus the picture is one of a capitalist system that is highly
dynamic and growing in terms of overall output, though with huge
social unevenness over geographical space, and a marked cyclical
pattern over time. But how sustainable are current levels of growth?
Will the present financial crisis and associated downturn in the
giant US economy be just another brief and shallow recession like the
five previous ones? Or are we starting to see the impact of more
serious limits in the recent pattern of growth?
To assess the situation more deeply we have to consider levels of
capital accumulation and profitability in the system. In an article
published last year Chris Harman reviews the literature about trends
in profits and comes to the following conclusions:

In the industrial countries high profits in the 1960s were
followed by a period of sharp decline which ended in the early 1980s
with the profit rate about one third of the level of 20 years
before.
 
“Profit rates did recover from about 1982 onwards, but
they only made up about half of the decline that had taken place in
the previous period”. [4] Harman does
not comment on the overwhelming evidence that an enormous rise in
profitability in much of the world economy took place in the period
between 2001 and 2007. On the global situation, one authoritative
source, the Bank for International Settlements, reports that
“corporate profits in 2005 appear to have reached historical highs
as a proportion of global GDP”. [5]
Harman’s discussion is confined to Britain, the US and China. He
concedes that “for the moment profits in Britain appear to be high
... 15.6 percent for all non-financial corporations in the fourth
quarter of 2006 – the highest figure since 1969”. [6]
On the US Harman gives no figures, but suggests only that the
upsurge of financial speculation and private equity takeovers will
mean that “corporate profits will be being puffed up until they
lose touch with reality”. In actual fact the ratio of share prices
to company profits has not been exceptionally high in recent years
in the US. Fred Moseley concludes in a recent article:

The rate of profit in the US is now approaching the
previous peaks achieved in the 1960s. The last several years
especially, since the recession of 2001, have seen a very strong
recovery of profits, as real wages have not increased at all, and
productivity has increased very rapidly (4-5 percent a year). And
these estimates do not include the profits of US companies from their
production abroad, but include only profits from domestic US
production. [7]
In the period 2004–6 annual profits in the US continued to rise,
from $1,331 billion in 2004 to an estimated $1,653 billion in 2006.
[8]
On profits in China, reliable sources report massive recent
increases. For example, Lardy estimates that “from 1998 through to
the first half of 2006, profits of industrial enterprises in China
soared from 2 percent of GNP to over 10 percent”. [9]
The World Bank’s Beijing office, in its latest report, says that
“profit margins in China’s industry have continued their trend
increase, supported by continued rapid growth of efficiency and
labour productivity”. [10]
Of course, overall profit levels in the system vary cyclically and
there is no reason to suppose that the recent upsurge in
profitability in China and much of the rest of the world economy will
not be followed at some point by a downturn. It may well have started
in 2008. But what would prevent a further recovery in the near
future, as happened after the temporary downturn around 2001? In
October 1987 world equity markets crashed by 30 percent in a few
days, but interest rate cuts implemented by the US Federal Reserve
and other central banks contained the crisis. The effect on jobs and
profitability in the industrial sector was very limited. The same was
true of the massive downward lurch in US bond markets in February
1994. As Marx noted, because the financial markets are often
dominated by speculative pressures they can, for long periods, become
relatively autonomous from the productive economy. Thus, he
concluded, financial crises, even if severe, need not necessarily
have a corresponding impact on commodity production.
There are many problems of measurement and definition of profits,
but really no clear evidence of any pattern of long term fall in the
rate of profit. [11] Profit rates in
the industrial countries were high in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
They fell sharply in the late 1960s and 1970s, rose again after 1982,
hit a short but steep downturn around 2001 and recovered strongly
through to 2007.
Harman reads Marx as arguing that the deepest and most persistent
tendency in the system is for average profit rates to decline, though
the decline can be slowed, or even in some periods reversed, by the
operation of countervailing processes. Harman explains:
Marx’s basic line of argument was simple enough. Each
individual capitalist can increase his (occasionally her)
competitiveness through increasing the productivity of his workers.
The way to do this is by using a greater quantity of the “means of
production” – tools, machinery and so on – for each worker. [12]
What matters here is not physical productivity – a few workers
operating a semi-automated production line, or a huge container ship
– compared with how it was done 50 years ago. Productivity is seen
as increasing the organic composition of capital, i.e. a rise in the
ratio of machinery to the labour that operates it. Thus the hours of
socially necessary labour-time incorporated in the means of
production tend to increase, but the number of hours of unpaid labour
– the surplus value extracted – does not rise correspondingly,
and may even fall. Thus Harman’s argument is that the increase in
productivity, which results from the pressures of competition, must
inevitably put “a downward pressure on the ratio of profit to
investment – the rate of profit”. [13]
This is certainly a correct summary of Marx’s argument that
productivity advance undermines the rate of profit by raising the
organic composition of capital. However, this is stated by Marx as a
tendency only, and one which operates at a very high level of
abstraction. Marx modifies his abstract argument in a number of
crucial ways as he develops, stage by stage, an analysis of how
capitalism operates as a concrete historical system. Harman gives
insufficient weight to the ways in which Marx qualifies his abstract
argument.
For example, Harman writes that “each capitalist has to push for
greater productivity in order to stay ahead of the competition. But
what seems beneficial to an individual capitalist is disastrous for
the capitalist class as a whole”. [14]
This is a surely gross overstatement. Over the neoliberal epoch since
1980 productivity has been rising persistently throughout most of the
world. Yet all the evidence shows that the global capitalist class is
doing fine. It has been growing rapidly in numbers, and in the amount
and proportion of the world’s wealth which it owns and controls.
Harman emphasises that aggressive price-cutting competition by
innovative firms undermines profits and devalues the capital of
rivals who are stuck with old technology, and may put them out of
business altogether. These losses have to be deducted from the
overall rate of profit in each branch of production. But such capital
devaluation and lowering of profits are directly damaging only for
those companies with outmoded means of production.
As Marx points out, the firms which find new ways of increasing
productivity are able, as they cut costs, to secure an above average
rate of profit – surplus profit in Marx’s phrase – and the
average overall rate of profit in a capitalist economy is raised by
such surplus profits. It is true that as their competitors adopt the
new methods there is a general fall in prices of the commodities
being produced, and rates of profit for all producers in a given
branch of production fall towards an average. But Harman says nothing
about the effect of the surplus rates of profit secured during the
time period before the competition catches up. In his scheme,
innovations seem to be adopted virtually instantaneously by all
producers. Nor does he discuss the possibility of continuous ongoing
waves of innovation which would allow some firms to enjoy surplus
profits for much longer periods. Yet repeated advances in
productivity have been the pattern in recent years in many
industries. [15]
And, in any case, as Harman does accept, in the longer run phases
of devaluation and elimination of less efficient capital clear the
way for higher profits among survivors. However, he discusses the law
of value and competition only in terms of bankruptcies, conceding
that the level of bankruptcy in the 1980s and 1990s had been higher
than he expected, because the role of the state in propping up
failing firms had been more limited than he had anticipated. But here
he underestimates the depth and savagery of the restructuring process
in Europe and the US in this period, and he says nothing about the
major form which it took. This was the internal restructuring as
large firms eliminated their less profitable operations, closed
loss-making factories, and imposed huge redundancies.
 
The current credit crisis
In the previous issue of International Socialism Harman
argues that the present credit crisis arose because in recent years
the US and European banking system has been awash with cash for which
the banks needed to find borrowers. Where did this extra money came
from? Harman notes that corporate investment in the industrial
countries, which fell during the recession of 2000-1, did not recover
to previous levels in the years following. Instead industrial
companies fed unused money capital into the banking system. The banks
recycled the money to the household sector especially in the form of
vast increases in mortgage lending. This pushed up house prices and
allowed more borrowing which drove up house prices even more – in a
self-feeding bubble, which, while it lasted, sustained consumer demand.
Harman accepts Riccardo Bellofiore’s characterisation of this as
“privatised Keynesianism”. The mechanism went into reverse when
the subprime crisis imploded in August 2007. The effect will be,
Harman argues, that the fundamental long-term forces of low profits
and industrial overcapacity will now reassert themselves strongly:
“Only the financial bubble stopped recession occurring earlier.”
As over-indebted households cut back on their spending the fall in
consumer demand will spread recession in the G7 countries. The
emergent countries will be hit as their exports to the industrial
countries collapse.
Certainly Harman is quite correct to stress that in the four-year
period up to 2005 industrial investment lagged behind profits in the
G7 countries and that this was one source of the housing-based bubble
in bank lending. The IMF reports that in the G7 countries “on
average over 2002–4 the excess saving of the corporate sector –
defined as the difference between undistributed profits and capital
spending – was at a historical high of 2.5 percent of GDP”. [16]
Harman sees this lag in corporate investment as decisive evidence of
a basic stagnation since the 1970s in profits and rates of
accumulation in the industrial countries. Here there are two
objections to be made. First, the IMF report emphasises that “one
factor behind the increase in corporate saving has been the strong
rise in profitability that has underpinned higher corporate saving
despite an increase in dividends paid”. [17]
Thus the lag in investment was not due to a lack of profitability, as
Harman’s basic line of argument tends to suggest.
Second, there is evidence that industrial investment in G7 has
recovered considerably since 2004. For example, the latest OECD
report on the question shows that net saving by the corporate sector
was down to only 1 percent of GDP by 2006. [18]
However, even if based on high profits, this is still a sizeable
surplus of savings over investment. Nevertheless, before invoking the
lack of demand which Keynes saw as underlying the slump of the early
1930s, we have to consider how far the present very high rate of
investment and consumption in the emergent world will plug the gap
left by a diminished rate of growth in consumer demand in the
industrial countries. I will return to this, but first it is
essential to consider the recent investment lag in a Marxist
framework, rather than rest content with a Keynesian
underconsumptionist perspective.
 
Productivity and the organic composition of capital
If the rate of productivity growth in department one of the
economy, which produces means of production, is faster than in
department two, which produces wage goods, then the effect will be a
fall in the ration of constant capital to labour. There is strong
evidence that this has recently been the case. A carefully researched
report by the Bank for International Settlements concludes:
Record profits, high cash levels [in companies] and low
interest rates have not prompted record corporate investment ...
Indeed corporate investment as a share of GDP remained low in the G3
economies by past standards ... That nominal investment/GDP ratios
are still low in most advanced economies remains a puzzle. Part of
the explanation could be the fall in the relative price of business
fixed investment. For instance, in Japan and the US the price of
capital goods has declined by between 25 and 40 percent since 1980.
[19]
The IMF notes that the lag in investment levels in 2002–4 was
temporary and in part due to “a short-term reaction to the high
corporate debt levels of the early 2000s”. But the IMF adds that
“there has also been a longer-term downward trend in the relative
price of capital goods” and this explains “about one half of the
decline in the nominal investment ratio”. Looking to the future,
the IMF suggests that “technological progress will likely continue
to lower the prices of capital goods, especially in information
technology”. [20]
This is the process that Marx calls the cheapening of the elements
of constant capital. Because productivity has soared in the sectors
of the economy which make means of production, industrial companies
have been able to meet production targets with relatively limited
investment in money terms. The result – in combination with rapidly
rising profits – has been to leave many companies with ample cash
reserves and debt-to-profits gearing ratios at unprecedented low
levels. If the recession that has now started in the US does turn out
to be limited in its effect on production and jobs in the world
economy, a major reason will be the current financial robustness of
the industrial sector.
 
Profitability and the cheapening of constant capital
The cheapening of the elements of constant capital has
contradictory effects on the underlying profitability of the system.
It slows down, or maybe even reverses, the build-up in the organic
composition of capital – which, as I noted earlier, is central in
Harman’s “declining rate of profit” reading of Marx. But, as
Marx noted in a little studied section of Capital, lower
prices for means of production have the effect of releasing capital
from the circuits of productive capital. [21]
It is this loss of demand that allows Harman to argue that a lower
rate of growth in investment in money terms could spread recession.
But to clarify which of these conflicting tendencies predominates in
the global economy today requires attention to some crucial and often
overlooked elements in Marx’s analysis of accumulation and profitability.
 
Some other countertendencies
Chris Harman’s attention tends to be focused on only one form of
accumulation – the intensive accumulation of mechanisation and
rising productivity. But in Marx we also find discussion of a second
sort – extensive accumulation in which investment takes place in
new branches of production and in geographically new centres of
production, and in which extra workers are drawn into capitalist
production. The extra workers come from two main sources. They are
either workers whose jobs have vanished because of the increase in
productivity or workers new to capitalism, for example, those drawn
from the peasant sectors of the economy.
The scale of extensive accumulation in the Global South in the
recent period has been extraordinary, much of it based on local
accumulations of capital derived from surplus extraction from
peasants, rather than capital exported from the industrialised North.
Chinese wages, for example, are 1/20th of US wages, so rates of
exploitation can be very high, though limited of course by the
intensity of competition in the markets for commodities produced.
Richard Freeman estimates that the labour force available to global
capital, either for direct employment or as a reserve army of labour,
tripled from just under one billion workers in 1980 to over three
billion in 2000. He calculates that 1.5 billion workers were added to
the actual or potential capitalist labour force by its incorporation
of China, India and the former Soviet bloc. The other half billion
workers came from population growth in countries that were already
part of the capitalist system in 1980, especially in Africa and Latin
America. Freeman also notes the sizeable effect of extensive
accumulation in cutting what Marxists call the organic composition of
capital: “The entry of China, India and the former Soviet bloc into
the global economy cut the global capital/output ratio by 55 percent,
to just 60 percent of what it otherwise would have been.” [22]
As I noted earlier, Marx argued that this fall in the average organic
composition of capital will tend to boost rates of profit.
 
China as a driver of world accumulation
I have already shown that profits in China have soared in recent
years. Harman argues that the Chinese economy is still far from being
large enough to act as locomotive in pulling the advanced countries
out of the impending recession. He notes that, at dollar exchange
rates, China produces only 6 percent of world GDP. But this takes no
account of the large undervaluation of the renminbi against
the dollar. In any case the capacity of China, a driver of the world
economy, is much greater than GDP figures would suggest. GDP in China
has been expanding at the rate of 10 percent a year, and nearly half
of this is reinvested. The increase in investment in China accounts
for a large part, maybe 20 percent, of the annual increase in world
capital formation in recent years. Profits from production in China
are not just retained domestically, or transformed into the vast
Chinese holding of US financial assets, but are widely shared among
the foreign capitals that invest in China, thus helping to offset the
damage done to profits elsewhere in the world by Chinese competitive success.
Foreign capital, American and Japanese especially, is sharing
lavishly in the profitability of the “Chinese” economy. For
example, the US government reported that “in the first six months
of 2006, US corporate profits in China passed $2 billion, up more
than 50 percent from the first half of last year. US companies were
on pace to earn more in China in 2006 than they earned there during
the entire 1990s”. [23] Demand from
China for raw materials and other imports is fuelling growth
throughout much of East Asia, Latin America and the Middle East. Nor
is the Chinese productive system as dependent on exports to the US as
is claimed by many, Harman included. The World Bank reports that only
one quarter of growth in 2006-7 was accounted for by an increase in
exports. [24]
In a useful recent article the Economist points out two
developments that will limit the global impact of recession in the US
and Europe, and act to offset the G7 investment lag that Harman
stresses. First, half of China’s exports now go to other emerging
economies. Indeed, Chinese exports to Brazil, India and Russia were
up by 60 percent in 2007, and to oil exporters by 45 percent. Exports
to the US account for only 8 percent of Chinese GDP, 4 percent of
India’s, 3 percent of Brazil’s and 1 percent of Russia’s.
Second, in 2007 consumer spending in the emergent countries rose
almost three times as fast as in the developed world:
Investment seems to be holding up even better: according
to HSBC real capital spending rose by a staggering 17 percent in
emerging economies last year compared with only 1.2 percent in rich
countries. [25]
Exports from the US and Europe to the emerging world are rising
rapidly, especially in the capital goods sector. It is certainly not
possible to predict how severe and extensive the crisis unfolding in
2008 will turn out to be. But so far it does not look like a classic
Marx-Minsky type of crisis of corporate indebtedness. In general
industrial companies in most major countries have responded to the
high profitability since 2001 by running down debt, buying back
shares and building up cash reserves – all of which will help them
ride out a downturn. In addition it is important to register that in
recent years China has been only the most dramatic example of a more
general pattern of more rapid growth in the industrialising than in
the industrial economies. In 2006 GDP in India increased by 9.2
percent, in Russia by 6.7 percent, in Latin America by 5.5 percent.
In the emerging and developing world as a whole it grew by 7.9
percent, compared to 3.2 percent for the advanced economies. This
growth is deeply uneven between different regions and social classes.
Moreover, such figures do not measure what is essential for a Marxist
analysis, namely rates of accumulation. But they unmistakeably
indicate that very high levels of capital accumulation are taking place.
My fundamental difference with Harman is that his discussion of
the rate of profit fails crucially to register the political and
economic consequences of the sheer momentum of current accumulation.
He is preoccupied with average rates of profit, but what drives the
system is the quest for surplus profit. We often use Trotsky’s
phrase “combined and uneven development”, but in practice
discussion focuses mainly on the unevenness of capitalist
development. My plea is for much more attention to current patterns
of combined development. Large numbers of new workers each year are
entering direct capitalist employment. Many of them move into jobs in
technically advanced factories and offices at high levels of
productivity, and are thus subject to high rates of exploitation. In
the present period what we urgently need to be thinking and debating
about are the economic and political consequences for the system –
and for our politics – when accumulation is both rapid and global,
and when extensive and intensive accumulation are closely combined.

Notes
1. For a re-education in critical
Marxism during a period as one of the editors of Historical
Materialism I am grateful to Sebastian Budgen and his
cosmopolitan array of colleagues. My thanks also to Pete Green for
discussion and productive disagreement, and to Sally Kincaid for
computer assistance.
2. See Bush, 2007, for a valuable
recent account.
3. World Bank, 2006, p. 9; Somewhere over the Rainbow, Economist, 24 January 2008.
4. Harman, 2007a, p. 150.
5. Bank for International Settlements,
2006, p. 24.
6. Harman, 2007a, p. 158.
7. Moseley, 2007. The New York
Times, 4 August 2007, reported, “In the 1960s, about 7 percent
of US corporate profits came from overseas. By the first quarter of
2007, that share was up to 29 percent ... government figures also
indicate that the profits of American companies from their overseas
operations have been growing at a much faster pace of 13.7 percent in
the current decade, nearly twice the 7 percent rate of growth of
profits in the domestic US economy.”
8. Economic Report of the
President, 2008, table B 90, p. 331, www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/.
9. Lardy, 2007, p. 14.
10. World Bank, 2007, p. 7.
11. Harman 2007a, p. 150,
reprints Brenner’s data showing a fall in the rate of profit of
manufacturing capital in the US, Germany and Japan from 1970 to 2000.
See also Harman, 2008, p33. Neither Brenner nor Harman take account
of the shift in manufacturing to the Global South, the massive rise
of a labour intensive service sector in the advanced economies, and
the post-2000 rise in profit rates in G3 manufacturing (even in Japan).
12. Harman, 2007a, p. 142.
13. Harman, 2007a, p. 142. For
an account of value as the monetary expression of socially necessary
labour-time, see Marx, 1981, chapters 13–15. Harman’s account of
the organic composition of capital, and its presumed effect on profit
rates, is similar to that presented in Fine and Saad-Filho, 2004. For
a detailed critique of this approach, see Kincaid, 2007. Ben Fine and
Alfredo Saad-Filho have responded with a detailed defence of their
position. This will be published by Historical Materialism in
2008, together with a critical reply by myself which also proposes an
alternative reading of Marx’s account of profits and value theory.
14. Harman, 2007a, p. 142.
15. Harman considers that computers
have increased productivity in only limited sectors of the economy.
“The US has experienced high levels of productivity due to
computerisation, but they have mainly been centred in the computer
industry itself and in the retail trade” – Harman, 2007b, p. 13.
This is a very questionable statement. The effects of
computerisation, and associated internet technology in the US and in
the rest of the world have been enormous and they have been
experienced right across the spectrum of commodity production,
including cultural products as well as goods and services.
16. IMF, 2006, p. 136.
17. IMF, 2006, p. 140.
18. OECD, 2007, chapter 3. Such
data, based on national accounts, underestimate the levels of
investment by G7 companies in emergent countries such as China.
19. Bank for International
Settlements, 2006, p. 24. Incidentally Japan shows investment at
14 percent of GDP, i.e. higher than the US at about 9 percent and
Europe at 10 percent. Lack of growth in Japanese GDP has not
precluded a fairly high rate of profitability and investment in
Japan.
20. IMF, 2006, pp. 141–142,
145. Harman, 1984, pp. 20–23, discusses capital-saving
investment. He argues that “we can expect that there will always be
more innovations calling for increased capital than those calling for
less”. I remain unconvinced. Why should capital-saving investment
be less prevalent than investment to economise on labour?
21. Marx comments on what he calls
the release of capital which can result from productivity advance in
either the means of production or wage goods sectors. Marx, 1981, pp. 206–209.
22. Freeman, 2005, p. 1. Marx
also discusses the boost to the average rate of profit provided by
the opening up of new branches of production, especially for what he
calls luxury consumption – often the production of services which
combine a low organic composition of capital with low wages and thus
a high rate of profit – “both the rate and mass of surplus value
in these branches of production are unusually high” – Marx, 1981,
p. 344. Enormous numbers of such new branches of production have
been opened up in the modern capitalist economies.
23. USA Today, 25 October 2006.
24. The World Bank, 2007, p. 2,
says that in China net external trade contributed 3 percent of total
GDP growth of 12 percent in 2006–7. See also Lardy, 2007, p. 4.
25. Decoupling Debate, Economist, 6 March 2008.


References
Bank for International Settlements, 2006, 76th Annual Report (June 2006)
Bush, Ray, 2007, Poverty and Neoliberalism: Persistence and
Reproduction in the Global South (Pluto).
Freeman, Richard, 2005, What Really Ails Europe.
Fine, Ben, and Alfredo Saad-Filho, 2004, Marx’s Capital (Pluto).
Harman, Chris, 1984, Explaining the Crisis: A Marxist Reappraisal (Bookmarks).
Harman, Chris, 2007a, The Rate of Profit and the World Today, International Socialism 2 : 115 (Summer 2007).
Harman, Chris, 2007b, Rate of Profit Warning, Socialist Review, November 2007.
Harman, Chris, 2008, From the Credit Crunch to the Spectre of Global Crisis, International Socialism 2 : 118 (Spring 2008).
IMF, 2006, World Economic Outlook (April 2006).
Kincaid, Jim, 2007, Production versus Realisation: A Critique
of Fine and Saad-Filho on Value Theory, Historical
Materialism, Vol. 15, No. 4.
Lardy, Nicholas R, 2007, China: Rebalancing Economic Growth.
Marx, Karl, 1981, Capital, Vol. III (Penguin). An alternative version is available online: www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1894-c3/.
Moseley, Fred, 2007, Is the US Economy Heading for a Hard Landing?.
OECD, 2007, Economic Outlook 82 (December 2007).
World Bank, 2006, Global Economic Prospects 2006.
World Bank, 2007, China Quarterly Update (September 2007).

 


The Origins of Totalitarianism
Hannah Arendt
Allen and Unwin. 30s.
A cheapish reprint of this famous book is most welcome. Miss Arendt is amazingly clever and on every page startling ideas pop up like rabbits; received opinions by the dozen are dispatched like so much tender lettuce.
The author offers first a complex analysis of the relationship between 19th century imperialism and anti-semitism in our time. In the 1880s the continental bourgeoisie take over the state, needing control of its police and military resources to protect exported capital. The Jews are supplanted and pushed outside society; business rivalry is sublimated into a world war which leaves Europe littered with national minority groups. Miss Arendt argues (a bit obscurely) that totalitarian movements arose as a response to the political isolation of these atomized masses.
She argues at length that Hitler’s Germany and Stalin’s Russia were totally different in their working from any other social system, and notably from the conventional one-party dictatorship. The concentration camp is treated as a kind of metaphor symbolising these societies, which are thus set apart from all others by the absolute horror of a planned destruction of human individuality and spontaneousness. And all other institutions in the totalitarian system are designed for this same end. Just as the camps meet no economic need, so terror intensifies as political opposition subsides. Crack-pot ideologies, incessant purges, the violent competition of innumerable police and party bureaucracies, the sheer crazy momentum of political life – all these tend to the stultification of social life. Neither leaders nor followers are motivated by self interest.
Miss Arendt is an ingenious advocate but her case is weak. The interests of the rulers are clearly advanced by such methods of government. Both Russia and Germany were capable of a formidable war effort. Most important of all, the concept of totalitarian society only looks valid if one attends exclusively to the form of the political apparatus. Germany had a highly industrialized economy, and Fascism scarcely affected the capitalist system; despite all the turmoil at the top, the social structure altered very little. During the same period, Russia was painfully industrializing and her class system was changing profoundly. As well say that Ghana today is no different from France!
Still, this is not a book to miss, for its faults are as stimulating as its virtues.

 


Two points. I have spoken at a good many IS branch and public meetings around the country over the past year. Almost universally the chairing of meetings is deplorable. Self-effacing, muttering, indecisive. Firm chairing (including the repression of the speaker if necessary) is a tradition of the working class movement. Please insist that branches appreciate its necessity. Also, and even worse, I attend branch business meetings wherever possible. It is quite staggering how few adopt proper procedure for the dispatch of business. Minutes kept, reading of minutes, making definite proposals which can be voted on, sticking to one thing at a time, moving that question be now put, aiming to finish business as rapidly as possible. Workers expect this kind of thing, and they are liable to discount the seriousness of organisations which don’t observe such conventions in a sensible way.
Branches will have to realise that they are wasting time by having everyone discussing every little arrangement and item of administration. The branch can only discuss policy and serious hang ups. The implementation must be left to the branch committee.



 


Jim Kincaid
Aberdeen



 
 


1. Social Security and The National Plan
Until quite recently it was widely believed in the Labour Party that a decent welfare state involved redistribution of income on a large scale. It was only in the period preceding the 1959 election that the party leadership made the wonderful discovery that extra resources to increase welfare expenditure are created by economic growth. More wonderful still, since the tax system is to some extent progressive, and since people pay most of their taxes on a percentage of income (though there are flat-rate elements like the National Insurance stamp) the Chancellor can keep tax rates constant and yet his percentage of economic growth will come rolling into the Exchequer of its own accord; thus Gaitskell’s dream election manifesto – higher welfare benefits all round, but no increase in tax rates to scare off the middle classes.
It all seems commonplace now; yet Gaitskell’s pledge not to increase income tax in the campaign of 1959, is widely held to have lost him votes on the grounds that people expect politicians to promise the impossible, but not the obviously impossible.
Nevertheless, since the election of 1959 it has remained the settled policy of the Party that major improvements in the scope of State welfare must be paid for out of the returns of economic growth, rather than by redistributive taxation. This was made a central element in the Labour Manifesto of 1964:
‘the key factor in determining the speed at which new and better levels of benefit can be introduced will be the rate at which the British economy can expand.’
Once in office, the Labour Party invented the growth rate of 3.8 per cent, and in The National Plan it allocated the extra resources this growth rate would produce, right up to 1970. Mr Gaitskell’s miracle has been translated into the workaday doctrine of the Control of Public Expenditure whereby the amount of extra resources becoming available to the government is fixed by the overall growth rate; and a Ministry only gets its share of the additional money in the proportion laid down in The National Plan. For the next few years history is to be made by the growth rate in circumstances chosen by the Plan.
It follows that the Plan provides a more realistic view of how the social security sector may develop up to 1970, than the hopeful speeches of Labour’s welfare Ministers. It is now fairly certain that a lot less resources than are promised in the Plan will become available for welfare expenditure in the next few years. The economy has not so far delivered the growth that Mr Brown told it to produce. The Economic Review is currently expecting an annual growth rate for the first two years of the Plan (till the end of 1966) of slightly less than 2.5 per cent.
During the 13 years of Tory rule, the proportion of gross national product (GNP) spent on social security payments to individuals rose from 4.6 to 6.4 per cent – the increase being particularly marked in the second half of the period. In The National Plan, assuming a 3.8 per cent average annual growth rate, the Labour party commit themselves to a further increase in the relative size of the social security sector, which is to be 7.1 per .cent of GNP by 1970. This means that the present government are aiming to increase the relative size of the social security sector at an annual rate which is half that achieved by the Tories in the period 1957-63 (increase in the proportion of national resources allocated to the social security sector: Tories, 23 per cent, 1957-63; Labour, 11 per cent, 1964-70).
Lest it be thought that social security is being held back in order to make possible a more dynamic development of other sectors, Table 1 provides comparative figures:



Table 1
Annual Expenditure as percentage
of Gross National Product [1]




 


1964


 


1970




Social Security


6.4


7.1




Education


4.4


4.7




Public Housing


2.1


2.3




Health and Welfare


4.0


3.9



There is to be a relative contraction only in the case of the Health and Welfare Services, but the increases in the other sectors are small by comparison with the expected increase by 1970 of 4.8 per cent in overall population, and the larger increases of 14.8 per cent in the number of children aged under 9, and of 11.1 per cent in the numbers of people aged 65 and over.
In absolute terms, expenditure on social security in 1964 was £2,085 million. The Plan provides that annual expenditure in this sector will rise over the 1964 level by about £800 million to £2,910 million in 1969-70. (This, by the way, is £800 million in real terms at 1965 prices – the amount of resources you could have bought in 1965 for £800 million.) It is clear from their speeches and White Papers that Labour’s welfare Ministers accept this figure of £800 million as the limit of what they can expect. There is no evidence that they are pressing for more. And official doctrine suggests that if the growth rate lags, the extra amount to be made available will be cut correspondingly.
Because of the demographic changes mentioned above by no means all of this money can be used to increase the level or widen the incidence of social security benefits. There are, at present, about six and a quarter million retirement pensioners and about the same number of children for whom family allowances are paid. The numbers in each of these two categories are expected to rise to seven million by 1970. At present levels of benefit, the extra customers will absorb an extra £154 million a year by 1970.
Of the proposed increase of 0.7 in the proportion of GNP to go into social security, 0.3 per cent will provide for this increase in the dependent section of the population. Overall increases in social security payments will be financed out of economic growth up to a proportion of GNP only 0.4 per cent higher than in 1964. The extra sum will be in real terms £646 million a year more in 1969-70 than in 1964.
The government have already allocated a good part of this money. £355 million a year went on the increases in social security benefits enacted in the autumn of 1964; the wage related benefits in the Bill now going through Parliament will cost another £70 million a year.
Houghton and Herbison are left with virtually nothing in the anticipated kitty with which to improve benefits in the next two years. And by 1970, they can only expect to have about £220 million a year more than at present. In terms of the kind of money involved in the welfare state, this won’t go far. For example, it would be enough to make the old age pension and other social security benefits ten shillings more in real terms by 1970 than they are at present – though this would leave nothing for an increase in family allowances, abolition of earnings rule for pensioners, etc.
If the economy does not deliver the hoped for 3.8 per cent annual growth rate, then either the projected welfare expenditure would be cut, or resources would have to be shifted in from other sectors of the economy, i.e. by a reduction in other forms of government expenditure, or by an increase in taxation. Personal expenditure is the only likely source, but already to finance the increases in social security payments enacted by Labour since 1964, an extra £500 million is being raised by taxation and increased welfare contributions. The National Plan does not discuss redistribution of income as such. But the section which makes predictions about trends in consumption patterns makes the tacit assumption that income will continue to be distributed much as in 1964, And thus to maintain the present degree of income inequality has apparently been adopted as one of Labour’s objectives.
 
2. Labour and Social Security, 1964-5
Towards the end of 1964, the Government increased the basic social security payment by 12s 6d a week for a single man (now £4) and 21s for a married couple (now £6 10s). The rate for a child went up by 2s 6d to 22s 6d a week.
For the unemployed and the sick, these increases were effective from 25 January 1965. The widows and the retirement pensioners had to wait until the end of March, for reasons which the Minister of Pensions has never managed to specify clearly. Increases in National Assistance Board (NAB) scales were equally delayed, but at the end of March 1965, allowances went up from £3 3s 6d to £3 10s a week for a single person, and from £5 4s 6d to £6 5s 6d for a married couple.
Labour party leaders have frequently claimed that these increases were the largest ever made since the national insurance scheme was started in July 1948. In money terms they were; in real terms and relatively, they were not. In 1952, 1955 and 1958 Conservative governments had managed increases of 25 per cent in the basic rates. Labour’s increase was less than 20 per cent.
The standard rate (i.e. what a single man gets) had been last fixed by the Conservatives in March 1963 at £3 7s 6d per week. Between that date and March 1965, as measured by the Retail Price Index the purchasing power of the pound decreased by ten per cent, and the real value, of the 1963 standard rate had decreased, therefore, by 6s 9d. The Labour Government, by increasing the standard rate by 12s 6d, in fact added only 5s 9d per week to the real value of the level of benefits thought adequate by the Conservatives in 1963.
Of this 5s 9d, 3s 1d has now been swallowed up by inflation between March 1965 and February 1966. So that those who depend on social security benefits are now in terms of purchasing power no more than 2s 8d per week better off than they were in 1963. This modest improvement would in turn be completely eroded by a further 3 per cent fall in the value of the pound, and more than this amount of inflation is expected to occur before the end of 1966.
Old age and widow’s pensions are not affected by the National Insurance Bill of 1966, and for these groups the chances of a basic increase this year are very dim. So a couple of years of Labour rule will achieve the reduction of the standard of living of the widows and the old below the levels current in 1963.
In any case, as Tony Lynes has argued recently, the purchasing power of increases in social security benefit is exaggerated by using as a measure the retail price index relating to the expenditure patterns of all consumers; for example over 70 per cent of the income of single pensioners goes on food, housing and clothing. For the period 1948-61, Lynes found that his low income price index rose 50 per cent faster than the official retail price index.
The other changes effected in the autumn of 1964 were relatively minor. The lump sum Maternity Grant was increased from £16 to £22, but the £6 extra paid to a woman who has her baby at home was abolished. 77,000 ten-shilling widows had their pensions increased to 30s a week. The earnings rule for widows was abolished, but the earnings rule for retirement pensioners was retained unchanged.
With minor exceptions, apart from these increases in benefits to meet inflation, no changes were made in the pattern of the social security system.
Since increases in NAB allowances and retirement pensions were not to be paid before the end of the winter, Ministers felt they should do something immediate, so that ‘those whose health was most likely to be at risk if heating was inadequate were in a position to provide themselves with any extra warmth they needed.’ A single payment of £4 was made – enough to buy 4 weeks’ supply of coal to last for 16 weeks of winter. This donation was only given to old age pensioners on national assistance, plus a number of other NAB groups.
Apart from the increases in benefits to match inflation, no changes were made in the overall pattern of the social security systems. In particular, contributory benefits (widows, sickness, industrial injury, unemployment benefits, and retirement pensions) were left at a relatively low level compared with NAB rates. (The NAB rate for a child went up by an average of 4s; the benefit for the child of a man on unemployment or sickness benefit only increased by 2s 6d.) This meant an increase in the gap between the income level defined by the NAB as the poverty line, and the much lower maximum level of contributory benefits. Thus the government’s policy, so far, has been to increase the numbers of families directly dependent on the NAB for a subsistence income.
 
3. Poverty in Britain, 1964-66
In the social security system erected in the years after the war, the role of the NAB was defined in a quite limited way, as a safety net to catch any unlucky individuals who escaped the fine meshes of the contributory sector. It has turned out otherwise, since the general level of national insurance benefits has remained so low that no one can live on them without other private means; and thus for large numbers the NAB is an essential support. The average number of people being paid a weekly NAB allowance has risen from about 850,000 in July 1948 to nearly two million at the end of 1964. The total number who received payments from the NAB in the course of 1964 was 2,700,000 – and this figure does not include dependents. Despite these huge numbers, the NAB has no kind of general brief to prevent poverty, since it is not allowed to help people who are employed, nor their dependents. There is no government agency concerned with the poverty of the low wage earner.



Table 2
 National Assistance Board
Weekly Allowances Paid at December 1964




A. Households receiving Assistance to help out
with social security benefits




 


Numbers




1. Retirement pensions


1,154,000




2. Sickness/Industrial Injury benefits


   146,000




3. Widow’s benefits


     97,000




4. Unemployment benefit


     38,000




5. Non-Contributing OA Pension


     61,000




B. Households in need, but getting help only from NAB




6. Unemployed (no benefit)


     93,000




7. Retired (with no state pension)


   127,000




8. Unmarried/Separated women with dependent children


     95,000




9. Chronic sick (no sickness benefit)


   135,000




10. Various others


     15,000




TOTAL


1,961,000




NB: this Table only includes those getting help at the end of 1964. Another 700,000 households
had received payments in the course of the year.



Table 2 indicates that about 75 per cent of payments made by the NAB are to people getting national insurance benefits. Apart from rent, the Board considers that a single man needs £3 16s a week (rate current since 1965) and a married couple £6 5s 6d to live at a minimum standard of subsistence. Since national insurance benefits are currently set at £4 and £6 10s respectively and rent has to be found from this weekly sum, it follows that no pensioner or unemployed man can achieve subsistence unless either he can find a house at four shillings a week rent, or has other means. The proportions of households receiving contributory benefits of various sorts who during 1964 were obliged to rely on die NAB as well, are as follows: [2]


20 per cent of all households depending on Sickness Benefit
23 per cent of all households depending on Widow’s Benefit
30 per cent of all households depending on Retirement Pensions
36 per cent of all households depending on Unemployment Benefits


Some NAB awards are made to help families through short periods of financial difficulty, but most have to be made on a regular basis over long periods. Of all NAB dependents in December 1964, 63 per cent had had weekly allowances for die previous three years, 48 per cent for the previous five years. 80 per cent of all retirement pensioners had had a weekly allowance for at least the two previous years.
Such weekly allowances are not enormous – for example, 56 per cent of allowances made to pensioners in 1964 were less than £1 a week. The Board is also able to make additions to die minimum rates for extra needs, e.g. special diet. 70 per cent of pensioners on NAB needed such additional payments, but die average amount given in this way was only 9s 6d a week. Despite the enormous numbers of people dependent on the NAB, the amounts it provides to each one are so small that the total expenditure of the Board in 1964 was only £239 million – 11 per cent of total social security expenditure. The other main group who depend on NAB are those who have to apply for National Assistance because no other part of the so-called universal Welfare State meets their needs. Such groups are created by the operation of the contributory principle which has dominated the structure of the Welfare State since its inception in die late 1950s. The pension, sickness benefit etc. which a person is given is determined not by need but by the number of National Insurance stamps he has paid for. Thus, for example, one in 24 of old age pensioners were not given the full pension increase in March 1965, because of insufficient contributions. There are still about 250,000 retired people who get no State pension. In 1964 there were in addition 81,000 pensioners (now aged 90 and over) who get a pension of no more than 28s 4d a week – and 40 per cent of them get less. A Ministry of Labour survey in August 1965 indicated that 108,000 of the 227,000 men then unemployed were not receiving unemployment benefit – either their contributions had been insufficient, or their period out of work too long. Apart from National Assistance no provision is made for the chronic sick, those who have not worked long enough to become entitled to sickness benefit, or who have exceeded the time limits for the award of sickness benefit. The present Government are just as fervently attached to the contributory principle as were their predecessors.
What must be emphasised is that though the basic level of national insurance benefits and NAB allowances was raised by the Labour government in 1964, no other changes have yet been made in either the role or the administration of the NAB. There is no reason to suppose that the numbers forced to apply to the NAB or their treatment by the NAB is any different today from 1964, The elaborate personal investigations by the NAB which precede the award of benefit are to continue. Nor – and this is even more depressing – has the Labour government done anything to improve the condition of those, not yet discussed, whose standard of living is still below the NAB minimum.
On 23 September 1964, Wilson told the country in a TV election broadcast:
‘What we are going to do now – we are going to do it early because it is urgent in the first few weeks of a Labour Government – is to provide a guaranteed income below which no one will be allowed to fall.’
During the past 18 months the minimum income guarantee has been referred to occasionally by Labour leaders, in a diminuendo way, and the latest word is mat it will now be 1970 at the earliest before the guarantee will be introduced. Whether, or not the guarantee would have made much difference to anyone’s standard of living has never been clear, since at no time was even a hint given about the income level that would be chosen as minimum. The last two Labour election manifestos were menus that scarcely mentioned the food.
There is, in fact, at present, an official minimum income established by Labour’s increases in NAB rates in early 1965. A single person now gets £3 10s a week, plus an average of £1 4s for rent – i.e. £5 a week. A married couple with children would get £8 2s plus £1 2s 6d for each child under five, £1 7s for a child age five to eleven.
It is known that large numbers of people have total incomes which are less than these minima. How many exactly is not, known – nor have the Government yet made any serious effort to find out,
Four main groups have incomes below NAB minima:


Non-applicants: those who would be entitled to NAB payments but who do not apply. The Government did conduct a survey in 1965 to establish the numbers in this category. The survey was restricted to retirement pensioners, and the number of unemployed, sick, widows, not applying remains unknown. It was found that about 700,000 (11 per cent) of all pensioners had incomes below the NAB minimum level, but kept away from the NAB. This figure may well be an underestimate. Abel-Smith and Townsend, using Ministry of Labour statistics, have calculated that there must have been about one million pensioners who were qualified by need but did not apply to the Board. They also believe that there are another half million people dependent on State welfare other than retirement pensioners who are similarly non-applicants.
 
Low Income – Large Family. The NAB gives no money to a man who is employed, and if his wage is low and his family large, it is very likely that he will be getting less in work than the NAB scale for his family size. It was reported in the Commons (20 July 1965) that between 150,000 and 250,000 families were in this position. (The vagueness of official poverty statistics is only equalled by the inadequacy of information about the wealthy.) The average number of children in these families is probably something over three. This means that between 450,000 and 600,000 children in Britain live in homes that cannot afford what the NAB considers essential: – even when the breadwinner has work.
 
Wage stop victims. Both Conservative and Labour governments in this country have an obsession about weakening the incentive to work. The system is, therefore, adjusted so that if the sickness or unemployment benefit plus national assistance were to amount to what a man had been earning at work, corresponding deductions are made to the NAB supplement. Figures are available only for the unemployed – 14,840 families were wage stopped in September 1965 (children affected, 59,000). Men on sickness benefit are similarly affected – but their numbers are not known.
 
High Rent Category. Families in privately rented accommodation may not have their rent fully met by the NAB because the Board thinks their rent too high. This limit affected about 20,000 households at the end of 1964 (60,000 children at least). People buying their own house on a mortgage are given enough per week for rates, repairs and mortgage interest – but nothing for capital repayments.


Ann Lapping [3] has quoted as an example a man earning £10, with rent £2 10s, three children between five and eleven years and three between eleven and fifteen. His £10 a week is £5 9s below the NAB minimum for such a family. If he became unemployed or sick, the NAB would limit its grant to £9 5s, i.e. £6 4s below its own minimum.
The above figures assume that the NAB minimum income includes the basic allowance, plus rent. In fact, the Board also makes numerous small additional payments for special needs, which effectively raise its minimum by about ten shillings a week. Also, figures (as above) from official statements are suspect since no Ministry makes itself responsible for investigating poverty. Abel-Smith and Townsend have recently made a painstaking calculation which established that:
‘... in 1960 approximately 18 per cent of the households and 14.2 per cent of the persons in the United Kingdom, representing nearly 7,500,000 persons, were living below a defined "national assistance" level of living. About 35 per cent were living in households primarily dependent on pensions, 23 per cent in households primarily dependent on other state benefits, and 41 per cent in households primarily dependent on earnings.’ [4]
Their numbers will be no less in 1966. The Labour government raised the money value of the NAB minimum; they have, as yet, done nothing to decrease the numbers who fall below that minimum. The NAB is shortly to be abolished, but only in name. Its functions will be continued by the new Ministry of Social Security. The NAB Means Test will probably continue to operate in much the same way. Until they achieved office, the Labour leadership intended to use the income tax return to identify those in need. The proposal is now abandoned; it seems that income tax returns are too confidential to be entrusted to another Ministry. Need is now to be established by a special income return. The Means Test system is to be diluted. There will be investigations to establish that people make an honest return – but at least people will not need to apply for assistance – and the Ministry has promised that officials will make fewer routine home visits,
The Government is not, at present, proposing to stop the wage-stop. Given Ministerial obsessions about the need to compel people to work, they could escape their dilemma by raising the wages of lower paid workers. This is not in their minds. Even the minimum income guarantee, promised in 1964, had they been going to introduce it before 1970, would not have applied to incomes of people employed.
 
4. The Financing of Labour’s Welfare
The increases in social security benefits introduced in the autumn of 1964 required that in the year 1965-6 an extra £332 million had to be found for the National Insurance scheme, and an extra £23 million from the Exchequer for the NAB.
They decided to raise 80 per cent of the £332 million by increases in the flat-rate contributions made by means of the National Insurance Stamp. From April 1965 employees paid an extra two shillings a week, and employers an extra 3s 6d. (The employee still pay more – 13s 8d compared with employer’s 12s 11d.) The remaining £67 million is being provided by the Exchequer out of general taxation. In choosing to raise most of the money by increases in flat-rate contributions, the Government were only following a pattern well established by their predecessors in office. In 1951, about 38 per cent of expenditure from the national insurance fund was directly financed by the Exchequer; by 1964 the Exchequer contributed less than 16 per cent. The Labour government has halted, but not reversed, this swing from a more to a less redistributive way of raising its welfare revenue. It is significant that the present administration – as did the Conservatives before them – have instructed the Government Actuary, high priest of the insurance principle, that he should allow for a Treasury contribution of no more than 16 per cent per annum right up to the year 2000.
In his budget of November 1964 Callaghan had to arrange for the Exchequer to find an additional £130 million for welfare in 1965-6 – the only significant items being the removal of prescription charges, NAB increase and the contribution to the insurance fund mentioned above. Only one of the fiscal changes made by Callaghan directly affected the distribution of income – his decision to raise the standard rate of income tax from 7s 9d in the pound to its present level of 8s 3d. The product of this tax was expected to be about £122 million in a full year.
The child allowance (£115 of income, tax free, for each child below age 11) was not increased, and thus there was no distribution from childless taxpayers to men with families. The minimum income below which tax is not levied was reduced by about £8 a year (the personal allowance went up by £20 a year, but national insurance contributions were no longer to be tax free; at new contribution levels this meant an addition of £32 a year to the taxable income of employed workers). So long as the minimum income level at which one starts paying tax remains virtually static, the effect, in a period when money incomes are increasing rapidly, is to bring an increasing proportion of wage earners into income tax paying categories, for an increasing percentage of their income.
Callaghan’s first essay in fiscal welfare was not wildly re-distributive, and he has to date made no further changes in the income tax system. After 18 months of Labour rule, the rates and incidence of surtax remain at the levels to which they were reduced by Selwyn Lloyd in 1961. (In 1961, surtax brought in £237 million – in the year following, only £161 million despite interim rises in average income levels.)
Since the decisions of the autumn of 1964, no further major expenditure on welfare has been proposed for finance out of general taxation (apart from £21 million for Crossman’s rates rebate scheme). The redundancy compensation scheme of 1965 is to be paid for by a levy on employers, the graduated benefit scheme of 1966 by a levy on employers and employees, with no Treasury contribution whatsoever.
The most recent, and very careful study, of income distribution in Britain is by J.L. Nicholson. He concludes that:
‘there appears to have been little increase in the amount of vertical redistribution between 1937 and 1959.’ [5]
Unless the government change their fiscal policies, his conclusion may well be valid for 1970 as well.
 
5. The New Graduated Scheme
The National Insurance Bill that was wending its way through Parliament in February 1966 introduces the first stage of Labour’s new deal in welfare.
What is proposed is that a wage-related supplement (to existing flat-rate benefits) amounting to one-third of that part of average earnings between £9 and £30 a week should be paid to men who are off work because of sickness, unemployment or industrial injury. Thus a man who in the previous year averaged £10 a week will get 6s 8d a week extra, a man who earned £30 a week will get £7 a week extra. All insured workers are to be in the scheme, and to contribute half a per cent of that part of their income between £9 and £30 a week; employers match the contributions made by their workers.
The original undertaking of Labour’s 1964 manifesto was that wage-related benefits would be quickly introduced for pensions as well as other social security payments. It now turns out that wage-related pensions will not be introduced before 1970. Widows figure in the new scheme, but only as regards the once and for all allowances paid in the first 26 weeks of widowhood (before this Bill they got an allowance for only 13 weeks). There will be no wage-related supplement for long term widows’ benefits till 1970. In choosing to begin with sickness, unemployment and industrial injuries benefit, they have picked out the less expensive part of the system, amounting at present to only 25 per cent of total national insurance expenditure. (Old Age Pensions take 72 per cent.) Second, since only a small percentage of the labour force is unemployed, sick or industrially injured at any one time, or dies before the age of retirement leaving a widow, it is, therefore, easy to organise a self-financing scheme for these groups, in which contributions match payments according to the strict insurance principles which Labour governments like to build into their welfare schemes. The Bill also represents exactly the kind of welfare which capitalism approves (a) because it involves no redistribution of income, and (b) because if the State arranges for additional payments during periods of unemployment or sickness, it is less imperative for private industry to extend cover beyond the half or so of the labour force at present provided for in occupational schemes.
The proposal for wage-related unemployment benefits was enthusiastically welcomed by The Economist, in the interests of labour mobility – though it suggested the dropping of the sickness part of the scheme, as not leading directly to economic growth. There are a lot of nasty little twists built into the new legislation, and the principles they represent are worth a close look, because we are promised a whole new social security system something like this when the major review takes effect at the end of the decade.
To begin with, no supplements will be payable for the first twelve days off work – Sundays and holidays do not count. This will mean a lot of flat-rate sickness. According to a Ministry of Labour survey, in 1965 four and a half million people were off work because of sickness for spells of less than two weeks (cf. three and a half million for longer spells). The supplementary benefit will only last for six months. (In 1965, 162,000 had been sick for more than half a year.) From six months onwards, it is back to the flat-rate only – and the NAB. Periods of sickness or unemployment not separated by more than 13 weeks are treated as one period, so seasonal workers are rarely going to touch supplementary benefit.
Workers who are temporarily laid off are to get no graduated supplement for the first six working days thereafter; and the Bill provides that from 1969 onwards they will get no flat-rate benefit either for these six days. This change is postponed till 1969, the Minister says, to allow time for workers to persuade their employers to make provisions for short-time working and the first week of lay-off. But there is to be no legislation to compel employers to do so.
The amount of the supplement is established by total earnings in the previous year; so if a worker was sick, unemployed, or on short-time in the previous tax year, his benefits in the current year will be correspondingly reduced. This would also apply if he had a holiday in the previous year, but was not paid in the holiday period.
Graduated benefits in the new scheme are related to earnings, not to need. A single man on a given wage will get the same as a man with the same wage, and a family. The one exception to this rule is that the married man with a large family may get less. The principle of wage-stop is built into the new scheme, which restricts the payment of graduated supplement, so that no one will get more than 85 per cent of his average weekly earnings while sick or unemployed. Thus, for example, the man averaging £12 a week with two children will be entitled to a supplement of £1 a week; if he has three children, he will get 14s a week; if four children, 8s; if five children, not a penny. The sacredness of the contributory principle is not proof against the deep conviction that people have to get a lot less money when sick or unemployed than when at work.
The Government appear to feel that in not pitching the wage-stop ceiling any lower than 85 per cent they are being very bold and idealistic. In a Ministerial speech on the Bill, Pentland said:
‘Of course the Ministry is well aware of the identity of the small number of claimants who are referred to as malingerers. They claim benefits frequently for trivial illnesses and injuries, but their claims are investigated and they are examined; we take steps to check their incapacity for work. It should not be assumed that they receive benefit every time they claim. Therefore, while the risk of doubtful claims has to be borne in mind, it would be wrong to think that the supplement with the twelve day waiting period and with the 85 per cent benefit ceiling is likely to create a new large problem. For any cases which do arise, as I have said, the Ministry has a regular system of control.’ [6]
There are one or two aspects of the new Bill which have not been emphasised by the Ministers responsible. The level of contributions is set at a certain percentage of income; whereas benefits are established in terms of so much money per week. Thus contributions rise automatically as the purchasing power of the pound declines and the money value of earnings rises. But benefits fall with inflation and their real value would depend on specific Government decisions to increase benefit rates correspondingly. This fact amply justifies the proud Ministerial claim that the scheme will be self-financing, and will not require any contribution from the Treasury. This has the effect of removing one of the two possibilities for building in a redistributive element into the scheme, since the higher income groups tend to pay a relatively higher proportion of their incomes in general taxation into the Exchequer. Nor is there any redistribution within the scheme; a person will receive benefits whose size is exactly determined by his contributions.
The new graduated system also applies to the industrial injuries scheme, and there is also to be an increase of £3 a week in the allowance for exceptionally severe disablement. On the other hand, the Government are no longer to pay industrial injury benefit for the day of the accident. Herbison says the change will mean the loss of a day’s benefit in up to 600,000 cases a year. To counterbalance this, however, the Minister announced what she called ‘an upward revision of the scheduled assessment for certain leg amputations between mid-thigh and the knee.’ Presumably the rest of the leg amputations will get their increase in 1970.



Table 3
Social Security Expenditure
as percentage of National Income [7]




1957




 


%


 


 


%




France


17.3


Holland


8.6




West Germany


17.3


Sweden


7.4




Austria


14.6


Norway


7.3




Italy


13.2


United Kingdom*


6.9




Belgium


11.2


Portugal


2.2




*The UK percentage is higher than in The National Plan, because the latter
calculates GNP at market prices.
 



6. Conclusions
As Table 3 indicates Britain is now lagging far behind many other European countries in social security provision, though information is lacking on the key question of how far European systems are redistributive in structure. The employer usually pays a much higher percentage of total social security costs than in Britain – e.g. 72 per cent in Italy, 69 per cent in France, 41 per cent in West Germany, 21 per cent in UK. But employer financed schemes need not be redistributive if wages are kept correspondingly low and/or social security charges are added to prices rather than subtracted from profits. Modern capitalism likes welfare schemes.
However, the scope of Continental schemes is impressive compared with those in Britain. Retirement pensioners here are not to have a wage-related scheme before 1970, and unless present policies change, pensions will be fixed in money terms at a proportion of earnings during working life, and will not change after retirement. In an inflationary economy the only kind of of pension worth having is one which will rise as the purchasing power of the currency falls. Sweden and Germany are now introducing such ‘indexed’ benefits. They are regarded by Labour leaders as hopelessly utopian.
It would be possible to increase social security expenditure by a vertical redistribution of resources – e.g. by the use of fiscal techniques to decrease level of benefits relative to premiums in the private insurance sector, and/or by cutting living standards of the higher income groups. But social security on the European scale would scarcely be possible (short of socialism) except by cutting the living standards of the middle income groups as well. It is not clear the extent to which a majority of workers would want, if given the choice, to spread their income more evenly over their life-span.
The big welfare issue of the recent election was said to be universalism versus selectivism. In the campaign this was mostly shadow boxing, since Labour do not intend to abolish non-contributory benefits (i.e. NAB) which is the major selective part of the social security system; nor did the Tories intend to award pensions only to those in need. The key immediate issue, redistribution, was not discussed by the politicians.
Labour leaders seem convinced that the financing of welfare expansion out of economic growth, rather than by redistribution, offers a rapid as well as a politically frictionless road to socialism. This is an element of official party ideology that badly needs demythologising. A GNP of £32,000 million (1964 value according to the Plan) increasing at an annual rate of two and a half per cent would produce about £80 million extra in real terms for social security in each of the first few succeeding years (assuming that ten per cent of the total increment from growth could be put into the social security sector). This would be enough, in a given year, to increase old age pensions by five shillings a week – i.e. an increase of only six per cent over current levels of benefit – or to give widows half as much again as they get at present or to increase family allowances by five shillings a week. The Labour Party, if it ever took to giving precise undertakings to the electorate, would blush to promise so little. Though at least these are increases in real terms, and another £80 million extra would be forthcoming in the succeeding year. But it is not hard to think of ways of producing a lot more than £80 million a year by redistributive taxation. For example, only to revert to pre-1961 levels of supertax would increase Exchequer income by more than £60 million.
The only kind of redistribution so far practised by the Labour government is at the expense of the larger family and in favour of small households. In 1964 social security benefits for a single person and married couples rose by 20 per cent; the weekly allowance per child was increased by only 12 per cent. The government have retained unchanged a fiscal system in which the combined effects of tax-free child allowances and family allowances are such that a man earning £10 a week with four children gets eight shillings per week per child. A man with the same size family and £30 will get 21s 8d per week for each child.
No change is contemplated in the system whereby a vast bureaucratic effort (40,000 people work for the Ministry of Pensions, plus an expensive computer) is invested in maintaining a record of every weekly contribution made to the national insurance scheme by every employer and employee in the country for the whole of their working lives. When contributions are judged to be deficient, or a particular need not met by the contributory scheme, and because national insurance benefits are recognised as inadequate anyway, the NAB (employing 13,500 people in 1964) provides an investigating service, and hands out shillings and pound notes according to an intricate set of regulations.
Meanwhile, the Labour Party in the last two elections has preached a gospel of universal welfare, which in practice makes nonsense of their aims to establish any kind of adequate minimum income. Suppose the basic social security payment for a single person was to be £8 a week. At present differentials, this would mean £13 a week for a married couple and £2 a week per child. Universalism implies the provision of such payments to everyone who retires, is unemployed, widowed, etc., irrespective of need. Such levels of benefit would increase total government income and expenditure by 20 per cent – £2,000 million a year. In the immediate political context, the whole project is mere fantasy.
This is the argument of the Tory party, and at least it is honest. If the Labour Party want to make their present Welfare State do its job, then they must identify those in need by the least stigmatising method they can devise, and establish a high minimum income level on a redistributive basis. The present ‘universal’ pattern would only be socialist in a socialist society.
If they feel committed to universalism as a slogan they could redefine it to mean incorporation of the private insurance sector into the State scheme. The private sectors in education and health are negligible in size compared with the massive concentration of resources in the private insurance sector. In 1960 British insurance companies held assets worth over £7,000 million and were raking in premiums to the tune of £1,500 million a year. (In that year National Insurance contributions totalled only £795 million.) The scope for economies of scale must be enormous, given the elaborate arrangements for pseudo-competition by advertising, high pressure sales techniques, the duplication of administrative functions. Insurance rests precisely on the reduction of relative costs by the spreading of risks as widely as possible. For this purpose the private insurance sector is hopelessly fragmented.
Anything worthwhile that the Labour Government could do in welfare would involve a confrontation with powerful interests. Their present welfare policy was accurately summarised by Douglas Houghton in a statement to the House on 23 February this year:
‘We are now engaged in an urgent study of the whole problem and have been for a long time.’

Footnotes
1. The National Plan, 1965.
2. Calculated from Annual Report of the Ministry of Pennons for 1964.
3. New Society, 9 December 1965.
4. Brian Abel-Smith and Peter Townsend, The Poor and the Poorest, London 1965, p.49.
5. J.L. Nicholson, Redistribution of Income in the UK, London, 1965.
6. House of Commons Debates, 7 February 1966.
7. OEEC, Statistics on Finance, 1960.
 
 


It is reckoned that in Britain there must be more than 750,000 adults under pension age who suffer from a physical or mental handicap sufficiently serious to make them unable to work, or to lower their earning power by a substantial amount. As might be expected such groups figure fairly heavily in current estimates of the numbers in Britain who live in poverty. Even the best estimate can only be a guess, but experts believe that for up to 250,000 men, women and children living at income levels below the government’s official ‘minimum,’ the primary cause of their poverty is that a member of the family is disabled. Paradoxically it is not necessarily the disablement of the bread-winner that does most damage to a family’s economic position. Worst off are families in which it is the wife who is disabled, for unless she happens to have been working and has paid full contributions into the national insurance scheme (most working wives do not) there is no financial provision by the State to help the family meet the extra costs of her sickness or disablement. Women in employment are always covered for industrial injuries, but only full insurance contributions cover them for sickness and unemployment; the husband cannot claim any allowance from the national insurance scheme on behalf of a sick or disabled wife, unless he too is unable to work. All local authorities have a home help service, but it is very poorly developed in most places.
There is another large category of handicapped people for whom there is no provision in the national insurance scheme, those who have never been able to work long enough to make the minimum number of contributions to the scheme and so qualify for benefit. The Supplementary Benefits Commission – still known to millions as the NAB – caters in a meagre way for 140,000 adults in this situation. The total of handicap is made up by three other groups,


about 300,000 workers on sick benefit for more than 12 months,
about 275,000 people with war pensions and
90,000 with industrial injury pensions. (Many of the war and industrial pensioners will hold a job, though often a poorly paid one).


Many of the injustices of the British system stem from the fact that the amount of financial assistance available to support a handicapped person is often not determined by the degree of his disability or by his family responsibilities. What counts more heavily is a variety of other factors; how the person was injured, whether by disease or accident, whether injury was in war, in industry or in some other context, the social status and previous income of the person, whether he can establish that someone else was legally to blame for the accident, whether that other person happened to be rich enough or well enough insured to bear the costs of compensation.
Those injured in war or industry constitute something like an aristocracy of handicap. A single person off work because of an industrial injury gets a basic £6 15s a week from the State for up to six months; the same person off work through sickness gets only £4 a week. The widow of a man killed in an industrial accident is paid £4 10s a week; other widows only £4 a week. Non-industrial widows only qualify for the £4 if they have dependent children, or if they had been married for at least 3 years and were at least 49½ years old when husband died.
In the case of long term benefits the distinction is even sharper. Once you have qualified, sickness benefit can continue indefinitely, but no extra provision is made for the rising costs to the family of long-term sickness. But if you become permanently handicapped as a result of a war wound, or an industrial accident or industrial disease, you can claim a disablement benefit which is compensation for the damage done to you, and is paid irrespective of whether you can return to work or not. A pension for 100 per cent disablement in industry is £6 15s, and likewise for privates in the army – captains get about £10 a week and brigadiers over £12. For those disabled in war or in industry there are in addition special allowances, e.g. for total incapacity to work, for the extra costs where nursing is needed. However to reach a weekly income of £20 10s – the average wage for manual work in industry today – a person disabled in industry or in war would have to be so crippled as to be incapable of any work, and require constant nursing and have dependent children as well. There are no corresponding provisions in the State scheme for handicap arising from non-industrial or non-military causes; a lucky few may be able to claim damages from someone, but, as an example, it is estimated that only 1 in 10 of people injured in motor car accidents are able to get any compensation; it is only very recently that people disabled in criminal cases have been able to get compensation.
Despite all these special provisions, however, the present system of protection for workers against the risks of industrial accidents and diseases, is very far from adequate, and reflects little credit on the Labour government who created it in 1946. Compensation for industrial accidents was one of the earliest elements of the modern social security system in Britain, initiated by the Workman’s Compensation Act of 1897. The pre-1946 scheme had many defects, eg a workman got half pre-accident earnings, but no allowance was made for any subsequent changes in the cost of living; if a workman was held responsible for the accident, he could only claim if his disablement was exceptionally severe. The scheme did, however, have one great merit, namely that the full cost was borne by the employers alone – £21 million a year by 1946. The post-1946 scheme offered better protection to workers, but made them bear a substantial part of the cost. The new scheme began on the basis that the total employers’ contribution was reduced from £21 million to £10 million a year – and another £10 million found by a flat-rate levy paid by workers as part of the national insurance stamp. Currently the adult male employee pays 9d a week into the Industrial Injuries Fund, and the employer 10d on behalf of each worker. Employees also contribute as taxpayer, since at present about 14 per cent of the income of the Fund comes from general taxation via the Exchequer.
In 1964, out of the 23.4 million workers covered by the scheme, 820,000 claimed industrial injury benefit. Most of these claims were for relatively minor injuries, and the average time off work was about 4 weeks. However, in 1964, there were 18,600 new claims accepted for disablement benefit, which is only awarded in cases where there is permanent damage to the worker as a result of an industrial accident or disease. Thus, each year, 1 in every 1,200 workers is suffering from some permanent impairment at work. At this rate of injury, about 1 in 30 workers can expect to experience such damage at some point in his or her working life. An example of the minimum kind of injury that would qualify a person for disablement benefit is the loss of part of a finger. The benefit takes the form of some kind of weekly payment in more serious injuries; for what are called minor injuries the worker gets a lump sum, calculated by reference to degree of injury and his age. The maximum lump sum paid is £450 at present (it’s called a ‘gratuity!’). To qualify for £450 a worker would have to be a young man, and have lost at least the whole of his index finger.
Just under 2,000 workers were killed in industrial accidents or by industrial diseases in 1964. At this rate of death, 1 in every 600 of workmen are being killed as a direct result of their work at some point in their working lives. Mining is still the biggest killer of all with an annual industrial death rate of 1 per 900 workers – nearly all from pneumoconiosis. As regards deaths from accidents, the fishing industry has the blackest record, 1 in every 1,300 workers killed in 1964.
This is enormously much higher than the death rate of 1 per 6-7,000 workers in metal manufacture and building in 1964. An injured workman is entitled for the first 6 months of work to a weekly benefit of £6 15s, plus 30s if he has a wife and 22s 6d per child (family allowances included). There is now, in addition, a wage related element, e.g. £2 a week if he had been earning £15 a week, £3 for a wage of £18. The man on injury benefit will be in any case a good deal better off than the man who is sick or unemployed (by at least £2 15s a week). But for the majority of workers an industrial injury will still involve a considerable drop in income, as Table 1 illustrates.



Table 1
Wages and Industrial Injury Benefit Compared




Weekly Income
Before Injury


Wife
Plus


Weekly Industrial
Injury Benefit*




£15


0 children


£11   5s 0d




 


2 children


£13   2s 0d




3 children


£13 16s 6d




£18


0 children


£12   5s 0d




 


2 children


£14   2s 0d




3 children


£14 16s 6d




£21


0 children


£13   5s 0d




 


2 children


£15   2s 0d




3 children


£15 16s 6d




* Wage related element included.
Family allowances excluded from calculation.
Injured worker will also not pay national insurance contributions
while off work – 13s 8d a week at present.



It is not clear why anyone who is injured at work should have to exist on a lower income while he is off work. The middle classes in Britain expect their employer to pay full wages for the first weeks or sometimes months off work, whether their injury or sickness is work generated or not. But the Victorian principle of less eligibility is still firmly installed in the British social security system, so that a worker’s standard of living has to fall when he is not at work, whatever the reason may be. In any case it would certainly cause political difficulties to make even sharper the disparity in treatment between the industrially injured, and those sick or injured in non-industrial accidents. For once, a lack of available resources cannot be made the excuse for not improving benefits. The government keep a quite separate fund for the industrial injury scheme, and if excess of income over expenditure is the test of successful administration, few of the government’s many balance sheets look more impressive than the Industrial Injuries Fund. By March 1965 the Fund had an accumulated reserve of £328 million. Over a period of only 17 years this huge sum has been taken from employees, employers and taxpayers and not transferred to the industrially injured and disabled. There might be a justification for building up a small reserve fund, given that the number of people with long-term disablement benefits tends to cumulate over the years. But £328 million is completely disproportionate. The 1964-5 expenditure of the Industrial Injuries Fund was about £86 million. The income from employees and their employers was £68 million, and from the Exchequer £13½ million. Thus the gap between contributions and expenditure was only £4½ million. Nor was it necessary to dip into the reserve capital of the fund in order to bridge this gap, since investment income from the reserve amounted to £14i million in 1964-5. So, from year to year, the reserve continues to grow – in 1964-5 by as much as £10 million. The reserve Fund is invested in various government securities at a low rate of return (4.4 per cent in 1965), and forms a convenient addition to the working capital required for the financing of the British Government, though why money collected to provide for the victims of industrial accidents and diseases, should be used for this purpose is not explained by the Government Actuary who guarantees the financial ‘soundness’ of the scheme.
The relatively favourable treatment accorded to the industrially injured and disabled as compared with other groups unable to work, means that a great deal of attention has had to be given to the definition of what exactly constitutes an accident or disease arising ‘out of and in course of employment.’ To this end much effort has been expended by lawyers, trade-union claims officers, and by the administrative tribunal of the National Insurance Commissioner who adjudicates disputes arising over national insurance benefits. To a layman the distinctions drawn seem pretty arbitrary. Accidents happening during the journey to and from work are not industrial unless the worker is in a vehicle provided by his employer, or is called out in an emergency. Accidents in pit-head baths, lavatories or canteens are industrial, but not in the case of canteens not for meals before or after work and not unless the canteen is run by employer. An accident at a trade union meeting would be industrial, but only if employer approved the holding of the meeting, and it was on his premises. Making tea is part of employment, but only at times specifically approved by the employer.
The basic benefit paid to someone with a long-term industrial disability is determined solely on the basis of the amount of damage caused. (There are a variety of additional allowances, if e.g. a person has become incapable of work, needs constant nursing and, if completely immobilised, the State provides a motorised three wheeler with one seat – only the war disabled get cars). The procedure by which entitlement to the basic benefit is assessed is a classic example of bureaucratic rationality in action. A person is counted as 100 per cent disabled (i.e. entitled to £6 15s per week disablement pension) if he or she loses both hands or feet; is made completely deaf or blind; loses a hand and foot. People counted as less than 100 per cent disabled are awarded the disability pension at an appropriately reduced rate, e.g. loss of one arm is 90 per cent, but only if the amputation is through the shoulder blade, loss of one eye is 40 per cent, loss of a thumb 30 per cent, if index finger lost 14 per cent, middle finger 12 per cent, either of two other fingers 7 per cent. Leg amputees are meticulously graded; hip amputees are paid a 90 per cent rate; if there is less than 5 inches of stump the rate is 80 per cent. Over 5 inches but not below middle of thigh 70 per cent, and so on down the leg. The use of a scale set out in 10 per cent units means that a small difference in degree of injury can mean a large difference in pension awarded – the difference could be 15s a week for life – so bureaucratic rationality, as often happens, has managed to combine precision and injustice. Such quantification problems become serious when the whole system is being run in the niggling spirit of the minimum.
There is, in addition to the State scheme, a quite separate procedure whereby a person injured at work can obtain compensation and financial provision – namely by suing the employer for damages. Not many workmen have a case that will stand up in law. It is believed that no more than 10-20 per cent of workmen seriously injured at work will claim damages, and not all claims are successful. Litigation arising out of industrial accidents forms a substantial and expensive part of the work of the British legal system, and of trade unions and insurance companies. From the point of view of people claiming damages it is a chancy and capricious business – ‘a degraded bingo session,’ one leading Scottish lawyer calls it. The burden of proof is always on the worker. To succeed, he must show that the accident happened because of the employer’s negligence; if the employer can show that the employee’s negligence contributed to the accident, then the damages will be reduced proportionately. To be legally negligent, it must be held that a person could have been reasonably expected to foresee that an accident might arise. Thus the outcome of innumerable cases turns on the interpretation of what constitutes ‘reasonable foreseeability.’ Given an issue so metaphysical, it is inevitable that judges will vary widely in their decisions. The chief authority on the matter notes that, ‘Some learned judges are able to foresee very little; others by taking a complex series of events, step by step, are able to foresee almost anything.’ [1] The appeal courts are kept busy correcting the grosser discrepancies in the judgements made in lower courts.
The workman or his widow who succeeds in obtaining damages for industrial injury is in a much better financial position than someone who does not. But the sums awarded are still trifling by comparison with those of, for example, American courts, where awards of well over £150,000 for fatal accidents are not uncommon. It is rare for awards to go over £25,000 in British courts, and then only for death or the total crippling of a young man. There are many criteria employed by British courts to minimise the amount of damages. Account is taken of how much a dead person or a person crippled would have earned if he could have continued in the same job, but no allowance is made for any future increases in the general level of wages in his occupation. Hypothetical future earnings are calculated net of the tax that would have been paid by the dead man, though interest earned by investment of the damages awarded will also be taxed. Thus the dead and the crippled are doubly taxed. One half of all prospective benefits from the State industrial injuries scheme is subtracted from common law damages! (Law Reform Act of 1948 – the law officers of Labour governments are always in the vanguard of reaction). The widow has to be produced in court; if the judge thinks her young and attractive, damages are reduced – she is more likely to remarry. It is normal to give £500 (very recently increased to £1,000) to compensate for loss of expectation of life; but the estimate of hypothetical earnings is reduced accordingly. As the judge said in a recent case:
’If the claimant is injured so severely that he can only live a year or two at most, the damages will be much less than if he is less injured so that he may survive for many years.’ [2]
Another important component in assessment of damages arises from loss of ‘enjoyment of life.’ A person who can prove that he had a lot of hobbies and athletic interests will get more. In a recent case (not industrial accident) in which a boy of 3 was badly scarred for life, damages were reduced because:
’Judge said the effect of scarring on a person of his age would be much less than on an older person because appearance would be the only appearance he had ever known.’ [3]
There is general agreement even among lawyers, that damages are too low. One pressure that operates to increase the size of awards is having progressively less effect, for in recent years there has been a deliberate and successful policy of keeping accident eases away from juries. Having to adjudicate between personal tragedy on the one hand and their insurance companies on the other, juries are apt to give high damages, and the appeal courts were spending a great deal of time cutting down awards that reflected the humanity of jurymen and not the inflexible conventions of the law.
The Labour Government has appointed a Law Commission which is busy devising reforms in many branches of the law, including the law of negligence, but in this area there is a strong case for much more than piecemeal reform. What is needed is a national insurance scheme that will provide for disability, however caused, whether by accidents in the workplace, at home, or on the road, and for handicaps resulting from disease, as well as from accident. And why should such a scheme aim to provide only half of the anticipated standard of living? Full compensation in monetary terms will scarcely produce a rush of people throwing themselves in front of cars or down stairs. It is sometimes argued that such a scheme would result in an increase in accidents, in that the employer or motorist would be less careful than at present because he would not himself have to bear the consequences of his carelessness. But already, unless in exceptional circumstances, the cost of negligence is borne by insurance companies, and thus individual carelessness is paid for by motorists as a whole (loss of a no-claim bonus is scarcely a savage penalty), or employers as a whole – as well as by the victim. Sanctions against individual negligence can easily be found in the Criminal Law or the Factories Acts. To make compensation depend on the identification of someone who has been negligent, and on whether that person is insured or well-to-do is an element of our legal system that belongs in a type of society in which face-to-face relationships predominate, rather than with the abstract relationships of modern society. Such a comprehensive scheme might not prove overwhelmingly expensive to run, since enormous savings could be made by a reduction in the vast litigation at present involved in actions for personal damages.
We can hardly expect however that the present Labour Government will consider the possibility of such a scheme as even worth investigating. However strong the case for such a reform might be, on grounds of social justice as well as rationality, to set it up would need more than the patching, fiddling spirit in which the present government deals with welfare problems. In any case there would be political problems of the kind which this government has shown no disposition to face; for the creation of an adequate and comprehensive scheme of provision for people who become mentally or physically handicapped would inevitably expose the inadequacy of present provision for groups arising from the disabilities of old age or sickness or from inability to find a job.

Footnotes
1. E. Munkman, Employer’s Liability, 3rd Ed., p.24.
2. The Times, report, 3 Nov. 1966.
3. Current Law, Aug. 1966.
 
 


Social Work Practice under Capitalism: A Marxist Approach
P. Corrigan and P. Leonard
Macmillan, £2.95p
This book is aimed at a very specific audience, the layer of radicalised young professionals who have entered social work in recent years. Its aim is to counter the fatalism that has overtaken many in this category as their idealism and radical strategies prove ineffective in helping individual clients or in changing the structures of the welfare state.
In a series of case studies, the authors describe the efforts of Pauline, Paul and Pamela to develop radical social work practice. Nothing seems to work. The children end up in care, the families stay in poverty. Destructive family squabbles rage unchecked. No way can be found to alleviate the hopeless loneliness of isolated old people. The area social work team can’t be persuaded to support the claimants union.
The authors, both academics and members of the Communist Party, argue that the perceptions of middle-class radicalism lead to incorrect interpretations of the personal situations of clients – e.g. automatic and uncritical support of wives against husbands, of children against parents and teachers. Radical tactics are condemned as impatient and individualistic – not based on the building of support among fellow social workers, or of alliance within the labour movement.
The core of the book is a set of chapters on basic Marxist concepts, such as class, ideology, family and the state. The gist of the argument is the need to relate the politics of the reproductive sector (claimants, women, community groups etc.) to the politics of production (trade unions).
Also that state employees such as social workers are in a deeply contradictory situation – they are agents of social control, but they can develop organised resistance to ruling class strategies, in alliance with other workers and with welfare dependent groups.
Given that so little writing about social work is informed by any sense of the labour movement, this is a useful book, and deserves to be widely read and discussed. But politically there are fundamental criticisms to be made.
The argument is firmly anchored in a reformist vision. The disillusioned radical is urged to join in a cautious, brick by brick construction of progressive alliances. As portrayed in this book, the revolutionary party is the lifeless cement that integrates the bricks, not as a fighting organisation.
Rank-and-file organisation in the unions is condemned because it leads to attacks on officials and disrupts unity. No reference to the disunity created as officials police their membership on behalf of the system.
Capitalism is portrayed as a static structure, not historically as driven by its own contradictions, and currently in deep crisis. There is no discussion of the impact of world economic dislocation on class-organisation and levels of militancy.
No sense of the rapid ebb and flow of class struggle and consciousness in a period of crisis, nor of the opportunities and responsibilities which socialists must consequently accept.
This is a book which uses pessimism to argue against fatalism. No one reading it could possibly imagine that within two months of its publication, social workers in a number of important areas would be taking determined strike action against their employers. Marxism is summarised by the authors as, ‘the congealed practice of a whole international class’. An accurate description of the politics offered in this text – more like yesterday’s gravy than a weapon of class struggle.

 
